The house of Prayer. It is written, My house shall be called of all Nations
the house of prayer. Mark. 11 17.


ADVICE TO THE READERS OF The Common Prayer, And to the PEOPLE Attending the
Same. With a PREFACE concerning DIVINE WORSHIP.

Humbly offered to Consideration, for promoting the greater Decency and
Solemnity in performing the Offices of GOD's Public Worship, Administered
according to the Order Established by Law amongst Us.

By a well-meaning (though unlearned) Layick of the Church of ENGLAND. T. S.

The Third Edition Corrected.

London: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes Head-Alley, next
Cornhil. 1691.

To that Worthy Citizen, my Honored Friend, Mr. Deputy Haws, Treasurer of
Christ's Hospital.
SIR,
I Dedicate this Impression to you, because your Bounty occasioned it; and I am
glad it did so, because I think such a Book may be always useful in the Church;
in which, it is to be feared, some, both of the Clergy and Laity, will always
want such Advice as is therein offered. I did most affectionately design this
Book to Excite the most Serious Consideration of the Excellency of the Solemn
Offices of our Common Prayers; and to give assistance, as well as I could,
toward such performance as the thing deserved. I could scarce hope (though I
much desired) that the Book should have had so good Success: But it pleased God
(who best knew the sincerity of my Affections) to move first our Right Reverend
Diocesan, and afterward another Bishop, to recommend it to their Clergies;
whereby the Efficacy thereof, to the end I designed, was much assisted: And I
do also impute this your Pious Undertaking, in giving a Book to every Lad that
is put out Apprentice, unto the same Divine Motion; And I verily believe, that,
if these young Men would argue from your giving it them as they ought, it would
mightily help to effect in them what I desire: For which reason I crave your
pardon, for exposing an imperfect Character of you, while I endeavor to
instruct them so to do. This Book, may they say, was given us by our Worthy
Treasurer, who was so much esteemed in the City for his Wisdom, Piety and
Readiness to all good Works as to be unanimously chosen to that Office; And
that, in the discharge of it, has outdone the Expectations of his Electors,
and the Example of his Predecessors, and has rendered himself a worthy Pattern
to all that come after him. The wholsomness of our Food, our warm and whole
Clothing, our sweet, cleanly and well repaired Lodgings, our well accomplished
Schoolmasters, our diligent and careful Nurses and Attendants of all sorts,
shows his great care of us: and all Men see the same in the healthiness of our
Countenances; which is observed to be, beyond what was formerly: And how can we
but conclude, that he, who was so kind to our Bodies, gave us this Book in
kindness to our Souls; which he knew and we ought to consider) are infinitely
better. And even for our Souls also we have found his Care exceeding great; for
he has caused us to be instructed in the Reasons of Worshipping God: and in
the Right Way of doing it, both in Private, and in Public: and we hear others
applaud our good Order and decent Performance, in both respects, while we
daily, Morning and Evening, Worship God in this great Family; and every Lord's
day most solemnly Praise him in the greater Congregation; imitating the
heavenly Host, whose Voice was like that of many Waters or mighty Thunders in
saying their Hallelujahs, Rev. 19. And this assures us he believed this Book
would teach us something very beneficial in that respect: And wi^ not God and
Man and our own Consciences condemn us of Folly and Ingratitude if we do not
read and consider it? I hope, dear Sir, these Youths will learn thus to argue
themselves into a serious attention to what I have written.

I hope also, that your thus approving the Book, will persuade more of my
Fellow-Citizens to read it, and that thereby they may be drawn from the
Impertinence of Coffee-house Conversation, unto those holy Exercises of God's
Worship, wherein they may find much better Diversion; a Diversion which is as
Rational and Sublime, as that is Mean and Foolish.

This little I have hinted to further the design of my Book not that I thought
to add to the Fame of your Virtues, but rather to express that true Respect
toward you, which they have begotten in me: Who am,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, THO. SEYMOR

TO THE READER.
THERE is no Christian that prays in the words which his Lord has taught him,
but does implicitly profess his desire that these Papers may be read and
considered: For the first thing be there prays for, is the hallowing God's
Name; which is, That God will give his Grace to us, and all People, that we may
worship him as we ought to do, as our Catechism has taught us. Now the design
of this Book being only to give assistance to the worshipping God as we ought,
he that desires the doing of that, must also the considering of this. For how
meanly soever the thing be done, it cannot but occasion some thoughts in Men's
minds, and some discourse in Company upon this Subject; whereby it is very
probable, many things which in the ordinary performance have been amiss, may be
observed and amended, which would not have otherwise been thought on; and Men
may be excited to consider what is fit to be done, that this Service may be
most decently and solemnly performed. And if it do but this, I have my end. I
do not impose my Dictates on any, but offer things to Consideration with all
humility; acknowledging, that both my want of Learning, Time, Health, and due
Composure, make me unfit to write for public View: but my fervent desire to
see things ordered in the best manner in this Service, which I have found so
comfortable to my self, and desire may be more esteemed and frequented by
others, has persuaded this Essay; which I hope will offend none. If any should
blame my boldness in meddling with those of the Ministry, my excuse must be, in
the Observation of an Ingenious Gentleman, That even the Lamps of the Sanctuary
may need Snuffers to make them burn the clearer. I know he says, they ought to
be of Gold; and I wish mine were better Metal: But I hope the purity of my
Intention, will make amends for the meanness of of my Style and Expression, and
procure a kind Acceptance with that Sacred Tribe.

Upon occasion of this Second Edition, I must add this to the Reader: That I
was forced in the first, to cut off much of what I designed, that so I might
accomn odate the Book to what the Bookseller would venture to print: but he,
now grown more bold by the good success of his first undertaking, gives me
liberty to prosecute my first Intentions; wherefore I here make some
Inlargements; and I have done it with good intentions, for the exciting a
serious Devotion in these Holy Exercises of God's Worship, which by the
prevalency of false Opinions, and vicious Practices, is greatly decayed; and I
have done it with full persuasion of mind, but without contempt of any that are
otherwise affected. I pity all that will not make a through trial of the
Felicity of a Holy Life, and of this practice of Holiness which is according to
the example of the ancientest and purest Times, and as purged from all
Superstition and Fanaticism, (for such, I think is that I recommend.) And I am
the more moved to this compassion, by the experience I have of the good success
of this practice in my self. I was bred to the exercise of Piety in another
Way, and endeavored to be devout therein, as my Conscience told me I ought. I
conversed with the wisest and best I lived with, and had some Interests among
them to persuade me to a continuance in that Way; but when it pleased God to
bring in another Order, I thought it my Duty to consider well, before I sat
down in a fixed Disobedience. I thought I could not express the honor I owed
to my Superiors, if I should refuse to consider what was said for Obedience to
their Laws; nor yet the love I should have for Communion with all Christians,
and especially those to whom I was united by manifold Obligations, if I should
forsake it on Scruples easily resolved, or for the bare liking of some other
Mode of Worship, as better than that they used. And upon an impartial
consideration of what I have heard and read, (having never balked any Argument
that I met with against the lawfulness of Lay-Nonconformity;) I am now
satisfied that it is my Duty to obey the public Order: and having endeavored
to do it with the Devotion I ought, I have found it no way inferior (to speak
the least) to what I was formerly used to, as to the uses and benefits of
public Worship, and especially to the exercise and entertainment of a heavenly
Mind. This experience moved the Importunity used to Ministers and People in
this Book that they which Conform might do it so devoutly, as might he to the
comfort of themselves, and attracting others to our Communion. And I have
insinuated some Arguments to enforce the same, as so brief a Discourse would
permit; which, with the former, I recommend unto God's Blessing, and a candid
Interpretation; being resolved to make no more Additions thereunto, although it
should have the good hap to be printed again. I hope they will not be angry
with me, that have bought any of the first Edition, because I believe most of
them are such, as Sixpence will not much concern; and it will be a good Work
for them (if they have a mind to this Book) to give the former where they find
any guilty of the Faults therein noted: and in this they will very much
gratify the Author of the Book, who desires nothing more in this World, than
to see the excellent Order of our Church observed with that Care and
Consideration (as well as with true Devotion) that it may have its true Beauty
in the eyes of all good Men, and may also have a mighty efficacy to their
Spiritual Joy and Consolation in this Holy and Heavenly Communion, and to the
Reformation and Sanctification of their Minds and Lives.

A PREFACE Concerning DIVINE WORSHIP.
THE Worship of God is a thing much talked of (and that with great Reverence)
by many who have not (as I think) such Apprehensions of it as they ought. And
on the other hand, of some it is as much slighted, as if there were something
of Fanaticism in all Pretenses to Devotion. My Design therefore in this Preface
shall be, to beget Right Thoughts about it, and a Due Esteem thereof; as I have
in what follows endeavored to direct a Right Behavior therein.

If Men would consider the thing, it would not be difficult to understand what
the true Notion of Divine Worship is. Every Man knows what it is to give
Worship in the common sense of that word, (viz.) That it is to signify our
Respects to Persons above us, by reverent actions suited unto their Dignity: And
so it must principally signify when it is applied unto God, The expression of
the greatest Dread and Reverence toward his Glorious and Tremendous Deity by
the most humble Postures of Adoration. This has been the sense of all Mankind
concerning this Matter, and this is the sense of the Holy Scriptures; and this
all the Christian World agreed in, until the Corruptions and Cruelties of the
Church of Rome, made those that justly opposed her in many things, to forsake
others, without any other reason, but the hatred of being like to Her, who had
been so cruel toward them. And among these, I reckon this to be the chief;
That they not only left off the Daily Offices of God's Public Worship, but
also that Ancient Order for the performance thereof on the Lord's Day, which
was most accommodate unto the conjunction of these Actions of Devotion and
Adoration; by which means, bowing the Head, and Body, and Knees, etc. (which
have in them the principal sense of that word Worship) have become almost quite
out of use among them.

I cannot imagine, for my own part, any other reason why these solemn Actions
should become so wholly disused; for I cannot believe that any who are
acquainted with what is written of the former or present Customs of the World,
can be ignorant what the usage thereof has ever been, and still is, in
worshipping whatever they called God: nor did I ever hear it proved, that their
common sense did herein deceive them. It seems to me also, that it is
impossible for any that read the Scripture, to be ignorant that when it speaks
of any Person or Assembly that they worshipped the Lord, it means principally,
they bowed their Heads before him in acknowledgement of his Deity, or in a
sense of Gratitude for his Mercies; nor that these two words, Bowed and
Worshipped, are almost every where in Scripture joined together. And those that
have read Ecclesiastical Histories, or conversed with any of other Churebes
(even those that never were of the Popish Communion) will find, that it is not
the Papists only among Christians, that abound in these solemn Acts of
Adoration; but that they ever were, and still are used by all Christians (and
by some as much, if not more than by them) except only those whom I speak of,
who have forsaken them on the account aforesaid.

Certainly there is some Reason upon which this common Consent is grounded, and
for which this expression has ever been made, by good Men of the Worship and
Honor they desire to give to Almighty God, and has ever been accepted and
approved of him; and for the same reason it ought not to be forsaken and
disused of us. And indeed, the very general Custom and Usage of the World, and
of the Church, has so much reason in it self, that it should be evidently
proved there is positive Sin, or great Inconvenience in the things recommended
thereby, before we venture to contradict or oppose them. We are commanded to
give no Offense to the Jew, nor Greek, nor Church of God: whereas it seems to
me, by forsaking these solemn Acts of Adoration we offend them all. And I
verily believe, nothing more persuades the Papists of the Goodness of their own
Religion, and makes them think ill of ours, than observing the Decency of these
solemn Actions so frequently used in their public Service, and that it scarce
looks like the Worship of God where they are wholly omitted, as they are in
some Protestant Churches, and in all Nonconformists Meetings, and too much in
our Parochial Assemblies also.

But it is not only the avoiding Offense that should recommend these solemn
Actions, (and especially that of Bowing) but many great Reason: 1. There is
nothing more effectual to impress on the mind a sense of God's Presence, than
this action of Bowing before him. It is impossible a Man can use such an
Action, but he must think there is some One present to whom it is performed;
and where Men have not a true belief of God's presence, and are conscious unto
themselves of that defect, it will seem so unreasonable and foolish to perform
such acts of Adoration, that they will be hardly persuaded thereunto. And for
this reason, when the World became so carnaliz'd by indulging their brutish
Part, that they could scarce have any apprehension of invisible Things but by
the help of something that was the Object of their Senses, they invented Images
to represent the invisible Powers they worshipped; and fancied that by their
Incantations and Charms, their Gods were drawn to inhabit those Images; by
which means they found they were helped in performing those Acts of Adoration
to them. But the only living and true God has utterly forbidden any such
Representations of himself, as being a dishonor to the infinite Glory and
Spirituality of his Nature, but yet requires External Worship from us, in
acknowledgment than he is every where present, but especially in the Assemblies
that meet to do him honor and service; and that he, and he only, is to be
feared, and had in reverence of all that are about him: and if we would perform
this act of Adoration as we ought, we should find great help thereby, against
the weakness of our Faith, and the dullness of our Spiritual Sense; and it would
beget in us such an habitual apprehension of God's spiritual and invisible
Presence, that it would be as a new nature or principle of spiritual and holy
Life in all other things: I say, if we perform it as we ought; because I would
have none think that I impute a Magical Force to this Action, as if all that do
it, on what account soever, should become inspired with such an habitual sense
of God and his universal Presence. For I know, that where this is in repute,
Men may be very observant thereof for carnal ends; and be inwardly Atheistical,
and outwardly profane still: but if it be done with a design to signify our
belief of God's presence, and our awful sense of his infinite Glory and
Greatness, it has tendency to work a habit of spiritual sensibility in this
matter, and by the efficacy of the same we shall be continually kept in the
fear of offending God, and excited to all holy and virtuous Actions that are
pleasing to him: which I think is a very weighty matter.

Besides, it prepares and disposes our minds to the performance of all the
Offices of Divine Worship, whereby we explicate the signification of such acts
of Adoration: and therefore it has been used to be done at our first coming
into the Church, that we may remember what we are chiefly to intend in all we
do there, viz. The Worship and Honor of Almighty God. The want of this
consideration, is a cause of great mischiefs in the Church: Men have learnt to
think, that all the Ministries of Religion are intended to work on their
Affections and Passions, and to gratify a Religius Fancy; and so they judge
they are best ordered, when they serve most effectually to that end: and upon
this account it is, that they condemn the Common Prayer as a dead Form, and cry
up the Extempore Way, as the only acceptable Mode of serving God. And while
they thus judge, they are subject to be drawn into Schism and Error by every
subtle Seducer that can handle the Instrument of his Tongue well, and affect
their minds with some devout Passions. For so long as they think That Way of
Religion best which most affects them, (Novelty having a great force in that
matter, and Men that design to serve their Interests by making Disciples, being
apt to bend their minds most strenuously to study to speak to Men's passions)
Men can never be fixed in any way of Religion. But now if they were once
persuaded that those public Administrations are best, which serve most fitly
to the Worship and Adoration of the Deity, and are most advantageous for the
conjunction of these solemn Actions which I here speak of; it would be hard for
them to find any better than ours among those which separate from us.

For the better understanding the beginning of the foregoing Paragraph, wherein
I say, That in the Offices of Divine Worship we explain the signification of
the acts of Adoration, I must observe, 1. That, as the Worship we perform to
God, by humbly bowing down in our approach to his glorious Majesty, does
declare our obligation unto all we perform in the following Offices; so those
Offices do contain the explication of the Worship we thereby give to the
Almighty. For since we declare by that action, that we worship him as the only
true God, we oblige ourselves to perform that service which Deity makes his
due: and this we do, when we give him thanks for the great benefits we have
received at his hands, and set forth his most worthy praise; when we attend
diligently to his holy Word, and seek at his hands things requisite and
necessary for Body and Soul: for by these things we do acknowledge him to be
the Fountain of our Being, and of all the benefits whereof we are Partakers,
and to be the free and gracious Donor thereof; and that he is most worthy of
all the Praise and Glory that we can give him, as by reason thereof, so also
because of the infinite Perfections of his Nature, and his mighty and wonderful
Works which we behold: That he is infinite Wisdom and Truth, and to be believed
in all that be reveals to us: That he is our only supreme Lawgiver, and to be
obeyed in all that he commands us: That he is our Sovereign Lord, and our Weal
or Woe does wholly depend on his Favor or Displeasure; and that no Arts or
Labors of our own can secure us against Misery, or instate us in true
Felicity, whether it be internal or external, present or future, but that our
whole dependence is on his Favor and Blessing. And all this, and much more, is
contained in our acknowledging him to be God; which we do, by bowing down
before him in the place of his Public Worship.

2. Since the chief end of our Public Service is the most explicit
worshipping God, by acknowledging those things which Deity does imply; It is
very meet that we join this act of Adoration with our Prayers and Praises, in
fit places; as, at the mention of God's glorious Titles and Attributes in the
beginnings of the Collects; and when we implore his gracious acceptance through
the Merits of our blessed Savior in the conclusion thereof: and there are also
many places in the Te Deum, and in the other Hymns and Psalms, where this
action is very fit, both to express our sense of God's presence, our reverence
toward him, our belief that he sees us, and that he hears all we speak to him;
and also to keep our Devotion in life and strength, and to assist it in each
other. I find in many places of Scripture, where the manner of the solemn
approaches of the People unto God is described, that they did bow their heads
and worship, in conjunction with their Praises and Prayers: And it seems to me,
that there is such a natural Decency in the thing, that all unprejudiced
Persons must approve it. Sure I am, that the devout behavior of such as I have
known to be truly pious Men in this kind, has had a great influence on me; and
I may think it will have the like on others.

3. That it seems to me, that the intention of Mind which is required to the
speaking in any good Sense and Method in the Extempore way of Prayer, is a
great hindrance to the due use of such acts of Worship in the Speaker, and that
the necessary attention to what is spoken, and the inward discourse of Reason,
whether it be fit for us to join with the Minister therein, is as great
hindrance to such Devotion in the Hearers.

4. That the brief and comprehensive Prayers into which the general Office of
Prayer in our Way is divided, seems much better in this respect, than if the
several matters whereof they consist were composed into one long continued
Prayer.

5. That it would be very convenient that every one would keep to their own
Parish Church, where they might have conveniences to perform both this and
other Expressions of Devotion, better than they can in a Crowd; into which many
throng for lesser benefits than they might have by a devout performance of
these Holy Offices.

This then I conceive (according to what I have said before) to be the Worship
of God: When Men knowing and considering that there is one eternal infinite
Being, of most glorious and tremendous Majesty, of incomprehensible Goodness,
Wisdom, and Power; and that is present in all places: who, having made us with
such powers and faculties as fit us for his Worship and Service, and enriched
us with such benefits as give us greatest obligations thereunto, does expect
that we perform the same to the greatest advantage of his Glory and Honor. I
say, when we knowing this, go unto the place of God's Public Worship, and
there do by actions worship God, bowing our Heads and Knees before him, and
also by words; declaring our belief of his Being, Presence, Perfections, and
wonderful Works, and our thankfulness for his infinite Mercies, and joy and
delight in his Service; when we humbly and seriously attend to the solemn
reading of his Divine Truth, the Histories of his mighty Works, to his Promises
and Threatenings whereby he has enforced his Laws, to the Prophecies and
miraculous Gifts whereby he has assured us the Doctrine is from himself,
though by Ministry of Men; and suchlike things, of great concernment to the
glory of God, as well as our good, which we hear out of the Holy Scriptures: As
also, when we make our Supplications and Prayers before him as our supreme Lord
and Governor, and thereby acknowledge his Universal Presence and Providence
extending to all Times, Places, and Persons, with all their circumstances, even
in the minutest things, and withal overruling the greatest: And when (...) all
these we intermix due Acts of Adoration, as continually intent on the
consideration of God's Presence, and waiting for occasions, in the Offices of
Praise, Hearing, and Prayers, to adore his Divine Majesty internally and
externally, and to express our devout affections by such actions as bowing and
lifting up our eyes and hands to Heaven, etc. and also kneeling and standing as
it is most fitly ordered by the Church: And when every one at the conclusion of
the Service using some short Ejaculation to beg God's pardon for what Defects
we have been guilty of, and his acceptance of our sincere desire to honor him,
humbly bowing before him at our leaving the Church; this I conceive has very
much Conformity to what all Men (that consider their natural apprehensions of
things) will judge most like to that, which is the plain sense of Worshipping
God.

It Is some wonder to me, that many who seem to have a great Zeal for the
Worship of God, and make every thing they do about Religion a part thereof (as
the Church Covenant, (which they add to that of Baptism) and the Suffrage of
the People in the matter of the Ordination of Ministers, etc.) should be so
inobservant of that Worship which Heathens have known by the Light of Nature to
be due to God, and which all that ever worshipped a God (true or false) have
used. Certainly the Law of Nature is God's most p^^mitive Law, and cannot be
altered while things remain the same; and all Divine Institutions in the matter
of Worship, do but supply the Defects of that Law, and were Modes of Worship
added (for special reasons) to that which Nature taught, but no way exclusive
thereof, or contrary thereunto; and the Sacraments of the New Testament are
instituted on the same account. Besides, I have observed in the Writings of the
Non-conformists, an acknowledgment of the Duty of Natural Worship, and of the
use of such Natural Actions whereof it consists, but always this of Bowing
(which is the chief) is left out of the Catalogue, and some hard Names, such as
Cringing, Gesticulation, etc. put upon it to disgrace it; of which I never
could find any reason, but their enmity to our Church, and their disuse of it
in their own Way. It Is true, in one I find this, That Custom does limit and
determine Nature's Laws; upon which account, Prostration, and wearing
Sackcloth, and rending Garments, are now disused. And Bowing (since it is
still left out) seems to be put among the number of those Natural Actions
determined by Custom. But what Custom is this? Surely not the Custom of the
Community of Mankind, nor of the Church of Christ, but of some that have almost
banished all other Expressions of Devotion, but such which may be as proper to
the hearing any Tragical Story, as to the Worship of God. But though Nature
only teaches the use of such Behavior in worshipping God as is most
expressive of our Reverence toward him, and Custom may make some variation of
those Expressions; yet this Act of Bowing seems so naturally fit to express
Reverence, and so decent, that it has become Universally (...) mary, and is
never like to be determined by contrary Custom, or disparaged by hard Names,
except amongst such as themselves.

I know that it is also said, that the Act of Parliament forbids the use of any
other Ceremonies than what are mentioned in the Rubric; and that this being
not mentioned, it would be an act of Disobedience to use it. To which I answer,
That the natural Expressions of Worship and Reverence to Almighty God cannot be
there meant: for then, lifting up the Hands and Eyes to Heaven, may be thought
forbidden as well as this; which I think none will affirm: But as God himself
has not instituted any thing positively, (no not in the time of the Law, when
he was (as it were) the Temporal Monarch of the Jews): about his Natural
Worship, (such as was performed in their Synagogues) so our Governors have not
thought fit to institute anything in this Case, but leave it to be done by
every one as his Devotion moves him; but certainly they never intended to
forbid it, as is here suggested.

It is also said by some, that it may make the Service of God seem ludicrous,
by being done too much; and every one has not discretion to do it as he ought,
and will be apt to exceed; that the Papists are grown to such an extreme in
this action of Bowing, and such Gesticulations about it, that their Service is
ridiculous to Protestants, etc. To which I answer: As to the Papists, I can be
no Judge in that matter, because I never saw the full Order of their Service;
but I know that many esteem ill of things they are not used to, without just
cause: the use of Music and Artificial Singing, of Responses and Alternate
Readings in Divine Service, seem ridiculous to some that have been educated in
another Way. Besides, what the Papists are thought to exceed in, is matter of
Institution; the time and place of their Bowing, Crossing, etc. being directed
by their Rubric (as I have read) but that which I speak of is a matter of
Liberty, in which I never saw or heard that there was excess. That People left
at liberty should be too much in bowing their Heads and Knees in Adoration of
him they worship, in lifting up their Hands and Eyes to Heaven, in expression
of their fervent affection in Prayer, etc. seems to me no way to be feared.
It Is like some few (especially of the younger sort) that are much affected by
observing the decency of this in some Ministers that practice it; being such,
as by the holiness of their Life, and excellency of their Doctrine, have
obtained a great reverence with them; I say, they may seem (and I think but
seem) too zealous in this matter: but as the generality are far enough from
that fault, and more like to be ashamed to do what their Consciences tell them
is very decent, (especially when done by grave Men) than to exceed therein; so
I think the fear of it should deter no Man from recommending a due and decent
Performance, which is all this Paper aims at. But supposing this to be true,
that Men do or may thus exceed, it seems an ill way of arguing, That because a
thing may be over-done, therefore it should not be done at all. Some find fault
with Extempore Prayers, that they are too long; and others, with ours in the
Common Prayer, that they are too short: Should any Man now say, It Is best then
to have no Prayers at all? yet it is a^ much reason in this case as the other.
Me^ will never be of one mind in the measure of these things, while they are of
different affection; the Formal will condemn the Devou^ of Excess, as they do
them of Defect: bu^ when Reason is consulted, all will agree th^^ something of
this kind is decent; and therefore methinks, after there has been among u^ so
long a total omission of this way of expressing Devotion, none should blame my
Essay t^ recommend it. Though I have said thus much in favor of Bowing, which
our Church leave to every ones liberty, yet I would not be though^ so confident
in my Assertions herein, as to co^demn all that do not hold or practice as I
do: but I humbly offer this, as other things, to the consideration of the Wise,
being willing to reform any thing in my thoughts or actions that I shall be
convinced to be amiss. And do believe that those Churchmen, who use not this
action, have better reason for it than I am aware of; or else on farther
consideration, may do as most Churches in the World, and most of their Brethren
have given them example.

I shall farther observe, as to this matter of God's Worship, That God expects
such Worship from us, as is suitable to the Revelations he has made of himself.
It was cause of his great displeasure against the Gentile World, that when they
knew him to be God, they did not worship him as God: when his eternal Power and
Godhead (though invisible in itself) was made evident by the Works of his
Creation which they had continually before their eyes, whereby they might have
learnt to worship him as an infinite incorruptible Spirit, yet they would
worship him under the Resemblances of Corruptible Things; which was a dishonor
to the Eternity and Omnipotency of his Divine Nature.

But now our blessed Savior has farther revealed the incomprehensible Deity,
as subsisting in a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of its Essence, and as
manifested in our Flesh, in the second Person of that blessed Trinity: which
revelation of God requires something peculiar in the matter of Divine Worship
from us Christians. It has been received as a matter of Faith by the Catholic
Church, That the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity is to be
worshipped; and that our blessed Savior, as God and Man, is to be honored as
we honor the Father. Now it seems to me, that there is such an excellent Order
in our Liturgy for the performance of the Worship of God and our blessed
Savior according to these Evangelical Revelations, that it is scarce to be
equalled in any other Way, especially that which is set up in competition with
it. And I doubt not, all those that will impartially consider the Responses,
the Te Deum, the Gloria Patri, (which we so frequently use, because it is
suitable to this Gospel Worship, (of which yet some complain there is great
defect in our Liturgy) as also the Creed, the Letany, and the
Communion-Service, and how God in these is honored as Three Persons, and yet
but one God; and our Savior invocated and acknowledged as God-man advanced to
the highest dignity at the right hand of God; I say, he that considers this, I
hope, will think as I do. I know prejudice hinders Men from observing what is
excellent in any thing, but especially in such things they are not used to: but
as I suppose none will deny that God is thus to be worshipped; so, where Men
are not prejudiced, I verily believe they will think, that in no Way they can
do it better.

There is something also to be inferred, as to this matter of God's Worship,
from the plentiful effusion of the Spirit in Gospel Times, and our Fellowship
and Communion in that Spirit. There are some Phrases in the New Testament,
which, I think have been perverted to a wrong sense, such as Praying in the
Holy Ghost, Worshipping God in the Spirit, and in Spirit and Truth: which I
think may better be referred to the worshipping God as revealed by the Gospel
(which is called the Ministration of the Spirit) in the respect forementioned;
or else to our worshipping God in Faith and Fervency, in Unity and Unanimity,
without distinction of Jew and Gentile; in spirituality, without legal Types
and Figures, and carnal Ordinances; in the virtue of Christ's Merits, which was
the truth of all the bloody Sacrifices of Atonement for acceptance^ with God in
the legal Worship; and this, according to the Revelations whereof the Spirit of
Christ is Author, and by whose Gifts and Powers they were confirmed: I say,
better refered to these things, than to praying without study or a prepared
Form, only by help of the Spirit.

It seems to me, that if those Expressions had any relation to praying by any
extraordinary and supernatural assistance of God's Spirit, (as was their
praying in Languages they had never learnt, or in Expressions that were above
any seize they could be supposed to have by ordinary means) it must be
appliable only unto that time. For, however an Opinion has been insinuated of
late, of a miraculous and supernatural assistance^ for the performance of that
Duty, which has given considence to many (who are naturally unable for the
same) to venture on it, and that even in public Administration, to the great
dishonor of Religion, and just offense of all wise Men: yet I think none will
dare to affirm, that any Christian or Minister has any promise from God of
such assistance of the Spirit, as may make it to be truly said, that be prays
in the Spirit in the sense abovementioned. But now praying in the Spirit, as I
first interpreted it of praying as the Revelations of the Spirit of Christ in
the Gospel requires, is appliable to all Times and Persons: and this I think to
be done (as in the forementioned respect of worshipping the Trinity in Unity,
and our Lord and Savior as God-man, so also) when our Prayers are ordered for
the greatest advantage of Faith and Fervency, and of the Unity and Fellowship
of the Spirit; and so I think ours are ordered.

For in the first place, our Faith is helped, by the assurance that we ask such
things as are pleasing to God; and secondly, by the frequent mention of the
merits of Christ: When we pray in the words which our Lord and Savior himself
has taught us, and use such Forms as have been composed by Men famous in the
Church, and approved by multitudes of Christians, and that for many Ages: when
our Prayers are ordered with great advice of those that are most learned among
our selves, (being also such as are orderly called to direct the public
Ministrations in Sacred Things) and when they are approved by all the
Christians united into one National Church under one Civil Government, (which
approbation is declared by the Representatives of both Clergy and Laity, with
whose advice they are by Law established) and when we ourselves may consider
and weigh the same before we use them, having them in our Books to read at any
time; certainly we may on all these accounts he more assured that we pray for
such things as we ought, than when we join in a Prayer we never heard before,
and such as is the sudden conception of a private Minister, (as the use is with
those that are against our Way.) And finally, the frequent mention of the
Merits of our Savior at the conclusion of our brief Collects, is more helpful
to our Belief that we shall find acceptance for Christ's sake, than when it is
only once at the end of a long continued Prayer, if my own experience, and that
of wiser Men do not deceive me.

And secondly, for Fervency, we have great help also, having nothing to do but
to apply our minds to earnestness in praising God and praying to him, no need
of attending to hear what is spoken that we may judge whether it be fit for us
to join in it or not: and when we know the Prayers beforehand, we can joy^
with the Minister and Congregation, though w^ hear not every word that is read.
And the briefness of the Prayers, being composed of such weighty and
comprehensive Expressions helps more to true Fervency than long Prayers; though
the Novelty and Variety may more work on Men's fancies.

Then thirdly, the Unity and Fellowship o^ the Spirit is hereby assisted: I
mean that Unity and Fellowship which that Spirit of Go^ has constituted by
whom we are all baptized into one Body, and made to drink in to one Spirit, and
so are obliged to all possible Concord and Agreement both external and
internal: For first, We agree with the Saint of all Ages in this, That the
public Worship of God is to be administered by a prepared Form, and not by the
present Conceptions of the Administrator: For I cannot understand that either
the Jewish Church or the Christian did ever administer their public Worship in
any other way (except what those Persons did who were divinely inspired, as
many were among the Jews, and in the first Ages of the Church, who therefore
were said to Prophecy when they uttered such excellent Psalms or Prayers
Extempore:) of which this is a sufficient demonstration to me, That in the
Jewish Synagogues all things at this day are administered by Forms, and in all
the Christian Churches (that have not been accounted Enthusiastical) the same
Way was ever observed; or at least, none can deny that it now is so in all the
Christian World, except those Congregations, united in some odd Opinions, that
do separate from the Body of Christians; the only considerable Body of these,
that ever admitted the other Way of Administration, being the Scots formerly,
and the English in the late Distractions: but on many accounts that Admission
cannot be esteemed an orderly Settlement, or excuse them from Schism, though it
were by the prevailing Party. Now since it has scarce ever been known, in
Matters sacred, and of long custom, that great Alterations have been made, but
with great Oppositions and Commotions; I conclude, that if, in the beginning of
the Jewish Worship in their Synagogues, or of the Christian Worship in the
public Assemblies, Prayers had been ordinarily used to be made in the
Extempore Way (except by inspired Persons, as before) that that Way could not
have been altered so universally as it was, to the use of Forms, and yet we
have no notice of the same either in History or by Tradition. But secondly, not
only in that we use a Form, but in that we use such Forms wherein we have the
most Communion with other Christians that is possible in the very words we
speak; we use the Psalms of David, which as they have ever been a part of the
Public Worship of Jews, so also of Christians: we use also that excellent Form
the Te Deum, which has been used very anciently, and received of abundance of
Churches into their public Liturgy; so the three Creeds, and the Collects
before the Epistles and Gospels; and the Gloria Patri; and most parts of our
Service are made up of the most approved and generally received Forms of Prayer
that could be found, with accommodation to the present time.

3dly, In the use of the Common Prayer, we have Communion most fully with the
Christians to whom we are united under one Government (which we call the Church
of England) and with all of that Congregation we presently join with in public
Worship: whereas in the other Way we have no certain Communion but only with
the Minister, because we are not sure that any one in the Congregation approves
of all he says, (nor it may be can we neither) and it is possible the Minister
himself may speak that, for want of premeditation, which he, on second
thoughts, may not approve himself. So that there cannot be so full Communion of
the Spirit in that Way as in ours.

These things I have thought fit to hint, to beget a good Opinion in the minds
of Men, of our established Order for the public Worship of God. But I would
not be thought to despise any that have a true love to God, and desire to
honor and glorify him in such a Way of Worship as they think most acceptable
to him, what Mistakes soever Misinformation and Prejudices of Education and
Converses may subject them unto. And I hope those that differ from me, will not
reproach my fervent desire to promote Piety in the Way I best approve, and that
which I am many ways obliged to choose before any other. And if what I have
written would persuade them to make a honest trial, (not by standing at gaze to
see what we do, or sitting by as unconcerned in the Worship we offer to God by
the Common Prayer, while they only wait for the Preacher they desire to hear,
but) by joining heartily with us, according to the Advices of this Paper; I do
not doubt but they would soon leave wondering at my fervency in this Way. But
if some should, through misguided Zeal, or for the Interests of their Party,
fall foul on me for commending what they seek by all means to deprave, I am
content to suffer as my Savior did, while the Reproaches of those that
reproach God (in condemning what by the Laws of Nature, and Examples in
Scripture, he approves) fall upon me. And if those, that approve this Way of
Worship, be made hereby the more fervent and devout in attending thereupon, I
shall rejoice in my Labors and Sufferings for their sakes. And I hope they
will be so, when they consider, that in this Way, Devotion is not subject to be
abused by the subtilty of ill Men (as it has been by such on both sides that
differ from us;) that here is no Discouragement given to the Weak and Bashful,
(by exemplifying a Way of Devotion that is above their reach) nor any
Temptation to the Bold and Self-conceited to aspire to things too high for
them, to their own shame, and to the disturbance of the Church: That therein
nothing but Principles of Truth (that tend to Piety, Charity, Obedience to
Superiors, Meekness Moderation, and Peaceableness among our selves) are
possible to be insinuated into our minds: That hereby we shall be greatly
assisted in Holy Meditations, (while our minds will he stored with abundance of
excellent matter for the same) and in educating our Children religiously, in
keeping our Families in Unity and Order, and performing the Worship belonging
to the same; and the many other great benefits that we shall experience in a
devout attendance on the daily Service of God in public appointed by this
Church; by which considerations they will also be more confirmed in their love
hereunto, and excited to become examples to others, who will be more
effectually drawn to their Duty, by observing the devout and frequent practice
of this Way of Piety, than by Disputations about it. And it seems to me, that
nothing is more like to preserve this Church against the designs of its Enemies
on both hands, than such exemplary frequency of Attendance and fervency of true
Devotion in those that profess themselves the Children thereof: The effecting
of which is the Design of the ensuing Advice both to Readers and People.

WHile this Sheet was Printing, I was told by a Friend, that he heard the
Learned Dr. Beveridge (in a Sermon on Titus 2.12. March 26.) declare, That the
import of the word Worship, was expressing Honor and Respect by bowing the
Head and Shoulders; and that this Action, as it had anciently been used in
sacred Offices to signify our Adoration of Almighty God, so it is most fit and
decent in the Exercises of Religion now. I was much pleased that the Judgment
of so excellent a Person, publicly declared, just at the coming out of this
Book, (which I am sure he had not the least knowledge or intimation of) gave
countenance to my Undertaking in this Preface.

Since that, I hearing the said Doctor read Prayers at one of the Lent-Sermons
at his Church, it seemed to me such a perfect Exemplification of what I advise
in the Book, that I might seem to have learnt all from his practice (though I
never heard him before). And I have great hope, that the Example of one so
eminently Pious and Learned, of so excellent a Temper, and such unwearied
Labors in the Ministry, may do more toward introducing Seriousness and
Reverence in Divine Worship, than these Papers can do themselves: wherefore I
have ventured (without his knowledge) to propose his Example in conjunction
with my Endeavors; humbly begging his pardon, if he be offended to have his
Name mentioned by so unworthy a Pen.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS Offered to Readers and People.
DIRECTIONS for READERS.
HE that will perform this Service as he ought, must first be prepared with
true Devotion in his Mind and Spirit.

Two things are needful for the Explication of this: First, That the Expression
of Devotion is a necessary Part of Worship. Secondly, That it will be difficult
for the Reader to make such Expression, if he have not real Devotion in himself.

For the first, I shall only observe, That it is the very Nature of Public
Worship, to be an outward Expression of such affections of our Souls as are due
unto God alone; and such an Expression as is most unto his Honor, and our own
and others Edification. This, I think, no Man will deny. And for that reason
our Liturgy for this Worship is fitted to express a great humility and fervency
in supplicating the Divine Majesty, as the Spring and Fountain of all our
Comfort; and a great joy and exultancy in extolling his Greatness, and praising
his Goodness, as the Perfection of our Felicity; and also to be accompanied
with actions suitable thereunto. And he that reads the Prayers with a rambling
Have, without such due expressions of Devotion in the manner of his Speech and
Actions, quite alters the nature of the thing, and spoils the design of it.

Every Man of any sense, can discern the Indecency of reading such words as
[Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us,]
with such a manner of speaking as signifies but little Devotion and Fervency of
Mind. And so they may also of saying the Gloria Patri, and Te Deum, etc without
such cheerfulness of Speech, and reverent Acts of Adoration as become the same.
Neither can we think, that we honor God by any words we speak, if we do not
appear fervous and devout in pronouncing the same: nor will it at all edify
ourselves or others. For words do not work here as Spells and Charms, but as
rational Instruments that signify the belief and affections of our Souls;
which they cannot do, but by being so pronounced, and accompanied with fit
actions as aforesaid. So that upon these reasons, the Reader is obliged to the
expression of Devotion in his performance of this Service.

But besides, he that is careless in making such expression of Devotion in
reading the Prayers, does very much to prevent the Conversion of Infidels and
Papists, to excuse the Nonconformity of all kind of Separatists, and to
encourage the Profane in their Neglect to attend these Sacred Offices.

To explain this, I must entreat the Reader to consider, That notwithstanding
the Confusion of Tongues, there is one Universal Language understood by all
Mankind, high and low, the ignorant as well as the learned: And those that know
not the meaning of the words we speak, or can well perceive whether we speak
Sense or Nonsense, yet by this can give account of what we say or do, as to the
general tendency thereof. And this Language consists in the Tone of our Words,
and Mode of our Actions; by these they know whether a Man means love or hatred,
anger or good pleasure, honor or contempt, in common conversation: and so they
may do also in the matter of Religion, they know by these, whether a Man, being
in the Church, means the Adoration of a God, or a fantastic Observation of
Persons or Things there present; whether he means a natural delight in
exercising his Gifts and natural Powers, and in attending to the Music of
Words, Voices, or Instruments, (for there is no great difference, if no more be
meant) or a spiritual employment of his Mind upon God, and the things of
Religion, as his chiefest Joy.

And this kind of Language, (for so (...) here call it) as it is understood
most generally, so it works most powerfully on the minds of Men, and disposes
them to believe what it expresses, more than any Rhetoric of Words can do:
And though these Expressions, as well as that of Words, requires some caution
for the right understanding them, and may be abused by Hypocrites, to cheat and
deceive the World; yet since, according to Men's understanding of them, (and
till they are convinced of the Hypocrifie) they do incline and affect their
minds, Men are to account themselves concerned to make such expressions for
their Conviction and Edification; and that the rather, because else the Souls
of Men will be betrayed to those that lie in wait to deceive by such false
Appearances. And it is not a thing arbitrary, and at Men's liberty, whether they
will use these expressions or not: For since they are so significant of our
Adoration of God, or fervency in our Prayers to him, and exultancy in his
Praises; we must be obliged thereunto, by virtue of the Commands of worshipping
God, of so praying and praising as is worthy of him; besides the many examples
of this in Scripture. And indeed, the minds of Men are so apt to be inclined by
these, that they will scarce believe we truly mean the Worship of God, except
we express it by such signs. Now to apply this to the present purpose:

All Nations, according to that knowledge which naturally they have of this,
have instituted and practiced such Expressions of their Honor and Respect unto
the God they worshipped; and the more the Papists have declined from the
Substance of true Piety, the more they have endeavored to keep up the
reputation of it, by outward Signs of Devotion; and a Sects, as they have
formerly, so do the still make the Appearances of extraordinary Devotion, as
means to introduce the Errors and Schisms. Now taking this for granted, That
it is part of the Law written in the hearts of all Men, that what ever is
acknowledged to be God is to b^ worshipped and adored; and that as the Name of
God is great and dreadful, so hi^ Worship should be awful and serious; and that
they all undestand, by the means forementioned when it appears to be so: I say
on such premises we may conclude, That be our Religion never so good, neither
Papists nor Sectaries will ever be inclined t^ consider it, nor brought to
embrace i^ while they perceive a Defect of these Expressions of Devotion in our
most solemn Offices of Divine Worship, and whilst the^ think they outdo us in
a matter they are so certain to be good and well-pleasing t^ God, and
profitable to Men.

And I believe there can scarce be assigned a more probable Cause then this, of
the great Averseness both of Papists and Separatists to join in our
Common-Prayer^ For both these have great Appearances o^ Devotion in their
several Ways: The Papists, in their frequent Bowing, and other acts of
Adoration; the Fanatics, in their seeming fervency and seriousness in
Extemporary Prayers: And these latter (in whom we are most concerned) are
necessitated to some kind of seriousness and intention, as that without which
no Man can pray in that Way with any tolerable sense and method; and many, who
with greatest intention and seriousness can scarce do either, are the more
obliged to a greater fervency, at least in show, in calling on the Name of God,
with seeming earnestness; and to use his Titles and Attributes over and over,
and all to cover the defects of their Invention: But this however looks like
the Expression of a great Devotion, and is so understood by the unwary
Multitude. If therefore they perceive no Expressions in our Way, that bear
proportion to the same, it is impossible but they will prefer theirs before it;
and hence they generally argue, That they are not bound to join in a Way of
Worship that is worse, when they have opportunity to have Communion in a Way
that is better. Now the main thing in which it is better in their opinion, is
this, That they perceive in the Ministers of their Way a great sense of God's
invisible presence, and a great seriousness and fervency of mind in their
Prayers to him; which they cannot perceive (...) our Way, when the Prayers are
read without such Expressions of Devotion, as I he^ affirm to be necessary.

And then it encourages the profaner so^ in neglecting these holy Offices: For
wh^^ they see the Readers of the Prayers so slight and superficial, and to
express so little Seriousness and Devotion in Reading, the^ will never think
themselves guilty of an^ great sin in being slight and careless i^ hearing, or
very indevout if they never come to hear them at all. These things show a
necessity of expressing Devotion i^ Reading the Prayers. But,

Secondly, This Men will very hardly d^ if they have not the truth of it in
their o^^ Souls. It Is true, Men may very easi^^ discern by Natural Reason, the
Decency o^ humouring words with a pronunciation suitable to the matter they
contain, and o^ joining therewith a fit and comely deportment of the Body; and
they may known by common Observation, that as this i^ Praiseworthy, so it is
of good Report among Men: And so it may be thought that in compliance with
their own Reason, and to gain Applause among Men, Reader^ may well enough
compose themselves t^ counterfeit Devotion in performing the Office of
Common Prayer; and that, although they have none of the truth of it in themselves.

I confess, for my own part, I think a counterfeit Piety so much better for the
Church than a professed Formality, that I wish the Prayers were devoutly read,
on what account soever it be done. But when I consider how Error has weakened
the respect that should be had to Devotion in ^he way of Common Prayer, and
observe ^he great slightness and general formality that is too common in
hearing it, I am afraid that this will prevent that consideration in most
Readers, and quite inervate the ^^rce of such Arguments; so that if Men have
not a great Devotion in themselves, they are more like to be ashamed than
in^ined to counterfeit it: For when they ^e that Men generally think they have
ac^^itted themselves very well in the Matters of God's Worship, if they do
diligent^^ attend to what the Ministers prays and ^^eaches in the Pulpit,
though they little ^^gard what the Readers do in the Desk; ^^aders will think
it little concerns them (...) regard it neither; and so they are apt (...)
hasten the Prayers out of the way, to ^^ke room for that which they see is
chief^^ intended, viz. the Sermon. But now if we may suppose a Reader to design
this we may find reason to think that it is much harder for any one in this
case to personate the Man he is not, than in any other that can be named: for
the sense of a^^ Omniscient Being, who is especially present, and requires
truth in the inward part^ abhorring all Hypocrifie and Dissimulation and that
more peculiarly in the Offices (...) his immediate Worship and Service; I say
the sense of this, will be apt to beget su^^ a dread in their minds, as will
hind^ their attention to the right performance (...) a counterfeit Devotion.
For certainly, (...) nothing is more helpful to the most dece^^ expression of
Devotion (where it truly (...) than the lively sense of God's Presence so
nothing can be more apt to discomp^^^ the mind that designs not at all to
expre^^ but only to counterfeit Devotion, than th^^ Again, Men's defect of true
Piety, often b^^trays them to gross Vices, which not o^^ impress a guilt on their
minds, but a^^ make them conscious, that all that kn^^ them will judge their
seeming Devotion (...) be but a kind of Pageantry; and this (...) very much
increase the difficulty of (...) thing. So that I think I may conclu^^ that he
which would read the Common Prayer well, ought to be prepared with t^^ Devotion.

But here I must incert a Caution, That do not approve of them that make a
scorn of the Appearances of Devotion in some Readers, because they are reported
^it may be truly) to be often guilty of ^ome gross Vice: For I believe,
notwithstanding that, they may be sincere. There (...) no Man that lives and
sins not: And there (...) a great deceitfulness in sin, and this de^eit
operates most on the persons where it most prevails; and therefore I have often
observed, (and so have wiser Men) that ^^me persons whom all the Town have
^^arked for covetous Men, would not believe themselves to be so: and so it is
with ^^iteful, rageful, froward, and revengeful persons, and many others. And
it may be (...) with these.

And though Intemperance (the Vice oft^^st insisted on) may seem to the
Objectors (and many others not inclined there^^to) to be much a greater Vice
than those ^^e-mentioned, yet it may not so seem to ^^em that are guilty; and
also they may ^^nk that their ordinary measures, though ^^eater than others, is
no excess in them, ^^d that their lapses into such measures as ^^ey cannot deny
to be Excesses, and to ^^guise them (as all Vices in some kind (...)) may be
but Infirmities, and, as such, be pardoned by the mercies of the Gospel (...)
the exercise of their daily Repentance. And though I think (as I said) that
the^ is much of Cheat in this, yet while th^^ believe their sins to be
consistent with^^ state of Grace, and profess and practise^^ kind of
Repentance, (though not such (...) will obtain their Pardon) I say, in such
^^ses I believe their expressions of Devoti^^ may not be charged with
Hypocrifie: F^^ they may truly mean to adore, supplica^^ and praise God; and it
may be the m^^^ truly, because they think he will not exa^^ such Observances as
they think themselves unable to perform. And I am afraid, th^^ sort of Men who
most complain of t^^ Reader, hold some Principles that give (...) much help to
that vain Hope whereby su^^ Men cheat themselves to their eternal rui^^ and
while they blame others, Sin deceiv^^ in this matter, even themselves. For i^^
a great cheat to think, that because M^^ do amiss in some things God will acc^^
nothing that they do; and as great, t^^ Men may commend nothing in such: F^^ as
it is evident, never any did any thi^^ well for God, but it was accepted at
(...) hands unto such purposes as were me^^ and as tended to draw them farther
a^^ not discourage them. Nebuchadnezzar, ^hab, Jehu, and many more, are
instances of this: All wise Men, and some inspired ones, have commended
whatever of Virtue or Piety they found in the worst of Men: Paul, for instance,
in the Jews. Therefore I conclude, though some Readers who perform this Service
well, and make fit expressions of Devotion in their outward Behavior; I say,
though they may be often guilty of Intemperance and other Vices, yet we cannot
condemn them of Hypocrisy, nor ought to discourage them in what they do well;
but our Duty is by all means to admonish them daily, and to convince them of
the deceitfulness of their sin, that they be not hardened by it; and persuade
them of the necessity of universal Repentance and Obedience, as that without
which God will never accept them into the embraces of his Fatherly Love,
however he may forbear them some Temporal Judgments, and give them some
Temporal Blessings; much less will he bring them ^o his Heavenly Kingdom: Nor
can the true Children of God and his Church maintain such intimate Converses
with them, nor show such brotherly Kindness to them, as to sober Christians:
Nor ought ^he Church to continue them in her Communion if they do not speedily
reform and amend their lives: But yet we may not decline their Ministration,
nor make any Schism in or from a Church on their account, or condemn them of
Hypocrifie in their expressions of Devotion.

But because I would not be though hereby to excuse such Men, or give them any
encouragement to presume, I intrea^^ them to consider, that the Evangelical
Precepts of Perfection are plain and cogent^ The Grace vouchsafed is mighty and
powerful; and to those that will fight manfully the Victory is certain; every
one that see^ as he ought, shall find a way of escape o^ of every Temptation;
for God will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able^ If we will
resist the Devil, he will fly from us; if we will walk in the Spirit, we sha^^
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; for the Spirit that is in us, is stronger
than he which is (...) the World, or than the most importuna^^ lusts of the
Flesh. Therefore it is only o^ willingness to yield, that makes us easy (...)
be overcome: and he that thinks otherwise, dishonours the Grace of God,
discourages vigorous Endeavors after th^^ Perfection which is the mark we
should (...) aim at, puts the Conscience on the ra^^ or, as the Prophets's
phrase is, stays long^^ the place of breaking forth of children, enjo^ing no
ease and content in his mind, and prevents himself of the highest Joy in the
hope of eternal Life: Besides, he is an offense to his Brethren, tempts them to
forsake, if not abhor God's Altar, and prove Separatists from the best Church
in the World, and neglect their attendance on the most solemn and edifying Form
of Divine Service; and many more mischiefs which are consequent unto an
indulging themselves in Viciousness, especially that unmanly Vice I here treat
of. Wherefore I earnestly beseech all Readers to break off all evil Customs of
this kind, and to endeavor a perfect Temperance and Sobriety. I have been long
on this Head, because I think it of greatest weight; I shall be brief on the
rest.

3. Being prepared as before, he must endeavor to carry a sober Gravity in his
Countenance, as becoming his sense of approaching the Divine Presence, in the
most solemn Exercises of Holy Worship; and also the knowledge of his Office,
that he is God's Ambassador to his People, and their Spokesman to God, (for so
is every Reader rightly Ordained, as well as the Preacher; and in reading the
Scripture as a Minister of the Church, he speaks from God with the greatest
Authority) he should therefore suppress in himself all timerousness and
bashfulness, and carry a decent majesty and gravity in his Deportment and
Countenance.

4. He must make those ends to which the several parts of this Service are
designed, to be his own: He must endeavor by reading the Sentences of
Scripture, and the solemn Preface at the beginning, to compose the minds of the
People to great seriousness and true penitence. By reading the Absolution, to
confirm their hopes o^ Mercy and Pardon (but without presumption.) By reading
the Prayers, and repeating all parts, of Praise and Thansgiving, and the
Responses and mutual Provocations to Devotion, etc. he must earnestly intend
not only the expression of his own holy affections, but to excite the like in
others. There is a vast difference between the bare reading the Prayers, and
this manner of speaking to God and Man thereby, making the words as if they
we^^ our own.

5. He must endeavor, by a clear Voice and distinct Pronuntiation, to make
himself understood of all, and by a treatable Speech to make it easy for the
People (...) follow him, especially in those parts (...) Worship wherein they
are to join the Voices: But yet not so slow neither, that many should run
before him in repeating the Prayers and the Belief, as People are apt to do;
which seems to me a very indecent thing, and an affront to the Ministerial
Office, which is always to lead in the Public Duties of Religion. And in
repeating the Psalms, he should make such observation, that his Speech may bear
proportion with the generality of the Congregation; and that there be no pause
between their ending one Verse and his beginning another, but that he come in
with them at the last word; which makes this Exercise more like Psalmody, the
thing for which it is intended; wherein the People do much want to be well
instructed, for this would turn their Prejudices against this manner of reading
the Psalms into a great Devotion, and make them have a great delight therein,
as a thing which has most of Heaven of any thing that is done here on Earth.

6. In the reading the Solemn Prayers, he must put on the greatest gravity, and
outward expression of humblest Reverence and Devotion; this being one principal
part of Divine Worship, wherein we apply our selves most immediately to God
himself, and make the nearest approaches unto his Throne of Grace. And he must
labor to excite the same expressions of Devotion in the People, (as by his own
Example, so) by the affectionate pronunciation of these words appointed
thereunto, Let us pray: than which nothing can be better ordered, to
distinguish between the Solemn Prayers we offer up to God, and those we make in
the way of Psalmody.

Especially in the repetition of the Lord's Prayer I earnestly recommend the
most devout Reverence and Fervor: For we cannot but know, that as God has
greatest regard to that, as the Composure of his dear and only Son (his eternal
Wisdom appearing in our Flesh) and as the Catholic Church, guided by the
Divine Spirit, has ever had it in great veneration, (as the Instruction of her
Lord and Savior in the most principal part of her Duty, and the Declaration of
her Catholic Unity) so every Minister of God and his Church should show his
great esteem thereof, by the most solemn and devout manner of repearing the
same. Besides, in honor of the Author, and for the excellency of the matter,
and the comprehensiveness of the words (as well as in conformity to God and his
Church) this is required at their hands. And I insist particularly on this,
because I have observed, that many Readers having this Prayer more perfectly by
heart than any of the rest, they ramble it over with a greater have, and have
less care to express that Devotion which becomes this Solemn Exercise, in
reading that, than any other; the amendment whereof I humbly desire of them.

And because I have a great desire that this may be amended, I shall here add
somewhat to what was said before: I have observed so great a proneness in all,
(even the most Grave and Devout) to say this Prayer faster than is meet, and
without due expressions of their sense of the Majesty of God, who is in Heaven,
though our Father in Christ Jesus; and of the great concern of those things
most briefly expressed therein; that I have in my thoughts inquired a little
into the cause thereof, which seems to me to be this: That this Prayer being
the first thing that we teach Children in the Exercise of Religion, there is
not that care taken to make them say it distinctly and reverently as ought to
b^ but they are suffered to do it with such Rambling have, and without any
regard of what they are about, that it begets an ill habit by long custom,
which is so strong, that all the powers of Reason can scarce overcome it; for
else it were impossible but that those Men who are exceeding grave and intent
in the Prayer they make themselves, should ramble at such a rate when they come
to conclude with that our Lord and Master has made for them; and that they who
in all Offices of our Church, would have none to want that Prayer which is the
sum and substance of all our Prayers, yet should have less of Gravity and
Devotion in the repetition of that, than any of the rest. I cannot but impute
this to an ill habit that almost all Men get in their Childhood, in this matter
of saying the Lord's Prayer; and upon account hereof, I make it my earnest
Request to Parents, and especially those of the Female Sex, (who have usually
the charge of hearing their Children say their Prayers) that they will teach
them, and often call upon them to say deliberately and distinctly what they
speak in this Holy Office, but especially the Lord's Prayer: the want of this
care, causes most Men, yea, Ministers, to have so ill a delivery, that it is
very prejudicial to themselves and others, and a dishonor to the Holy Offices
they perform, and a great hindrance to Edification, especially in Ministers.
And it is this that would season their tender Years with a sense of God and
Religion, which would never go out. Some Vessels never loose the savor of that
which first of all is put into them, especially if it stand long; and if
Children were first taught a right manner of performing their Devotions, and
kept constantly to it while under the Tuition of their Mother, they would
retain the effects of it through their whole lives. And we see by sad
experience, the neglect of this not only is cause of the habitual Defect
forementioned, but betrays them to some ill Habits that make them a Grief to
their Parents all their days. And I have hope, if Mothers were but conscious of
their Duty herein, it would make them more wary of giving way to these frothy
or froward humors, and that inordinate concern for little things, which
indispose them for the same, and more willing to put on the Ornaments of the
inward Man of the Heart, which inables them thereunto, by giving them that
reverence and respect with their Children without which it can never be
effected.

I hint this, 1. Because (as the welfare of Mankind depends very much on the
good Education of Children, so) their good Education will be most essectually
begun in the well performance of this Duty; for in teaching them to say the
Lord's Prayer devoutly, they will have occasion to discourse to them of the
Glory and Presence of God, of the Awe and Reverence we must have for him; of
his alldisposing Providence, and our Dependence on him, etc. which are the
Principles of all Goodness; and also of the great Indearments of our Blessed
Savior, and of the excellency of his Person who taught this Prayer; whereby
they will be disposed to true Christianity; and this foundation being laid, it
will be easy to build them up in all Virtues.

2. Because I believe, that as Formality has for the most part its beginning
from the ill saying this Prayer, so it is most like to have its ending by our
learning to say it aright; and he that can be devout as he ought in this, will
be able to perform all acts of Devotion as becomes him. It Is the Opinion of
wise Men, That Christ and his Church has therefore thought better to teach us
to pray, by prescribing us Forms, than by giving us a Directory for the Matter
of Prayer, and leaving the Composure to ourselves, because no laborious
Exercise of the Memory or Invention should hinder the free and vigorous
Exercise of Devotion; and that these Forms are usually brief, (except those for
Fasts, which for a peculiar reason are longer) lest that vigilant and erect
attention of mind, which in Prayer is very necessary, should be wasted or
dulled through continuance if the Prayers were few and long. (as Mr. Hooker
has it out of St. Augustine.) Now when Men pervert these ends, and because
they are not necessitated to be intent, by being put to study their Prayers
just when they make them, or to remember what they studied before, therefore
they will take no care to be intent at all, but say their Prayers as a Hireling
does his Work, as fast as they can, that they may be at leisure for that which
they take more pleasure in. And because they have these brief Prayers very
perfect, their Devotion is the more imperfect; this is a very unworthy requital
of the Care of Christ and his Church: and how justly may such Persons be given
up to such Errors as have drawn many into Fanaticism? as, That Forms of Prayer
are the bane of Devotion: The Lord's Prayer is no Form: The way of Extempore
Prayer is the only acceptable Service of God: And to pray by the Liturgy, or
other Forms, is unlawful; and suchlike.

Let me therefore once more entreat the care of Parents in this matter, that
they will, first by their own Example, in saying this Prayer most distinctly,
gravely, and devoutly, and in the most reverent posture in their
Family Worship, and then by Instruction suitable to the Capacities of their
Children, and by the exercise of Parental Authority, bring them once to a good
performance in saying this Divine Prayer by themselves, (which might be easily
done if Men had a mind to it) and then bring them to Church with them, and make
them join with the Congregation in that Prayer first and in a devout posture
and with a distinct and audible voice, (and this they can be taught very young)
and this will beget a desire in them to join in the rest, a diligence in
learning to read, and a good pronunciation in all things: and this their
concern to make their Children devout, would prevent another concern (which in
the Church seems very indecent) and I mention it at the request of one who is
much offended thereby, which is, a concern that their Childrens Hoods and
Clothes sit in the best manner, and be kept clean; which makes them more busy
about these things, even in the face of the Congregation, than about their
Prayers: which I hope will seem to themselves so unfit, when they consider it,
that a word will persuade them to reform it. But to return to my purpose.

7ly, He that reads, should not only observe to do it in such postures as the
Church has ordered, as standing or kneeling in the parts of Worship proper to
each; but also with such natural actions, as lifting up the Eyes or Hands, etc.
which the Church has not ordered, and that because they are so obvious to the
reason of all Mankind to be meet expressions of the inward Devotion of our
minds, even such as are due to God by the very Law of Nature, that they need
not be ordered: and they are indeed so natural, that it is scarce possible for
a Man truly devout, to forbear the use of them. And it seems to me a thing
wonderful, how Satan has so blinded the minds of Men professing the best
Religion in the World, that they do not more plainly perceive the Decency of
such acts of Devotion, nor more generally practice them.

8ly, He ought also to make such fit Pauses where the People are to change
their posture from kneeling to standing, that they may have time to rise up,
and compose themselves for the acts of Adoration especially before the
repeating the words o^ Glory wherewith we begin the Office o^ Praise and
Thanksgiving.

9ly, He ought also to give to each part of the Service the proper accent or
measure of Voice belonging to the same: For it is not seemly that all should be
read in one Tone; but those parts that are for Instruction, wherein he speaks
to the People, should have one manner of reading; the Prayers, wherein he alone
speaks for them, another; and those Psalms and Prayers, wherein they speak with
him by turns, another. He that has no understanding of this, nor does observe
it as it ought to be, can never read well.

10ly, It is also fit to give an Emphasis to some words in Reading, for the
better expression and excitation of the devout affections which they may be
supposed to require. But some Readers have accustomed themselves to a kind of
devout Tone which puts an Emphasis on words where none is required; which
plainly shows an affectation of Devotion where none is: Whereas nothing shows
well in the Ministers of Religion, but that which appears to be natural, that
is the true effect of a devout mind in themselves, and directed by sober
judgment to beget Devotion in others. But this, of all other, is most indecent
in the repetition of the Psalms and all Alternate Readings, because the People
can observe no Concord when they read thus as they may when it is read with an
even Voice, and without such long Pauses as such kind of Tones are usually
accompanied withal.

11ly, And it is very convenient, that in Reading those things that the People
are least perfect in, the Reader should take most care to speak distinctly and
audibly; which I have often observed they do not: The reason seems to be,
because the care of reading right, what they are least used unto, takes off
from the regard they should have to read so that they may all hear. The things
I mean, are the Collects which are proper to several Days, the Prayers to be
used on several Occasions, and the Chapters that are read out of the Apocrypha,
etc.

12ly, Though it be a great advantage to this devout manner of Reading, to be
so perfect, that he need not have a continual eye on his Book; yet until he be
so, the Reader is not to venture on his memory alone: because mistakes are very
indecent, and discompose the Auditory.

13ly, He ought also to make careful provision that all things be ready looked
out beforehand, that there be no cluttering of leaves in the midst of the
Service.

And here I shall humbly offer to the consideration of the Governors of
Choires in Cathedral Churches, the Reformation of a great Disorder, that I
suppose proceeds from the neglect of something of this kind. I have observed
myself, and heard many complain, (some out of Devotion, others in Reproach of
our Service) that the Singing-boys are so rude and indecent in their Behavior,
that it makes that Service seem more like a carnal Divertisement, than the
solemn Worship of Almighty GOD: The occasion whereof seems to me, to be the
neglect of due care, that all the Singing-men and Boys know beforehand what is
to be sung, and have it, every one, turned down ready in their Books: for the
chief occasion of their talking to the Singing-men, and among themselves, is
about this matter; and their being so used to talk in the midst of the Prayers,
begets a profane Spirit in them, and is such an excuse for them, that they are
ready to talk and laugh together, on other accounts, in the very face of the
Bishops and the Masters of the Church: which has given great Offense to many;
and, I believe, the suffering this has been one great cause of the Contempt of
that Service among the common People, which makes the Reformation thereof the
more needful. I was lately told of an Order in some Lutheran Churches, (whose
Service consists chiefly in Singing the Psalms of David to the praise and glory
of God; and Songs of Love and Honor to our blessed Savior, composed by
excellent Persons among themselves, for which Service they have Assemblies
twice a day) and it is this: That all may know what is to be sung, there is a
Table hung up at the entrance of the Church, where it is written down what
Psalms and Songs are appointed for the day; and the People (coming early to
Church) go first to this place, and take notice what they are to sing, and look
it out ready before the Service begins. Such an Order in our Choires would
prevent the Indecency forementioned, as also the Boys running up and down with
Books to tell what Anthem is sung; which is also very indecent.

Neither is the care of Cleanness and Neatness both of Body and Garments to be
neglected. The reason of the Judicial Laws for the Washings and curious
Garments of the Priests, (which was for the beauty and glory of the Worship)
they were to perform) seems to me to infer thus much at least, That those who
administer Holy Things, should avoid all offensive Nastiness and Slovingliness,
and appear before God and the Congregation as becomes the Ministers of the most
Holy God, and of that Church which Christ designs to be without spot or
wrinkle: and especially in administering those things which are more sacred and
glorious.

The observation of the great proneness of poor Readers to neglect this, has
persuaded me of the convenient Institution of the Surplice, to teach them
Cleanliness, and cover their defects therein; which yet will not prevail with
many to keep Themselves clean, nor That neither.

Thus have I hinted such things as seem to make for the Solemnity and Efficacy
of Divine Service; and the contrary whereunto, I have either observed myself,
or heard others complain to be indecent: which I humbly offer to the
consideration of those that are to read Public Prayers. And I hope they will
be moved the more to the exercise of a serious consideration in this matter,
when they see the People do take notice what is decent and what indecent in
their performance, and concern themselves as much to have the Prayers well
read, as to have excellent Sermons preached. And upon such consideration, they
will find far better Rules to direct themselves, than my Pen has offered.

And I might use some Arguments to persuade all Readers to attend unto such
most serious consideration of this Advice; but I shall mention only this for a
Conclusion: that every one of them did declare (at their Ordination) their
belief that they were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take on them this
Office and Ministry to serve God, for the promoting his glory, and edifying his
People. For their undertaking such an Office, for such ends, at the motion of
the Holy Ghost, is the best Argument that can be imagined to persuade them to
such a performance as may reach those ends which the Holy Ghost is so much
concerned to promote; because they must apprehend it a dreadful thing to
frustrate the design of that Almighty Spirit, (as much as in them lies) by
their negligence and unfaithfulness, and a most happy and comfortable thing to
cooperate with him by a right performance of that honorable Office to which
he has advanced them.

ADVICE to the PEOPLE.
HE that will perform this Service as he ought, must be duly prepared for the
same. Now these Preparations are either Moral or Natural. The Moral are, 1.
That we rightly understand, and well consider what we go about; that we compose
our Minds to such a frame as becomes the Worship and Service of the most High
God and of his Son Jesus Christ; and so that we may perform it as in the
Fellowship and Communion of the Holy Ghost. He that thinks of nothing else at
his going to Church, but of hearing some celebrated Minister, one that has a
rare Gift of Prayer, or excellent Method in Preaching, where he shall have his
Mind stirred up to good Thoughts, or his Fancy pleased with curious Notions,
his Doubts resolved in hard points of Divinity, and himself assisted to defend
his Opinions and Party against their Opponents, and suchlike things: I say, he
that has only such thoughts at his going to Church, will never concern himself
to be so serious and composed, and to put on such a heavenly frame of mind, as
he that thinks he is going to do the work of Angels; to adore and worship that
Eternal Being that is enthroned in the Heavens, and that Lamb of God who has
taken away the sins of the World, who is in the midst of that Throne; To
celebrate their Praises, to make our common Supplications to God through his
Son: and to witness our subjection to his Laws delivered by immediate
inspiration of his blessed Spirit; and to act and exercise the Graces of thy
Spirit in holy Communion one with another.

And as this is evident from the nature of the thing, so is it apparent in the
effects among Men. For while these of the latter sort have always been
concerned to approach the House of God with great reverence, and at their
coming thereinto to be uncovered, and to bow down and worship, and to fall on
their knees at their coming to the place of their station, to implore God's
gracious assistance in the performance of this solemn and sacred Service; they
of the former sort cry out of these things, that they are Idolatry,
Will Worship, and Superstition, etc. And though not one of a thousand of them
know the original import of those words, nor scarce what themselves mean by
them; yet are they extreme confident in their own way of slightness and
irreverence in approaching to Sacred Offices, (especially in Public, where it
is most indecent) and in reproaching us for what we do out of Conscience of our
Duty, the reason where^^ (as it is evident to me) is this; That the sea no
necessity of such Preparation for attendance on the Public Worship, because,
in their Way, they find themselves a^ apt to be affected, by the Passions and
Rhetoric, by the Voice and Action of the Preacher, without such preparation,
a^ with it; and think it sufficient to lift u^ their Hearts to God when so
affected but without any outward expressions o^ Reverence and Adoration, and
that this ^^ the only Worship God requires of them and then indeed there were
no great need of such a care to compose our minds for his Service. Therefore
they think it need less, that we do the forementioned actions, in our Way, to
that purpose; an^ for that reason load the same with opprobrious names as
beforementioned. (...) confess I cannot but wonder (though know some will be
very angry with m^ for it) at the little Exceptions that an^ made against these
things, which seem ^^ very necessary and decent; and I hop^ that
(notwithstanding their great confidence) our opposites herein, on serious
thoughts, may come to have a better Opinion thereof.

I intend no Disputation (for I pretend not to Learning) nor does the thing
require it: For every thing that is fit to be done, is not fit to be disputed;
because that would suppose a difficulty where there is none. But I shall
propound a few things to be considered, to bring Men to right thoughts in this
matter.

1. That the belief of the invisible universal Presence of the most glorious
and only adorable Being, who has made and does govern all things, is one chief
Foundation of all Religion.

2. That the belief of the special Presence of his Glory and Grace, where the
Offices of his solemn Public Worship is administered, is the chief reason of
our meeting in Religious Assemblies for the performance of the same.

3. That the most express and intelligible acknowledgment of our present belief
and sense of this his glorious and gracious Presence, is required of all the
Members of such Assemblies, both by the nature of the thing, and by Divine
Revelation.

4. That uncovering the Head, bowing the Body, and falling down on our Knees,
does plainly signify such acknowledgment and that to the most dull and
unlearned o^ Mankind; especially if they do but know that we meet together to
worship God, as observed before.

5. That because it may not be possibly for them to mistake the meaning of ou^
Bowing, (that action which is the chie^ cause of offense) our Custom is when w^
bow down (especially when it is without words accompanying it) and worship, to
do it toward the place where the Hol^ Table is. Now every Man that will bu^
enter into any consideration of this matter, must necessarily perceive, that,
in such circumstance, if that action be done at all in the place of Public
Worship, it cannot be fitly done any other way. For Quires where it is most
customary, (especially those I have seen) have one entrance at the end against
the Communion Table, and two others on the sides, over against each other Now
if a Man at his entrance at the former, should think it better to face quite
about, and bow toward the Door he cam^ in at, than to bow right-forward toward
the Table, I believe he would make himself ridiculous to all the People;
because ^^ it could not signify Worship vt his approa^^ to God; And so it
would be on the sam^^ account, if he prefer bowing toward the People sitting
on either side. Again, if two making their entrance at the Doors on either
side, should choose to bow strait before them, rather than to turn toward the
Altar, none can think it would look like an act of Divine Worship, but it would
seem like their passing a Complement to each other? And if it should be done
the other way, there would be a greater likeness of civil respect to the
Company, than of Religious Worship. And something of like nature would be found
in bowing in any way whatever but that in use; and that, however the entrance
into, or situation of Quires be, or of any other places of Worship should be.
So that the only matters to be disputed are, whether it be lawful and fit, when
we first come into the place, purposely appointed and presently to be used, for
the most solemn Exercises of Divine Worship; I say, whether it be lawful for us
then and there to make public acknowledgment that we are sensible we are come
to appear in the special presence of God, and that, to give him the utmost
Worship and Honor we are able. 2dly, Whether we do not make a fit expression
of this by humbly bowing ourselves before him at our coming into the Church?s
3dly, Whether it be not best that all do (...) one way, since all come thither
to the sam^ end? And finally, Whether not all tha^ way where there is something
in the ve^^ place that may help to mind us of God^ condescension to be so
graciously present but where is nothing that may so much (...) seem to be the
Object of our Respect signified thereby but God's invisible presenc^ only? And
these are things that see^ to me to need no Disputation, as I said (...) first.

I know it is easy to multiply words (...) this Subject; but my intended
Brevity permits no more. Therefore I return to what I first began withal, to
remember those (...) write to, That it is their Duty so to man age all their
secular concerns and world (...) business, that they may never be habitualy
unprepared for these sacred Offices ((...) all are, that live a carnal and
unrighteo^^ life;) and that they ought, at the tim^ when they are presently to
approach the special presence, of that Almighty GO^ whose Name is great and
dreadful, an^ who will be sanctified by all those th^^ approach unto Him in the
acts of his solemn Worship; I say, then especially, the^ ought actually to
prepare themselves by (...) voluntary composure of their Minds; an^ also by the
most serious consideration of the glorious Greatness and aimable Goodness of
that God they are going to Worship, and of his special Presence in Holy
Assemblies; and by such Consideration and Prayer stirring up in themselves an
earnest desire to express their own, and excite the Devotion of others, to the
Honor of Almighty God, and our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. And I shall add
this, That as they go into the Church it will be very profitable to think on
such sentences of Scriptures as these following: Oh how dreadful is this place!
this is no other but the house of God, this is the gate of heaven. Lord, I have
loved the habitation of thy house, the place where thine honor dwells. Oh
how amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! my soul has a desire and
longing to enter into the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh thirsts
for the living God. I will go unto thy house in the multitude of thy mercies,
in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple. Blessed are they that dwell
in thy house, they shall be always praising thee. My soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness, whilst my mouth praises with joyful lips. One day in
thy courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. Such Meditations will
dispose us to that Reverence and holy Joy in God, as is meet to accompany us in
the performance of this Service, which holy affections, as we express by humbly
bowing at our first coming into the Church, so by falling on our knees at the
place o^ our station, secretly to implore God's acceptance of and assistance in
the service w^ are to perform to him.

And this they are taught by the best o^ Preachers, in his Ecclesiast. Chap. 5.
v. (...) Keep thy foot when thou go to the house o^ God; and be more ready
to hear, than to offe^ the sacrifice of fools. Which place I the rather
mention, because I have heard it perverted to a contrary sense, against this
very thing; as if Men ought hastily to run into the Church, and immediately fix
themselves to attend to the Prayer or Sermon^ and if we thus fall on our Knees
to worship and to beg God's gracious acceptance o^ our Service, and his
assistance to perform i^ as we ought, this they think is but the Sacrifice of
Fools. In answer to which I observe, that these things must be inferre^ from
the words that they may serve t^ condemn our practice.

1. That the only or chief part of God^ Worship was, in Solomon's time, as it
(...) with them, Hearing of Sermons; (when indeed we have scarce any notice
that in the Temple (the House of God in the highest sense) there was any
Sermons at all.)

2. That this Custom which they condemn, was more ancient than these Proverbs,
as it must be if this was intended to reprove it (which it may be they would
grant a mistake, (as being too much for its credit) if the whole strength of
their Plea from the Text consisted not therein.)

3. That this was the only or chief thing to which the name of Sacrifice was
then appropriate, for which reason Solomon calls it Sacrifice by way of
Eminency: which I dare say they do not believe, (if ever it were called so at
all.)

4. But, if that were meant by Sacrifices, we must be sure that it was the
matter of action, and not the ill manners of performance, that (in Solomon's
sense) did denominate it the Sacrifice of Fools. For we know there were such
things, as are in the most primitive and proper sense Sacrifices, and that of
God's own appointment, which yet by ill circumstances might be made the
Sacrifices of Fools. If any of these be a mistake, as I believe they all are,
no proof of any ill in this Custom can result from this Scripture.

But it is not more certain that an i^^ humor in the Eye gives its own
tinctur^ to all Objects presented to it, than it is that salse Opinions being
once fixed in the Mind, make Men think, Scriptures to soun^ the praise of their
own Way, and the reproach of others. But if I might give my Opinion of the
Instruction which thi^ Scripture affords, it should be this: Tha^ as the Jews
of old were not to think i^ enough that they went to the Temple and did their
Sacrifices as was required (as to the matter of them) but ought diligently to
attend to a due preparation and the right manner of performance without which
they would be accounted, in the sight of God, but the Sacrifice of Fools,
wherein God has no pleasure; So Christians now ought to tak^ the same care,
lest their slight and irreverent approach to the House of God or any
indecencies or disorders in wha^ they do there, may render their Evangelical
Sacrifices unpleasant unto God. These Sacrifices are those of ourselves, an^
especially of our Bodies: for by words and actions we do the same thing that
wa^ done by the legal Sacrifices; I mean in thi^ respect, that they were
Ordinances of Divine Worship; That Worship was by Types and Figures for the
time then present, (as was the place where they were offered) ordained by a
positive Law; This the Natural and Eternal Worship, founded in the unchangeable
rules of Reason, and therefore called our Reasonable Service: this Service we
perform when our Bodies are employed in the forementioned acts of Adoration, in
speaking in Prayer and Praise, and in hearing the Word of God read or preached.
But it is not these bodily Exercises and external Appearances (being alone)
that can profit ourselves, however they may in some respects honor God, and
edify others: Because the good they do to others is by accident, and not of
design; and therefore can no more profit us as to our acceptance with God, or
to the increase of Piety in ourselves, than what was there called the
Sacrifices of Fools did profit them. And they may be called foolish Sacrifices,
both because not done from a right Principle, nor to a right End, in which
things true Wisdom much more consists than in the best outward performance if
it be but in Masquerade, and for ill or mean purposes: But then they are much
more foolish if unduely done, (i. e.) in a slight and irreverent manner; in
which they will be very subject to do them that are not so disposed as before
is advised: Therefore we ought diligently to attend to the preparing ourselves,
both by the sobriety of our general Conversation and by our pious Resolutions
beforehand (...) and also by putting on such holy affection^ at the present
time, as may animate ou^ Devotions, and direct them to a right end; and then
continuing our care all the time of Divine Service, that we be not diverted nor
discomposed, either by our own vain thoughts, or by outward Objects; but that
the performance may be according to our preparations. And this is the thing to
which I admonish, as our moral preparation for this Service. And I must ad^ one
thing, (omitted before) viz. That it is very helpful to such composure for this
Service, That all persons do endeavor to be at Church before the Prayers
begin, that they may more sedately approach the Divine Presence, and perform
the Reverence due to the most high God; and, without any disturbance to
themselves or the Congregation, take their place in the Church; and compose
themselves by Prayer and Meditation for these holy Duties, as before Certainly,
it is a great advantage to a right performance, that we do this: for when we
come, suddenly and hastily, from our worldly Businesses, to sacred Offices, it
is hard ^o compose ourselves as we ought, and so, as to do them well; but being
at Church before hand, where we are retired from the World, and are helped, by
the Magnificence and Beauty of the place, and by our custom of worshipping God
there, to think of his glorious Presence, and fix our minds on him by serious
Meditations of his Attributes, Words, and Word, etc. I say, this ^s a mighty
help to a right performance: Then we may with more freedom make our private
Prayer to God for his gracious acceptance and assistance; and those who are
offended when we do it in midst of the Service, can find no fault with us for
doing ^t before it begin: And we shall also prevent, as much as may be, the
disturbing the Congregation by clattering of Pews, and by disordering others to
get to our places, and calling the Sexton from serving God to wait on us to
open our Pew: And indeed, I have thought that sort of Men very unhappy in this,
that they can have little time and composure to attend this Holy Office upon
that very account; which every one should prevent as far as they ^an;
considering they have souls to save as well as we. But yet let not this, nor
any thing else, so prevent those who are necessarily hindered from coming early,
that they come not at all; it is better to come but to the Blessing, than
wholly to forbear; God accepts the will for the deed, when we can do no more,
(and so he does a part for the whole) and by declaring our willingness to do
what we can, we keep up a reverence for the Prayers, and gain our selves a
share with the rest of the Congregation in all the Blessings sought therein.

There is one thing that I would advise, as a help to this our coming early,
which is, that a certain time be fixed by the Minister for the beginning of
Prayers, for then every one can the better order his business, and watch the
time that he may be ready; and where it is so, I know that Men of great
business may find a time to attend the daily Prayers: I have some Examples near
me that I can scarce forbear to name, but without leave I dare not. And I wish
withal my heart that while Prayers are read daily in some places in this City,
the Parishes where they are would take care for a Bell of a clear sound, and
advantageously hung, and would also cause it to be rung some considerable time
before they begin, which will be very helpful in this case: and this would
prevent an Abuse which I have observed in most Churches that have Prayers twice
a day, (viz.) that the Sextons are so careless and negligent, that the
Church-doors are not so much as opened when the Clock strikes the hour
appointed for Prayers, so that many that, out of Devotion, or by reason of the
difference of Clocks, come a little to soon are fain to wait a great while, at
the Church-door for entrance.

Secondly, The natural Preparations are, An ability to read distinctly that
which we are to read, and also to say perfectly by heart the daily Psalms and
Hymns; that so we may perform our part with the better grace.

It Is certainly a thing most evident to any that will consider it, that what is
to be done in the sight and presence of Almighty God, and especially when it is
to be done, most immediately, for his Glory and Honor, I say that it should be
done in the most excellent manner that is possible; and therefore it will need
no proof, to those that believe what I have already written on that Subjects,
that this which I advise is a great and most concerning Duty. And I the rather
insist on it, because I have observed that many who profess to be great
Approvers of the Common Prayer, and of all the Orders of our Church, do yet
seldom or never read their part of the Psalms, or join in the Repetition of the
daily Hymns and Responses, as they are ordered: which I impute to their great
carelessness in those preparations: and that many who do what is required to be
done, yet do it so ill, that it is apparent they want some excitation to their
Duty hereabout.

I shall therefore entreat all that are defective herein, to employ their
leisure hours to practice a more perfect and punctual way of Reading; which
will be a thing of credit and use to them, otherwise as well as here. I have
sometimes been present, when Men of good Quality and Estates have taken upon
them to read some Pamphlet in a Coffee-house; but read at such a pitiful rate,
that a Man could scarce make sense of it, or be ever the wiser for hearing it:
which is a reproach to them among wise Men; for whatever the defects of their
Education have been, it might easily have been supplied by their own diligence,
if an inordinate love of Company and other Divertisements did not make them,
too much, to decline profitable Retirements.

And I would entreat all Parents and Masters to consider the obligation that is
upon them in this respect, and to look that their Children and Servants do the
same: We owe not only our selves, but all ours, to the honor and service of
Almighty God; And if Children were taught, as they should be, their duty to
worship and praise God in the public Assemblies, and encouraged therein by the
example of their Elders, it would be a mighty Argument to persuade them to
learn the most distinct and graceful way of Reading. I have been much pleased
to see the good success of this care in some Parents that are well affected to
the Common Prayer, whose Children read their part of the Psalms with a better
grace than many when grown to be Men can do: And when these do attain to a
perfection herein, it will beget in them a great delight in that heavenly
Exercise, and make them love to attend the Prayers; and this doubtless will be
a mighty Antidote against Profaneness and Schism, and both plant and root in
our minds that Doctrine whence a holy Life cannot but spring.

II. That being prepared as before, we should endeavor our selves to perform
our part of this Service in the best manner we are able.

There are some things which I have observed in the performance of the People
that seem to be very indecent: As first That they speak when they should hear^
repeating together with the Minister, (and often before him) the Prefatory
Admonition wherewith the Minister is to begin thi^ Service, and the Absolution
which he give^ them after the General Confession; the Commandments also, and
many other things appointed for the Minister alone; which i^ by all wise men
held very improper and indecent.

The Church indeed has ordered some things to be said after the Minister, with
great advice. As, 1. The General Confession, wherein we solemnize that
Repentance that gives us admittance into the reconciled state, that which makes
all our Services acceptable to God. And there is this great advantage in the
conjunction of all therein (and that with the Voice as well as the Heart,) That
the professing of our Repentance in that manner, has all the circumstances
that may make it satisfactory and obliging, (at least as far as the Church can
provide in the case.) Therein every one does as it were accuse, judge, and
condemn himself before God and the whole Congregation, for sins contained under
the general heads therein mentioned (the particular instances whereof are only
fit to be repeated in secret Confession to God himself) and if he do it
seriously, with a Devotion suitable to the Words, it is to me a more
satisfactory sign of penitence, than the enlarged Confessions used in the other
Way; wherein some, (to seem fervent, or to make themselves so) run into the
enumeration of sins beyond due measures, being, as I think, beyond what the
Congregation in general can be supposed (though Christians of a sort inferior
to themselves, at least in their own judgment) to be ordinarily conscious that
they have been guilty in. And it is also obliging; for this should be a mighty
argument against returning to sin, when we have solemnly confessed our folly
and guilt therein before God and the Congregation: For having as it were called
God and Man to witness the truth and sincerity of our Repentance, it will be a
high aggravation of our carelessness, if we suffer our selves easily to be drawn
to sin again, and that either in omitting our Duty, or committing Iniquity in
any kind: and it will engage every good man to watch and pray, lest he should
enter into temptation, and be hurried into the sins for which he has so
condemned himself.

The 2d. is the Lord's Prayer; which (because it teaches the forming of the
affections and desires of our Souls unto the most excellent order, and raising
them by degrees to the highest perfection, and because it comprehends the heads
of whatever is to be sought by us at the hands of God, and that with greatest
brevity and plainness) it is necessary to be learned of all, even from their
first attainment of the use of Reason and Speech; And this the Church cannot
better provide for, than by engaging them always to say it after the Minister:
and besides, it implies a declaration of our Christian Unity, and a
renunciation of all Heresies and Schisms as far as we know them: And we do the
greater honor to God and our blessed-Saviour, in that we repeat that Prayer in
the most solemn and triumphant manner we are able; and every one, by a great
fervency and devotion therein, does most effectually edify his Brethren.

The 3d. is, the Repetition of the Creeds; a thing so useful to implant the
brief sum of Christian Doctrine in the memories of all, and to declare our
common joy and exultancy in the belief and profession of those truths upon
which the hopes of our common Salvation is built, as also to assist the
production and growth of the blessed fruits and effects of our Faith, by a
daily cherishing the Root; which we do by this solemn profession, and the
renewed consideration that we should join with it: I say, a thing, in these
respects (and many other) that may be thought so useful, that all good men must
needs commend the wisdom of the Church in ordering the same.

These are all of that kind that I remember in the daily Service, (to which
this discourse chiefly relates) and in these it is very commendable to say
after the Minister: but now, if those that are naturally loquacious, finding a
delight in saying what they should, remit the Exercise of their consideration
so far, as to say that they should not; here is a fault that ought to be
amended; and I am sure, on serious thoughts, they that love our Prayers will
freely incline so to do. For they will easily perceive, how indecent it is for
them to say after the Minister where he is supposed to speak to them; either by
way of Exhortation, Consolation, or Admonition; and that the People should
absolve the Priest, as much as the Priest absolves them; this has great
absurdity, and on that consideration will, I hope, readily be reformed.

It Is true, in the Conclusion of the Absolution, when the Minister speaks to
himself as well as the People (as the result (...) his declaration of God's
pardoning mer^^ to the penitent) to exhort that we should beseech God to grant
us true Repentance and his Holy Spirit (...) etc. we may very profitably join
with (...) soft Voice, Lord grant us true Repentan^^ and thy holy Spirit, that
those things m^^ please thee which we do at this present, etc. (And this will
supply a defect which some complain of, viz. That there is in o^^ Service no
preparatory Prayer:) For being now presently to begin the most immediate act of
Worship in the words o^ our blessed Lord, and to join with the Heavenly Host in
Hallowing God's Name and to proceed to all the rest; it is met that we prepare
our selves with this humble desire, that God will assist the sincerity of our
Repentance, and bestow on us the grace of his Holy Spirit, that such
performance may be well-pleasing to him, and the effect profitable to us,
rendering u^ more pure and holy in the remainder o^ our lives, and so securing
our admittance into his Eternal Joys at the end thereof.

2. As the former custom of saying after the Minister where we should attend
and say nothing, seems indecent; so it seems as much, if not mo^^ so, when the
People say before him, what they should say after him: and this appears to be a
disorder on the forementioned account that it is an invading his Ministerial
Function; for he is to lead and guide the people in all the public Offices of
Religion, and neither to follow their humors in the manner of his Prayers (if
he were, in other respects, to order them as he pleased) or to follow the
measure of their Voices, (where the words as well as the matter is prescribed)
though in both respects, Ministers are fain sometimes to depart from their
right. And as I have known, in former times, many that used the way of
Extempory Prayer before their Sermon, only to humor the people, when in their
own judgment they much preferred the constant use of a well-composed Form; so I
know some now, who do read the Prayers very fast (and that beyond what the
solemnity of the matter can bear) only (as I charitably hope) because they see
the people so subject to this disorder of running before them (which they know
not how to remedy otherwise) or because they see some hate to be long at
Church. But besides this, there are other ill effects of this custom, in
respect of our selves and others^ For it much h^^ders the devout operation of
the mind^ which is much assisted (...) hearing the matter first spoken by the
Minister, and by fixing on the intent consideration thereof, which he speaks so
as w^ can speak afterward with much greate^ fervency and affection, as every
ones experience will witness, that will but tr^ the thing.

And again, those that have so accustomed themselves to speak before the
Minister, are at a far greater loss to say such New Prayers, or Penitential
Psalms, which are sometimes ordered on Fasts, to be said with the Minister,
than those who are rightly practiced in the regular way, for that makes it
easy to say, and that very decently, such things after the Minister as we
never heard before. For if we attend well unto the main of the Sentence which
we are to repeat we shall be able to guess at the Conclusion; so that we need
not stay till he has quite done before we begin, but may hear the last while
we speak the first so as to say all right, and may come up with him in the
conclusion, as is most decent. And this would make much for the solemn
performance of the Service on extraordinary times; wherein now, for the most
part, only the Minister and Clerk ^re Speakers, and the Congregation sit and
look on; which to me, shows very ^ll.

But further, I have heard some complain, that come over from the
Nonconformists to our Church, and attend our Prayers, That this is to them a
most offensive disorder; and that it tended very much to distract their
Devotion when those that ^it by them thus ramble over the Prayers, and are at
the end before the Minister is half way; and I believe it cannot but give some
disturbance to the Minister himself: I am sure it has been no small offense to
me; so that I could hardly forbear telling them of it, but that I considered it
required more sedate discourse than that season would afford: And this was one
chief cause I engaged in this work; and I hope those who have not considered
this matter, will be persuaded, by what I have written, to order themselves
better for the time to come.

The 3d. thing is, that the people generally answer the Minister (especially in
the Responses and Psalmody) with too soft a voice; and are so little heard,
that it has seemed to me (coming into the Church whilst such Exercise was
performing) as if the Minister read a Verse, and then stop^ a while and read
again, the people bei^^ so little heard; (especially if the Clerk (...) absent,
as he may have often occasion (...) be, where Prayers are read every day. That
it seemed to me very unsuitable to (...) nature of that Exercise, wherein we
(...) to declare our Joy and Exultancy in Go^ and therefore (in speaking, as
well as sin^ing) should lift up our Voices, and pra^^ him lustily and with a
good courage, as it (...) Psalm. 81.1. And in many places t^^ Scripture exhorts
to a great cheerfulness (...) this Exercise, and to do it with loud a^^ exalted
Voices. And if we did so, (...) would make it show like another thin^ than it
does in the way I reprove, an^ would render it more laudatory and h^^ nourable
to Almighty God, and more pleasant and comfortable to our selves; an^ it would
also remove the offense tha^ some take against it as Unedifying; for that it is
only on account of this I mention, because they can understand bu^ half the
Psalm through the imperfect murmur of the people in repeating their part For if
every one spoke as loud and plai^ in repeating his Verse, as the Minister dot^^
in repeating his, (as they ought to do (...) they would have it appear like
Psalmod^ or an Office of Praise) there would be no cause for this Complaint:
And also those that cannot read, who might be helped, by the next by-stander,
to perform their part without it, or at least may understand as much as if the
Minister read all, and so be more edified in that holy Joy which this manner of
reading is apt to beget.

And I wish also, that people had the art to speak in some kind of Concord with
the Minister, either that their Voites might be Unisons with his, or a Fifth or
an Eighth from it: For there is a Speaking, as well as Singing together, that
is very harsh, by reason of a discordancy in the Voices of those that perform
it. And if men that have understanding in this matter, and good strong Voices,
would set themselves to do their part, it would soon bring the Congregation to
a better performance. And why should they not think themselves concerned so to
do? Is there any Exercise in the world of a higher nature, or more immediately
designed to the Glory and Honor of Almighty God? Besides, it is done as in his
sight and presence, and therefore to be done with a manly courage, and the best
skill we are able. And nothing can be more exhilerating to pious minds, in that
therein we have communion together (...) celebrating the Divine Praises, and in
repeating the Histories of God's wonderf^^ Works with one mouth as well as wi^^
one mind: nor more edifying, in that (...) is a provoking one another to
worship fear, and obey him, speaking to our selve^ and teaching and admonishing
one another, (...) the Apostle exhorts, in Psalms, and Hymn^ and Spiritual
Songs, singing with grace, a^^ making melody to the Lord in our hearts (...)
Ephesians. 5.19. Colos. 3.16. For the gracious Harmony which we find in our Sou^^
between our Reason and the truth of the Divine Revelations, between our
Affection and the goodness and suitableness of the objects therein proposed
(especially as the^ powers are renewed by the Holy Ghos^ must needs yield an
unspeakable delight (...) our selves; and also we make melody in o^^ hearts to
the Lord, when we exercise the Graces of Faith, and Love and Joy, and Hop^
therein (which is our singing with grace so as to express them to the sense of
other^ By this solemn, serious, and joyful mann^ of speaking we also teach and
admonish o^ another; for such pleasant conversation i^ repeating those
excellent parts of Scripture, sweetly insinuates holy Doctrine, teaching one
another to follow God and hi^ Saints, whose virtues and blessedness we
celebrate; and admonishing one another to take heed lest we have any fellowship
with the Wicked whose vices we condemn; and remember their woeful downfals, as
ensamples to warn us to repent, lest we also perish as they have done.

Now this being so pleasant and profitable an Exercise, why should not all good
Men endeavor to revive the credit thereof, by the most excellent manner of
performance? Certainly it had never been in the power of Satan or his
Instruments to have brought into contempt a thing that is so heavenly and
angelical, if Men had not remitted their care of doing it as they ought.

For our lauding and praising our most great and gracious God, and
communicating the delights of heaven-born Souls in this Way of responsory
speaking, is so accommodate to the capacity of all, descending to the very
meanest without abating the delights of the greatest, that it is strange that
any should not like it. I have known some Families, that for many Generations
have been so defective in the way of artificial Singing, that no one Person of
them could ever sing the Tune of a Psalm in any tolerable manner; yet these can
praise God with the Congregation in thi^ way of repeating the Psalms by turns;
and Children may be much earlier taught (...) do so in this, than in any other
wa^. And though this does create delight to some that cannot sing, yet it is no
abatement of delight to others that are skilful in Music: For that way of
Singing, which is now most commended, is but a melodious kind of Speaking; and
all Music^ Graces that hinder the understanding o^ Words, are quite out of
fashion. So tha^ here is a delight, that offers itself, most early, to be the
Felicity of Humane Nature^ anticipating the base and brutish delight of Sense,
that press upon us for entertainment, on the account of their being pleasant
and necessary; and that before we ca^ well discover the slightness of their
pretenses thereunto. And it is also such (...) Pleasure as loses not its relish
in any Age^ but still continues its force and power, t^ counter-work the
insinuations of such Delights, in all parts of life, as may be prejudicial to
our spiritual Felicity: and t^ sweeten and sanctify all the rest.

And I persuade myself, that if Person^ of Age and Honor, and those that have
some excellency of Art, would but desig^ and endeavor to make the best of thi^
Way, they would find great satisfaction to themselves thereby; and would also
beget an ambition, in the younger sort, to do worthily, in performing their
part in this heavenly Psalmody: And Youth, being so encouraged, would soon
conceive such a pleasure as I have before spoken of; and this (in conjunction
with other appointed means) would mightily facilitate the work of their
Conversion from a carnal to a spiritual Life, engaging them heartily in the
Combat against the Enemies of their souls, and in a serious prosecution of true
Felicity, (as obliged by Baptism). It is evident, that Life without pleasure is
an empty name, and little more desirable than Death: David lamenting, in his
own person, the deplorable Miseries to which Man in his best state is now
subject, asks the question, Wherefore God has made all men for naught? and yet
the Apostle tells of some who li-lived in pleasure, that they were dead while
they lived; hence we may conclude, that Man is a Creature capable of two sorts
of Pleasure, Mental, and Carnal; and that these do for the most part militate
against each other: and if carnal Pleasures prevail, and get the possession of
our Life, we are said to be dead in respect of our minds and spiritual part;
but if the Delights of the Mind once take place, and become our Employment,
then the Body is said to be dead, dead by reason of sin as the spirit is life
because of righteousness. So that it is of mighty avail, to cherish these
spiritual Pleasures, and depress those that are carnal; especially in the
beginning of our life; as that upon which the Happiness of our whole Life
depends. And this, I think, may be done by a pious and prudent Instruction in
the forementioned Duty, and by giving a good Example to encourage the
performance. I cannot give this matter the explication it requires: but I hope
a word to the Wise will be sufficient.

Having hinted these things, to rectify what seemed to me amiss; I shall now
briefly sum up all by representing that Behavior which I judge most decent in
the performance of these Sacred Offices: First then, having a due sense of what
you are going about, viz. to approach the most glorious and dreadful Presence
of the Almighty; and having composed your minds to worship him with that
Reverence and Devotion you ought, and declared this by the solemn manner of
your coming into his House, and placing yourself in the station wherein you are
to perform your part in this holy Exercise; you are to fix your eyes on the
Reader, as the Minister of God; the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; sent to
call you to Repentance, with offers of Peace and Reconciliation, that you may
escape his dreadful Wrath, which none can endure or withstand; which Wrath the
Host of Heaven and Powers of Hell, as well as the Creatures here on Earth, are
ready to minister, against all impenitent and profane Wretches. You are to
stand up and attend seriously to the reading of those Scripture-Sentences
wherewith he begins this Service; wherein are declared, in the very words of
God himself, the necessity of Repentance, and the certainty of Pardon, and of
his gracious acceptance of all that truly perform it.

You are also well to consider the inforcement of those Sentences, by his
reading the Exhortation following; in the mean time reflecting on yourself with
a due remembrance of your particular sins, that you may be the better prepared
to accompany him, with a pure Heart and humble Voice, in the General Confession
following. And this Confession (as it is ordered) we should make, in the most
humble posture; which, according to the use and custom of this Country, is
kneeling on our Knees; and this none are to omit, except hindered, by bodily
infirmity or such inconveniences as are sometimes occasioned by Crowds of
People; and in such case they must take care to supply that defect by other
expressions of humble Reverence. And we ought so to speak in repeating the same
after the Minister, that we thereby express, that we verily believe ourselves
to be guilty (in many particular instances) of many sins contained under the
several Heads there mentioned; and that we are heartily sorry for the same, and
earnestly implore pardoning Mercy and Forbearance, and to be restored to God's
Grace and Favor, trusting to his Promises made to us in Christ; and with no
less earnestness desire the assistance of God's Grace, to enable us to live
better for the future. This faithful endeavor to appear as humble Penitents
before God and the Congregation, will suppress the workings of Pride and
Self-conceit (the Parent of all Vice) and strengthen Humility, (the Nurse of
all Virtues) and beget that brotherly Love which is founded in true Piety and
Humility.

In attending in the same posture while the Minister, as God's Herald,
pronounces Absolution and Pardon to the truly penitent that unfeignedly
believe the Gospel; we ought to express a great Reverence of the Almighty (from
whom he speaks) and also the most humble Thankfulness, and holy Joy for his
rich Grace; which Grace is communicated to us by the Stewards of his Mysteries,
and cannot be received, in the contempt of their Administrations whom he has
empowered to dispense the same: And withal, earnestly begging (according to his
Exhortation) that our Faith and Repentance may be assisted by Divine
Cooperation, that we never fail of the same Grace, for want of meet
dispositions to receive it; nor neglect the improvement thereof when bestowed,
either at present or for the future.

When we have thus prepared ourselves, we ought, with heavenly Joy, and great
Fervency, to join with the Minister and Congregation in repeating that Divine
Prayer which our Savior taught. The beginning whereof being Eucharistical;
containing such Petitions as are for the immediate honor and glory of God; it
is fit, that we lift up our hands and eyes to Heaven, when with our voices we
declare our joy in God; and exultancy in his Praises. In the rest we supplicate
things necessary for ourselves; therefore we should express greatest humility,
in bowing our Heads and Bodies toward the Earth; as unworthy to ask so great
things, of so great a Majesty; and speak we should also with more lowly and
humble Voices in repeating the same. Until, returning, in the Doxology, to the
acknowledgment of his Paternal Government, which inclines him; of his Power,
which enables him, and of his Glory, which engages him to be so good to his
Creatures; and especially to his Children; we again lift up our hearts and
hands to Heaven, and repeat the same cheerful Voices.

After this, we pass to that high and heavenly work of praising God, in the
Psalms and Hymns following: Now though it were the work for which chiefly we were
made, and the excellent power of Speech given us; and that to which (while we
continued innocent and happy) our mouth was still opened, and we had freedom
and power to perform the same; yet now sin and sorrow, guilt and fear, cares
and vexations, have even made us dumb to God's Praises, and disabled us for due
celebration hereof: Therefore in this respect we ought most devoutly to join
with the Minister in the Response following the Lord's Prayer, Lord open thou
our Mouths, And our Lips shall show forth thy praise. O God make speed to save
us, O Lord, make have to help us. And while we seek his Grace, we should use
our own endeavors to open our own Mouths, and lift up our voices, while we
sing his Praises; and to awaken all our powers, to a cheerful performance of
this Service.

The Gloria Patri follows; at the repetition whereof we are required to stand;
a posture most fit in all manner of Psalmody, and when ever we speak or sing
praise and glory to God; but especially in the Public Assemblies convened
chiefly for that purpose. And in pronouncing these words of Glory, it would be
very indecent to do it in any posture that is less reverent. To sit, is very
offensive to all that desire to see this Service duly performed. And it is
reason it should be so; for these words signify a most immediate Address to
God, the Ever Blessed Trinity in Unity, in the highest act of Christian
Worship; and so fitly do they serve to the Adoration of the Deity, according to
the Faith of our Religion, that the Man that does not express the inward
reverence and adoration of his mind, by the devout manner of his pronouncing
them, and by a fit deportment at that time; gives suspicion of some defect in
his Christianity, or of some mistake in the way of expressing the same. And
this erect posture of our Bodies, would mind us to lift up our Hearts, yea, and
our Voices too, in giving praise and glory unto this Blessed Trinity; whereas
the other disposes us to a defect in both: and therefore, not only to avoid
giving offense, but for our own benefit we should observe it.

Being next to proceed to praise God by the repetition of the Psalms of David,
etc. the Minister (that he may mind us that it is not the ordinary reading
those parts of Scripture for instruction, but the repeating them as an Office
of Praise and Solemn Worship to Almighty God) I say, the Minister on that
account is ordered to say, Praise ye the Lord; and the People to answer, The
Lord's Name be praised. In hearing and saying which words, we must endeavor to
excite in ourselves holy desires to praise God, and so to perform this
Exercise, as may tend most abundantly to his Glory and Honor.

The Psalm with which we always begin at Morning Prayer, is, O come, let us
sing unto the Lord; and is most fitly chosen, both for mutual provocation to
this heavenly Exercise, and for instruction in the reasons thereof; and withal
to insinuate that obedience to all God commands in the whole course of our
lives should be consequent to the adoration and praise of God as our God;
showing in the conclusion the dreadful danger of not attending to the same:
which excellent matter requires that we be serious and intent in repeating this
Psalm, as that which will prepare and dispose us to be so in all the rest.

As for the repetition of the Psalms in course that follows; I have hinted
before what is needful in that matter; one thing pray remember, that none
should take liberty to fit in that performance, except constrained by bodily
infirmity; because standing is so much more fit a posture for the Office of
Thanksgiving; and sitting was counted so indecent in the Primitive Times, that
the whole Service was called Station; and sitting is only indulged now in some
Parts for bodily weakness, and because of the great decay of Piety, which will
not bear such strictness.

After the Psalms, a Chapter is read out of the Old Testament, that we may be
instructed in the Doctrine of the Creation and Government of the first World,
its Destruction and Restitution; the Promises of the MESSIA, and procedure of
God's Grace in preparing Men for Him, in, bringing them to Him, and saving them
by Him, as also in the correspondency of our Savior's Doctrine to that which
God of old delivered by his Prophets; his agreement to the Types and Figures of
him under the Law, and the accomplishment of what Moses and the Prophets wrote,
in that which he was, did, and suffered: in such, and many other respects, the
reading thereof is profitable; and therefore all talking, gazing, and careless
behavior (too often seen at this time) should be avoided, and we should appear
as diligent Auditors of those Divine Oracles.

The instruction therein given us to it, and the respite we have had hereby in
it, should cause us to return with greater joy and cheerfulness to this
heavenly work of praising God. For which, there is next prepared the
Evangelical Hymn TEDEVM; the most excellent that ever was composed by Man, and
speaks as much of Divine Inspiration as any thing (not acknowledged for such)
ever did: it is so fitted for Divine Adoration, and apt to excite Devotion, and
to minister most abundantly to the Consolation of good Christians, that even
that alone (methinks) should draw us to Church, if not withheld by great
obligations. I do therefore most earnestly recommend to you the most solemn
appearance, and the most devout acts of Worship, and the most plain, joyful,
and reverent manner of speaking, and what ever you can think becomes the
repetition of those excellent words.

The Adoration of God, and of our Savior by the foresaid Exercise, cannot but
dispose us to the next, viz. the Chapter out of the New Testament, which being
called New for its excellency and perpetuety above the Old, and reporting to us
either the wonderful Works of Christ and his Apostles, their holy and
incomparable Doctrine, or perfect and exemplary Lives, cannot be too diligently
and reverently attended to: And I should think those who have strength of body,
would do very commendably in standing up at the reading thereof, on the same
reasons for which we do so at reading the Gospel.

Then we are ordered to return again to the work of Praising God; which nothing
but Carnality can ever be weary of. And the Psalms here appointed, are such as
minister most fitly to the Joy conceived by hearing the glad tidings of the
Gospel sent to the Gentiles (of which we were) as well as to the Jews; and
therefore to show that we have not received that Grace in vain nor heard the
Gospel of it without diligent heed, we should repeat that Psalm devoutly and
joyfully.

The next that follows is the CREED^ which contains those matters in which a^^
Christians are of one Mind, (all that believ^ with their hearts to
Righteousness) and o^ which all Christians must make public^ Profession, (all
that will Confess with their mouths to Salvation.) We therefore, in one posture
and all with our Faces one way, (as indeed it should be, and would be if the
Reader did give the example) do with one mouth repeat that excellent Form of
sound Words, which so excellently ministers to the stedfastness of our Faith,
our rejoicing in Hope, our unity in Love, and cheerfulness in the Praises of
God and our Savior, that no Man, that considers it, could choose but stand up
and bear his part with us; and he that finds no spiritual joy and elevation of
mind in repeating the Creed, can have nothing else but a natural delight in
hearing the most excellent Sermon, or ravishing Prayer: For neither of these
can have any Matter that is more transporting; and if it be only the words or
passion of the Speaker that affects us, it is no spiritual delight. Let those
therefore take heed, who regard not to honor God, and express the joy of their
Faith, by a due performance in this matter.

After this, we return to the solemn Duty of Prayer; which that we may perform
with mutual Charity, and great Devotion, the Minister salutes the People with
that excellent Option, The Lord be with you: and they return, And with thy
Spirit. Which words, spoken with the holy affection they ought, are apt to
beget such a disposition of mind, as will render the Prayers very acceptable to
God, and edifying to one another. The Minister yet farther (to awaken all the
powers of our Souls to this most serious business) is to say, Let us pray:
which therefore we should compose ourselves to do with all our might.

The Response wherewith we begin, Lord have mercy, Christ have mercy, Lord have
mercy, serves most fitly to assist this endeavor of great fervency; and being
repeated without it, seems very indecent, and a kind of vain Repetition:
therefore remember this.

Then we renew the Repetition of the Lord's Prayer; which Prayer certainly is
of that excellency, that no Christian should think it too much to use it both
in the beginning and end of this Service. And indeed, this is the very sum and
substance of all our Prayers; and others are added only for greater solemnity,
and fuller explication: And therefore the oftener it is repeated, the more
devoutly it should be said, and greater fervency excited by it: of which before.

To relax a little the great intention of mind that should accompany all our
Prayers, but especially the Lord's prayer we have that excellent Response,
wherein the Minister and People exchange some devout Ejaculations, for
themselves, for their Superiors, and for their Brethren: which as they mix
holy delight with fervency, so they greatly strengthen the Bands of Christian
Unity.

The rest of the time we spend in repeating several Collects; most excellent
for the matter, and comprehensive for the words: In praying for the King and
Royal Family, for Magistrates and Ministers, the Church and State; all
Christians, and all Men; and in giving solemn Thanks for God's mercies to us
and them: in all which we should strive to preserve a constant intention, and
true devotion of mind: and if, to that end, we accompany the Minister with our
voice (as many do) it should be always with such caution as I have expressed
before; and so it may be very useful thereunto; and also it would make us
perfect in saying those Prayers, which may be of great use to us in other
cases, besides that, of our joining with the Congregation therein. But now if
Men having got the faculty of saying the Prayers readily by heart, do let their
Tongues run before Wits, and say faster than it can be thought they understand,
or can consider what they say; then they abuse God's good gifts, and shame
themselves, and disturb others. It was greatly blamed by the Apostle, that some
of those who had received the miraculous Gift of Tongues, were so forward in
the use of it, as that it hindered their due consideration of the things they
spoke, and others understanding them; for amending whereof, he proposes his
own example to their imitation, saying, I will pray with the spirit, but yet
so, as with the understanding also; and I think we may infer something from
hence for our instruction in this matter. I have taken liberty of some
repetition and enlargement here, because I have often heard this Disorder
complained of since the first Edition of this Book; and many wish the
Reprinting of it for this very reason, that it may be lent or given to those,
in whom they observe this Disorder, to rectify their practice herein.

What I have here discoursed shows, that I believe this Service to be well
ordered to prevent all wandering thoughts, to preserve a due presence of mind,
to promote pious affections, and to give the best entertainment to true
Devotion; and indeed on all these accounts I do wonder very much that it is not
had in greater estimation.

But Men must do their own part, also toward this; therefore, I earnestly
admonish all Men to avoid sitting, lolling, leaning, and all indecent postures,
and to continue kneeling meekly and devoutly, in the whole Performance if they
can. And I think Men too apt to plead Infumity, out of indulgence to the Flesh,
which should be taught to suffer something for the honor of God, and interests
of our Souls, which have suffered a great deal by its pleasures and passions:
and I doubt not, the pain we endure to express our reverent Adoration of the
Almighty in this his Solemn Worship, shall be accepted of God as a part of Our
Mortifications, and of our Conformity to Christ and his Church; and no
Christian that considers the great and most dolorous pain wherein Christ
offered himself in Sacrifice on the Cross, can think much to endure some little
pain, that we may offer our Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises with that
reverence which becomes us: nor can any Man have that sense of the adorable
Majesty of the most High, when his head and elbows lie on the bench of his
seat, as when he kneels in an erect posture with his eyes and hands lift up to
Heaven. The actions of the Body have a great influence on the Soul; as well as,
on the contrary, the Souls affections move it to act: Besides the decency of
this, which is so evident, that I may appeal to Men themselves in this case, as
the Apostle in another of the same nature, (being in a matter of Indecency in
God's Worship) Judge in yourselves what is meet. Can any Man think it fit to
supplicate the infinite Majesty of Heaven and Earth in any but the most humble
posture of body, (which with us is Kneeling) or that we ought to sit on our
breeches when we sing or speak praise unto him? Certainly the power of Error
is very great, that it can blind the mind of Man in a matter so evident and
plain. But I trust that those to whom I write are not so deceived.

Yet I would not be thought to commend any such Uneasiness, as is either
against the due composure of the Mind, or the good estate of the Body: I know
God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, and prefers the due operations of the
Mind before the most devout actions of the Body, (especially where they cannot
be both in perfection, but our exactness in one must necessitate some
relaxation in the other.) But there is an uneasiness that is so small, that it
rather helps than hinders inward Devotion, and disturbs nothing but a lazy
humor, or ill habit; things no way to be indulged. But yet where there is such
real Infirmity as justly excuses from Standing, or Kneeling upright, etc. Men
should be careful that in what posture soever they be, they make such
expressions of Seriousness and Devotion, that it may appear to the Congregation
that they omit nothing out of Laziness, Contempt of the Orders of the Church,
or a profane Spirit.

I have now run over the Daily Office of Morning Prayer; and shall proceed no
farther, because he that will observe what I have written in that, cannot be to
seek in ordering himself a right in all the rest.

It may not be inconvenient in the Conclusion, to offer something that may help
us to show our Devotion in leaving the Church, as well as in coming to it and
continuing there. It is said of the ancient Jews, that they went out of the
Synagogues backward, that they might declare their unwillingness to leave God's
House, in which holy Men have desired ever to dwell. And (whatever that way of
expressing this may seem to some) I am sure there ought to be such affections
in us, as was thereby signified; and nothing we do that is contrary thereunto,
can seem decent to wise Men; and if People's hurrying out of the Church as soon
as ever the Sermon or Prayers are ended, be not apparently contrary to such
affection, my conceit deceives me; especially, when they will not stay to take
God's blessing along with them; I say God's, for though a Man pronounces it,
yet it is such a Man, as is his Minister and Herald, the Steward of his
Mysteries, whose words, as such, he will never suffer to fall to the ground,
but will give them their effect on all that are meet Subjects: and therefore to
despise that glorious and mysterious Blessing wherewith these holy Offices are
concluded, shows great Ignorance to Profaneness, and little manners, and is an
affront to the Blessed Trinity, and to the Congregation met to do Worship
thereunto.

POSTSCRIPT.
ONe thing I have thought fit to add, as useful to the design of this Paper,
which is, My humble Request to Ministers and Vestries, that they will take care
that fit and worthy Persons be put into the Office of Parish-Clerks; for that
the defects of the People in performing their part of this Service, is chiefly
imputable to this cause, that they have not a Clerk that i^ able to lead them
in the right way of that performance: for if the People would but consider,
that it is the special work of a Clerk to Guidethem in what they are to say and
do in this Service, and would make such observation of him as they ought, (he
standing so advantageously for the same) it would bring the whole Congregation
unto a good performance. Some Persons that may offer themselves, and that it
may be the Parishes interest to choose, may have such natural Defects, that they
can never be made fit for the place; and some are of such a profane Spirit,
that they will never set themselves to study to do their duty therein. Both
these are to be rejected; whatever advantages the Parish may make by their
Election: for, so sacred a thing, as the Worship and Service of Almighty God,
is not to be subjugated to the secular interests of Men: And it is a great
reproach to any Parish, that, to save themselves a little charge in maintaining
a poor Family, they should employ a Person to be Guide to the People in this
most solemn Office of Divine Worship, that is in any way a scandal or dishonor
thereunto, or unfit to perform it as he ought. And if any such be already in
the place, my request is, that the Minister and Vestry will use their Authority
to reform them, and engage them to study the most decent and graceful manner of
performance; and if that cannot be effected, to force them to admit the help of
another, in that matter, though they continue to do the Parish-business in
other respects. I make this humble Request, because I believe that a Clerk that
was a devout Man, and one that had a good command of his Voice, if he would set
himself to study, to excel in performing what is required of him, he would
greatly assist the People in the well performance of their part, and excite
them thereunto.

AN APPLICATION TO THE Clergy and to the People.
To the CLERGY.
AND now I most humbly beseech the Reverend Clergy of this Church that they
will not despise the Advice of so unworthy a Person: If there be not Truth in
what I write, I desire not to be regarded, but if there be, Truth is a thing so
Divine and Excellent, as not, for my unworthiness or for any defects in the
delivery, to be rejected; especially, when it is Truth of the highest concern
that can be imagined, that which concerns (and that most immediately) the glory
and honor of the most High God, and his Son Jesus Christ our most holy
Savior; that which concerns the supreme good of the best of earthly Creatures,
and that with relation to his better part, and his eternal state; that which
much concerns the happiness and welfare of this flourishing Church, and tends
to its Unity, Sanctity, and Glory: That which concerns the discharge of your
great Duty to God and his Church, and is the best Return of the Benefits you
partake from both; I say, when it is Truth of such concern, methinks it should
be considered, and that whoever it come from as the Instrument, since God
himself must be acknowledged the Author.

The Worship and Service of God has been esteemed of all wise Men, the chief
of those things wherein Men or Angels could employ themselves; It Is the
principal End of bringing Men into Holy Orders, and of instituting Christian
Assemblies, the greatest Means of inducing that super-excellent Principle of
the Divine Life, that Evangelical Spirit which only can overcome our Vices, and
sublime Moral Virtues into Christian Graces, and make our good Works Seeds of
eternal Glory. This is the Prelibation of and Preparation for the unspeakable
Joys above: It Is this for which all our Noble Faculties were given us: It Is
this that chiefly distinguishes us from Beasts, and that, more then the mere
shape of our Bodies, or our Natural Reason, and gives us the greatest Likeness
unto, and Communion with the Angels. It Is the Worship of One God that is the
greatest Incentive to Love, and the strongest Bond of Peace among Men; and
among Christians, it becomes more so, when we worship Him in and through One
Mediator and Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Natural Worship which was offered in the State of Innocence, the
Superstitious Worship of guilty and affrighted Criminals, the Typical and
Pedaegogical Worship of Mosaical Institution, all these had something of
Excellency in them; nay, they were the best thing the World had besides: But
the Excellency and Glory of Evangelical Worship is above them all, it far
exceeds whatever else we can do in this Life, and is the highest Felicity of
the Life to come; Angels began it here on Earth, Luke 2.13, 14 and shall
rejoice to accompany us therein when we are in Heaven. A Man that has the
Power of Godliness in his Soul, is apt to say when he is at Church, as the
Disciples when they were on the Holy Mount. Lord it is good for us to be here;
or as David Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, and are ever praising
thee.

These Things I have touched, that I might introduce this great Consideration,
That the most learned and highly dignified of the Clergy ought not to think it
any abasement of themselves, but their great honor to read Common Prayer: It Is
not (as some would persuade us) the easiness of the Thing that can make it
contemptible: There was no great difficulty in that which God required of the
Priests in the Services of the Temple, yet was their Office esteemed no small
Honor; the reason whereof was, because they approached nigh to God in the
Offices of his Solemn Worship: for as the Greatness of God's Majesty requires,
that not every one that can do the Thing, be admitted to perform it, as an act
of his Solemn Worship; but that it be done by Persons solemnly set apart
thereunto; so the Consecration which Men receive unto this Office gives them
the chiefest Dignity and Honor that is to be found among Mankind; and all
Nations ever had their Priests in highest Esteem (however they are scorned in
this profane Age.) But then if their approach to God in the Offices of his
Worship, which puts this great Honor upon them, becomes contemptible in their
eyes, and they think scorn of all but Preaching; I think they do greatly err.

And when (through bodily Infirmity or the Attendance on other parts of their
Ministry) they are obliged to employ Readers, I think, for the same reason,
that they ought to take care that they get such as (at least) do not scandalize
that Service either by their wicked Lives or undecent Performance. To perform
the Public Service of God in the Assemblies of his Servants, is too great an
honor to be put on Fools or vile Persons: Certainly something very
considerable must be pleaded in excuse of those, who professing a great Zeal
for Holiness in their preaching, are careless whether the Prayers be read well
or ill; and that do employ such to read them that are a dishonor to this
Service. It cannot be sufficient to say that these Readers are poor Men, and
that they have no other way to live, and that they employ them out of mere
Charity: For that Charity to Men which is against the Love of God, and a Regard
to the Solemnity of his Worship, is an ill sort of Charity: And so is that
Charity to particular Persons which is against the Edification of the Church:
Nay, I am of Opinion it is no Charity to those to whom it is showed; for their
ill Reading proceeding (for the most part) from their vicious lives, which has
destroyed in them that sense of God and Religion, which is the only due
preparation to a well performance of this Service (as I observed before) so
long as they see that slubbering over the Service without that Seriousness and
Devotion which their corrupt Affections cannot admit, and which for the reason
forementioned, they find it difficult to counterfeit; I say, whilst this will
serve to get their living, they will not be so easily brought to Repentance, as
if (being rejected of all on this account and brought to extreme poverty) they
were taught by the Rod to reflect on their folly, and to see the necessity of
Amendment. Affliction is God's way of teaching men to Repent, and I think men
should not think to find any better. Therefore I wish that if Scholars will be
profane, they may know they must be poor; and none that have power would put
them into employment in the Church, or own them; but as they have nothing to do
to take God's Name into their mouths, while they hate to be Reformed, and cast
God's Word behind their backs, so the Church will not suffer them to do it,
especially when it is apparent they desire it for a Secular Advantage, and to
maintain them in a Vicious Life, and not out of any desire to Serve God and his
Church. And I earnestly pray that a stop may be put to the admission of such
into the Ministry if it might be, although I know it is extreme difficult as
things stand. For, as our Church directs, so we have great need to pray at this
time, That God will so guide and govern the minds of the Bishops and Pastors of
this Church, that they may lay hands suddenly on no man, etc. which Prayer, I
hope, will offend none.

Some there are also that do it thus slightly out of Erroneous Principles, and
some out of Carnal Wisdom, the first sort think the Common Prayer a grievous
Imposition, and that they ought to be left to their liberty to Pray as they
please; but because the Rulers will have it so, they submit to it only to get
their livings, or else for the sake of Preaching; which being of so great
necessity to men's Salvation, they think it must not be forsaken, though they
are forced to accompany it with a defective disorderly Form, (as they think
ours is) and they hope their good intentions toward men's Salvation will
excuse their using it, when they can do no better. But men thus minded will
make what have they can to rid themselves of what is burdensome, and so ramble
over the Service without that Devotion it requires, and plainly show by their
careless manner of Reading that they do not love the Common Prayer, though they
are forced to use it.

My Opinion is, that men of this temper (as well as of the former) ought not to
be encouraged neither by the Church nor the Ministers thereof; and that they do
need both Repentance and Reformation, to set them right in the Judgment of God
and all good Men; God will be Sanctified in all that come nigh him, and that
especially by the most solemn, decent, and reverend Performance of the Offices
of his Public Worship; and this he can never be, by men that are not fully
persuaded in their own minds of the goodness and fitness of the mode in which
that Worship is performed. For it is certain that doubts in this, will hinder
such manner of speaking, and such deportment as becomes their approach to God,
who is Glorious in Holiness, and Dreadful in Praises; and in that respect also,
I think it may well be required, by the Laws of this Church, that every one
that is admitted to the Ministry do declare publicly their Assent and Consent
to all and every thing, etc. God himself does require a full persuasion of mind
concerning the goodness of what we do (especially in weighty matters;) and
tells us that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, and he that doubts is damned
if he does that he doubts of; and therefore the Church cannot be blamed in this
Order: for such Readers were better out of the Church than in it, for they
scandalize the Excellent Service thereof, by their slight performance far more
than the profane do; for that they seeming very devout in their
Pulpit-Prayers, and so indedevout in the Common Prayer, people are apt to think
the Common Prayer not to be the Worship of God, but something to be read on
condition to have liberty to Preach, and that it is no matter how it be done if
done; and it is these men that encourage offensive and indecent behavior, for
many of their hearers though they are present at Prayers, yet never observe any
thing that the Rubric directs to be performed, but sit and loll and stare
about, and endeavor, as much as they can, to seem unconcerned in what is done,
till the Minister goes into his Pulpit (for they came to Church only for the
sake of what is done there) lest they be thought to approve the Common Prayers:
these, I sear, conceit that they do well in this, from observing the slightness
of such Ministers in Reading the Prayers; or at least it prevents that
conviction which such might receive from the devout and reverend performing the
same by others; and I believe this, because in those Churches, where the
Minister is very devout in Reading the Service, I could never observe any such
behavior; so that either such people seldom come to such Churches (and I think
(giving more scandal by their ill Example than they receive benefit by the
Service) they were better be absent) or else the power of a Devout Performance
is such, that they cannot but be inclined to imitate it. Therefore if there be
any such employed in the Ministry of this Church (as I have cause to fear there
are) that Read ill on this account, I earnestly entreat that they will reflect
on the indecency and ill consequences of such practices, and (as a Remedy
hereof) that they will consult the most learned and judicious (that are devout)
of our Church, for suller Satisfaction in the Reasonableness and Excellency of
our Service, that so they may perform it more Reverently and Affectionately, to
the Honor of God and the Peoples Edification; and this they will find to be
more comfortable to themselves, and of better acceptance with all good men,
than halting between Two Opinions: For it is evident, that if there were any
thing sinful in the performance, they ought not to have undertaken it at all
(for Evil must not be done that Good may come.) But if there be only a defect
of some degrees of Goodness in this Service; then, Reason requires, that they
do not make it worse, by an ill performance; but that they do make the best of
it for effecting the ends to which it is designed, viz. God's Honor, and our
Spiritual Consolation. Yet those that Read ill on the account of such Error,
are more to be pitied and less condemned than those that do so out of a kind of
Carnal Wisdom; yet such there are; I mean those who are very unwilling to seem
Zealous and Devout in that which is condemned by a great Party of Men, because
they may (some time or other) be uppermost, and indeed when such men can stand
as fair for Preferment for the present as the most devout, and yet have the
good Opinion of those in whose power it may be to prefer them hereafter; there
may be many temptations of this kind especially among a People consisting of
Parties, that bear an equal Balance, and therefore the Consideration of this is
not to be despised. Men are apt to think they may serve God and Mammon, but it
cannot be; it is true we may and must become all things to all men that we may
win some, but in this they rather win us than we them; (if it may be called a
winning, when for fear that a Party may prevail, we are indevout in what we own
for the Worship of God) and indeed we shall never win them from their Errors by
such compliance: for the reason of all mankind must agree, that men may not
serve their own Carnal Interests to the prejudice of that Worship whereby God
is most eminently Served and Honored in the World: And whilst these men
acknowledge our Liturgy to be such, none can approve their indevout performance
for fear of being esteemed High Church Men, and of losing their Interest in
that they call the Moderate Party; nor will any of that Party ever be brought
from the admiration of the Ex tempore Way by such kind of politic Readers:
And yet I believe these men do mistake their Interest (I mean even in things
Temporal) for the Pious of every Party agree in this, that men should have an
hearty Zeal in the Way of Worship they use, and do abhor such men as prefer
their own Interest before God's Honor. Now if Times should change, a man,
formerly Zealous in the Way of the Church of England, if he should see Cause to
change with them (as he may sometimes do) would have as kind Reception among
such, as those that were afraid to be zealous for fear of offending them, and
they would be more apt to glory in bringing one such devout man to their way
than in the Conformity of many such lukewarm worshippers. And for those that
in all ways of Religion make Gain their Godliness. and only follow Christ for
the Loaves and Fishes, they are for shutting out as many as they can (on any
pretense) from sharing in the Benefits of their Church Order, and think the
fewer the better cheer, they will be sure to exclude from preferment, those
that fared well in the times that were ill with them (whether they were zealous
in the contrary way or not) by such terms of Communion as they shall very
hardly comply with: or if they have a Latitude beyond men's reach in that kind,
it is ten to one but the want of the fear of God will betray them to some vices
that will spoil the comfort of all their worldly enjoyments, and make them less
happy than the greatest sufferers for Nonconformity can be: But lastly, if
Carnal Wisdom should so discern the inconsistency of such Vices with this
Worldly Happiness, as, on that account they should avoid them, yet the loss of
the Endless Joys of Heaven, which such shall never obtain, will detect the
folly of this sinful Indifference and carnal Compliances.

I fear these kind of Men will but deride me for all this, and be more hardly
persuaded to be truly zealous and devout Readers than either the Profane or
Erroneous, because they have less sense of the things of another Life, and what
relates thereunto, then either of them. Concerning the later there is no
question, and of the former not much; for the cares of the World and
deceitfulness of Riches, are named before the Pleasures of other things, in
choking the Heavenly Seed, (viz.) The Doctrine of Eternal Life. For though
Sensual Pleasures are of another Nature, and have other Objects than Spiritual,
and are therefore called the Pleasures of other things, and upon that account
must needs discompose the Mind and make it unfit to conceive or enjoy the
Delights and Pleasure of Communion with God and his Saints in these Holy
Exercises, yet because we are many times incapable of such Sensual Pleasures,
and satiety often turns to loathing, (especially for a time) this helps men to
see the vanity thereof, so that they may be disposed by good counsel at such a
time to turn themselves to seek the Pleasures that are always Savory and
Lasting, of which we can never surfeit. But now these Lusts of the World (that
is Covetousness of Worldly Riches) as they are more insatiable than those of
the Flesh, so they have scarce any recesses: they follow us into our Closets,
and to Church; accompany us when Sickness shuts us into our Chambers, and even
on our very Death beds; and nothing but the utter destruction of our Faculties
can eradicate this Love of Money: These Lusts give us no time or composure for
the Hearty and Zealous Service of God, but though our Bodies be present, our
Minds being agitated with Thoughts about the World, cannot intend what is done
to the Honor of God and their Souls Health as they ought. Therefore Men of
this Temper cannot be good Readers till they be converted; and their Conversion
is very difficult as our Savior has taught, Matthew. 19.24. There remains
therefore, but this Way to make them Read well, That it be for their Worldly
Advantage so to do, and that none will employ them except they can approve
themselves to Read very well: and this will make them Study it, and it may be,
Do it as well to the Peoples Edification (though not to their own Acceptance
with God) as the most Pious Men. And it is my humble Request, to those who
Employ Readers, That they will be sure they do so before they Admit them to the
Place, and will not suffer themselves, by any Importunity, Interest, Relation,
or any other thing, to be drawn to Accept an ill Reader, to the dishonor of
this Service whereby we Glorify God, and in which we enjoy the Highest and
most Heavenly Delights in our own Minds and Spirits, if a good one may be got.
But because there may be defect of such, and that they may be forced to accept
such as need the Instruction, Encouragement, and good Examples of the Ministers
to whom they belong, my Request is farther, That neither their reserving
themselves for long and earnest Preaching (which I fear, God will not bless,
when set up to the contempt of the Prayers) nor Greatness, nor Studies, nor
Business, nor any thing else may hinder them from Reading sometimes themselves,
according to that good Order of our Church which they are many ways obliged to
observe; and the more obliged, for that they receive a large share of the
Dignities and Benefits thereof; I beseech them therefore that once a Month at
the least, they will most Devoutly and Solemnly Read the Service of the Church
in their own Persons, that thereby the Readers may see they have a great love
for the same, and be excited to do their Part the better in imitation of their
Masters. For certainly nothing will be so prevalent as the Example of those on
whom they depend to make Readers more studious and industrious to do their
Duty. And to this I also beseech them to add one thing more, as that which will
be of great avail to beget a reverence and good esteem for our Prayers in the
Minds of the People, and draw them to attend more Constantly and Devoutly upon
them; and that is, That the Ministers of the Parishes will never omit (but when
constrained thereunto) to be themselves present at the Prayers, when ever they
are read in their own Churches: And also that here, in this City, where
Churches are very near (in some of which Prayers are read twice a day) that all
the Neighbor Ministers will come as often as they can possible, to such
Prayers. It has been a great Grief and Offense to some good Men, as I have
heard them complain, that they see so few Ministers at the daily Prayers at St.
Christophers; a Church that stands most advantageously, to give Example and
Influence to the City and Kingdom; where Prayers are read twice every day: and
the Example of a devout Attendance and good Performance of Eminent Ministers of
our Church in that Place, would for ought I know, Influence the whole Nation
unto a greater Reverence for the Public Worship according to this Order.
Others I have heard complain of the Ministers retiring into the Vestry all the
time of Divine Service, as if they came to Church to Study and not to Worship,
and were not as much concerned in the Common Prayers of the Church as the
People. I know not what their Plea may be in this Case, but I have not been
able by my own wit to excuse them to those that have blamed them for it: But
the worst Complaint of all has been, That of many Ministers, who at the time
of some eminent Lectures, will sit in a Coffee-House, till Prayers be almost
done, and rather let their Company be wanting to the Solemnity of God's Holy
Worship, than leave a Pipe of Tobacco before it be smoked out, or not take
their usual Dose of Tea or Coffee: I confess I have been much troubled to hear
of it, and am more so to mention it, especially thus publicly, if the thing
were not notorious, and in no way that I know of, I can assist the Reformation
of i^ so well as in this, which I hope will plead my excuse with all good Men.

I know Ministers may be many ways hindered sometimes, from attendance at daily
Prayers, and I am against those that are so censorious in imputing their
omission to ill causes; no man desires to preserve a greater Reverence and
Respect for the Clergy of our Church than my self, but yet I cannot excuse them
wholly in this matter, and therefore I humbly beg, that it may not be reckoned
any sign of dis-respect that in my Zeal for the Service of God I have proceeded
thus far, since I believe the good or ill State of this Church depends much on
the Esteem or Contempt that is had of its Public Service of God, and the Good
Order appointed for the same, and upon the Love and Reverence, or Neglect and
Contempt of it by its Ministers, which will very much influence the Minds of
the People in this matter.

I have but one thing more to beg of them, which I must crave leave to press
with some earnestness: which is this,

That in their Sermons they frequently inculcate the Duty of being constant and
devout in attending the Common Prayer, and that they prove to their People,
That it is not only possible, but much more easy, to be devout in the use of
Forms of Prayer, than in the Ex tempore Way: Methinks when Papists out of a
Malicious Design to divide us that they may destroy us, and Separatists out of
Mistakes of some Scripture Expressions and -- an Opinion of Experience, cry up
the way of Ex tempore Prayer in opposition to the Public Liturgy, to the
distracting Men's minds, and dividing the Church; I say, surely, since it is so,
the Ministers of our Church should not think themselves unconcerned about the
Esteem their People have of the Common Prayer and their Devotion in the use of
it. But since they that are against us on both sides, are so earnest in
defending their own ways and reproaching us, the Ministers should not be remiss
in counter-working such ill Designs by the most Rational and Convincing
Demonstration, joined with Fervency and Importunity of Persuasion in their
Preaching on this Subject.

And here I must first observe, That general Exhortations to Piety and
Holiness, how Excellently and Passionately soever delivered by our Ministers,
tho they may make them admired and followed, and that by Men of several
Persuasions, yet they will not have the effect such should intend, if Men's
minds be corrupted with false Notions, about the exercising and expressing of
Piety and Holiness: But as the best Food may do Men hurt by reason of ill
Humors in the Stomach; so may such good Doctrine through ill Principles in the
Understanding. Such as think the best way to be holy is to Consecrate
themselves in the Blood of Heretics, as the Papists, or of such as will not
let Christ rule over them, as some Enthusiasts; (believing that as the Levites
were by Moses commanded to Consecrate themselves, every Man on his Son and on
his Brother that had committed Idolatry in worshipping the Calf, so they may
Consecrate themselves by this) and such as think the way of Holiness lies in
distinction of Words and Phrase, and in their Garb and Garments, or in
strictness in some Indifferent and Apocriphal Observances not injoined by God
nor the Church: Nay, if they think it lies in being above Ordinances and
rejecting both the Sacraments, in railing against God's Ministers, and
censuring all their Neighbors that are not of their Sect, and calling us all
Ignoramus's and Persecutors; or, (which is most my Subject) in condemning all
Forms of Prayer, and all Superiority among Ministers as Popish and
Antichristian, and applauding Independency as the only Scriptural
Church Government, and the Ex tempore Way as the only Acceptable Mode of
Worship (and that in public as well as private) I say, all these and whatever
other of like kinds (of which there are abundance in the World) when they hear
the most Powerful and Passionate Exhortations to Piety in general terms, they
make the Application to Zeal in their own Way: Wherefore I think those
Ministers who believe that in a Sincere and Diligent Improvement of the Order
of our Church we may Exercise the most Fervent Devotion toward God, and the
most pleasant Communion of Saints in Holy Worship, and also prosecute the
Sanctification of our Hearts and Lives, in a way to be preferred before all
other Ways wherein Men pride themselves: I say, those Ministers that believe
this (as all of the Church of England, and especially those concerned in its
Government, I hope, verily do) should not think it enough to preach up Piety in
general, but should think themselves obliged to make such particular
Application to a Devout and Constant Attendance on the Common Prayer as a
principal Act of it, as may prevent such abuse of their Sermons by Men of ill
Principles, and make them most serviceable to the Honor of God and Peace and
Welfare of this Church.

If we Observe the Sermons and Books of the Nonconformists on this Subject, it
will appear that all their Discourses of Piety have always a secret (and very
frequently an open) Relation to the Exercise thereof, in their own way, and
very bad Reflections on ours as being but a kind of pageantry and ostentation
of Devotion, and mere formality and outside, without that life and power which
makes it acceptable to God, and that such Devotion is no evidence that we are
truly Regenerate and his Elect People. And this is that which confirms their
Disciples in their own way, and hinders them from so much as trying ours. And
shall the Ministers of our Church be outdone by those they account
Schismatics? Does not the Ancient Orderly and Solemn Way of our Church deserve
as much Zeal as the novel Ways cried up with them? Is not the Honor of God and
Salvation of Men's Souls as much concerned in being devout in our way as in
theirs? Is not a great love to the Common Prayer, a delight to attend
constantly on the Offices thereof and a fervent Devotion therein, as good a
sign of true Grace as the love of Extempore Prayer, and a delight in going
frequently to private Meetings? Is not the neglect of God's Worship in our way
(especially by those that profess to approve the Order we have for it) a sign
of the deadly state of carnal-mindedness and unregenerateness (from which Men
must be converted, except they will be damned) and so to be esteemed by us, as
well as the neglect thereof in their way. All Men know, that no Way or Mode of
Religion is so good that Men should be thought good Christians merely for being
Educated therein, and Professing to approve the same: but such Education and
Profession will aggravate their sin if they be not serious in that Way of
Religion they approve, and so will the Excellency and Goodness thereof, if they
slight it. And should not the Ministers of God (who must bear the blame for
ever if God be dishonored, or Souls damned through their default) Consider
this, and persuade Men to a greater love to God and to his Worship in the Way
of this Church? And so to order their Concerns with Relation thereunto, that
they may approve themselves truly Converted and such as shall be Saved. It Is
Seriousness in Religion that speaks Men true Christians, and this joined with
Constant Attendancy on Religious Duties (which is the fruit thereof) is their
security against Apostasy of all kinds, and I must say this, that however there
may be, and I am confident there are, some of all the different Ways of
Religious Worship that are truly Converted and shall be Saved; yet none that I
have known are better Christians then they who are Serious and truly Devout in
the Way of the Church of England: I know there are many Hypocrites that seem so
and are not, amongst us as well as others, but I speak of the Sincere. And if
it be so, sure Ministers should think it their Glory and Joy when they can
bring Men from a Carnal and Unregenerate State, to that which is truly
Spiritual and Gracious. It has been some grief to me to see that Ministers on
both extremes should outdo ours in this matter; those of the Papists seem to
exult, not only when they can bring one of our Religion over to their Church,
but when any of their own turn from a Worldly Secular Life, to that which they
call Religious and Spiritual: And the Separatists not only pretend to leave us
upon the account of forsaking the World and devoting themselves to God, but to
set up their Meetings on purpose to call others to a more Spiritual Life in
communion with them, and rejoice greatly in their success therein; and in
nothing do they more glory over us than in out-doing us in Seriousness and
Intention in the Matters of Religion, And should we give them cause so to do?

It seems to me, in very deed, there is too great cause of the same Complaint
in Christian States (where Men are Christians by their Birthright) as was in
that of the Jews under the Law, That there is none that understands and
seeks after God, and much more then was in the Apostles times (where Men
chose Christianity though accompanied with Reproaches and Persecutions) when
yet it is said, That all minded their own things, and not the things of Jesus
Christ: The Worship and Honor of God and our Savior, is not so dear to Men as
their Secular Advantages. Men do not believe or consider that it is of
necessity to their Salvation to love God above all, to do all that ever they do
with a greater relation to his Honor than to their own Carnal Advantages; and
that the careless neglect of these Holy Offices, when they might order it so as
to have time to attend them, gives great suspicion they live to themselves and
not to God, and are yet but Carnally Minded and in a state of Spiritual Death.
Methinks therefore, those who have Care of Men's Souls should be Jealous over
them, lest that all their Labor should be in vain, whilst they continue such
under their Ministry; and be in Travel, as Women with Child, for their
Regeneration. It Is certainly a woeful sign when Ministers have no greater
Concern than to get Money and to make the best of his Livings, and little
regard whether his People be pious or profane: God complains heavily of this in
many places of Scripture; and it were easy here to declaim against it in many
words, if it were not sufficiently done by others, and also so evident in it
self, that no Minister that will but think on it, can be ignorant of the great
sinfulness of such a Temper; and that the Wrath of GOD, and Curses of the
Damned for this their neglect, awaits them in the World to come, and that they
are the grief of good Men, and the scorn of bad ones in this World on that very
account. They cannot but know that it is they that make Men Separatists, while
no Man that has any Concern for his Soul, can endure to live under a Minister
that regards the Souls of his People not half so much as he does the Life of
his Beasts: And I wonder they can blame any Man for endeavoring their
suspension, since they can be no true Christians, who had rather see so many
Souls damned, as may be in danger of it by such Men's neglect, then that they
should be displaced by a Just Suspension, that a better may take their Place.
For my part, I wish all Parishioners were convinced of their Duty in this kind,
and would endeavor all that is possible, in just ways, to remove such
Ministers: And those that are most offended at this, should do their duty in
this before they think of separating from the Church; and those that have not
thought of this, (which was the right way to ease their grief) but run into the
wrong way of Separation, let them now return at the earnest Invitation of this
Church by her best Ministers: and when they have resolved to do their Duty to
God, and to the Church, according as the Law requires, let them, in God's Name,
see that their Ministers do theirs too, especially in taking care of the Souls
of their People, and in performing what the Law of God and the Church requires
of them in order thereunto; and and if, by humble Entreaties, and a pious
Example, and by due Attendance for their Reformation, they cannot prevail with
them, they ought to complain to the Bishop of the Diocese, to endeavor their
Suspension, and that more Faithful ones may be Entrusted by them, with the Cure
of their Souls: And it seems a great Argument to persuade all Nonconformists
that are truly Pious to return to the Communion of our Church, and to endeavor
to approve themselves Devout and Pious in the Offices of God's Worship
administered therein, for that by so doing they may be greatly helpful to the
Reformation of things amiss, to the Encouraging the good and Removing unworthy
Ministers, to the Honor of our Religion, and Salvation of Men's Souls: And I
believe there be many Pious Bishops in this Church that would be glad to have
such just proof of the Misdemeanors and Neglects of their Clergy, as might
enable them to suspend such as deserve it, and put into Employment those that
are able and willing to do better, and there are many such to my knowledge, who
can have no Employment in the Church, while these naughty Persons, by the
favor of careless and prosane Patrons, get into good Livings: And I look on it
as none of the least mischiefs of Separation, that thereby those that should be
Instruments of Reforming the Parochial Churches by Example, Admonition, and
assisting the Exercise of Discipline therein, (which cannot take place there
through the prevalency of Profaneness, and majority of evil Men) forsake them
and leave Ministers and People to perish together, at least for any thing they
will do to help to save them. It Is not enough for such to rail against ill
Ministers and corrupt Communions; for if it be found that through their unjust
forsaking the Church to join in Separate Societies, it comes to pass that
Parishes cannot be reformed, nor evil Men (Clergy or Laity) be expelled as they
ought, their professed detestation of such will not excuse them, but aggravates
their guilt: But this Subject has been sufficiently Handled by others, I only
thought fit to mention it, that none may think a legal liberty to separate will
excuse them from Sin or Schism.

But as I have thus expressed my Dislike of those Ministers that are negligent
in a Charge of such Infinite and Eternal Concernment; so I cannot but declare
my great Respect for such as are Diligent and Faithful: and many such there are
(God be thanked) in this City and Kingdom; however some Nonconformists have
reported them so few, that they were next to none.

And I do heartily congratulate the happy success of such Ministers; such, who
in Conscience of their Assent and Consent to the Orders of this Church, have
taken upon them the constant daily Reading of the Common Prayer in their
Parish-Churches, and that do frequently Administer the Lord's Supper therein;
that do not make the backwardness of their People to come to Prayers and the
Sacrament, a pretense for their own neglect (when they never tried how forward
they would be if they had Opportunity and good Instruction) but set themselves
to do their own part (in waiting on the Ministries to which they are called)
and to persuade the People to do theirs, in a constant and devout Attendance
thereon, and to beg God's Blessing on their Endeavors, for their Peoples
Edification and Salvation. In this way they have found success beyond their
expectation (the numbers of those, that have attended the Prayers and
Sacrament, being much greater than what slothful Ministers suggested to be
likely;) and the comfort and satisfaction of performing their Duty, and their
delight in the good success of it, as far beyond that of the negligent in their
carnal ease and pleasure. And I have great hopes that if others would follow
their good Example (especially at this time) it would be a means to restore the
Unity, Peace and Glory of this Famous Church, to prevent the Confusions and
Troubles we are afraid of, and to establish us on such sure Foundations, that
the Gates of Hell, (the Subtilty of the Jesuits, and Bandings of all sorts of
Fanatics) shall not be able to destroy us, or alter our well settled
Constitution. And I beseech those Ministers, that, by their Pious and
Unblamable Lives and Excellent Preaching, have obtained a great Reputation
among the People, and a potent Interest in their Affections, that they will now
show themselves hearty Friends to this Church, and be very Devout and Serious
in Performing the Offices of God's Public Worship, according to the
Prescription thereof, and Zealous in persuading the People to attend the same,
that now when the inforcement of the Laws brings many Dissenters to Church, who
formerly never came there, we may show them the Practice of our Public
Devotion in its own Beauty and Excellency; and this would be more effectual to
their Conversion to the Union and Communion of our Church than any Disputes can
be. And I also beseech those Ministers that are most strict Observers of the
External Part of the Rubric, and most Zealous Assertors of the Lawfulness and
Excellency of all things in our Church Order, that they will also show
themselves as Zealous Practisers of the Internal Part, viz. Of that Devotion
that is agreeable thereunto; and lead a Life in other things that may adorn the
Order of this Church, and allure Dissenters into the Communion thereof: And I
believe this would do much more good than reproaching them with their former
Miscarriages, and putting a harsh interpretation on their present Compliances;
than exulting in the Execution of the Laws, and using bitter Invectives in
Sermons or Discourses, against them. I would not be thought to discourage any
in what is truly their Duty, as it may be of our Governors to enforce the Laws
of the Land: And I believe, they design only the bringing the Nonconformists
to a sober and serious Consideration of their Duty, and a faithful and
impartial Enquiry after satisfaction in such things as they scruple; that we
may all Unite in the Solemn Worship of that God who is pleased when his House
is filled, and bids that Men be constrained to come in; that we may Live in
Christian Charity and keep the Bond of Peace (now much loosened by our
different Orders and distinct Communions;) that we may Join together to Oppose
the Popish Designs (which are much furthered by our Divisions;) Finally, that
we may provoke one another to Love, Honor, and Obey our Superiors, and to
Encourage their Government by most ready and free Assistance; and may lay aside
all unjust Suspicions, and froward Oppositions, whereby they may be provoked:
that so at last there may be no other strife, but whether the Prudence and
Sweetness of their Government, or the Humility and Reverence of our Obedience,
shall be greater.

And although the Penalties which the Laws inflict on Dissenters seem severe,
yet since the Execution thereof is committed to a most Merciful Prince,
furnished with the Advice and Counsel of most Pious, Prudent and Moderate
Bishops, and by his Prerogative Royal he may make such Relaxations and
Moderations therein as the Circumstances of Persons and Things require, I
cannot think it my Duty (or any Man's else) to discourage any (especially the
Ministers, as now obliged) in presenting such as do not Communicate in our
Public Worship and the Blessed Sacrament. And I cannot but observe this in our
Excellent Constitution, That as the Severity of the Laws against those that
Factiously Dissent from the Public Order, and affront the Wisdom of
Lawmakers, by setting up their Self chosen Ways against that they prescribe: I
say, as this does secure the Peace of the Kingdom as well as it can be; so
their allowing to the King his Prerogative Royal and Supreme Headship in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, provides better for what Toleration and Connivance is
needful toward Peaceable Conscientious Dissenters, than any of the Models in
which some Men have taken so great pains to direct the Parliament what Laws to
make: But all this on the by.

I know some will think me over Zealous, and that it were better to encourage
Ministers in their Compliance with Nonconformists; Connivance at their Meetings
and breach of Order and their not coming to the Sacrament; and in their
pleasing them by omitting many things in our Service, etc. But although I
honor Piety in all, and would please my Neighbor for his good to Edification,
yet I do not think we are bound to remit any thing of our Duty to God and our
Governors for that Reason; neither do I think that Edification lies in being
humored in that kind, I am sure the Peace of the Church does not: Hear what Mr.
Baxter writes on this Subject, and I doubt not it will be better taken from him
than from me. Cure, page 392. The Pastors who will preserve the Churches, must
not be so tender of preserving their Interest in the Religious Persons of their
Charge (such as are their Parishioners) as to depart from Sober Principles and
Ways, ( such as those in the Church of England are in our Judgments) to please
them, etc. And a little farther, This pleasing Men is not the Way of Peace, it
may prove a Palliate Cure for the present, but prepares for after Troubles and
Confusions. -- for the weakness which cries up one Error to day may cry up
more to morrow (and it is so in crying down too) and if you will please them,
you must follow them on, except you repent; and then you might at much cheaper
rates have forsook them just where they forsook the Way of Truth and Peace.
(Such is the observance of the Order of our Church.)

For though Men's Humors, their Corrupt Affections, and Erroneous Conceits may
be gratified hereby; yet their Reason and Conscience is not: When Men consider
seriously, that the Minister does against the Laws and Orders made with
greatest Advice of Church and State; against the Public and Solemn Declaration
of his Assent thereunto, and Consent to Practice accordingly; against his
Solemn Promise at his Ordination, and also by Subscriptions; and against the
Unity and Peace of the Church: I say, when they consider this, they cannot in
their Reason and Conscience approve the Omissions, Alterations or Additions
which some take liberty to make in the Matters of God's Worship prescribed by
the Rubric. For the violation of such Obligations in Sacred Things (though
seemingly small) carries in it the appearance of Contempt of God and his
Church: God looks we should be Just and Faithful to our Promises in small
things as well as great, and if it were lawful for them to Promise, it is
necessary they should be careful to Perform: It is not haste of Business or
every kind of avocation that can excuse the curtailing of the Service; nothing,
but what a Man may justly think the Church would have allowed for an excuse (if
she had foreseen it) and dispense with her Laws for, can discharge the
Conscience from the Obligation of this Promise at any time.

Therefore if any one, to please his own private fancy, or to gratify others,
leaves out, or puts in, or alters any thing of the Service, I cannot think but
he sins against God; and I am sure he gives offense to many that have a
Reverence for the Orders of the Church; and scandal to those that have not; and
incourages others to reject and disobey them in greater matters. But that which
is worst of all, is, that it divides the Ministry and the Church: Some are
counted Moderate Men and Friends to Nonconformists and Dissenters, whilst
others (that believe such to be Schismatics, and that the Church has given
them no cause of displeasure) who strictly observe the Orders of the Church,
and seek not so much to please as to bring Dissenters to Repentance and a
return to their Duty, these are branded as Popishly Affected Persecutors and
High Church Men, and are many ways rendered contemptible to the Vulgar. It seems
to me a thing much to be desired, that Ministers would agree to be Uniform in
their Practice in these Matters; and that they would all thoroughly study the
Rubric, and agree together, in what cases they may be excused from the strict
observances of such things, which many constantly omit, and others very often;
and let the People know it; that we may not think it proceeds from condemning
themselves of doing amiss in their promises to observe all and every thing,
from differences of Judgment about the Lawfulness of such Things, or the
Contempt of Public Order; and in what cases we may expect it, and in what not:
And I think if the Ministers of this City did begin this Agreement, it might
give great Satisfaction and good Example to the Country. I have heard some
Country Ministers (that are for strict Obedience) complain of the Defects of
some Eminent Persons in this City in this matter of following the Directions of
the Rubric, and that they have found by Discourse with them, that it has been
caused through ignorance, in that they never thoroughly Read it. Certainly this
is a great Reproach, and should be considered; and since the chief strength of
this Church consists in the respect which is given by its Ministers (especially
those that should be Examples to the rest) to the Rules and Orders thereof, and
their Unity and good Agreement in observing the same, I hope this Advice will
not be despised: And I am sure this will make much for the Agreement of the
People, who are much distracted and divided by the different Practices (as well
as Judgments) of the Conforming Clergy, and they would be more disposed to seek
Satisfaction about Conforming to the Orders of the Church, who scruple it, if
their Scruples were not too much Justified by these Men's Irregularities; and
they would be a thousand times more like to be Reformed and brought into good
Order by the Methods prescribed by the Laws of Church and State, if they had
not this to say for themselves, That, those who Prosecute them for breaking the
Laws, make but little Conscience of keeping them themselves, or of suffering
others (that believe all things good and lawful that are ordered) to walk
disorderly; not observing the Law, but through breaking it, to dishonor the
Wisdom of Church and State themselves: whereas they disobey, not out of
contempt, but because they fear to dishonor God and offend against the
Dictates of their own Consciences, and would swear (as I have heard many say)
that it is not to serve any Interest, but out of pure Conscience they Conform
not (although I fear, they have not used due ways of satisfaction.) Now it is
mighty hard to give a Reason why some should be indulged in a slothful or
contemptuous Disobedience, and they punished that disobey out of Conscience. I
confess could we say, that these Men prosecute the End of the Law, which is the
Edification of the Church, and the Peace and Prosperity of the State, Unity and
Charity in each Man's Parish; in which Cases some things at some times, may be
dispensed with; (and a Man may be sure the Lawmakers meant they should:) or
could we say it were like to win the Scrupulous Dissenters, that these Men pass
over many things that the Church injoyns, and do some which she allows not, we
might say somewhat to purpose to silence this Complaint, but it is hard to
prove either, (when so many Worthy Persons of this Church have written so much
to the contrary, and Twenty Years Experience disproves it;) therefore the best
way to bring Nonconformists to Reverence and Obey the Public Order, to promote
Peace, Amity and Edification, is, For these that are called Conformable
Ministers, to take care to observe the Public Order strictly themselves, and
to have frequent Conferences, Personal and by Letters, for the effecting a
general Agreement therein: And I most humbly beseech the most Reverend the
Archbishops, and Right Reverend Bishops of this Church, to take the Matter
into their Serious Thoughts, and consider what Concern they have herein, since
the different usages of Ministers in Cathedrals (in Presence of the Bishop
himself) gives great offense to some that hold the forementioned Obligation to
a Uniformity in all things, and gives greatest strength to the Argument of the
Dissenters against their being prosecuted for not observing the Laws.

There is one Thing which the Rubric most plainly orders, but is generally
omitted, (viz.) The Administering the Sacrament every Sunday, at the least in
Cathedral Churches, and I mention it, because I believe the due performance
thereof, and the preparations requisite to the same, would be a great means to
reform the Manners of those that officiate in Choirs, of the Officers belonging
thereunto, and of the Servants of the Bishops and the Chief of the Clergy;
these ought frequently to attend the same (as well as the Priests and Deacons)
and may be easily brought to it by the Authority of their Masters (and no doubt
many Devout Persons in the City would come also) and this Solemnity, performed
as it ought, I verily believe would be a means to restore much of Primitive
Devotion, which the Errors and Disputes of the late Times had almost utterly
extinguished; and I believe also that the Zeal and Devotion of the Bishops and
chief Ministers of this Church, in thus promoting Piety and Devotion, and
endeavoring such a Reformation in the Place of their Residence and among the
Officers that depend most on them, would mightily convince the Dissenters of
their Sincerity in Religion, and silence their scandalous Reports of them, and
induce a greater Reverence and Respect toward them among all the People. And I
am apt to think the woeful Contempt that is cast on the Clergy by the generality
of the People, is permitted by Almighty God as a punishment for the so great
neglect of this most Solemn Christian Office in that Place which should be an
Example to all others, and would have a great Influence upon them.

I Conclude this Discourse with my hearty Prayer to Almighty God, that he will
indue his Ministers with Righteousness, and make his Chosen People Joyful.

I Shall now add to the People, as I did to the Ministers, an earnest
Exhortation, That they will seriously consider this Matter, and attend the
performance of their Duty, that I may not lose my Labor in directing their
Behavior.

If Men will not dispose themselves to Serious Consideration, we were as good
talk to Men asleep, or to the dead; neither God has made any Promise, or Men
can have any hope, that such shall ever be enlightened with the knowledge of the
Truth. The most Glorious Light of Spiritual and Eternal Life, our Blessed
Savior, even he gives Light to none but those that will awaken themselves and
arise from the dead; and what can be hoped a Candle should do after the Sun?
Men had formerly learnt to talk of Spiritual Drowsiness and Death, as if it
were bound upon us by such a fatal necessity as must suppose all Exhortations
to be vain; but I hope Men have since been better taught; for neither the Sin
of our first Parents, nor our own Faults, can so far constitute us Bruits, but
that we may (if we will) show our selves Men; and in nothing does it more
concern us so to do, than in Things most immediately relating to the Honor of
God, and our Highest Felicity; for on this very Account he has given us more
Understanding than the Beasts of the Field, and made us capable of doing him
more Honor, and being more happy: There are few Exercises of our Reason about
Sensual Pleasures, but have their likeness in the Natural Sagacity and
Instincts in Brutes, and in things of that Nature such may serve as well as
Reason; but to consider of God and Invisible Things, and perform Religious
Worship in a fit and decent manner; nothing but Reason will serve, and it is the
Privilege of Mankind alone, and therein does our Honor and Felicity chiefly
consist. But alas, how do Men close their Eyes and harden their Hearts
wilfully, until they provoke God to do it judicially; and because they would
not have the Light of Truth shine into their Minds, nor the Power thereof
impress their Souls, God resolves they shall not: Oh woeful Condition! When Men
say to God depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy Ways, and God
says to Men depart from me, I know you not you Workers of Iniquity. And yet as
woeful as it is, it seems to me that there be but few that dread this. What
other sense can be put on the Language of most Men's Lives and Conversations,
but that they speak them Contemners of God's gracious Presence in the Place
where he puts his Name, which he calls his House, placing his Residence there,
and owning it for his Dwelling, whence he confers his Blessings and Favors
upon us, where we behold the Beauty of his Pleased Face when he lifts up the
Light of his Countenance upon us in the Comfortable Promises of his Holy
Gospel; where we offer up our selves in Sacrifice unto him and sing his
Praises, and power out our Souls before him in Holy Desires, Humble Complaints,
and Hearty Thanksgivings for his Mercy in the performance of these Holy
Offices; for thus is God present in the place of Holy Assemblies for his
Worship. In this Presence of God, good Christians find a Fullness of Joy, and
therefore value it above the highest Enjoyments of the World: But how few do
approve themselves good Christians by this Character? Do not the most among us
show a great dis-regard to our Public Prayers, and seem not to care whether
ever there were any or not? It may be, since Law and Custom even forces them
to recede from Worldly Employments and go to Church on the Lord's Day, they
will desire that then they may have a good Preacher there that can entertain
them with good Language and quaint Notions to please their Ears (while they
little regard the Matter of his Sermon, and much less the Solemn Service of our
Common Prayers.) But though we have an Order established by Law, that in every
Parish Church the Morning and Evening Prayers shall be said daily, and a Bell
rung a convenient time before they begin, that the People may come hear God's
Word and to Pray with him, yet who, either Ministers or People, regard this?

It grieves me to think, that Ministers should here need Excitation, whose
chiefest Joy should be to Honor God and to be Examples to their Flocks;
Examples I say of Heavenly-mindedness and Delight in God's Service, who
therefore because the Law admits an excuse (which yet proves daily Reading
ordinarily) should not pervert it to a total omission. And for the People (whom
I am here writing to) it is not enough for them to go to Church on Sundays, but
(if not hindered by Works of Necessity or Mercy) they should attend daily: And a
plentiful Estate is desirable chiefly upon this account, yet the Richest and
most Leasurely Persons never take care that this Order be observed by Ministers
in their Parish-Churches; and when it is, will scarce ever come there, but make
that, which should give them the greatest Advantage and Obligation to come, to
be a Hindrance thereunto; I mean, make use of their Riches, to run themselves
into such vast Trades and troublesome Projects, as not to have leisure for
God's Service; or else (if they incline more to pleasure than profit) they take
no care to order their Divertisements, that they be no hindrance to the Service
of God, but may make them more joyful and zealous therein, though this they may
and ought to do, they suffer these either to ingross their time, that they
never come to Church at all (at least on Weekdays) or to exhaust their Vigor,
that they are more ready to sleep than pray when they come, and can take no
delight in these Spiritual Exercises: Nay, many altogether idle (a thing
tedious to Nature) and yet will not divert themselves with going to Church;
these are chiefly of the Female Sex, who being not so subject to be encumbered
with Business, and often wanting Company or Pastimes, having nothing else to
do; and yet, though they live near Churches where Prayers are daily read, they
seldom or never come there: Now what does this signify, but that such care not
for God, nor his Presence? let him be gone if he will, and remove the Throne of
his Grace and send the Ordinances of his Worship to them that have time and
will to attend them, they have other things to do, or had rather be idle than
to be at Divine Service seeking his Blessing, owning his Providence, and
adoring his Holiness; they hope to do well enough without God, and practically
say to him as Herbert expresses it, We know where we can better be, than to
serve thee; or rather, as in the Prophet, We are Lords, we will not come to
thee; What is the Almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit shall we
have if we call upon him? We desire not the knowledge of his Ways: We will not
trouble our heads with Considering how we may best Honor and Please him, give
us the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World, and take those of the next
who will.

To such as these I would first speak (if it were possible to make them hear) I
would but ask them, if they were in the place of Almighty God, Whether they
would endure to be so slighted? I know their pride will help here to show them
their own folly, in thinking to escape God's Vengeance whilst they contemn his
Worship. Will he that is God from Everlasting, he that gave Being to all
Things, and brings them to nothing at his own Pleasure! be disappointed of the
Honor for which he has Made and still Governs this World? (and that by such a
worm as man) and not Vindicate the same? Will he not take that Glory by his
just Punishments, which they would not give in the Offices of Divine Worship?
Can the Proudest think to resist Omnipotency, or fly from Omniscience? Nay, if
God should do no more but withdraw his Divine Influences, we, and all we so
love and honor above him, perish together: And can we hope God will attend us
with his gracious Influences, who will not attend him with our Prayers and
Praises? Or shall we say that we believe Almighty God takes not this for any
affront, but rather esteems the Zeal I here commend, to be a work of
Super-errogation? Certainly we shall be of another mind when Sickness or Sorrow
make us Sober, and especially when we approach to Death or Judgment: I never
knew any that talked at this rate, but that at one time or other have
confessed, that such words came not from their Reason or Conscience, but from
their Pride and Passion; and that they were forced sometimes to have a secret
Reverence for Devout Men, and to Condemn themselves for their Neglect of God's
Service. There is no Man that consults his own Reason, or God's Word, but must
think God highly values his Honor, and that we do him Honor most immediately
in this way; and if Men be not careful to honor him in this, they mean it in
nothing else. That the love of God's Worship has ever been esteemed the first
Principle of what we truly call Religion; That those who are recorded for the
most Holy Men and Women in Scripture, have been the greatest lovers of God's
House; and that upon this very account, that it was the Place where his Honor
dwelt, and because they were inamoured of the Beauty of his Infinite Goodness
shining there in his Premises, desired to be instructed by his Wisdom there
appearing in his Laws to be assisted and comforted by his Grace exhibited in
his Sacraments, and prepared for Heavenly Glory by these Holy Exercises of his
Worship; this made them love the Place where they might see and enjoy him to
these great purposes. Again, it is most evident to considering Men, That it was
the Happiness of the State of Innocence, that Man had nothing else to do but to
Worship and Praise his Maker; (at least nothing that might divert him from it.)
And that it shall be our chief Happiness in the State of Glory, to be freed
from all Cumbersome Labors and Cares, and all Distracting Prosecutions and
Carnal Pleasures; and that we shall then continually attend Divine Offices, as
that which is our only perfect Bliss and Felicity; and therefore should esteem
ourselves the more Happy for having a Recess from Worldly Business now, that we
may more freely and frequently attend Divine Offices.

Again, it is evident that God who first made all things for himself, created
again his Church and People, that they might be to the praise of the Glory of
his Grace, Ephesians. 1. And all Christian Assemblies are so constituted and Holy
Offices appointed therein, that they may be so; therefore for Men to call
themselves Christians and Members of such Assemblies, and yet despise Public
Worship, is a great Affront to God and to the Church, which has well appointed
these Daily Offices of Divine Worship, as being agreeable to Reason, to the
Divine Prescriptions, and to the Customs of the wisest of Mankind, and requires
our attendance upon them when ever we can redeem time from the Business that is
necessary to our Maintenance, and the Recreations that are necessary for our
Health, both which are allowed in most cases for our excuse; and those that
will think of more, I believe will find themselves mistaken at the Day of
Judgment.

These Things, and much more that might be said of like nature, being so
evident, I must believe these kind of Men, that think our Daily Attendance at
Prayers is being Righteous over much, are not moved hereunto by any thing of
Reason or Sober Consideration; but are wholly influenced by Pride or
Covetousness, or other Carnal Affections, which hinder the Exercise of their
Rational Faculties, and make them live more of the Animal than the Divine Life,
(i. e.) more like Beasts than Men; and so long as they are such, we must expect
no other Language from them; for the Carnal Mind (a Man that discourses as a
mere Animal) perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned; and therefore it will be in
vain for me to say any more to them, then earnestly to desire them, To pluck
out the Beam that is in their own Eye, and then shall they see clearly to pluck
out the Mote that is in their Brothers: For an Extreme in this matter, (if any
man be supposed to be guilty thereof) is no more, in comparison of their total
Neglect and Contempt of God and his Public Worship, than a Mote to a Beam, as
they will find at the last.

The Second Sort to whom I shall apply my self, and for whose sake I chiefly
undertook this Work, is such as have a love for these Holy Offices and daily
frequent them; to whom my earnest Request is, That they will persist in the
good way they have begun, attend to the best manner of performance, and make
all the rest of their Lives answer to their Devotion herein. I doubt not but
such who do understand the Grounds and Reasons upon which our Public Service
was first ordered, and have taken up this practice, in a sense of their Duty to
God and Man, will easily and effectually comply with my Desire, and save me the
Labor of Arguments. I shall only say, the Inward Peace and Satisfaction they
will find in governing themselves in this Matter, by Reason and not by Fancy,
and in following the Custom and Usage of all good Christians for many Ages, and
of most even in this, (and not that of Heretics and Schismatics) by obeying
the Orders of our own Church, made with the greatest Advice and by the most
unbias'd Persons of any in the World; and not Herding with Quakers,
Fifth-Monarchy men, Anabaptists, and other turbulent Sects, that oppose the
same and seek its Ruin; the Satisfaction they will have in finding all that was
Good and Profitable, all that was Decent and Solemn, all that was truly
Primitive or any way Praiseworthy in the Service of the Church of Rome (a
Church which was once very Famous for Learning, Piety, and Stedfastness in the
Faith) still retained in ours; and all that which Ignorance, Error, or the
Corruption of Time had introduced into that, purged out in this: I say, the
Satisfaction they will find in considering the Excellency of our Form of Divine
Service, in this and such like respects, Will prevent all Inclinations to turn
into other Ways.

And should they have any Scruples suggested unto them by cunning Seducers, I
dare say, if they will but do (what may be justly expected from Men so educated
and obliged,) that is, Consult the Ministers of our Church, they will find the
fullest satisfaction that they can desire.

Again, As these Considerations, so the good Effects of a Devout Attending this
Service, will persuade them to continue the same: The Exaltation of our Minds,
thereby, above the mean Concerns of this World, so that they shall not be
influenced by the Revolutions and infinite Changes to which it is subject; the
Confirmation of our Faith and Hope in God's Promises, and the inward Joy and
Peace that results therefrom; the Excitation of our Love to God, and the
Exercising thereof in Holy Adorations and Cheerful Praises; the Increase of our
Love to one another by Holy Communion in such Sacred Offices: these and such
like, which will be the Effects of attending this Service, will enforce our
delight therein, and our endeavors, so to order it, that we be not kept from
the same. To which I may add some outward good Effects, such as, 1. The
Preventing many Idle, and, sometimes, very Chargeable Clubs and Visits, from
which this will both excuse and oblige us. 2. The inducing Harmony and Good
Order into our Families: For our contriving that as many as possible may attend
God's Service, will make much for Order in other things, and also for Love and
Peace and Good Success of our Affairs. I cannot attend the Demonstration, but I
am sure he that will try, shall find it true by Experience. 3. The Cheerfulness
induced into our Minds by our Communion in the Psalmody and Responses, and the
use of our Voice in other parts of the Service, tends much to the health of our
Bodies and the mending our Temper: For as silence feeds the Melancholy Humor
(the worst that Man's Body is affected with, and of most pernicious influence on
the Mind) so Speaking, and especially in such Heavenly Converse, does much to
dissolve and disperse the same, and preserves the Body healthful and lively,
and the Mind in a sweet and pleasant Temper. I shall mention no more, I hope it
may suffice to have touched these things in so short a Discourse to persuade a
Constant Attendance on the Public Prayers.

2dly. I shall say somewhat also to persuade an endeavor of a right
performance, which even those are in danger not to do who daily frequent these
Holy Offices. Education, Custom, and various Interests may have great force to
effect a constant attendance at Prayers, when yet want of consideration may
betray Men to Formality and undue Performance. There is a Fear of God (so his
Worship of old was called,) which is taught by the Precepts of Men, Matthew.
15.8. and this is when Men go to Church merely because the Magistrate Commands,
or their Parents bred them to it, or because it is the Custom of their
Neighbors so to do: These show themselves of a good dactile and sociable
Temper, and are more to be esteemed than such, who, in despite of the Laws,
good Education, and a pious Cohabitation, contemn and scorn a daily attendance
on God's Worship: Or than those that strain their Wits to find Faults in our
Liturgy, and that do all they can to create Scruples in themselves and infuse
them into others. But they must not rest here, but while they constantly go to
Prayers, they must endeavor to exercise that Fervent Love to God and to our
Blessed Savior, and that Divine Joy in the Hope of Glory to come, and to
Fore-taste the Blessedness we shall partake of in the Communion of Saints above
in these Exercises, wherein (as Saints) we have communion here below, and will,
to that purpose, attend more diligently to the Preparations wherewith they
should come to Worship, and to those Expressions whereby they Honor God while
they do so.

Therefore I beseech these to whom I write to consider, that God will be
Sanctified in all those that come nigh to Worship him; and this he only is by
those who Worship him with a Holy Worship, both Internally and Externally:
Which we do not, except our Minds be so disposed, and our Words and Actions so
ordered, as is aforesaid, and as becomes the Glory of God's Essence, the
Immensity of his Divine Perfections, the Sense of our own Concernments and of
our Relation to those we are to pray with, and to pray for; and so as is
suitable to the several Parts of Worship which we are to perform. Now these
Dispositions cannot be attained but by serious and frequent Meditation: For
there is a Connection in the Duties of Religion, which make it impossible to
perform some as we ought, except we make Conscience of others that are
preparatory thereunto; in this Connection I suppose Meditation to be the first,
and he that makes no Conscience of that, or knows not how to Perform it, will
be hardly brought to a Good Performance in any other Duties, especially this of
Prayer. Men may by a natural fluency of Speech, assisted with a quickness of
Wit and ready Invention, easily pray to good acceptance with Men: but as to our
acceptance with God, and the effects of Prayer to our own Benefit and
Consolation, it depends on the preparation of such Affections, and such
Expressions thereof, as can never be without frequent Meditation.

Meditation in the most common sense of the word, is taken for more than bare
thinking; it is a thinking of things, that we may have such knowledge of them,
and esteem and affection toward them as we ought to have: And so great an
Influence has the proposed End into the Efficacy of any Action, that I cannot
expect that any Man should excite his Devotion by thinking of things though
never so Divine, except he designs by such thinking so to do: Students of
several sorts are engaged to think of such things as would serve to this and
other excellent Ends, but without any Effect. The Reason is, because their
Minds by being so intently fixed on the love of Carnal Pleasures, do not
discern even the things they look full upon, nor understand those very things
they teach to others; and although they are constrained to think how they may
talk or write of such things, yet they are withheld by these Sensual
Affections from considering the Concern which themselves have therein.

There is no way therefore by meditating, to attain Devotion or any Virtue, but
by crucifying the Flesh, with all its Affections and Lusts, and awakening our
dead and drouzy Souls to design and endeavor to live that Life for which they
were made, and in which alone they can be made happy: And to this our Blessed
Savior has given us such Assistance by the Grace of the Gospel, that no Man
that will take hold of it can complain of infirmity; for although we never so
much feel the weight of earthly things which press down the Soul, as when we
strive to ascend to God in the Exercises of Devotion, yet if we fix our Minds
on him who was God manifested in the Flesh, showing us how little these things
are (how great soever they seem;) how little to be desired or feared, though
seemingly dreadful or pleasant, by his refusing all the Glories we so eagerly
prosecute, and accepting the Sufferings we so fear and fly; and would
contemplate the Heavenly Joys which he offers us, on condition we will
receive his Spirit, and lead our Lives after the Pattern he has set us; I say,
if we would thus look unto Jesus, (the Author and Finisher of our Faith) we
should soon find ourselves able to lay aside these Weights (how easily soever
they beset us) and to ascend to him in Holy and Devout Affections, while we are
employed in these Sacred Offices.

But it is not so much the want of Ability, as of Intention, that is cause of
the Decay of Devotion, as I said before, and therefore to awaken that I would
represent the Excellency of this Heavenly Affection.

Devotion it is a most Divine Spirit in Man, his greatest Exaltation above
Beasts, and his nearest Approach to Angels; it is (as Herbert says of the
Sabbath) the Fruit of this World and the Blossom of the next, the highest
enjoyment which we are capable of here, and the fore-taste of what we shall
most fully enjoy hereafter. It transforms the Soul into a Seraphim, burning
with the Fervours of Divine Love, carrying it to Heaven (as Elias) in a Fiery
Chariot to take its place in the Choir of Angels, and join in their
Halalujahs, and Adorations of him that sits on the Throne, and of the Lamb that
is at his Right Hand. But yet it carries us not above any of the Concerns
wherein we may be useful to Men, but descends to the Consideration of all their
Wants and Necessities, Sorrows and Miseries, taking them into its Breast, and
presenting them before God, with earnest request for comfort and relief in them
all; yea, it begets in Men such a Divine Charity as reaches to the uttermost
of what may be done for the Welfare and Happiness of their Neighbors. For
while we Adore God, who is the Supreme Benefactor, and our Savior, (God-Man)
the Example of Self-denial and Meekness, (Virtues that Cure our Hurtful Lusts)
and such a lover of Men as to prosecute their Salvation and Felicity, with the
shedding of his most Precious Blood. I say, while this is the Object of our
Adoration, as it is in these Exercises of Devotion, how can it be otherwiise
but that it must beget in us a Life and Temper most pleasant and profitable to
Mankind? And indeed I have observed, that this Heavenly Flame of True Devotion
is like that which descended on Elias's Altar, it licks up all our opposite
Interests (as that did the Water) and makes both ourselves and all we have, a
Sacrifice to the Honor of God and Good of Mankind: None therefore that
considers the Excellency of Devotion, but would set himself with great
attention of Mind, to the Consideration of such Things as may render him a
Devout Man.

The Things that are of this Nature are principally such as relate to God, to
Ourselves, or to Others we are to Pray for. We should think upon God, That he
is worthy all our Adorations and Praises, for his Glorious and Infinite
Perfections, his Wonderful Works, and for his Innumerable Blessings and
Mercies: That he, and he only, hears Prayers, and is nigh to all that call
upon him, and is pleased when Invocated for the things he is willing to give
us: That he alone Orders and Disposes all the Affairs of this World, according
to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure; Restrains or Inlarges the Powers of Nature;
Stops or Diverts the Course of it; Overrules Second Causes; Prospers or
Disappoints Human Undertakings; Gives and Takes away; Lifts up and Casts down,
even how and whom he pleases.

We should think of our Dependence on him, That we Live, Move, and have our
Being in him, and cannot Subsist a moment without him; that we are subject to
innumerable Casualties, which may destroy the strongest Body and healthfullest
Constitution; and to such Vexations as will four the sweetest Temper, and to
such Amazement as will shake the most fixed and composed Mind, which he only
can prevent from befalling us, (as being under his Divine Government) and can
by his immediate Influxes Comfort us when they do so. We should think how many
things we want; what woeful things we are in danger of; of our manifold
Temptations, by allurements of sensual Objects, and suggestions of evil
Spirits; of the weakness of our Graces and insufficiency of all things in
Heaven or Earth besides God for our Supply and Succor: And if we would think
seriously of these things, we should find great help to Devotion in Prayers
thereby; we shall find how much we are concerned to reconcile ourselves to God
by humble and penitent Confessions, to seek his Grace and Favor by Fervent
Supplications, to pray for the Aid of his Spirit to help our Infirmity, and to
assist our Victory over our Spiritual Enemies; and to give him thanks that we
have not fallen into greater Sins and Miseries; to attend to his Holy Word,
that thereby we may receive Grace from him, to learn to please him and oblige
his care and kindness for us, and these things will beget and excite Devout
Affections in us.

It will be profitable also to this End, to think of our Obligation to our
Christian Brethren, and of the Particular Regards we ought to have toward all
Sorts and Degrees among them: For we Pray, as Members of the Catholic Church;
and must have a Concern for all Christians as Fellow Members of one Spiritual
Incorporation. But particularly, we should often think what Affection we should
bear to those, whether our Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors, with whom we are
united, as one Nation and National Church, and also should endeavor to
represent to ourselves what may be the several States and Conditions of those
we are presently to join with, in the performance of Sacred Offices: Such
Considerations will much help our Devotion; for the sense of the sins of others
to whom we are united (as well as of our own) will help to make us humble and
contrite in our Confessions; the sense of their Wants and Miseries will help to
make us fervent in our Supplications; the sense of the Mercies they receive,
will help to make us joyful in God's Praises, because we are obliged by our
Union to reckon their Sins, their Wants and their Mercies our own. Thus the
general knowledge that multitudes of Christians, as well as our selves, are
concerned in the Matter of our Prayers, and the sense we have, in particular,
of the Concern of many of those we presently join with, will add much more to
our Devotion. It may be there are many things in the Public Prayers that we
have not at present such a particular Concernment in, but, when we think there
are Millions of Christians that have, who are all of the same Divine
Incorporation, and that many of them are our own Countrymen united with us, as
a National Church, and some our Neighbors, with whom we are one, as a
Parochial Church, and of whose Concern we may have a particular knowledge. I
say, this Meditation will greatly assist our Devotions, and will also increase
that Charity, without which our Prayers as well as Ourselves are counted but
dead in the fight of God: And when we have wrought Ourselves to this excellent
Temper, our love to our Brethren will help our Devotion another way also. For
it will make us endeavor, by our example, to make them Devout; and the more
defefective we do perceive their Devotion to be, the more shall we endeavor to
assist it, by the perfection of our own. And there is certainly no better way;
for I have known those that Reproof and Disputation did but irritate, by such
Examples to have been reformed.

Lastly, Frequent Reading these Holy Offices by ourselves, and serious
Meditation thereon, would be a great help to our Devotion, (and Dr. Comber 's
Excellent Book on the several Office of the Common Prayer, will much (...) us
therein;) for when we have a full understanding of the great things contained
in the brief comprehensive Sentences of the Lords Prayer and of our Collects,
etc. the memory thereof, when we come to repeat them, will much assist our
Devotion: And I am persuaded, that if Men were but conversant in the study of
the Common Prayer Book, they would find more Instruction in the Matter of their
Duty to God and Man; more Assistance in governing their Affections and Passions
and preserving Peace in themselves; more Support and Consolation in Troubles
and Afflictions; and more Aid against Temptations, etc. than in reading many
Books; but especially it would be an excellent Means to increase those Holy
Affections which prepare us for Public Prayers, and to assist our Devotion in
the Performance.

I have mentioned this little of a great deal that might be said, of the Matter
of our Meditation: but still it must be remembered, that these things be thought
on with a purpose and intention to beget in us such habitual Affections and
Dispositions, that we may be always fit to Pray: and may in the most wonted
Expressions, exercise a servent Devotion: and if we do so, we shall not so need
the Natural or Artificial Rethorick in Prayer as those do that want these
Dispositions; nor shall we be cloyed with having Prayers always the same; as
some Dainty Stomachs are with eating often the same Meats; for such Men
constantly carry in their Breast such a sense of their past Enormities, that it
puts Life into their repeating our General Confession; and such Esteem of God's
Mercy in Christ, as gives them a Behavior, not ordinary, in receiving
Absolution; they have such Affection toward the Glory and Pleasure of Almighty
God, and such belief that he only can give what we want, and forgive the Sins,
and prevent the Temptations that would involve us in evil, now in this World,
and eternally in the next: that it gives a great Devotion to their saying the
Lord's Prayer; and all the rest though they are still the same.

And where Men have such sense, methinks no Man should deny that they pray in
the Spirit or in the Holy Ghost, as the Precepts of the Gospel require: That
Pious Nonconformist, Mr. J. Corbet, in his Kingdom of God, has these words,
The Spirit of Prayer is never wanting, where the Heart has a due sense of the
Matter: page 46. Although (as he afterward explains it,) we use a stinted Form
of Words. Dr. Owen I confess, in a late Discourse of Prayer, has these words;
If Persons are able, in the reading any Book, merely of Human Composure, to
rise up in answer to this Duty of Praying with all manner of Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, or the exercise of the Aids and Assistances
received from him and his Holy Acting in them as a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication, endeavoring, laboring and watching thereunto; they have
attained what I cannot understand. That is in plain words, the Doctor cannot
understand how a Man, that uses a Form, can be said to pray in the Spirit: It
would be a high presumption in me to question the Understanding of so Great a
Man; but he will not be angry if I question my own: for I cannot understand,
why our Savior (from whom we have these Precepts of Praying in the Spirit)
should teach his Disciples a Form of Prayer, if in using a Form we cannot pray
in the Spirit. But it may be the Doctor will say (as he does insinuate in many
places of that Book,) that Christ gave those words only for a Doctrinal and
Directive Help to Prayer, (i. e.) To teach Men how to pray Ex tempore; for
which End (he says) we may read Forms of Prayer (how unlawful soever the use
be, for which they were made.) But then I do not understand how the Doctor can
say, page 234. That it were better (it may be) that this were done: (Men taught
to pray Ex tempore) in some other way, and these Doctrinal and Directive Helps
not cast into the Form of a Prayer, which is apt to divert the Mind from its
proper End and Use. Which words seem to me, to have such a Reflection on our
Blessed Savior as is little short of Blasphemy; (according to the Doctor's
Opinion of the Lord's Prayer:) For if that were not intended for a Form, but
for a Doctrinal and Directive Help to Prayer; then those words applied to him,
plainly say, That it may be, Christ might have done better, than to have cast
his Instructions and Directions about Prayer into the Form of a Prayer, which
is apt to divert the Mind from its proper End and Use: which to say, is to
reproach the Wisdom of God-incarnate, and to tell Our great Teacher, sent from
God, that he did not understand his Office, nor teach, in the best manner, a
thing of greatest concern to the Glory of God, and Happiness of Mankind (as the
Doctor rightly says, the well performance of Prayer is.) Words, which no
Christian can patiently hear of his Savior. Now, according to my weak opinion,
there is but one of these two ways for the Doctor to avoid this consequence
from his words, either that he confess the truth and say, That our Savior
intended to teach his Disciples a Form of Prays, and that it is not only
Lawful, but a Positive Duty to use this his Holy Prayer as we do. Or, if he
will hold to this Opinion, viz. That it is a Doctrinal and Directive Help to
teach to Pray Ex tempere; Then he must prove, that it is not cast into the Form
of a Prayer. Now this later seems utterly impossible to be done; for since it
so plainly appears, that it is cast into the Form of a Prayer. And since the
Christians of many Ages throughout the World, have esteemed and used it as a
Form of Prayer. And since the Doctor himself (notwithstanding his Opinion that
it was not so intended) cannot forbear in many places of his Book to call it
The Lord's Prayer. I say, since it is so, he will never make Men believe it is
not cast into the Form of a Prayer: Therefore I hope the Doctor on second
thoughts will retract his Book, and confess that there is a Work of the Spirit
in Prayer that he has therein much opposed. A Work wherein he moved our
Savior and Holy Men to compose Forms of Prayer, and to teach their Disciples
to say them, as the best Help to Prayer. A Work whereby he moved and enabled
our Reformers (as well as the Governors of other Churches) to Compose and
Prescribe a Liturgy or Form for the Public Service of God. A Work whereby he
excites Men to approach daily to God in this Solemn Office of Prayer in the
Church, and not to think it enough to Pray occasionally, when they are pressed
with the present sense of Dangers, Miseries, or Wants,) as I confess every
Christian can and may do in his Closet, Ex tempore. A Work whereby he teaches
Men thankfully to accept, and faithfully to use as Prayers, the Form our
Savior taught; and other Forms taught and prescribed as before. Lastly, A Work
whereby he teaches, and assists, the Preparations I before mentioned; that in
the use of such Forms we may be truly devout and fervent. And if the Doctor
will believe and consider this, I hope he will use no more such Insinuations to
persuade that no Forms of Prayer should ever hereafter be made; nor those that
are, be used any otherwise than to help the attainment of the Art of Praying Ex
tempore: nor will (while he professes to oppose our Liturgy, as set up to
exclude their Way of Praying) endeavor by such Insinuations to banish our Way
of Praying out of the World (as the use of Ex tempore Prayer did once the
Liturgy out of the Church:) And I hope the Doctor will excuse this warmth,
which the conceit of such a design has occasioned. But (to return) if our
Savior meant to teach a Form of Prayer, there can be no greater proof than
that, That in the use of Forms we may best pray in the Spirit. For since by his
Inspiration the Precept of Praying in the Spirit was given, the Way of Prayer
he taught, must be acknowledged best for the performing the same. This I hope,
will put an end to the common way of appropriating the phrase of Praying in the
Spirit, to the use of Ex tempore Prayer, and give those, that pray by Forms,
and by our Liturgy, some share in the honor of it; and then I hope we shall
hear no more Scoffing at Praying by the Spirit (which this appropriation has
caused, however the Doctor complains of it) which I by no means approve.

But Lastly, When we have done our best in our Preparations and Performances,
we must take heed that all be not intended to gain an Indulgence for living in
any Sin, either of Omission or Commission.

The Enemies of our Church boast much of their good Lives; and condemn us, that
are for the Common Prayer, as a profane sort of Men: I do heartily wish them as
good as they think themselves, and that their goodness may consist as much in
the Government of their Passions, in Just Retributions, in Meekness, Humility
and Candid Interpretations, as in decrying Sensual Vices and Worldly Pomps and
Vanities: And I wish also, that ours did not give just occasion for this their
complaint; and that we may endeavor to Equal (yea Excel them in Temperance and
Heavenly-mindedness; adding Sobriety and True Sanctity to Conformity and
Loyalty. But that I may also to my Wishes add my Faithful Endeavors, I shall
offer Two Considerations to persuade thereunto, 1. That, of the Incongruity of
a Vicious Life to daily Attendance on Divine Service and appearing Devout
therein: 2. Of the Unacceptablness thereof without the Conjunction of a Holy
Life.

1. The Incongruity is Evident to all Men. None that see a Man to go constantly
to Church, to bow very low at his coming in, to appear very devout in the
several Parts of Worship, both by Speech and Behavior; I say, they that see
this, expect that such a one should be very exact in the Course of his Life:
And if they come to know, that they are not, they will be very apt to take
offense at it: I confess, for my own part, it has been so with me, and others
have told me it has been so with them, and reason tells me it must be so with
all: For it is absurd to hear a Man at Church very devoutly to own himself a
sinner, and condemn himself of silliness in wandering from God's Ways and
following his own Desires and Devices, (as in our General Confession) and then
return home as Proud and Self-conceited as ever, and never the less inclined to
wander from God in prosecution of Self satisfaction as before. To call God our
Father at Church, as if we did partake of a Nature like his, inclined to all
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, and when we come Home (by our Ill Nature and
Destructive Practices) to show ourselves the Children of the Devil. To call
him, Our Father in Heaven: when neither the consideration of the Heavenly
Original of our Souls, generated first by Divine Spiration, and regenerated by
that Word which is of Divine Inspiration (on both which accounts we call him
our Father) can raise our Minds from this Dunghill Earth, to seek the Things
above: Nor the Height and Excellency of God's Glory, and his Advantage of
Seeing and Punishing (expressed by his being in Heaven,) can move us to fear
him. To Pray, that his Name may be Hallowed; and then Profane it ourselves, (by
using it in vain and light Interjections, or by Oaths and Execrations in our
common talk) and causing it to be profaned by others, through our vicious and
scandalous Lives. That his Kingdom may come; and yet rise in Rebellion against
the Holy Government of his Spirit in our Hearts; and against the Disposals of
his Providence, as to our outward Estate: And to affront his Ministers, either
Ecclesiastical or Civil, and discourage them in their Administrations, by our
Crosness, Frowardness and Disobedience. To Pray, That his Will be done on
Earth, as it is in Heaven, when yet our Obedience is so dull and heavy, and as
it were constrained by necessity, and so very unlike the Angels, who in doing
the Will of God, fly with all alacrity; all this is very absurd and
incongruous. I may add the Indecency of our Grumbling if we are not as Rich as
our Neighbors, and our Discontent at Losses and Crosses, though we have more
than enough left; when yet we pray but for our daily Bread: Our Implacableness
and Irreconcilableness toward those that offend us, when we pray to be
forgiven no otherwise than as we forgive: And lastly, that when we pray that
God will not lead us into Temptations, we do so heedlesly or presumptuously run
into them; I say, so run into Temptations, that without a Miracle God himself
cannot deliver us from evil, when we may be sure he will work no Miracle, in
favor of such, as offer themselves as a prey to Satan, by their running into
Temptation, and neglecting the Means of their own Preservation.

I hint these things from the beginning of our Service, that we may see the
incongruity of a wicked Life with the whole.

2dly. The Unacceptableness of all Expressions of Devotion, from Men of such
vicious and profane Lives. The sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to
the Lord, it is the prayer of the righteous that is his delight. Unto the wicked
says God, What have to do to take my Name into thy mouth, since thou hate to
be reformed, and casts my words behind thee? The most Solemn Assemblies of
such Men for his Worship and Service is a burden to him; Isa. 1. the reason is,
because his infinite Veracity makes him to hate their Hypocrifie, his just
Resentments of their bold breaking his Laws, when ever the Devil and their
Lusts tempt them to it, makes his Displeasure to arise at their Fawning when
these are satisfied. To give real Worship to Satan by doing his Lusts, and to
live to the Flesh, by fulfilling its Desires, and then to make these outward
Appearances of great Devotion toward God, makes his Jealousies burn like that
of an abused Husband, when his Wife fawns on him after her Adulterous Embraces.
It Is our Hearts that are God's Peculiar, and if we suffer any thing to ravish
or defile them, the sacrifices of our lips will not be accepted.

But now how excellently does Holiness and Righteousness suit together? and how
graciously does God accept such in whom they are conjoined? To see a Man that
makes acknowledgment of a most Glorious and Trimendous Deity by Solemn Acts of
Worship in the Morning; Walking in the Fear of God all the Day long. To see a
Man after he has Celebrated God's Glorious Perfections (Wisdom, Goodness,
Truth, Faithfulness, Patience, Long-suffering and Forgiveness, etc.) in the
Solemn Office of Thanksgiving, striving to imitate them in the Course of his
Life. To see a Man after the Cup of Blessing received at the hands of God's
Ministers with great Devotion, to declare, by his Conversation, that he has
thereby been made to drink into the same Spirit with his Savior: That he is
Lowly, Meek, and Patient; Loving, and Diligent in doing others good; a
Contemner of things below, earnestly seeking those above, as Christ was: I say,
to see this is most lovely, because these things do so excellently agree. And
such Men in whom these are united, are most acceptable in their approaches to
God; he is well pleased with their Adorations and Praises, delights to hear
their Prayers, and will show such tokens for their good; that they may always
see to their joy, and their enemies often to their shame. And I am persuaded if
the People of this Church will join these Two Things in their constant
Practice, God will so Bless us, that all the Ends of the Earth shall Fear him;
(i e.) be allured by the Flourishing Glory of our Church and State, to Imitate
the Excellent Order der of our Divine Service.

And if they would but consider what good effects this would have (to the
healing our Breaches and restoring us to Love and Unity among ourselves, making
us a Joy to our Friends, and a Terror to our Enemies abroad, and preventing the
Miseries we lately felt and presently fear at home) and will not suffer
themselves to be blinded by Passion and Prejudice, and the ill Arts of
discontented Men; I say, they could not choose but put their helping hand to
effect the conjunction.

I conclude therefore, with my Earnest Prayer to Almighty God for the good
Success of this Book, affectionately designed to persuade Men to a Decent
Performance of Holy Offices, and to Exemplary Piety in all their Converses,
That, by his Blessing, notwithstanding all its defects, it may fully attain its
End; and to this Prayer I hope all Good Men will say, Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

GEO. ROYSE, R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris.
Aug. 10. 1691.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 2. for fervous, read serious. p. 68. l. 12. after same, add with.
p. 81. l. 24. after to, add much. p. 98. l. 20. for their, r. our. ibid. l. 21.
for they, r. we. p. 131. l. 21. after many, add are.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AN Engraved Cyphering Book. 1680.

The A^la-mode Secretary.

Accomplished Clerk.

Tradesman's Copy-Book.

Youth's Indroduction to Trade; An Exercise-Book for Scholars at the
Writing-School.

The Striking Copy-Book: Containing diverse Alphabets of Capitals, to be
performed by Command of Hand.

The Pen-man's daily Practice, 2 new Cyphering-Book, 1691. Curiously Engraven
in all the Modish Running M^xt Hands now in use; with great Variety of Command
of Hand. Being a great Help to the Improvement of Penmanship.

A Royal Sheet of Paper full of Variety of the Clarks Hands, with Breaks of the
Exemplifying Cour^ Le^^ers, and 166 Words abbreviated in Court-Hand, and fairly
written at length in the M^dish E^gressing Set-hand, (Price 2 s. 6 d.) so
contrived, as to be cut in par^^ and rolled up in a Pencase. All by John Airs,
Writing Master.

S^ld by him, and S. Crouch at the end of Pope's-Head-Alley in Cornhil.


