HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROICT royal English blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn blazon with the
Hapsburg double-headed eagle, surmounted by a crown
the Sun in Splendour, an English heraldic device the Hapsburg double-headed
eagle the Sun in Splendour, an English heraldic device
By His Majesty's License, and Special Approbation. OF THE True Orvietan, or
Antidote.
EXperimented before His Majesty in White Hall, by Cornelius a Tilbury, and
also upon the public Stage, by taking sixty grains of Poison, and curing
himself by the said Antidote; whereupon his Majesty, in testimony of his
approbation thereof, was pleased to cause the said Cornelius a Tilbury to be
sworn His Majesty's Chyrurgeon in ordinary.

The VIRTUES of the TRVE ORVIETAN.
THis ORVIETAN is very good to expel all sorts of Poison, by taking the
quantity of a Nutmeg in some warm milk or broth, and it will immediately expel
the poison out of the body, either by Vomiting, Sweating, Stool, or Urine; the
said ORVIETAN being taken three or four times one after another, until the
poison be expelled; then a small cup of fat broth must be taken with an ounce
of Conserve of Roses, and you will be quite rid of the poison.

2. If any person be bitten by a Viper, Mad Dog, or other Venomous creature, he
must immediately take the quantity of a Nutmeg in Wine, then lay open the place
of the bite, my making of an incision, and extract the Venomous blood, then
apply the ORVIETAN as a plaster upon the same place, and keep the party from
sleeping twelve hours, and by Gods blessing he will be cured.

3. This Medicine cures, and is a great preservative against the Plague; you
must take the quantity of a Nutmeg in Wine every morning; and if you be
infected with the plague, twice the quantity; then let the Patient be covered
up warm till he sweats, and the pestilence will be driven out, and the party
cured insensibly.

4. This ORVIETAN is also good against all Distempers proceeding from a weak
stomach, by taking the quantity of Nutmeg in the morning, fasting two hours
after it, and in the Evening two hours after Supper. It fortifies the Natural
heat, causes digestion, and cures the pain in the stomach, stinking breath, dry
coughs, palpitation of the heart, short breath, and all distempers occasioned
by the stomach. It keeps the Vapors from ascending to the brain, which
oftentimes occasion very grievous pains in the head, and prevents defluxions
upon the lungs.

5. This ORVIETAN is very good for several distempers, that happen to men at
Sea, as pain in the stomach, faintness and vomiting; it prevents bursten
bellies, and such like accidents. It must be used in the manner as in the
fourth Article. It is good against all Pestilential Fevers and Agues, either at
Sea, or on Land, by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg in Oil, melted butter, or
any other Cordial Water, or in warm beer. As soon as the Fit comes, the Patient
must be covered till he swears, and the dose must be repeated as often as the
sit comes, until he be cured.

6. If any children get Fevers by the Small pox, or Measles, give them the
quantity of half a Nutmeg in some Cordialwater, or Wine, and cover them warm
till they sweat, to drive out the Small pox or Measles. It is also very good
for such as are troubled with Worms, and Hard bellies, and are therefore
hindered from Growing, by giving them a small quantity of it in beer till they
are cured.

7. This ORVIETAN being taken to the quantity of a Nutmeg in warm Wine or
broth, cures the great pain of the belly, occasioned by the Cholick, cold Wind,
and also the pain in the side.

8. It is also good for Women in Labor, by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg in
some Cinnamon Water; it hastens the birth, strengthens both Mother and Child.
It is also good against Vapors, and the Fits of the Mother.

9. It is very good for the Murrain, and other distempers, as pains in the
belly of Horses, Oxen, or Sheep; and a very Sovereign Remedy, by giving them
the quantity of an ounce in a pint of warm Wine, and cover them well; and for
smaller beasts, half the quantity; this is good too, if they were bit by mad
Dogs, or other Venomous creatures; and it cures many other distempers, too
tedious to be inserted.

And this Orvietan will keep good ten years and more, if it be kept in a place
that is not too hot, nor too cold; and if it should dry a little, it may be
made good again, by mixing with it some Syrrup of Roses.

They also cure these several Infirmities and Defects following.
1. IF any person be troubled with Films or Catarrhs in their eyes, if the
Apple of the eye be not hurt, they can restore them to their sight presently;
they also cure by Medicines in a short space, any Pearls or blood in the Eyes,
or overgrown flesh.

2. They will cure and recover such as are troubled with the Stone in the
Kidneys or bladder, by cutting, or by particular Medicines; they can also take
Stones out of the Kidneys or bladder of Women and Maids, per dilatationem,
without cutting.

3. They cure all manner of bursten people, both Men and and Women, young and
old, by rare medicines, and artificial Trusses, in a short time, without any
let; but as to such as have been of long continuance, they can cure them by a
fine Manual Operation, so as they shall in ten days time be perfectly cured.

4. They cut and cure Hair lips in six days, the Cancer in the breasts, and
other parts of the body: the Noli me tangere, and such like Diseases, in a
short time; they can artificially cut the Polepum in the Nose; they cure
Weakness in the Limbs, and dexterously cut all Carnosities or Swellings.

5. And they having traveled through the chiefest and most famous Countries of
Europe, have learned and experienced the safest and most approved ways of
curing all Venereal and soul Diseases practiced in each Country, and have
brought over with them excellent and peculiar Remedies, not vnlgarly known, for
that dangerous distemper, the symptoms of which follow.

If any have got the POK, or any of its symptoms, as virulent Gonorrhea, with
Running of the Reins, and pain in making Water, Ulcers in the throat, mouth,
nose, or Vrethra, Carnosity, Inflammations, Swellings, Soreness, Phymosis,
Paraphymosis, Christaline, Hemorrboids, Swellings and Buboes in the Groin,
Pains in the Head. Arms, Shoulders, and Legs, with Nodes, Knots, or Exostosis
on the Head and Shin-bones, with Pustles, Tetters, Ringworms, or breaking out
of the whole body, etc. which if not cured, becomes Consumptive, Hectical, and
ends in the Grave (few persons have all these Pocky symptoms, its enough to
have one or two of them).

This Disease has several and various accidents, and fellows, that attend it,
but in substance there is but two kinds; One that setleth it self in the blood,
and other humors of our bodies. The other that is in the very marrow of the
bones. To know the distinction, it is not for every Practitioner, but for him
that has cured thousands and thousands, as he can show the Testimonials of
several great persons in several parts of the World.

How many has he cured, that having had a Running too soon stopped, were
turned to the POX, and could find no Remedy? How many that had not taken two
hours of rest in their beds from ten and more years, by reason of the violent
pains in the head, arms, shoulders, shin-bones, has he cured? and (were it not
for privacy and civilities sake) could mention the names of hundreds in this
Bill.

This is sufficient for such as love their health; and such as have been
tampering with other Physicians, I shall certainly reduce to their former
health, although they have been sweated and lanched by other Doctors: I shall
give you remedy by pleasant medicines, that you your self shall wonder at it;
some perchance may say these are but words, but I shall confirm them by actions.

We could mention also many other effects and operations that we have done, but
for brevity sake, and not to trouble the Reader too much, we have omitted them,
being you may have our advice at all times for nothing, and be informed of many
Cures more, not mentioned here; as can be attested by Eminent persons that we
have cured, which were left by others. Neglect not your own health, since God
has been pleased to send a means, now being the best time of the year. And if
any one cannot come, let him but send his true Water or Urine, and we shall
give our judgment to the best of the skill wherewith God has endued us.

6. They can fortify the cold Nature of men and women; and have a rare Art to
cure such as cannot Hold their water; they can also cure women that are
troubled with Falling-fits, and Vapors.

7. They have a rare Art of curing Deafness, if curable.

8. They can restore to perfect health such as are troubled with Vomiting,
Cholick, Rising of the Vapors, Pain in the Milt, Stitches in the Side, and all
Scorbutic Distempers, which they cure in a very short time.

9. If any persons be troubled with the Toothach, they can cure them; and take
out any Teeth or Warts without pain. They can also put in Artificial Teeth in
the Upper or Under Jaw.

They Lodge in Russel Street in Covent Garden, within Two Doors of the
Piazza's, near their Stage, at the sign of the Clock; where you see the
Kings-Arms over the Balcony. They are privately to be spoken with from Eight of
the Clock in the Morning till Ten at night. I could wish you to take care, that
you come to my own Lodging in Russel Street, for fear you mistake.


