A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the ACTIONS With the whole Defeat Of the Turkish Army AT
VIENNA By the IMPERIALLISTS.
From the Imperial Camp about four miles from Vienna September the 2^ The King
of Poland has Joined us, and all things are disposing for the relief of Vienna,
which continues to make a very brave Defense; however the Garrison is much
weakened, and therefore the Governor has let the Duke o^ Lorrain know, that no
time is to be lost. You have already had an account o^ the Action we were
Engaged in against a body of Turks and Tartars on the 24th past, to which we
cannot add any thing, unless it be to do right to the King of Englands
Subjects, who had a share in it. Count Tafe Commanded in the left wing and gave
Eminent proofs of his Courage and Conduct, and the Lord Lansdowne, who was with
him, with other Volontiers; did distinguish himself with great Gallentry in the
hottest of Action.

Lintz September the 9th The 6 Instant the Prince of Baden returned hither from
the Army, (which passed the Danube the 3.4. and 5th Instant, at a place called
Stetzdort) and gave the Emperor an account of the resolution that have been
taken for the Relief of Vienna: That the King of Poland was to march with the
Van toward Maurbach and Maur, the main body commanded by the Duke of Lorrain
toward walkersdorf, and Count waldecke with the Rear toward Closter Neuburg,
That they intended to attack the enemy on Sunday next, and that the Christian
Army consists of 85000 Fighting men. The 6 instant arrived here the Elector of
Bavaria, who parted again from hence yesterday with the Emperor for Closter
Neubourg. Before his Imperial Majesty went hence, he received advice that the
Turks had the 7 instant Sprung two mines, one whereof made a Breach in the
Bastion of Lebels and that thereupon they made a very furious assault, in which
they were repulsed. However the place begins to be in great danger, as we know
by the signs the besieged have made. The 7 the Emperess was brought to Bed of a
Daughter. From Hungary we have advice that Prince Abafty, as likewise the
Princes Walachia and Moldavia have orders from the Grand Vsiier to remain with
their Troops near Raab to hinder the Incursions of that Garrison and of
Comorra, and to secure the Convoys That go to the Turkish Army

Ratisbonne September 13th we have Letters from the Imperial Army near Mautern
of the sixth Instant which say; That the next Morning they were to March into
the Tolne fields, where they were to expect the Troops of Franconia and Saxony;
and the Letters from Lintz of the 9 tell us, that the Turks were masters of the
Ditch of Vienna that they had sprung two Great Mines; one of which did not
succeed, but the other blew up the point of the Lebel Bastion, and that
thereupon they made a very fierce assault, but that they were repulsed with
Considerable Loss That the King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain were
Marching to relieve the place (which began to be in great Distress) and that
the whole Army was Compassed of 64 Battalions of Foot, 500 in each, and 162
squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, in each 220 which amounts to 32000 Foot and
32400 Horse and Dragoons, in all 64400 men

Ratisbonne September 16 several Couriers have passed through this place since
yesterday Morning; coming from Vienna and from the Imperial Army, by whom we
are informed That on Sunday the 12th instant, the Christian Army attacked the
Turks in their Camp, and totaly defeated them, that their Foot were all cut in
pieces and their Horse fled, leaving their Bagage; Cannon, Tents, and all they
had behind them, that the Emperial Army stood in Batalia all the Night
following that they might be in a posture to receive the Enemy, in case they
should rally again; That the King of Poland with his Troops and some of the
Germans, were gone in persuit of them, and were not returned to the Imperial
Army on Monday Noon; at which time Liberty was given to the Soldiers to strip
the Enemies dead; its said the Imperiallists have not lost above 4 or 500 men;
and that the King of Poland has taken two Horse Tails (which are the Turks
signals of War) as likewise the Grand Visiers standard; and his own Horse, but
that it is not yet known what is become of himself; the Letters we expect to
morrow will give us with more certainty the particulers of this great Action

Brussels September the one and twentieth: Last Night arrived here a Gentleman
from the Imperial Army, who brought the great and happy news of the raising the
Siege of Vienna and the total defeat of the Turkish Army on Sunday the 12th
instant, of which he gives us these particulars. That the Christian Army
consisted of 40000 Horse, and the like number of Foot, That the King of Poland
commanded the Right Wing. the Duke of Lorrain, accompanied with the Electors of
Saxony and Bavaria, the main Body, and Prince Waldecke, the Prince de Salme,
Prince Louis of Baden, and the Marquis of Brandenburg, Bareith, the Left Wing;
That the whole Army advanced in this order of Battle toward the Turkish Camp
with several small Parties of Horse and Dragoons before them to clear the way;
That the Grand Vizier had drawn up his Army within his Camp, having several
advanced Bodies of Horse and Foot to defend their Retrenchments, and had they
made a stout resistance, it would have been difficult to have forced their
Camp; but that these advanced Bodies* not being well seconded, gave way, and
put their main Body into disorder; That the Christians having without much
opposition entered the Enemies Camp, their Horse immediately fled, and the Grand
Vizier with them, That their Foot, being between 20 and 25000 men, made a
considerable resistance; but being environed by the Christians, were all cut in
pieces; That the Polish Horse pursued the Enemies Cavalry till night, and
killed many of them, and intended to continue the pursuit the next day; That
the Enemies Camp infinitely rich That all their Baggage and Cannon are taken,
with 60000 Tents, and that in that of the Grands Visiers, was found two
Millions of Money. That Vienna was brought to the last extremity, and could
have held out but four days longer, the Garrison being reduced from 15000 to
5000 men; However they made a very brisk Sally at the time the Christians
entered the Turkish Camp, and killed many of the Turks that were still in the
Trenches. It Is said the Enemy lost during the Siege 70000 men, besides those
slain on this great day. Count Starenberg has given the Marquis de Grana a
short account of their Deliverance, having Writ his Letter upon one of the
Enemies Cannon. We were told that neither Teckeley nor Abafti was in the
Turkish Army, and that there was not one Tartar found among them. In our next
we may be able to give you a more particular Relation of this great and signal
Victory, which cost the Christians not above 3 or 400 men; among whom are no
Persons of any note, except the Duke de Crov's Brother, and the Count de
Tratmansdorf.

Brusels Sept. 1. It is hard to express the Joy we are here in occasioned by
the news we have of the entire Defeat of the Turkish Army; We first heard it
from a Courier which arrived here yesterday morning from Passaw, but in the
Evening we had the certainty of it by an Officer who came from the Imperial
Camp, and from Vienna the 13. inst. the day after this Memorable Action, He
tells us That the 12. about ten in the morning, the Christian Army attaked the
Turkish Camp. That the King of Poland made the attack on the side of the
Empresses House called la Favorite, where the Grand Vizier had his Quarters;
The Duke of Lorrain on the side of the Bastion of the Court, and Prince
Waldecke on that of the Scotch Gate. That having without any great opposition
entered the Enemies Camp, their Horse fled, and the Foot was all destroyed, and
all their Baggage Cannon, Tents and Treasure taken; during this action the
Besieged Sallied out, and fell upon the Janissaries, who, as is said, to the
number of 10000 had that day the Guard of the Trenches, and were in the posts
against the Town, and, being likewise attackt on the side of the Army, none of
them escaped.

The Marshall d'Eumieres continues still at Lessiness; On Sunday last some
Squadrons of French Horse were at Alost and Asch, and carried away several of
the Inhabitans for refusing to pay the Contributions they demanded, 4000 Ducth
Foot, and 2000 Horse are encamped between Malines and Doffle. and 2000 Foot
more are marching to Gaunt to remain in Garrison there under the Command of
Monsieur d' Auvergue. The Cavalry of this Garrison are drawn within the
Counterscarp, and encamped along the dry Ditch, and all the lower part about
the Town is laid under water. We have advice that the Dutch Fleet is arrived at
Gottenburg.

DVBLIN, Reprinted by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's
Printing House on Ormond-Key 1683.

FINIS.

