The Last SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF John Thompson, Richard Crook alias Hide,
John Atkins alias Lush, Richard Stanley, Robert Wright, and Thomas Birch,
for Killing the two Boys. Who Were Executed at TYBOURN, On Friday the 4 th. of
this Instant May, 1688.
ONE would think, that after so many Instances of Divine Justice against
Malefactors, Men would at last, begin to be so Wise, as to beware of such
Courses that naturally tend to such deplorable Ends. But, Alas!
notwithstanding all the Exemplary Punishments which we see daily inflicted upon
Criminals, too many ^n on in their Wicked courses, and never stop, till the
Justice of God lays hold upon them, and they by this means, Ruin themselves,
at least as to this Life, (if not likewise as to that which is to come, since,
as Divines say, Late Repentance is seldom true.) Would Men but seriously
reflect upon the sad Consequences of evil Courses before they enter upon them,
it cannot be supposed they would so easily give themselves over to them, but we
too often find, that by Men's heedless running upon one Sin, that makes way for
another, and that again for a third; and so they go on, till at last they make
themselves an Example of Justice, as we have many times before observed, and
now of late at the Execution of the following Prisoners. But I shall proceed to
give you an Account of their Confessions and last Words.

John Thompson, who was Condemned for Breaking open the House of Edward
Mullins, and Stealing thence a Silver Salt, three Silver Spoons and 40 l. in
Money, with other Goods, Confessed that he had been a Lewd liver and had been
guilty of many Crimes, and particularly, that he committed that Murder upon
Dorothy Stanton, the Wife of Philip St^^ton, otherwise called Lump's) in
Fig-lane, on the 2 d. of March, 1685. For whith and all his other Crimes, he
seemed very Penitent, and asked Forgiveness of the said Philip her Husband, who
was present at the Execution. He was frequently heard to repeat these Words,
Whither shall I go in a few Minutes? He likewise said, that it was not the bare
apprehension of Death, or of losing this World, that Troubled him, but that he
was amazed at the thoughts of appearing before the Tremendous Tribunal of God,
having lived so profligate a Villain.

Richard Crook alias Hide, and John Atkins alias Lush, Condemned as Brethren in
Iniquity, for Breaking open the House of William Hollyer, and Stealing thence
two Pieces of Scarlet Cloth, both notorious Offenders, but now very Penitent.
Among other things, Hide Confessed, that he Robbed my Lord Preston in
Soho-Square, with a great many other Thefts and Villainies, having continued
that course of Life for above these Nine or Ten Years; for though he was but a
Stripling being not above 17 Years, yet he had been no Novice in Villainy. He
sadly regretted his being drawn away by bad Company, but above all, he lamented
his Profaning the Sabbath day, as a Sin which provoked God to withdraw his
Grace from him, which laid him Naked to all the Assaults of the Devil, so that
no Sin seemed so horrid but he could without any check of Conscience commit it.

Thomas Birch, Sentenced for Killing two Boys of Clerkenwell Parish, viz.
Edward Bunny and Samuel Wilson, on the 4th. of April. He was likewise very
Penitent, and declared that Drunkenness had brought him to his untimely end;
for he said, had he not been in Drink, he might have escaped that horrid Sin of
Murder he committed on those Innocent Boys; and that never till then he had
been Accused of the least Misdemeanor: And therefore he advised all People to
beware of that Sin, which frequently has such sad Effects attending it, it
being a Sin that drowns Reason, and makes a Man more Salvage than the most
rapacious Beasts, and exposes him to all manner of Sins.

Richard Stanley and Robert Wright, Condemned for Robbing of John Clarke on the
Highway, and taking from him a Mare, one Guirea 16 s. in Money, a Saddle, and
other Goods, were no less Penitent than the former, making ample Confession of
their wicked course of Life, begging Pardon of God for all those they had
Injured, and freely Forgiving their Prosecutors. But they utterly denied the
Robbery charged on them in Hartford-shire.

The PRAYER of Richard Stanley.
MOst Holy Lord, Good and Gracious, Everlasting and blessed God, how Gracious
art thou! Lord God, Thou art a great God, a Merciful God, and Thou have done
for me a Thousand times more then I deserved; I confess I have been a great
Sinner, and have done those things I ought not to have done, and left undone
what I ought to have done: Lord, help me, strengthen my Faith ever minute more
and more, these few Minuets I have to live, that when my Soul and Body parts,
my Soul may ascend up to Heaven; and that he that shed his Blood for Sinners,
may make my peace with God. Let my Sins be covered, forsake me not, because of
them I have been a great Sinner, I have offended against thy Holy Laws, I have
humbly confessed them all. Lord, for Christ Jesus sake, forgive me all my Sins; I
have confessed them upon my bended knees: Grant that I may be a warning to
others, that they may spend the Sabbath better, walk uprightly and justly, and
do nothing contrary to God's Law: Lord, bless my everlasting Soul; Jesus keep
me from the torments of Hell. And now I part in peace, I have repented of all
my Sins, and for Christ Jesus sake enable me with all things necessary this
day, concluding this my imperfect Prayer, as Christ himself has taught me, Our
Father, etc.

In Sum, they Died all with as great sense of their Sin as most Prisoners that
have been Executed these many years, showing a great deal of fervency in their
Prayers to God Almighty, earnestly requiring the Prayers of all that were
present, and begging Forgiveness of all whom they had offended.

Four of them, viz. John Atkins alias Lush, Richard Stanley, Robert Wright and
Thomas Birch, Died in the Communion of the Church of England; and the two
others, viz. John Thompson and Richard Crook alias Hide Died in the Roman, and
had two Priests attending them. The four former joined in Prayer with a
Minister of the Church of England, and afterward Sung a part of a Psalm, while
the other two performed their last Devotion with their Priests after their way.
After which, they continued about half an hour bewailing their miserable
condition, asking God Forgiveness of their Sins, and showing all the signs of
true Penitence. And we hope that God of his infinite Mercy has been Gracious to
their Souls.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ballin Thames Street, near
Baynard's-Castle, 1688.


