THE Traitors Pilgrimage From the TOWER TO Tyeburn:

BEING A true Relation of the drawing of William Lord Monson, Sir Henry
Mildmay, and Esquire Wallop, upon three several Sledges on Monday last the 27th
of this instant January, being the day that our late Gracious Sovereign King
CHARLES received that horrid and most unjust Sentence to lose his dear and
precious Life before the Gates of his own Royal Palace

WITH The manner of the proceedings at Tyburn, in Order to the degrading and
devesting them of their former Titles of Honor; and their declaratory Speeches
to both the Right Worshipful Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.

London, Printed by J. Johnson, 1662.

A true Relation of the manner how the Prisoners were drawn on a Hurdle on
Monday last the 27th of this instant January, from the Tower of London, etc.
WHen Subjects rebel against their Lawful Sovereign, great are the Omens of
their destruction; and an hasty Sentence once past, may be sooner repented then
recalled, as it is clearly demonstrated from the case of many of those Members,
who sat in the pretended high Court of Justice again our precious and never
too much lamented Sovereign King Char^es the first, of ever blessed Memory;
many being unfeignedly sorrowful, that ever they had a hand in so wicked, so
great, and execrable an Act as to murder so pious virtuous, and loving a King,
that so patiently received Martyrdom at the ^ates of his own Royal Palace
rather then he would betray a good Conscience, the Kingdoms peace, or the
liberty of his Subjects; and as it is expressed in the Holy writ. That he that
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed again (especially Royal
Blood) there being an express command, [Touch not the Lords Anointed] etc. But
how contrary to this many have gone, let the World judge. Some have already
drank of the bitter Cup of Death for their Disobedience and Rebellion, others
are like to taste of the Dregs; but thrice happy are they who shall walk holy,
and in all reverend obedience fear God and honor the King: But some Zealots of
the Zuinglian faction, spreading their woeful Schisms throughout these British
Islands, many loyal Subjects paid Death for it, whose Blood was poured forth
like Water in most parts of the Kingdom, but no where more abundant then at
Cromwels-slaughter-house, in, and about the City of London. And observe, the
stones that they cast at others fell upon their own heads, for several changes
and mutations happened, in so much that there was a most miraculous deliverance
from the hands of Usurpers, by a providential restoring of our dread Sovereign
Lord King Charles the second, and the bringing of His Majesty's grand Enemies
to the Bar of Justice, and others to public shame and disgrace; amongst whom
the Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, being all Members
of Parliament for constituting of that most unjust, illegal, and pretended High
Court of Justice; and although they were not present at the Sentence of the
Kings death, yet they were A bettors thereunto; but through the tender mercy of
King and Parliament being not immediate, they were excepted for life, and to
receive reward according to their merits; which was by the High and Honorable
Court of Parliament to be secured and kept in safe custody, and on the 27th of
January to be drawn upon a Sledge from the Tower of London to Tiburn, there to
be degraded and divested from all their Titles of Honor, which accordingly was
put in execution on Monday last, but Sir James Harrington having made his
escape prevented that which otherwise had been determined for him.

But before we proceed to particulars, observe this by the way, That as for
Mildmay, he was raised and prefered by his Majesty; the King not only ordering
him to be his Jeweller, but preferred him to other places of profit, and was in
high Trust as well as in great Gain; And because, as the Proverb goes, Much
would have more, his Covetousness, egged forward by his Ambition to be Great,
snatching at more then was just, laid him open to lose what was due, and to be
deprived of his place that formerly was so good. Then he, like the unjust
Steward spoken of in the Gospel, withal alluding to Mr. Pym, that grand enemy
against Monarchy, took unjuster courses against his Royal Master; for he not
only advised with himself to destroy his Majesty and to deceive him gaining
Riches to himself, as his false Steward that Christ spea^s of, had had showed
him the way before; but as After-ages grew more subtle, so they became more
wicked then the former times; even so this unjust and unthankful Servant became
more wicked then before; for such hatred and malice did he lay up against his
Lord and Master the King, that he sealed it in the depth of his heart, wherein
the same boiled like New Wine that wanted vent; so that it was like Meat and
Drink to an hungry Stomach, or thirsty Soul, for him to find any opportunity to
broach the same, and was against all Concessions of peace with the King; for
when the Essex Petition for a personal Treaty with the King [during His
Majesty's confinement in the Isle of Wight] was published in London, the
Printer was sent for by a Pursivant, and being carried before a Committee where
this Judas Mildmay was Chairman he used these words: Sirrah* sirrah, How dare
you Print or Publish such wicked Papers as these, for a personal Treaty with
him whom we have conquered. To which the Printer replied, That to his
apprehension and judgment there was nothing therein contained but what was
just and lawful; whereupon he was committed: But to the deportment of this
precious Jeweller and the rest, upon the Sledge and at Tiburn, this is very
remarkable; That,

On Monday being the 27 of January, (and the day that our late Gracious Lord
and Sovereign King Charles, received that most horrid excrable, and detestable
Sentence,) the aforesaid William Lord Mounson Sir Henry Mildmay, Robert Wallop
Esquire, were drawn from the Tower of London, on three several sledges, with
Ropes about their Necks, to Tyburn, being guarded by the Sheriffs Officers,
etc. The first was the Lord Mounson, who lay along in the sledge, and seemed
very much dejected, having almost the Picture of Death in his face; The second
was Sir Henry Mildmay, who lay as it were crooked on the sledge, in a long
Gown; And the third was Mr. Wallop, who likewise lay in the same posture. But
when they came to Tyburn, after some Discourse betwixt the Worshipful Sheriffs,
and the Prisoners, in order to the Effect and Causes of their being brought to
that Place, with so great and deserved Reproach and Ignominy: To which the Lord
Mounson deelared, That what he had done, he was sorry from his very Soul, and
had he ten thousand lives he would facrifice them all for the King. The like
regret of Spirit were upon the other two, who when they came near to the
Gallows, shaked their heads, and said, It was but just, their sins had deserved
it. And all three Sledges being drawn under the Gallows, they were afterward
guarded back to the Tower.

FINIS.

