A Peaceable and Friendly ADDRESS TO THE Non-Conformists: Written upon their
desiring An Act of TOLERATION Without The Sacramental Test,

DUBLIN, Printed at the Post-Office-Coffee-House in Fish-Shamble-Street, for
John Foster, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Dolphin in Skinner-Row, 1697.

Imprimatur

Hoc Scriptum, cui Titulus, A Peaceable and Friendly Address to the
Non-Conformists, etc.

July 19. 1697. Narcissus Dublin,

To His Grace the Lord Primate of IRELAND.
My Lord,
THe hope which I have of doing some good, or at least, the confidence that I
shall do no hurt in Publishing this small Piece, has induced me to expose both
it and my self to the censure of the world. And although there may be nothing else
in it which may recommend it to your Grace, yet I assure my self You will
approve of that temper and calmness which I have endeavored with all care to
preserve in every period of it. For, as bitterness, or sharpness of style is
contrary to Charity, no less than mirth and drollery in matters of Religion,
are to the seriousness of Christianity; so have I ever observed, that such a
satirical way of writing is much more effectual to raise the Passion, than to
convince the Judgment of an Adversary. For which reason I have been studiously
careful to avoid all expressions which might exasperate, or give offense to our
Nonconforming Brethren; and shall, with God's Blessing, continue the same
care, if ever there be an occasion for me any further to defend what I have
here written.

And upon this occasion, I beseech your Grace to give me leave to remember to
the World how Eminent an Example of Temper and Moderation You have constantly
shown Your self, as to all others, and at all times, so particularly to those
to whom I now am about to Address my self. No man could be more true and firm
to the Established Church, and at the same time more mild and gentle to those
who dissent from her, than Your Grace has always been. Of which, Your unbyassed
Steadiness through all changes and vicissitudes; together with the great lenity
even in those times when it was most in your Grace's power to have used
severity toward them, is a demonstration beyond all exception.

Nor can I omit to take notice of the admirable good effect which your moderate
way of Dealing with such persons has had upon diverse of the Nonconforming
Ministers, who were in these parts at the time when your Grace formerly sat in
the Chair of this Diocese; several of whom, (as I have been informed) being not
only convinced by the Arguments, but even won by your Obliging and Christian
temper, did freely and readily yield to receive Ordination at your Grace's
hands, according to the form prescribed by our Church; and continued ever after
to conform to the worship and discipline of it.

Nor have I any thing else to excuse my presumption in this Dedication, but
only the hope that your Grace will be ready, according to your accustomed
Candor, to approve of, and encourage every man, tho in the meanest station,
who endeavors, according to his capacity, to follow any part of that excellent
pattern which Your Grace for so many years has set to the World.

That Your Grace may enjoy all the Happiness of this Life, until such time as
You shall exchange it for a Crown of Eternal Glory, Is the most earnest and
hearty Prayers of

Cork, July 15. 1697. Your Grace's Most Obedient Chaplain, And most Obliged
Humble Servant, EDW. SING.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe following Address was Written in the year 1695, upon occasion of some
Papers, which a little before had past between the Established Church, and
Protestant Dissenting Party, in Reference to a Bill of Indulgence, then under
consideration in, or ready (as was supposed) to be brought into the House of
Commons: Which Controversy having been for some time silenced, by the frequent
Adjournment of both Houses of Parliament, it was thought unseasonable to
Publish any thing in that Interval, which might relate to it: But because it is
not improbable, but that our Dissenting Brethren will, now the Parliament meets
again, endeavor to gain the same Point which before they aimed at; it is hoped
that those Papers may at least be as seasonable now, as they would have been,
had they been Published at the time when they were Written.

A Peaceable and Friendly Address To the Non-Conformists. Written upon their
Desiring An Act of Toleration without the Sacramental Test.
SInce it is the Duty of every Christian to promote the Peace and Unity of the
Church, and heartily to endeavor that there may be no Divisions amongst us;
but that we may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. In one spirit, and with one mind, striving together for
the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. And since, when one party of Christians
separate from another, it must either be for a just cause, or without a just
cause; it will follow, that wherever there is Schism in any Church, and one
Congregation set up in opposition to another, and refusing to join in Communion
with the other, there must, of necessity, be a sin either on the one side or
the other; either in them who give the others a just ground of separation, or
in them who separate without a just ground.

That there is a separation between you and us, and thereby a Schism made in
our National Church, is too apparent; but where the sin of this Division lies,
whether upon u^, for giving you a just cause of dividing, or upon you for
separating from us without any such cause; this is what on both sides we ought
to enquire after, and to reform it where ever we find it. And in order to the
making of this discovery, I do (as I trust, in the fear of God, and in a true
spirit of Meekness and Charity) beseech you all calmly and seriously to weigh
and consider these following things which I offer unto you.

First, Is there any of those things which are necessary to the salvation of a
Christian, wanting in the Communion of our Church? Do we not profess and teach
the true Christian Faith in all its fundamental Articles? And if some of our
Divines do perhaps differ from yours in the determination, or rather the manner
of expressing of some Theological Points; will any one venture to say, that the
explicit belief of such Doctrines in difference, is absolutely necessary unto
Salvation? Do we not require all men to lead virtuous and holy lives? And is
any part of Christ's Institution omitted by us in the Administration either of
Baptism or the Lord's Supper? Or what is there more required by God, in order
to any man's Salvation, than a true Faith, an holy Life, to be admitted into
the Church by Baptism, and to own our Communion with it by the frequent
participation of the Lord's Supper? In short, if we are deficient in any thing
which is necessary to Salvation, let us know what it is that is wanting amongst
us, and let the necessity of it be proved, and then if we receive it not, the
Sin is ours.

Secondly, is there any thing required by us from those who Communicate with
us, which is a Sin, and therefore not to be practiced with a good Conscience?
However unnecessary or impertinent any thing may be esteemed, yet nothing is to
be looked upon as a Sin but what is contrary to the Law of God: Are then any of
our Constitutions contrary to God's Law? Or has God any where forbid us to use
the Sign of the Cross after Baptism, a Ring in the Celebration of Marriage, a
Surplice in Divine Service, the posture of kneeling at the reception of the
Lord's Supper, or any of those Rites and Ceremonies which are appointed to be
used amongst us? And can any thing be called a Sin which God has no where
forbid? But if you shall say, that tho the bare use of these things is not
forbid, yet we use them after a superstitious manner, whereby they become
sinful. I entreat you to consider that we have sufficiently declared, that we
place no holiness in any such things as these, (wherein our Superstition, if
any there were, could only consist) but that we only use them as things in
themselves indifferent, ordained by human Authority for decency and order, and
at any time alterable by the same or the like Authority that appointed them. To
conclude this Point, either such things as are indifferent in themselves, may
possibly be used without Superstition, as Circumstances in the worship of God,
or else it will scarce be possible to perform any outward Worship at all
without Superstition: For outward Worship cannot be performed without Outward
Circumstances; And no Man sure will pretend that all the Outward Circumstances
of Worship are prescribed or regulated by God himself. Since then our Rites and
Ceremonies of Religion are things in themselves indifferent, and therefore such
as may be used, without Superstition, do you your selves teach us how we shall
more effectually disclaim all Superstition, in the use of them, than we already
do: And if we give you not satisfaction in the matter, the fault is justly
ours. But to charge us with Superstition in the use of those things which do
not necessarily imply that sin in themselves, and that at the same time, when
we do positively renounce, not only the Name of Superstition, but also the
thing it self; In my poor opinion, is not so agreeable unto Christian Charity,
which believes all things, and hops all things, 1 Cor 13.7.

Thirdly, If then in the Communion of our Church there be neither any thing
wanting which is necessary to Salvation, nor, on the other side, any thing
prescribed in it which is sinful; does it not apparently follow from hence that
our Communion is at least innocent? And that any Christian may, with a good
Conscience, join with us in God's Worship and Sacraments, since thereby he
needs not involve himself in any sin, either of Commission or Omission. If you
shall say that our Communion, though to us, who are persuaded of the Lawfulness
of it, it may be innocent; yet to you would be sinful; because some of you
judge it absolutely unlawful to Communicate with us (and no Man ought to act
directly against his own Conscience) and others of you do, at least, doubt
whether it be lawful or not; Whereas in such Cases as these, every man ought to
be fully persuaded in his own mind, To. 14.5. And he that doubts is damned if
he Conform, as well as if he eat, because he Conformeth not of Faith (that is
to say, is not thoroughly persuaded of the Lawfulness of what he does) for
whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, v. 23. To those who judge our Communion
unlawful, I must again urge what I have already said in the two preceding
Paragraphs, and tell them that their Judgment in this is not only false, but
also apparently uncharitable, except they can show either that something is
wanting, and not to be had in our Church, which yet God has commanded; or
something appointed and required which God has forbidden, for nothing can be
absolutely sinful and unlawful, except it be to omit the one, or to do the
other. But as for those who only doubt, that is to say, are not well assured,
whether it be lawful to Conform to our Communion or not: If they are not able
by any means to clear their doubts, and satisfy their Scruples; yet surely, in
such a Case, they ought to choose that way which is most safe, and free from
the danger of sin; and if there be a plain and evident Law of God which direct;
them one way, they ought not to forsake that way, and go another, upon such
suggestions as they own to be but obscure and doubtful. Now, what can be more
evidently commanded, than that we should seek and promote the Peace and Unity
of the Church (as I have said at the beginning of this Address). And that we
should give obedience unto the commands of lawful Authority, Romans 13.1, 1 Pet.
2.13. But, on the other side, the case in hand supposes a man to be only
doubtful (and not resolved either way) whether it be lawful to conform to the
Rites and Ceremonies by Law Established in our Church; Now, if, after a
reasonable time for enquiry, he is not able to determine this doubt, so as
positively to satisfy himself upon solid grounds, that such Conformity is
unlawful; what reason can be given why such a doubt (which probably may be the
effect of his fancy, or prejudice only, and not of any sober and impartial
reasoning, because it never comes to a determination) should be put in the
balance against those plain commands of God which I have mentioned: And as
long as such a man remains doubtful as to both sides, why may not the above
objected words of St. Paul be more strongly urged for Conformity than against
it? For why should a man refuse to conform, if he be only doubtful, and not
fully persuaded in his own mind, that he ought not to conform? And why may I
not say, that he that doubts is damned, if he refuses conformity, rather
than if he conform? because he refuses not of Faith; (that is to say, is not
thoroughly persuaded of the lawfulness of such a refusal; there being two plain
Laws of God which direct him to conform, and nothing but a doubt, which is
raised but upon obscure grounds, that restrains him from it) for whatsoever is
not of Faith (whether it be an action, or a refusal) is sin. But if you shall
say, that to impose such things upon you in the worship and service of God, as
are in themselves indifferent, and not commanded by any law of God, is an
infringement of your Christian liberty; which you are bound not to yield or
give way to, but to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free; Gal. 5.1. I answer, that if any Church should offer to impose the belief
or practice of any thing, as an essential part of Religion, and necessary to
Salvation, which God has not particularly required; Against such an Imposition
as this every Christian ought to stand up, and assert his Christian liberty; as
the Apostles did against the Jewish Ceremonies, which some would have imposed
upon the Church as absolutely necessary to Salvation, Acts 15.1. And this is
what the Apostle exhorts the Galatians unto; and is, as far as I can
understand, the true notion of Christian liberty, as it is stated in the holy
Scriptures: For if way should be given to such sort of Impositions as these; in
process of time so many things (through the pride and vanity of some, and the
ignorance and mistakes of others) might come to be introduced into the
Christian Religion, as might render it (as the Jewish was) a yoke too heavy to
be born, Acts 15.10. But to plead Christian liberty as an exemption from such
Laws and Rules which an Established Church shall think fit to make about
things, in themselves professedly indifferent, and only for order and
regularities sake; as it has no foundation that I can find either in Scripture
or Reason; so the apparent consequence of it must be, not that decency and
order which St. Paul directs the Church to provide for in the service of God, 1
Cor. 14.40. (which cannot be maintained without some established Rules in
circumstantial matters). But, on the contrary, that disorder and confusion
which we may imagine must be in such an Assembly, where every man shall esteem
it unlawful to demean himself according to any human prescribed Rules; and
where therefore every the most ignorant person will be guided by nothing but
the suggestions of his own thoughts, in all such things as God himself has not
particularly determined: For the avoiding of which confusion and irregularity,
every settled Church has always found it necessary to follow that direction
which St. Paul long since gave; and to make and prescribe certain Rules for the
establishment of Decency and Order in their Congregations. And if our Liturgy
be an infringement of Christian Liberty, not only all other Churches are guilty
of the same, but even your own Directory, which imposes some things which in
themselves are indifferent, cannot be excused from it. And if you shall say
that our Ceremonies are too numerous and burdensome, besides that others who
perhaps may be as competent Judges, are of another opinion: If this were really
so, yet the most it would amount to, would be only an inconvenience, (of which
hereafter) and not a sin. And tho St. Austin complained of the number and
burden of Ceremonies in his time; yet we never find that he looked upon that as
any cause for separating from the Established Church. And lastly, If you shall
say that many of our Rites and Ceremonies are altogether unnecessary, and that
the Governors of a Church ought not to lay unnecessary impositions upon the
people; besides that what some may think unnecessary, others may judge to be
expedient. Let us suppose that our Governors were guilty of a fault in imposing
some needless things upon us, yet will it not follow that our compliance even
with such things, for Peace and Unity's sake, would be any Sin, but rather, I
think, a virtue: And therefore upon the whole, I cannot but conclude, that any
good Christian may, at least very innocently, join himself to the Communion of
our Church.

Fourthly, Then if the Communion of our Church be Lawful and Innocent in its
self; what imaginable reason can there be why you should refuse to join with us
in it? For sure you do not think that every Man is at his free Liberty, either
to join himself to the Established Church of a place, or to set up a distinct
Church for himself, for this would be the way not only to divide, but crumble
the Church; till the different fancies of Men should bring it to nothing. And
if you shall tell us that some of our Constitutions are not so conveniently
settled, as they should be for promoting the Glory of God, and the Practice of
Piety; Besides that there never was any Human Appointment so perfect as to be
free from all defect and inconvenience; And that what may seem inconvenient to
one, may perhaps be thought convenient by another (there being scarce any
particular Rules of convenience so fixed, but what will be differently thought
of by different Men, according to the diversity of their Apprehensions and
Circumstances). I desire to know whether one or more bare inconveniences, which
yet are, or may be, free from sin, can be a sufficient reason to separate from
an Established Church? And if so, what Church is there upon the face of the
Earth from which this principle will not justify a Division? It is indeed the
duty of every Man soberly and peaceably to seek for the Rectifying, even any
inconveniences which he perceives to be in the Church: But since it is a Rule
of Charity that it bears all things, endures all things, suffers long, is
not easily provoked, and seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13, 4. etc. Methinks every
good Christian should be contented to bear, even with many inconveniences
(until such time as God should touch the hearts of those in whose power it
should be to remedy them) rather than occasion a Division in the Church, which,
besides the sin, is certainly a greater inconvenience than all those which you
can complain of put together. But if you shall say that you find your selves
more Edified in Godliness and Piety by your own Meetings, than by frequenting
our Assemblies; Not to ascribe this to your prejudice and prepossession, nor to
make any comparisons which may seem odious, or may tend to exasperate; I shall
only tell you if this be a real truth, and not a bare fancy only; it may seem
to be a reason why you should hold some Assemblies, besides the Parochial
Congregations, for your mutual Edification, and to provoke others to emulation;
which might be a means to promote a general reformation of all neglects or
disorders in the Church, (provided that nothing were therein said or done which
might give any of your own members or others, a just occasion to look upon you
as a separate Church set up in opposition, and not in subordination to the
established one). But what reason you can ground upon this for a downright
separation, and an utter refusal of our Communion; I confess I am not able to
find. But if you shall say that you do not absolutely separate from us, nor
utterly renounce our Communion, but that you sometimes come to our public
Worship, and receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper after our prescribed
Form, which is by some of you asserted and pleaded for under the name of
occasional Communion; I desire to be informed, if occasional Communion with us
be lawful, why should constant Communion with us be thought unlawful? If it be
a sin to join with us in God's Worship and Sacraments, it ought not to be done
so much as once; but if it be no sin, why may it not be done always? And would
it not be much more agreeable to the temper of Christianity, and the Spirit of
Peace and Unity, for you constantly to frequent our Assemblies, who own you may
lawfully do it, and to hold your own other Meetings either after or before
ours; rather than by holding them just at the same time with ours, to keep the
people as much as you can, strangers from our Congregations, than alienating
their affections from us; cherishing an opinion in many of them, that our way
of Worship is utterly unlawful, and widening, or at least keeping open, that
breach which otherwise in a little time, would probably close, and heal of it
self.

The design of what I have hitherto said, has been to lay the matter home to
your Consciences, to persuade you to embrace the Communion of our Church, and
thereby supersede the necessity of a Toleration: But if all we can say or argue
upon this matter will not prevail, then,

Fifthly, I would gladly know what it is which you aim at, and propose to your
selves in an Act of Toleration? Is it only to have the liberty of Serving God
in that way which you think to be best, and thereby to be free from
persecution, and to go the readiest way, as you suppose, to Heaven, without let
or molestation? Or is it to lay a foundation for the overthrow of the
Established Church, and to get, in time, the whole Ecclesiastical and Civil
Power into your own hands, as is already done by those of your persuasion in
Scotland? If the latter of these be your design, sure you must think us no less
than fools and madmen, if we give way to our own Overthrow and Ruin; and do
not give you all the Opposition that possibly we can; but if the former be
only, and adequately your desire, why are you so Zealous against the
Sacramental Test (as it is called) as even to refuse an Act of Toleration,
rather then have this Clause inserted in it, That no one shall be capable of
any Office, or Employment in the Commonwealth, who shall not so many times in
the Year Receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the
Established Form? I am sensible, That Men may have strange Notions, Prejudices
and Scruples, in matters of Religion; and that what seems to be the highest and
clearest Reason to one Man, may not appear Convincing, or Concluding to
another. And therefore, I do not wonder that good and well meaning Men, though
mistaken, should be very earnest for Liberty of Conscience, to be clear from
such Impositions as they think they cannot lawfully submit to, and to have the
freedom of serving God in such a way as they apprehend may be pleasing to him.
But when Men are not contented with this, except they may have also a share in
the Government, and be made capable of Employments of Power, Trust, and Profit;
I think it is very apparent, That they design and aim at some thing else
besides the Salvation of their Souls, and freedom from Persecution; And it
becomes the Wisdom of every Government, carefully to consider even the remote,
if probable, consequences of what they do; and however, it may be fit to deal
gently with tender Consciences, yet that State which shall seem to Encourage or
set up two several Parties, differing from each other in matters of Religion,
(which strangely Unites, or divides the Affections of Men) to make Factions one
against the other, and to stand in perpetual distinct Opposition and
Competition one with the other for all the Places of Trust, Power, and Profit
in the Commonwealth; I believe will be thought by most Wise Men to be out in
its Politics.

But if I am told that this last Question which I have put, contains in it a
False and Uncharitable Suggestion against the Non-Conformists; and that they
have no manner of Design against the present Establishment of the Church, as is
pretended, but only desire to stand upon equal Terms with the rest of His
Majesty's Subjects as to Civil Matters; I answer that, supposing all this to be
True; yet no one knows but their Successors, in the next Generation, may
endeavor to advance a little farther than what is proposed by their
Predecessors in this. And since the Presbyterian P^rty in these Kingdoms did in
the late Wars of 1641. actually overthrow the Established Episcopal Church, and
have never yet Publicly Renounced those Principles by which they then Acted,
nor Testified any Repentance for what they did. And since the Presbyterians of
Scotland have now again Overturned the Episcopal Church of that Kingdom; have
we not all the Reason that can be to fear that, though our present
Non-Conformists may keep a kind and friendly Correspondence with us; because we
have been (...) lately joined against a common Enemy, yet in the next
Generation Heats and Animosities may probably arise between their Successors
and ours, which if not before hand carefully prevented, may tend to the
disturbance, or perhaps the Ruin both of Church and State: And ought not every
Government to provide for Posterity, as well as for the Present Generation? And
thus have I Declared, or at least Suggested, my thoughts in this great Affair,
with all the brevity and plainness that I could; and I hope with that Mildness
which becomes a peaceable Man and a Christian: How far what I have said may
prevail upon any Man, I know not, but I hope that no one can take any Offense,
either at what I have said, or at the manner wherein I have expressed my self;
and if I have missed of that Good which I designed, yet at least it will be
some satisfaction to me, to think that I have done no hurt; and whilst I have
been Pleading for Unity, have said nothing which should tend to the breach of
Charity.

FINIS.

