A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A most Terrible Storm of Thunder and Lightning, that
happened at Cruise Morchard, four Miles distant from Tiverton in Devonshire, on
Monday, being the 18th of February last past, about one of the Clock in the
Morning.
THE Publisher not intending to delay the Reader from perusing the following
Relation, with an Harangue of attributing it to be the effects of Natural
Causes, or as a Judgment of an Angry Deity, for Crimes either General or
Particular, leaves all to their own Censure, and only sets forth the true
matter of Fact, which take as follows.

That on Monday, the 18th of February last past, about One of the Clock in the
Morning, John Cruise Esquire; whose House is very near adjacent to the said Parish
Church, with his whole Family, as well as the whole adjacent Country, being
much affrighted with the terribleness of the Thunder and Lightning, and the
appearance of the whole Element being in a Flame; and hearing a strange noise
of Flames, imagined it to be his own House; but endeavoring to find out the
certainty thereof, quickly with astonishment discovered that the Parish Church,
and Tower thereof were all on Fire; and continued burning with that violence
(till the whole were entirely consumed) that it is difficult for Pen to express
the same. The Bells in the Tower were so melted (excepting half of one) that
the very substance of the Metal was turned into perfect Dross, and made useless
to be remelted. Which Accident is the more admirable for the Season it happened
in, when the least part of Thunder and Lightning is accounted Wonderful.

I hope none will be difficult to give credit to what is here related, for that
the said Gentleman has written a particular thereof to two Members of this
present Parliament, of the said Town adjacent; and an Estimate of the Damage,
which is computed to be near Two Thousand Pound. Who likewise are desired to
procure a Brief for a public Collection of Charity toward the rebuilding of
the said Parish Church, so dismally consumed.

There was also much more damage done in the adjacent Country, by blowing up
Trees by the Roots, the Roofs off some Houses, and Thatch off others; of which
the particulars are not yet taken.

Licensed,

April 6. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1689.


