THE SUBSTANCE OF WHAT SIR HENRY VANE INTENDED To have spoken upon the Scaffold
on TOWER HILL, at the time of his Execution, being the 14th. of June 1662.

Published to prevent false Reports.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

THe work which I am at this time called unto in this place (as upon a public
Theater) is to Die, and receive a discharge once for all, out of prison, to do
that which is but once to be done; and the doing or not doing of which well and
as becomes a Christian does much depend upon the life we have been taught of
God to lead before we come to this: they that live in the faith, do also die in
it; Faith is so far from leaving them in this hour, that the work of it
breaks forth then into its greatest power, as if till then it were not enough
at freedom to do its office, that is, to look into the things that are unseen
with most stedfastness, certainty, and delight, which is the great sweetner of
death, and remover of its sting.

Give me leave therefore in a very few words, to give you an account of my
life, and of the wonderful great grace and mercy of God in bringing me home to
himself, and revealing his Son in me, that by the knowledge of the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, I might even whilst here in the body
be made pertaker of eternal life in the first fruits of it, and at last sit
down with Christ in glory at his right hand.

Here to mention some remarkable passages and changes of my life.

And in particular, how unsought by my self I was called to be a member of the
long Parliament; what little advantage I had by it, and by what steps I became
satisfied with the Cause I was engaged in, and d d pursue the same: what the
Cause was did first show it self in the first Remonstrance of the house of
Commons.

Secondly, in the Covenant.

Thirdly, in the more refined pursuit of it by the Commons house in their
actings single, with what result they were growing up, into was in the breast
of the House and unknown; or what the three proposals mentioned in my charge
would have been at last, I shall not need now to repeat them. But only from
all parts together to assert that this Cause which was owned by the Parliament,
was the Cause of God, and for the promoting of the kingdom of his dear Son
Jesus Christ, wherein is comprehended our liberties and duties both as men and
as Christians.

And since it pleased God who separated me from the womb to the knowledge and
service of the Gospel of his Son, to separate me also to this hard and
difficult service at this time, and to single me out to the defense and
justification of his Cause, I could not consent by any words or actions of
mine, that the innocent blood that has been shed in the defense of it
throughout the whole war ( the guilt and morrall evils of which must
certainly lie somewhere) did lie at my door or at theirs that have been the
faithful adhearents to this cause, which is with such evidence upon my heart
that I am most freely and cheerfully willing to put the greatest Seal to it I
am capable, which is the pouring out of my very blood in witness to it, which
is all I shall need to say in this place and at this time, having spoken at
large to it in my defense at my Trials and had intended to say more the last
day, as what I thought was reasonable for the arrest of the judgment, though I
was not permitted then to speak it. Both which may with time and Gods
providence come to light.

And I must still assert, that I remain wholly unsatisfied, that the course of
proceedings against me at my trial were according to Law, but that I was run
upon and destroyed contrary to right, and the Liberties of Magna Charta under
the form of Justice: which I leave to God to decide who is the Judge of the
whole world, and to clear my innocence. Whilst in the mean time I beseech him
to forgive them, and all that have had a hand in my death; and that the Lord in
his great mercy will not lay it unto their charge.

And I do account this lot of mine no other then what is to be expected by
those that are not of the world, but whom Christ has chosen out of it; for the
servant is not greater then his Lord, and if they have done this to the green
tree, they will do it much more to the dry.

However I shall not altogether excuse my self, I know that by many weaknesses
and failings. I have given occasion enough of the ill usage I have met with
from men, though in the main the Lord knows the sincerity and integrity of my
heart, whatever aspersions and reproaches I have or do lie under.

I know also that God is just in bringing this sentence and condemnation upon
me for my sins, there is a body of sin and death in me deserves this
sentence. And there is a simil^tude and likeness also, that as a Christian God
thinks me worthy to bear with my Lord and head in many circumstances inference
to these dealings I have met with, in the good I have been endeavoring for
many years to be doing these Nations, and especially now at the last in being
numbered amongst transgressors, and made a public sacrifice through the wrath
and contradictions of men. And having finished my course, and fought the good
fight of faith, and resisted in a way of suffering (as you see) even unto blood.

This is but the needful preparation the Lord has been working in me to the
receiving the Crown of immortality which he has prepared for them that love
him. The prospect whereof is so cheerful that through the joy (in it) that is
set before the eyes of my faith, I can through mercy endure this cross,
despise this shame, and am become more then conqueror through Christ that has
loved me.

For my Life and Estate, all is not so dear to me as my service to God, to his
Cause, to the Kingdom of Christ, and the future welfare of my Country; and I
am taught according to the example, as well as that most Christian saying of a
Noble Person that lately dyed after this public manner in Scotland, How much
better it is to choose Affliction and the Cross, then to sin or draw back
from the service of the Living God into ways of Apostasy and Perdition.

That Noble Person whose Memory I Honor, was with my self at the beginning and
making of the Solemn League and Covenant, the matter of which and the holy
ends therein contained, I fully assent unto and have been as desirous to
observe; but the Rigid way of prosecuteing it, and oppressing uniformity that
has been endeavored by it, I never approved.

This were sufficient to vindicate me from the false Aspersions and Calumnies
which have been laid upon me of Jesuitisme and Popery, and almost what not to
make my name of ill Savor with good men, which dark mists do now dispell of
themselves, or at least ought, and need no pains of mine in making an Apology.

For if any man seek a proof of Christ in me, let him read it in this action of
my Death, which will not cease to speak when I am gone; and henceforth let no
man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

I shall not desire in this place to take up much time, but only as my last
words leave with you: That as the present storm we now lie under, and the dark
Clouds that yet hang over the Reformed Churches of Christ, which are coming
thicker and thicker for a season, were not un-fore-seen by me for many years
passed, as some writings of mine declare.

So the coming of Christ in these Clouds in order to a speedy and sudden
revivall of his Cause, and spreading his Kingdom over the face of the whole
Earth is most clear to the eye of my Faith, in that Faith in which I Dye,
whereby the Kingdom of this world shall become the Kingdom of our Lord and of
his Christ, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

