THE DECLARATION OF THE BRITISH in the North of Ireland.

With some Queries of Colonel MONK, And the Answers of the BRITISH to the
QUERIES.

desolate landscape

Printed Anno Dom. 1649.

Queries propounded by Colonel Monk, to the Counsel of War, at Belfast, the
9. of April. 1649.
I Desire to know what cause You have to distrust Me, for my faithfulness to
the good Cause You stand for?

2 Why do You grow upon Me daily by new Propositions, and are not satisfied
with these which the Presbytery at first propounded, but assume an unlimited
power to Your selves?

3. Why do you declare against that prevalent party in England without Order
or advice from England, and thereby do in all appearance, prejudge the good
Party oppressed there, by declaring your selves sooner, then they think it
seasonable: And yet to suffer Malignants in your Quarters contrare to Order.

4. I desire to know, (in regard of our dependence upon England) whom it is
that We shall serve for the present?

Answers given by the Counsel of War, to Colonel MONK his forementioned
Queries.
To the first nothing can be inferred from ouractions implying distrust of you,
or your faithfulness to the good Cause; since we are willing and desireous
yet to trust you.

To the 2. It cannot be thought strange, that we have other propositions
(besides the Presbyteries) in regard of ourdifferent relation, neither do we
concieve that adding to our just desire, upon new Emergence, can be called an
assumed unlimited Power.

3. Albeit, when lawful Authority is suppresed, an Order be impossible to be
obtained, yet as we are Christians, our duties to God, and lawful Authority,
^yes us to declare against the Publict Enemies of our God, such as are now the
^revalent party in England, who have overturned Authority, from which we night
have exspected Orders. And besides, the Protestation of many Members of both
the Houses of Parliament, the Protestation of the Kingdom of Scotland, the
Representatio^ of the Ministry, the Apologetical Declaration of many thousand
Citizens, in and about the City of LONDON, all against the present prevalent
^ourses of the Sectaries, may be unto us, in place of a strong advice, to join
with them, in declaring against them, and dissalowing of their proceedings ^s
also for Malignants you understand we conceive, only such who were inga^ed
against England; none whereof are by us Publicly owned, and if any be ^rivatly
sheltered, when they are discovered, we shall take such course with them, as
shall be incumbent unto us.

To the 4. As we have hitherto in relation to England, served the King and
Parlia^ent thereof, whose just Power rights and proviledges we are deeply sworn
to ^antain and defend in our solemn League and Covenant, so we resolve
faith^ully and constantly to serve, and adhere unto them, though (now for a
time) ^hey be violently bereft of the exercise of their just and lawful power.

Propositions presented to Colonel MONK, by the Army.
FIrst, that he and all under his Command, solemnly swear, and subscribe the
Solemn League and Covenant.

2. That He and They do sign the Declaration to be emitted by the Army at
their meeting.

3. That he shall not obey or execut any Order that shall be sent unto him, om
the now Prevalent power in England.

4. That until it please God to establish a free Parliament in England, that
^ee will act nothing wherein the Army is publicly concerned, or dispose of any
^rtified Garrison, without the advice and consent of a Counsel of War, first
^^lled by him, consisting at least of two Officers out of each Regiment,
whereof ^e a Field Officer, the other, a Captain chosen by consent of the
Regiment.

5. That He be pleased to give out of the Magazine unto each Regiment and ^oup,
a proportionable quantity of Ammunition, and Arms to be in custody the
Commander in Chief of every several Regiment, for the which He is be
comptable. These are the most moderat desires, by assenting whereunto (...)
conceave our Religion and our selves can be secured: Which being granted, (...)
do firmly oblidge our selves to obey His Commands.

The Countries Propositions to Colonel MONK.
FIrst that nothing be done wherein the Country is concerned, such as the
equal and just distribution of the Quarters, the adding to, increasing, or
diminishing the present standing Forces, or associating with any Party, and
other particulars of the like nature, without the consent of a Commitee,
consisting of equal number of the Army and Country first called, the which is
to be called upon any just Complaint.

2. That if We shall be invited by any of our Covenanted Brethren in this
Kingdom for their Defense in maintaining of the Covenant, against the opposers
thereof, that the General, and this meeting, shall receieve them in this
association, for mutual defense, in so far as may contribute for the ends of
the Covenant, and for their preservation in pursuance thereof.

3. That in regard of apparent hazards, and the many Enemies of the Covenant,
we desire that the Country may be presently put in a Posture of Defense, and
that their Forces shall not be disposed of, without the consent of the Commitee
above mentioned.

4. That before parting, an equal number of the Army and Country be chosen
for the ordering of the business as is aforesaid.

5. That as we have desired a proportionable quantity of Ammunition and Arms,
may be given to the Army. We do likewise desire, that a competent number of
arms with Ammunition, may be put into the several Regiments Magazines for
their Quarters use upon necessity.

6. Considering, that throw the General's declaring against the present
prevailing Party in England, His proper means may be obstructed: Therefore We
shall lay down a course, notwithstanding of the great poverty of the Country,
for his subsistence, till means come from England.

The Counsel of Wars Declaration.
AS We cannot without great Rejoicing and Thanksgiving think upon the first
blessed vowing of our selves in the Land, by a solemn League and Covenant unto
the Lord our God; So We cannot without great sorrow and remorse (We pray God
give Us so much as we ought) call to mind the fearful backslidings and
out-breakings that have been in all manner of Persons, some by not endeavoring
to perform what they did seem truly to intend, others by never intending what
the genuine sense of the Oath did oblidge them to perform, which do clearly
appear by the great Defection of many from the Covenant, their joining in the
late unlawful Engagement against England, and by the Actions, Discourses, and
new Propositions of diverse at this time, contrary to the same: For remedy of
all which, that the just might not pass with the unjust, we heartily praise
the Lord for the giving of his servants of the Ministry, here the boldness to
move the renewing, and the rest of his people, the readynes and willingness to
renew that solemn and sacred* vow: and least after such mercies, We should
grow secure, and suffer our selves to fall into our former Errors, especially
when so great powers have assembled themselves against the Lord and his Christ.
We have thought it necessary, not to rest satisfied with the swearing of the
Covenant, which many false Brethren formerly did, but with Daniel, who opened
his windows toward the East, to witness his avouching of the service of his
God, so by this Declaration do we testify to the world, that we have sincerely
and faithfully without any equivocation sworn the said Oath according to the
true and clear meaning of each Article thereof, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, so we shall by the strength of God, with our lives and
fortunes, maintain the same against the opposers and Enemies thereof, as well
private underminders, as public opposers; whether Papists, Sectaries, or
Malignants, not doubting but their powers may be great; yet the Lord our God,
will deliver us from them, or if he do not, yet we will not serve their gods,
nor ^y any connivance, or politic lukewarmnesse, be any ways partakers of
their inquities, least we justly provoke our God to spew us out of his mouth,
and suffer ^s to be swallowed up in their judgments, and having found of how
dangerous, con^equence, it is to leave power in the hands of these, as are
refufers of the Covenant, ^^ double minded at it, being so far against our
Vows therein, made to the Lord ^f hosts; and such an apt means to breed
division amongst our selves, and ad^ance the designs of these who wish its and
our ruin: We do declare that we will have none in our Army, nor associate our
selves with any, but such as shall ^^ke and renew this solemn League and
Covenant, and particularly, that we ^^all not receave into public charge
into our Army, nor associat our selves at any time hereafter, with such as have
been violent promoters of the late unlawful ^gadgement against England, nor
with any who have formerly been known to ^ave been Malignantly affected, did
go on upon the same, until there shall be a ^ublick way agreed upon by King
and Parliament, for receiving of such upon ^^idence of their repentance, with
the advice of the Church: Neither shall we ^ceave into charge, any whosoever
have gone upon the former Ingadgement, before they have first, not only given
public signs of repentance to the Church, ^^t also, shall have satisfied the
officers of the Army of their good deserving, and ^ocured a testimonial from
the Presbytery, of their honest behavior: nor shall ^e trust any other
notorious Malignants; before they have given constant obedi^^ce of their
resenting their former Malignant courses; and (if when upon such ^^nes given,
they shall be received to charge, if they shall yet at any time vent ^^eir
Malignancy by discourse, or otherwise, we shall instantly thereupon remove ^^em
from their respective charges. And more especially, we shall not associat our
^^ves with the Marquess of Ormond, not with any of his party, so long as they
shall combyne with Papists, or other forementioned Malignants, and shall not
swear and subscribe the solemn League and Covenant, as we have done here; and
whereas the Sectarian party in England of late, hes usurped an illegal power
over both King and Parliament, and are resolving an universal Tolleration of
Religion, and the subversion of lawful Government, by Kings, Lords, and
Commons, and have taken upon them to proclaim all adherers to the foresaid
just Government in the person of the present King, to be Rebels and Traitors.
All which the said ^surped practices they visibly intend to force upon us in
this Kingdom, so soon as they can transport their power thither, to be obeyed
and received by us, contrare to our sworn solemn League and Covenant: and for
this cause, we do faithfully obliedge our selves unanimously with our estates
and lives, to resist and oppose any such irregular Power which shall proceed
from them, and that we shall maintain the Government of the Church here,
together with the just power of the King and Parliament in the state, against
the opposers thereof* And being confident that these our present intentions,
will not want bitter and false aspersions of all sorts, and particularly that
by this act we intend to, shake off our due obedience to the Crown of England,
and desist from prosecuting the service against the Irish Rebels, wherein we
were employed by King and Parliament; we do hereby declare, that we shall
really demean our selves as becomes faithful and loyal Subjects to the Crown
of England, and shall at all times give due obedience to the King and free
Parliament thereof. And until it shall please God to establish these according
to our solemn League and Covenant, we shall prosecute, by Gods help and
assistance, sincerely the Common Enemy, and advance by Gods assistance all the
ends thereof. And least by misunderstanding, or carnal reasoning, we might be
drawn to any thing contrare to the word of God, and our solemn Engagements, we
are resolved to proceed to nothing, whatsomever in reference to Religion,
without advise of Gods Ministers and servants here given unto us in the same,
but shall be ready according to our power, to prosecute every mean of surety
to our Religion, which they shall propose to us according to the word of God,
and the Covenant, and that they and our consciences may bear us witness of the
integrity of our hearts, and that we may with the more confidence, expect the
blessing of God upon our proceedings, we shall take care that sin may be
suppressed in our Army, all scandalous persons, and disobedient to Church
censures, put out of it, and for removing of all jealousies, our Quarters may
have that upon this change of affairs, they may suffer prejudice; we do hereby
assure them, that we shall equally regard their respective standings, as well as
our own. These our resolutions being pondred by any well affected person, we
are confident, will seem as just, as necessary: It is evident to the world our
consciences in matters of Religion, loyal to our Sovereign the Lords
anointed, whose Fathers unparaleld execution, our souls abhorres* and we
tremble to name, and whose just Succession, He giving security for maintaining
all the Articles and ends of the solemn League and Covenant, before He be
admitted to the exercise of His Royal Power, We are resolved to maintain with
our Lives and Fortunes, to our duties, the Parliaments of the united Kingdoms,
our own mutual Liberties, Lives and Safeties. Withal our solemn vows unto
the Lord our God, which are likely to be most impiously violated. Neither We
hope will any believe We precipitate, when they consider the present power of
Sectaries, the secret and open enemies of the Kingdoms, the want of affection
of many amongst our selves, and the great opportunity they have by every days
delays, to subvert that which we are most obleidged to maintain. Lastly, the
subscribers do faithfully and solemnly promise, that We do truly intend, and
shall zealously prosecut by the assistance of God, with singleness of heart,
having still Gods glory and Honor before our eyes, all the several points of
this Declaration, and as We earnestly desire, and obtest all good Christians to
join with us, and now discharge their duty to God and the King, so we shall
not be diverted from maintaining of all these who shall faithfully join herein,
with an uninterested regard by what means soever, humbly praying the Almighty
Lord, to direct us by his Spirit, and witness by his power, that he is our
strong City and Rock in whom we trust. We the Gentry and others of the Country
do assent to, and Cordially join with the Army in all the points of this
Declaration, and shall be equally careful of their engagement, as of our own,
and prosecution thereof, shall run all the hazards with them.

FINIS.

