I A B. of the Parish of L -- do certify all whom it may concern, That having
become sensible of the Falseness of the pretended Reformed Religion, and the
Truth of the Catholic Religion, of my free will, and without any constraint,
have made profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion in the
Church of L -- in the hands of P. In testimony of which I have Signed this Deed
in the presence of the Witnesses undernamed, this -- Day of -- in the Year --

J. P. -- Incumbent of the Church of L -- in the Parish of L -- in Rouen, do
certify that this day being the -- of -- in the Year -- have received the
Abjuration of the Pretended Reformed Religion, and the Profession of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Faith, which A. B. of the Parish of L -- made
in my hands.

In presence of C. D. -- E. F. --

Bonaventure le Brun Notary Public in the Palace Yard, Rouen.

Dublin, Printed for John Bentley over against the Four Courts door in
Christ-Church-Yard. 1685.

By the Major General of the Parliaments Forces in Ireland, with the advice of
the Council of Officers.
Whereas Lt. General Ludlow stands charged before the Parliament of High
Treason, for breach of trust and duty; and whereas, notwithstanding, he does
from Duncannon send out several Orders to the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, some whereof have eminently acted against the Parliament, to repair unto
him, and to recover Garrisons for him, which have already, according to their
duty, declared for the Parliament: Whereby (as much as in him lies) he
endeavors to put this Nation into blood, which is all through the mercy of God
(except that place he is in) unanimous for the Parliaments service. For the
better preventing of which intended mischiefs, all Officers Civil and Military,
and all other well affected persons to the Parliaments service, are hereby
desired and required to seiz upon any person or persons that shall come out of
Duncannon, or shall be found going thither, without speciallicence in writing
for their so doing, from the Officer commanding for the Parliament before
Duncannon: And any persons so apprehended, going to Duncannon or coming from
thence, are to be brought to the next military Officer, who is hereby Ordered
to send such person or persons in safe custody unto me at the Head Quarters.

Dated at Dublin the 11. January, 1659. Har. Waller.

Ordered, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Har. Waller.

Dublin Printed by W. Bladen, 1659.


