Imprimatur.

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilberto divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a sac. Dom.

(...):

The Highest END And Chiefest WORK Of A Christian: Set forth in two plain
DISCOURSES, Concerning The Glory of GOD, and our own Salvation.

By J.W.

(...) Pirke Aboth. Lib. 2.. 12. (...). Arriani Epictet. l. 2. cap. 19. LONDON,
Printed by E.T. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1668.

A PREFACE To the READER.
THose two words defective in the Title Page, by which the name of the Author
was desired to be expressed, are so insignificant, as he could not believe they
would contribute any thing to his only designs, which he can (with some
comfort) profess to have been no other, than those which are expressly set forth
in the Titles of these Discourses, viz. The Glory of God, and the Salvation of
Men: And Books (such as deserve the name of Books ( Lord Verulam his
advancement of Learning. l. 1. p. 16.
as he said, that has so judiciously observed the defects of them) ought to
have no Patrons, but Truth and Reason.

But because most Discourses now published, are thought by the many that are
able to judge, and the many more that are willing to censure, really to need
their accustomed Apologies; let this be accepted for the Author of these, viz.
that he was indispensably engaged to the publication of them, by a sacred
obligation, (how advisedly entered into, is now too late to inquire) upon an
extraordinary occasion, which no other man can be concerned to understand. This
only is to be added to complete the Apology, for the Language and Method;
that the fashion of that plain Vest wherein they are clothed, was not to be
alterd or changed, Lev. 27.10. nor did it seem needful for them to whom it was
designed.

They only are beholding to the Preacher, that studies to seek out acceptable
words for them, whose judgments are qualified with a capacity of being so
gratified. Eccles. 12.10.
But neither the Persons to whom these Meditations were first presented, were
of that form; nor are they yet intended for any such, as can tell where to
satisfy their curiosity in the many (perhaps too many) Discourses that are
purposely labored for such an end. The Knops, and the Flowers, with which the
Golden Candlestick, that was appointed for the service of the Temple, was so
curiously adorned, could be no advantage to the Lights which they sustained,
and yet were precisely ordained to the glory of the Lord, whose dwelling was in
that house. And they that now are able to offer any such Lamps in Gods house,
and do it with the same design, may hope to be accepted; but if they have any
other of their own, especially if it be their own glory more than Gods, that
they secretly aim at, they will fall in with the persons, of whom our Savior
speaks, Mat. 6.5.
when he says: Verily they have their reward

As in holy Scripture all things necessary to the common Duti^^ (...): Chrysostom.
of glorifying Gods, and working out our own salvavation, are sufficiently
clear and manifest, at least in some parts or other: so ought they to be set
forth in the Sermons and Writings of them, whose office it is to guide men to
these ends: When the Veil of Moses his face is taken away by Christ, God forbid
it should be put on again by any of his Ministers; which yet seems to be
unhappily done, in this last age, by the overcurious, subtle and scholastic
Discourses, and Disputes about the great Doctrine of Justification by Faith in
Christ Jesus; which can have no better effect upon the generality of
Christians, than to obscure the matters which they pretend to clear. It was
very much in this Authors desire to scatter, or remove those Clouds; which be
thought was best to be done by abstracting wholly from the consideration of
them, and by confining his Answer to the grand Question, What is to be done to
work out a man's own Salvation, to the express resolutions of holy Scripture,
illustrated and confirmed with the plainest reason, without respect to the
Authority of Humane Testimonies. A few things only he has thought fit to add
by way of Preface to each Discourse, which he strives to deliver with as much
plainness, as the matter will bear.

And first to the first: That which inclined him to the publication of this
familiar discourse (at first delivered in a small and popular Auditory) was
that he could not find himself prevented by any other upon the same Subject,
in our own Language. And it was matter of wonder to him, how it should come to
pass, that, that which is acknowledged the Supreme End, and Scope of all
Religion, should not fall under the Meditations of so many Learned and Zealous
Writers, as this Age has produced: Or, how the distinct and just tractation of
that great Duty, could come to be so much omitted, that scarce any thing to
this purpose has come to his knowledge, besides the brief strictures that are
found in the Schoolmen: whilst the other Point (respecting indeed the chief
Good, and ultimate End of Mankind, in refeverence to himself) has been the
Subject of numberless Discourses, as well of Christian as Heathen Philsophers.

But instead of what he has sought and desiderated toward the declaring,
directing, and pressing that chief of Duties to the most high God, consisting
in the seeking of his Glory; he has in some late Authors, of good Learning,
met with odd reflections of disparagement of this End, as unworthy the
excellency and perfection of the Divine Nature, and too much resembling the
vanity of the Humane: Which misprision of Error crossing the many
significations of holy Scripture, and the general sense and expressions of all
religious minds, may possibly be removed, by the consideration of a double
glory belonging to the Divine Majesty. The first is Intrinsecal, and Essential;
and therefore, infinite and immutable, incapable of receiving Addition, or
Diminution. The second is Extrinsecal and Accidental, resulting from his own
Acts, and the Acts of his Creatures; and this is capable of being multiplied,
and augmented; as the light of the Sun (which is its glory) though we suppose
it fixed, and immutable in it self, yet may, and does receive innumerable
varieties of reflection from other Bodies, which are beneath, or about it:
Which reflections being agreeable to its glorious Nature, would be gratefully
apprehended by it, if it had any sense. So, though God can receive no
additions, or variations of his Essential Glory and Happiness; yet can be
assume created Glories, and may clothe himself with Glory, and Majesty, and
design to glorify himself extrinsecally, as well by the Acts of his Creature,
as by his own, multiplied and varied, according to the pleasure of his Will:
and so may be both glorified, and pleased, in such a way, as is something
resembled by the Radiations of the Sun, and their respective Reflections: So
God can create glories wherewith to glorify and please himself, as well as to
honor, and gratify his Creature. To this purpose does the Holy Psalmist so
often pray: Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, let thy glory be above
all the earth. Psalm. 57.5, 11. and 108.5. Let the whole earth be filled with
his glory. Psalm. 72.19.

That common piece of Vitiosity which abounds so much in men, taxed by the name
of vain glory, is justly reproveable for its injustice, upon diverse accounts;
especially, because it is an affectation of more honor than is due, either
without, or above the merits of the person that affects it: which may be done,
by attributing to himself things worthy of honor, which are not at all in him:
As, when an ignorant person judges himself, and would be judged wise, or
learned, Or, by assuming to himself more of those things (worthy of honor)
than are found in him; as when a mean Scholar shall desire to be thought
profoundly learned: Or, by esteeming those laudable things which are in him,
worthy of greater honor than they are; as, when a witty Man, or fair Woman,
shall think themselves to deserve as much respect as a Wise, or a Virtuous: Or,
by an excessive affection to that honor which is due to him, preferring it
before other ends, which are more valueable upon a religious and reasonable
account: Or lastly, by attributing, and assuming the merits of honor which are
in him, entirely to himself, without acknowledgement of the prime and chief
Author of them: All which things are branches of iniquity; and the last, the
greatest act of injustice to God that can be, who, as he is the first cause of
all that is worthy of honor; so, and therefore ought he also to receive the
ultimate reflection thereof.

But none of these things (but the direct contrary) is in God; who is
infinitely worthy of all the Honor and Glory that is possible to be given him;
and has all this merit, entirely and solely from himself: And therefore, as
the attribution of highest glory to him, is no more than justice to him: So the
requiring of it from the Creature, is an Act of Justice to himself: And the
designing, and accepting it when it is done, is no other than a delight in the
Exercise of Justice, and Virtue, in those Creatures, which are capable of
giving it him, upon such an account: So that Gods requiring integrity, and
perfection of Glory from the Creature, and the pleasure that he takes therein,
has precisely the same reason with his requiring and being pleased with any
acts of Piety or Virtue in his Creature. Thus much may suffice to clear the
objection that has been made against Gods being so much pleased with that
great Duty of doing all to his honor.

Now the general Precept in the Text, being given by the Apostle in a
particular case of Conscience (concerning eating things offered to Idols) gave
occasion to the Author to speak of some other Cases of ordinary occurrence in
humane life: whereunto in this Preface, he thinks it not amiss to add the
following resolutions of a doubtful Conscience; which he shall deliver in a way
borrowed from the ordinary Method of Demonstrations, without pretending that
they are exactly such.

First. He takes leave to lay down the following Propositions for his
Principles.

1. That whatsoever a man does, ought to be done to the glory of God; that is,
(as is declared in the explication of the Precept) a man ought first to be
careful to the utmost of his power, that nothing be done by him, to the
prejudice of Gods Glory; and therefore nothing contrary to his Will: 2. That
nothing be omitted by him willingly, that is requisite to the promoting his
Glory, in obedience to his known Will.

2. Princip. That whatsoever is done doubtingly (that is, not of Faith) is sin,
Romans 14.23.

3. That it is absolutely necessary for a man, either to do, or not do an
action, notwithstanding his doubt.

4. That a man is to act as reasonably as he can in all his actions, and
therefore in the most doubful.

5. That in doubtful cases, the safest course is to be chosen.

6. That it is safer to do that which I do not doubt to be lawful, than to do
that which I doubt whether it be lawful or not.

7. That of things equally evil upon one common account, it is unreasonable to
choose that which is more evil upon other accounts, refusing that which is less.

If any of these Principles seem to be co-incident, the Reader is desired to
pardon that redundancie.

Now the general cases of doubt to be resolved by these Principles, are these
three, to which all others may be reduced.

1. Whether a particular action in question be lawful, or not lawful; or, which
is all one, whether it be forbidden, or not forbidden.

2. Whether a particular action in question be commanded, or not commanded.

3. Whether a particular action in question be commanded, or forbidden.

In each of these Cases, the doubt is to be supposed only of the things
specified in the Case, other considerations being supposed to be out of doubt.
These things premised, the resolution is as follows:

In the first Case, where the only doubt is whether the action in question be
lawful, or not lawful, (the doubt remaining) the action is to be forborne; by
the first and second Principle. 1. Because a man is bound to abstain from all
actions contrary to the glory of God; and every sin is so: 2. And every action
done doubtingly is a sin; likewise by the fifth and sixth, because in doubtful
cases the safest course is to be taken. And it is more safe to do that which I
do not doubt to be lawful, than to do that which I do doubt whether it be
lawful or not. Now the doubt being only whether the action be lawful to be
done, or not lawful; and not at all (in this Case) whether it be lawful to be
forborne, the resolution is clear, by the forementioned Principles; because, if
I do this action, I must necessarily sin, whether the action in it self
(abstracted from my doubt) be lawful, or unlawful: If it be unlawful, I sin
doubly; 1. by doing an action which in it self is unlawful; 2. by doing it,
notwithstanding my doubt: If it be lawful in it self, as abstracted from my
doubt, yet under it, and with it, it is not, and therefore I must needs sin in
doing it; and therefore ought to forbear it. As for Example: Suppose a man
doubt whether it be lawful to eat blood or bloudings, upon the account of the
Apostolical Canon, Acts 15.29. and some other Canons of Councils, and Opinion
of the Primitive Church. In this Case, a man ought not to eat such things,
because he doubts not at all the lawfulness of abstaining from them, as having
no color of obligation upon him to eat: But whether it be lawful to eat, is
his only doubt, and that doubt makes it a sin to him: Or, suppose a man to
doubt whether it be lawful to lend money to Usury, or to play at Cards or Dice,
or to drink a health upon the reflections of the Fathers upon those things, as
not agreeable to Christian sobriety, or as things scandalous, and of no good
report. He that doubts the lawfulness of those things, though (whilst he does
no more) he cannot condemn the use of them in others, that are free from that
doubt; yet is bound to abstain from them himself, because he is perfectly free
so to do, as he is not in the use of them, by reason of his doubt.

In the second Case, where the doubt is, whether the action in question be
commanded, or not commanded, the action is to be done by the same Principles;
because the only doubt supposed in this Case, is whether the action be
commanded, or not; and not at all whether it be lawful: so that it is supposed,
out of doubt to be lawful to do it, and doubted only whether it be lawful to
omit it. In this Case, I say, a man is bound to do the action; because if he
does it, he supposes himself not to sin, because he doubts not the lawfulness
of it. But if he does it not, he must needs sin, by the 2. Principle: Either
doubly by omitting that which is commanded, (and so obliging him before, and
without his doubt, and also by omitting the same Duty doubtingly): Or at least
he must needs sin singly, by acting doubtfully without necessity, and where a
safer course was in his choice. As for Example: Suppose a man doubts whether
the Canon, or Custom of the Church to keep the Lent-fast; or other Fast-daies
appointed by Law, do bind his Conscience or not, having no reasonable excuse
for the omitting those observances; but does not at all doubt, but that it is
lawful for him to keep them, whether in compliance with the Church, or upon
other accounts. The resolution of this doubt is plain; to wit, that the Fasts
ought to be kept in this Case, because they cannot be omitted without sin,
whereas it is supposed they may be kept, without any doubt of sin. In these two
Cases, the resolution is demonstrated by the forementioned Principles.

The only difficulty is in the third Case, where the doubt is double, viz.
whether the action in question, be commanded, or forbidden. In this Case, (the
doubt remaining) it seems impossible to avoid the necessity of sinning, because
the action in it self must either be forbidden, or commanded, or neither
commanded, nor forbidden: Now if it be forbidden, and I do it with this doubt,
I sin doubly, as before was showed; if I do it not, and it be commanded, I sin
likewise doubly upon the same account. If it be neither commanded, nor
forbidden; yet I cannot but sin whether I do it or no, because I either do or
leave undone a thing which I doubt whether I may lawfully omit, or do: For if a
man must not choose to do a thing, which he doubts whether he may do or not, for
that only reason, because he doubts; then neither may be omit an action, which
he doubts whether he may omit or no. If then the Case be (as is supposed) that
the doubt is whether a thing be commanded or forbidden (either directly and
immediately by God himself, in his Word, or the Law of right Reason, or
indirectly, and mediately by his Authority vested in lawful Governors, not
exceeding their Commission): the same reason that makes it unlawful to do it (
viz. the doubt whether he may do it or no) will make it equally unlawful to
omit it. As for instance, Suppose a man doubts of a ceremony in Gods Worship,
commanded by the Church, whether it be not forbidden by God: In this Case the
doubt must needs fall in both ways: For first, the Command of the Church is
reason enough to doubt whether it be not commanded of God, because that
Authority by the Law of God extends to all things not forbidden by God, and the
doubt whether it be forbidden or no, supposes him not to know, or believe that
it is; and therefore must needs leave him in doubt whether it be not commanded,
because if it be not forbidden, it is commanded. 2. The reason of the doubt
whether it be not forbidden by God, may be various taken from the Opinion of
some Learned and good men, or grounded upon some dubious interpretation of some
Texts of Scripture, or upon some mistaken Principle, or seeming consequence
from a true one. The question is, what is to be done in this Case, it being
concluded by the third Principle, that it is absolutely necessary for a man
either to do, or not do it; neither of which elections can be made without sin,
by reason of the doubt both ways, as is supposed.

The common answer to this straight, is, That a man ought to depose his doubt;
which answer is perfectly unreasonable in most Cases, because it is for the
present impossible. It being not in the power of any man to cease his doubting
the truth of any proposition immediately, and arbitrarily, without removing or
solving the reasons of his doubt: So that this advise to a distracted
Conscience is no better, than if a Physician called to a sick Patient, should
prescribe for the only remedy of his Distemper, an Exhortation to shake off
his sickness, or not to entertain it any longer, which would be taken for no
better than a plain mocking the Patient. The only reasonable meaning that this
advice can have, is, That a man should do what in him lies to resolve his own
doubt, by laboring to understand the true resolution of the Question on either
part: But this advice may be impracticabe in many Cases, and is in all
Extempore, where neither means, nor time is allowed sufficient to effect it.
The Question then is, What other advice may be given for the present, and what
resolution is to be made thereupon.

This Question is only capable of being resolved by the fourth and the last
Principles, which may be thus applied in all actions (and therefore in this,
notwithstanding my doubt) I am to act as reasonably as I can; and it being
supposed, that whether I do this action or omit it at this time, I must
necessarily sin, (because I cannot depose my doubt, nor avoid sin, if I act, or
not act with it) I am to inquire what reason I have to adventure upon one of
these sins rather than upon the other; and if I can find any sufficient to
turn the Scale, that must determine my choice, by the last Principle. And in
this disquisition, the most considerable Reason of the Election to be made on
either part, will consist in the degree of the sin, if any such may appear, or
be justly suspected: For seeing the greatest Reason that can be for the
abstaining from any action, is the avoidance of sin, the dehree of the sin,
does proportionably augment the Reason: If then the action, whereof I doubt
whether I should do it or not, has to me an appearance of a greater sin in the
doing it, than it can be in the omission; that Reason is very sufficient to
restrain me from the action, and oblige me to the forbearance, till I can be
otherwise informed to the better satisfaction of my Conscience: For, 2 Thessalonians.
5.22.
when we are commanded to abstain from all appearance of evil, it is most
reasonable to conclude, that the appearance of the greatest Evil, does most
strongly oblige my abstinence. As for Example: Suppose the action, whereof I am
in doubt, has an appearance of Idolatry; as in the Corinthians case, the
eating things sacrificed to Idols had, and as the worshipping a piece of bread,
or the invocation of Saints departed, may justly have: In such cases, I say, it
is most reasonable to abstain from the action, because it is most safe so to
do; because by the doing of this action, I do at least suspect, I may be
guilty of Idolatry, which is a far greater sin, than a bare omission of an Act
of obedience to any humane authority can be.

The same resolution upon parity of reason is to be made, where the omission
upon due consideration may appear to be a greater sin, than the performance of
the action which seems to be the case of refusing obedience to authority;
causing disorder, and having at least an appearance of Schism, in matters of
mere ceremony, or circumstance in the public worship of God, upon a bare
suspicion of their want of allowance from God, or being some way forbidden: I
say, That the disobedience in this case, if the action should prove not to be
forbidden by God, is a greater sin than the action would be in obedience to
authority, though it should prove to be forbidden; whilst we have so much
reason to doubt whether it be or no: For it cannot with reason be conceived,
that the Transgression of a Divine Precept (in a matter of circumstance) so
obscurely revealed, as has not been discovered by the Catholic Church for
many Ages, nor yet is by the Rulers, and most learned and pious Doctors and
Pastors of the present Church, can be so great a sin, as is the transgression
of so plain a Precept, as that of obedience to authori^ie; especially when that
disobedience produces the effects of Disorder, Schism, Scandal, with
separation from the public Worship of God, and privation of the means of his
Grace. These things considered, I say, it is not reason able to think, but that
the sin of disobedience, in case the thing should prove to be not forbidden (as
by this doubt is supposed possible) is far greater than the doing of the act,
though it should prove to be forbidden. And therefore in this case, the action
is to be done, notwithstanding the doubt, by way of caution against a greater
sin: It being a greater sin to disobey doubtingly, than to obey doubtingly in
such a matter.

But if for ought appears to me, there is no such difference, but that it may
be as great a sin to omit the action, as to do it, considering my doubt as well
whether it be not commanded, as whether it be not forbidden; I am then to
consider what other reasons may incline me, either to the action, or to the
omission, in respect of advantage, or disadvantage to my self or other on
either side. As for Example: Suppose on the onside, if I forbear the action, I
do not only sin again^ God, (upon one or both of the forementioned accounts
that is, as doing that which is forbidden in it self, (...) forbidden to me,
because I doubt the lawfulness of it) but I also deprive my self of many
advantages which might have by the doing it, and incur considerable damage in
my Liberty, Estate, Reputation, with other incommodations to my friends. On
the other side, if do the action, I do only sin against God, by acting
doubtfully, or it may be by transgressing some unknown command, abstracted from
that doubt (which inconveniences are equally supposed in the forbearance:) But
I avoid the forementioned disadvantages, without incurring any other of equal
concern. In this case, I say, it will be perfectly unreasonable to choose the
more hazzardable resolution, with rejection of the less: And therefore the
resolution will be as clear what is reasonable to be done in this case, as is
in any of the former; with this only difference, That the practice under this
duplicitie of doubt cannot be without a necessity of sin: What then can I, or
should I do more in this case, than this? commit my self to the Mercy of God,
with a cautionary profession of my desire to obey him: And that if I could any
way possibly avoid the hazard of transgressing his Will, I would do it,
notwithstanding any motives whatever, respecting my self, or mine own interest.
But because I cannot so do at this time, for want of present means to
understand his Will; I act according to the general Rule, and law of my Nature,
that is my reason, as far as it will afford me any direction, begging his
pardon of my present ignorance, and the inevitable effect thereof.

Against this resolution, if it be objected (as was before intimated) that
there can be no such necessity of sinning against God: Whilst every man is
bound to depose his doubt, and embrace his Duty: I answer first, That this
destroys the supposition of the Cose, and therefore is no just Objection to
the answer, which is given upon the admission of it. 2. That it is not true
that there can be no such necessity of sinning, or that every man is bound
immediately to depose his doubt, though it be not in his power so to do. For
though God does not put a man upon any such necessity of sinning against
himself, yet a man may by his own fault, and by his culpable ignorance, bring
himself into this straight.

But here it must needs be observed, that the entire resolution is grounded
upon that Principle: That whatsoever is done doubtingly is a sin: Which
Principle I take up in this Discourse, only upon the account of its common
reception, grounded upon the words of the Apostle: He that doubts is damned
if he eat. And therefore the resolution, that supposes this Principle, can be
serviceable to such only as receive it.

But whether this Maxim be universally true, or can be inferred from the
Apostles Words, by the necessary sense of them, and whether it ought to be
extended to such actions as fall under the command of Authority, and not rather
to be restrained to such actions, as the Apostle speaks of in that Chapter,
viz. such as are indifferent in themselves, and wherein a man is sui juris, not
supposed to be under command of authority either way, is a just Problem.

For the Apostle in the Discourse of that Chapter, wherein he delivers that
conclusion: He that doubts is damned if he eat, etc. speaks only of such
actions wherein a man is sui juris, at perfect liberty, on one side at least,
that is, either to eat, or not to eat. For though he might have reason to
doubt, whether it was lawful for him to eat such meats, yet he is supposed to
have none at all, to doubt but that it was clearly lawful for him to forbear,
and therefore by the premised resolution of the first question, he ought not to
eat with this doubt.

I shall not insist upon the objection from the word (...), which the vulgar
Latin translates discernit; that is, maker difference or distinction of meats,
thinking it not indifferent to eat of that meat: this variation of sense, was
thought fit to be put in the Margent of our English Bibles, by the last
Translators. In which Case it is evident he must needs sin, and that
presumptuously against his Conscience, and so is damned; that is, condemned by
his own Conscience, if he eats: But from hence there can be no such conclusion
made, as that he must needs sin if he only doubts; that being not the Apostles
meaning by this translation. And it is certain, that the word (...) and (...)
is so used in many Texts of scripture, as Act. 15.9. 1 Cor. 4.7. and Jude 22.
(...): And of some have compassion making a difference.

But because the same word does elsewhere as often signify to doubt, and is so
renderd in this Text by the Syriack, and most other Translators, I adhere to
that Translation; and the rather because, the following words are most
consonant to this sense, Seeing he eats not of faith: For though it be true
indeed, that he that makes difference of meats, and eats that which by such
difference, he esteems to be unlawful, cannot cat of Faith, because he eats
directly contrary to it; yet is this a more jeune sense, and not so proper, as
to say, he that doubts, eats not of faith.

Omitting therefore this Objection from the variety of translation, I advance
another more considerable; that is, whether because he that eats when he
doubts, whether it be lawful for him to eat, but is at perfect liberty not to
eat, is damned? it will follow that whosoever does any action (wherein he has
no such liberty of forbearance) with any doubt, be in like manner condemned. As
for Example: He that is commanded by lawful Authority to do an action, whereof
he doubts whether it be lawful by the law of God or no, to do it: It is
certain, this person if he were free, ought not to do this action, because of
his doubt, whilst he might forbear it without any doubt: But under this
command, he has no more liberty to forbear this action, than he has to do
it; And therefore it will not follow by this instance of the Apostle, wherein
the case is so different, that he must necessarily sin if he do it, more than
if he do it not.

But it may be urged, that although from the first words of that Text (he that
doubts is damned if he eat) this Universal conclusion, cannot be inferred;
yet from the next words, which are added as a reason thereof, it may, Seeing he
eats not of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. For thus it may be
urged: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: But whatsoever is done doubtingly, is
not of Faith; Ergo, whatsoever is done doubtingly is sin. The 1. of these
Proposit ons is expressly asserted by the Apostle; and the second seems to be
rightly collected from the connection of those words, (...), quoniam, ac quia.
He that doubts is damned if he eat, seeing (or because) he eats not of
faith: Which reason would not be true, if it were possible, notwithstanding the
doubt, to eat of Faith. And if that be not possible in this instance, it may
seem to be so in all others: whence the universal conclusion will be inferred
rightly.

To this Argument, a rejoinder may be offered to this sense; That there is no
necessary consequence, in the deduction of the universal Proposition, from the
particular Case; admitting the truth of that universal Proposition, whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, without any limitation in the matter; and understanding
Faith, (as in that Text it can only be meant) to signify no more than a
persuasion of the lawfulness of the action to him that does it. May it not be
said, that although in that Case, he that doubts only whether it is lawful
to eat, and not at all whether it be lawful to forbear, cannot eat of Faith,
because it is at his free choice, to forbear the action that he doubts, and to
determine himself to that wherein he has no doubt; yet in another Case, where
the action is doubful both ways, it may be possible, notwithstanding his
doubt, to act in Faith. For, as many things may be lawful to be done, whilst
they are left free, being not forbidden by authority, which are not lawful,
when they are forbidden, though but by men: So may some things be unlawful to
be done, when they are not commanded, that yet may be lawful when they are. It
may be as great a sin to disobey an unlawful command, as to give it; if he that
disobeys, knows no better for his disobedience, than he that gave the command,
did for his giving it. Of this kind are doubtful actions, which are not to be
done, when a man is free, for that only reason, because they are doubtful: The
doubt being a sufficient reason to bar the lawfulness of the action, as before
has been said: But when a man is not free, but under the obligation of
Authority, every doubt is not a sufficient reason to make a thing unlawful: So
that in such a Case a man may, notwithstanding his doubt, be persuaded of the
lawfulness of-his action, unless that doubt be grounded upon reasons, more
credible than is the judgment of the persons, by whom that action is
recommended to us, as not only lawful, but expedient.

But further, that it may be possible for a man, notwithstanding his doubt,
concerning the lawfulness of an action in it self, to have a just persuasion
that it is lawful for him in a present Case, I offer these grounds of Reason.

1. That all manner of doubts do proceed from ignorance.

2. That some ignorance may be inculpable, as well as culpable, and that not
only in matters of mere Faith, but also in practical matters: For as there are
many divine verities, contained in the true sense of holy Scripture, and the
necessary consequences thereof, which are not understood by the Learned, much
less by the Unlearned, and yet that ignorance is inculpable in the Learned, and
much more in the unlearned. So may there be diverse practical conclusions,
inferring the Obligation of just Precepts, to them that do or are bound to
understand them: which, persons unlearned may be inculpably ignorant of, for
want of that understanding of the Original Texts, or that faculty of deducing
consecuences, by Art of Logic, or extraordinary perfection of Reason, which
they are not obliged to have. In this Case the ignorance of those practicab
Precepts, so obscurely revealed in holy Scripture, may be inculpable, as I
suppose.

3. Where the ignorance is inculpable, the doubt is so too.

4. Inculpable ignorance, as well concomitant, as causal, does excuse the Act
that is done with it, (though contrary to a Precept) from sin, not only a
tanto, but a toto. I use the term (inculpable) rather than invincible, because
it is more clear, and less liable to cavil: Nor are those terms equivalent: For
both some ignorance may be invincible in some circumstances, which is not
inculpable; and some ignorance may be inculpable, which is not simply
invincible; for to render ignorance inculpable, it is not necessary that it was
not to be prevented by any possible industry; but it suffices, that it does
not proceed from the neglect of any means, that a man was bound to have used;
or, from any other fault of the ignorant person. Inculpable ignorance, I say,
excuses any action that is done with it from sin, as well a tanto as a toto,
and as well when it is barely concomitant, as when it is causal. This
conclusion is disagreeable to the ordinary resolution of the Schools: and yet
seems to be true, upon this reason, because inculpable ignorance barreth the
Obligation of a positive law, which cannot oblige, till it be so promulged, as
obliges all them that are to be bound by it, to the knowledge thereof: And
though actual knowledge of a law be not necessary to the obligation of it, yet
promulgation is, and that such as is sufficient to take off all excuse of
ignorance, and therefore to render it not inculpable: And where there is no law
actually obliging, there can be no sin. Therefore inculpable ignorance, as well
of the law, as of the fact excuses from sin: and that not only when that
ignorance is a cause (sine qua non) of the action, which a man would not do if
he knew of the law, but also when the ignorance does only accompany the
action, which a man would have done, though he had known the Law: The
disposition of the will to do such an evil action, though it were known to be
so, is indeed a sin; but the action it self cannot be a sin, whilst it is not
forbidden to the Agent, by any obliging law.

To apply these Propositions to the Question premised: seeing all manner of
doubt proceeds from ignorance, and that ignorance may be inculpable; and where
the ignorance is inculpable, so is the doubt; and inculpable igrance of a law,
takes away the Obligation, and therefore excuses from sin: it seems to follow,
that when a man is inculpably ignorant of any such law, as forbids the action
which he deliberates about, he may act with persuasion concerning the
lawfulness thereof to him: Though he should have some reason to doubt whether
such a Law may not be: For whether there be, or there be not, if he be
inculpably ignorant of it, it obliges him not: And therefore he is at liberty
to act, or forbear according to reason, and may do either of Faith; that is,
though he doubts upon some uncertain account, (not obliging his belief) whether
the action to be done, be not forbidden by some Law of God; yet if he be
inculpably ignorant of the Law, it does not oblige him; and therefore leaves
him free, till he be so far instructed, as he can plead no inculpable
ignorance. As for Example: Suppose the Law forbidding an action be no where in
Scripture set forth expressly, and the only evidence thereof depends upon
doubtful interpretations of Scripture, or subtle consequences, disputed and
denied by good and learned men, of equal credit, and not declared, or
determined by any Authority of the Church. In this Case I being no competent
judge of the Controversy, may suppose myself inculpably ignorant of that Law,
as well as I am of other verities and points of belief, that have no other, or
no better evidence of Scripture; whilst yet pretensions of reasons not cogent,
together with the Opinions of Learned men, may be sufficient to make me doubt,
as well of the uncertain Precepts, as of other verities. I inquire now whether
notwithstanding this doubt, I may not act in Faith? that is, believing it still
lawful for me to do this action, whether in it self it be forbidden, or not
forbidden; because the Law whereby it is forbidden (if it be so) under this
inculpable ignorance, does not yet oblige me; and if I believe my self not
obliged by a law, I may act in Faith; that is, with persuasion that I am free,
whether my ignorance be in truth inculpable, or not; yet if I be persuaded that
it is so, its certain I may have the same persuasion concerning the lawfulness
of the action, that I do against no other law than that whereof I think my self
inculpably ignorant: It is true, if my ignorance be not inculpable, I shall sin
in this action, but shall notwithstanding act in Faith, notwithstanding my
doubt; whilst that doubt is not whether it be lawful for me to do this action,
in this case of ignorance (for that would impart a contradiction to my Faith,
or persuasion, that it is) but only whether there be not some law forbidding
the action in general, and obliging all that know it, or should know it; but
not obliging me (as I suppose) because I am as yet ignorant thereof, and that,
as I believe, inculpably.

But here it is to be considered, that although it be certain, (by the express
words of the Apostle) That whatsoever is not of faith is sin; yet it does not
follow that whatsoever is of faith is not sin. For then St. Paul had not sinned
whilst he persecuted the Church: for he says, I verily thought with my self,
that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. And
therefore though a man, notwithstanding such a doubt, as has been declared,
may act in Faith, (which was the only thing endeavored to be proved) yet it
will not follow that he sins not, except his ignorance be inculpable. And if he
only believes that it is so, he may likewise for that reason believe, that it
is no sin; but can have no more certainly of the innocence of his act, than he
has of the inculpableness of his ignorance.

If this Hypothesis seem to destroy the second Principle before delivered, with
the resolutions of the Cases, made upon it. I answer, 1. As before was
intimated, that, that Principle in those indefinite terms, wherein it is first
laid down, was taken up, upon the common presumption of the universal truth of
it; and the respective resolutions supposing it, were accordingly framed. But
2. If that Principle be restrained (as I understand it) to such a doubt as is
made, not only concerning the being of a positive Law, but concerning the
Obligation of it to me; that is, if I doubt whether the action be lawful to me,
and not only whether it be lawful in it self, or not forbidden by some Law
unknown to me; I say, If this be the doubt, the Principle will be true, and the
Resolutions upon it certain, without any prejudice to this Hypothesis. These
cautions premised, I shall proceed to give an instance or two of the Case; 1.
Some Divines have asserted the second Commandment to forbid all manner of
Ceremonies, not expressly commanded in Scripture to be used in Divine Worship:
Suppose this assertion should be true, can it be said to be sufficiently
evident to oblige my belief, or to convict me of any culpable ignorance, whilst
I understand it not; being no otherwise declared than in the terms of that
Commandment, forbidding nothing expressly, besides the making and worshipping of
Images, and having no evidence for this comprehension of uncommanded
Ceremonies, other than from the interpretation of those Divines, contradicted
by most other Divines of equal judgment at least? whether now is the
interpretation of those Divines, that affirm the Prohibition of un-instituted
Ceremonies from that Commandment, a sufficient Promulgation of that Law to me.
If it be, it must certainly be such as obliges my belief: for, I cannot be
bound to obey a Law, which I am not bound to believe to be a Law, because then
my obedience could not be grounded upon my faith, as all obedience ought to be.
But how can I in reason be obliged to believe this interpretation, upon the
account of their assertion, whilst I know it to be denied by others of equal
credit, and greater Authority. And if that Interpretation be not a sufficient
Promulgation of this supposed Law, how am I, that have, either no other, or no
better evidence for it, obliged by it, though it were a Law. And if I be not,
why may I not act in Faith, (especially when I am commanded by just Authority
to the Act) notwithstanding my doubt, whether that interpretation may not
possibly be true? Why may I not persuade my self, that if this should be the
sense of the Commandment, I am not at all obliged by it, till I have some
better evidence thereof.

Or, 2. Let the Question be whether it be lawful to use any set Forms of
Prayer? It is certain, this is no where expressly forbidden in Scripture: But
some Divines have judged it unlawful, and given some reasons for their opinion,
depending upon uncertain Principles, or unnecessary consequences: Suppose now a
weak judgment be induced to doubt the lawfulness of any forms, upon the
account of these Divines Opinion, and Arguments against them. This doubt must
necessarily suppose ignorance, because if the truth were known, the doubt could
not remain; is then this ignorance culpable, or inculpable? If it be culpable,
then the doubt is so too; and then the party was bound to believe that Opinion
without any doubt, notwithstanding whatever reasons he might have to the
contrary: If it be inculpable, (whilst he has no better evidence to determine
his belief) how can he be hound to forbear the use of Forms, by any Law whereof
he is thus ignorant, notwistanding his doubt, which does not take away, but
necessarily infer the ignorance, which would be impossible without it? May be
not therefore, notwithstanding this doubt, make use of Forms, with persuasion
that to him it is yet lawful^ to do, whatever be true concerning the question
in general.

I am very sensible how much these Discourses ^ want of those enlargements of
illustration, and con^imation, which they might, and perhaps ought to have if
the occasion would bear it. But I must not forg^ that I am writing a Preface to
a small Book, where I have already exceeded the bounds of a just proportion and
therefore am to leave the modest proposal of the Problems, to them that are
best able to consider, a^ judge of them, hastening to a conclusion of these
prely minary Discourses; which I shall finish with the addtion of a few things
concerning the second Tract, t^ wards the further clearing of the Doctrine
there delivered, from appearance of contradiction to that St. Paul, concerning
justification by Faith witho^ works. I say therefore;

1. That the business of that Discourse, upon ^ proposed Text, was not to
determine, what particul^ Act it is which God in the New Covenant, does prin^
pally require as the special condition of justification But to inquire what
that entire Work is, whereby a^ cording to the direction of Scripture, the
Salvation (...) a Christian was to be wrought out.

2. Yet in the Method of the same Discourse, a pr^critie is given to Faith, as
that which gives the first rig^ to justification, or a right to the first
justification, before and therefore without any such works as are consequ^ to
that Faith. Undoubtedly, Faith is the Root of ^ such Works as are truly go^d,
in a Theological senc^ that is, of all such as are done upon any account of ^
ligion; because it is plain, Faith is the first act of Re^ gion, and the ground
of all the rest: He that com^ to God, must believe that he is, and that he is
the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6. Whatever good Works
can be done by a man without Faith, or not proceeding from Faith, can have no
respect at all to God, and therefore are not respected by him. St. Paul
therefore in that Chapter, by many Examples, proves Faith to be the principle
of all good Works.

Verse. 5. By faith (says he) Enoch was translated, that he should not see
death, and was not found, because God had translated him; (...): For he had
this testimony, that before his translation he pleased God. So the words I am
sure may, and I think should be read; because it is certain, that Enoch pleased
God before his translation, but the testimony thereof he had not before, but
long after his translation, being that which was given him by Moses, above a
thousand years after, in the words of that Text (Genesis 5.24.) which the Apostle
refers to; as appears by his using the same words, which are there used by the
Septuagint: (...), etc. And Enoch pleased God, and was not found, etc. The same
translation is quoted by the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 44.16. We read, according
to the Hebrew, he walked with God, which imports the same sense: For they are
said to walk with God in Scripture phrase, whose life is pleasing unto God, or
agreeable to his Will, Amos 3.3. But so can no man's life be without Faith; as
the Apostle adds: But without faith it is impossible to please God: That which
makes any man's works pleasing to God, is his Faith, without which as they could
not be done to any such end, so neither would they have any such effect: For he
that comes to God must believe (at least so much) that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. This is the shortest Creed that can
be; and what acceptance it may have with God, in such as are invincibly
ignorant of the Gospel, we are not concerned to inquire.

But to all them to whom this Gospel is sufficiently revealed, the Christian
Faith, or Faith in Christ, is absolutely necessary to render their works
pleasing to God: And that Faith is undoubtedly the principal^ condition of
Justification, and Salvation. And although other conditions be required to
Salvation; yet they are subordinate to this Faith, as the proper effects, and
verifications thereof, whereby it becomes allowable to God: So that the
concurrence, and efficacy, that other Graces, and all good Works have unto
Salvation, is by virtue of Faith, from whence they proceed. It is Faith in
Christ the Savior that gives us Union with him, and his Church; and that
consequently gives the first right to that Salvation, which is procured by him,
and is the only privilege of his Church. But this Faith must he (...), a
Faith unfeigned, which it cannot be, unless it be joined with repentance, and
works by love, and so makes a man a new Creature.

Faith is the prime Article of the New Covenant; And in congruity to the design
of man's Redemption and Salvation by Christ; the principal act of this Faith, is
to receive him, as the Author of this Salvation, and to depend upon him, and
the expiation that he has made for us by his blood: But because he is also
propounded to us in the same Gospel, as Christ, the anointed of the Lord, as
well for a Prophet and a King, as a Priest; and sent by his Father to declare
the Mind and Will of God in his Precepts, as well as to publish his Grace in
the Promises, and is invested with all power to rule and govern his people, as
well as to save them; therefore are all Christians, that expect to be saved by
him, equally obliged to receive him as Lord, and Christ: to observe and keep
his Precepts, as well as to trust upon his Promises. And thus much is included
in the notion of their Faith, given unto him when they are baptized for his
Disciples, which is the solemn Rite of engaging our Faith unto him.

For that Faith which is professed in our Baptism, is undoubtedly the same with
that by which we are justified and saved: But the Faith which is professed in
Baptism, is not a bare trust in Christ as a Savior, but a Faith given unto him
as our Lord and Master, to become his faithful Disciples, importing our defire
to learn, and stipulation to observe his Precepts: And therefore as S. Paul
says, we are saved by faith, Ephesians. 2.8. So S. Peter says, Baptism does also
save us, 1 Pet. 3.21. Interpreting his meaning, in the following words, Not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer (or stipulation) of a
good conscience.

And to this purpose it is observable, that when our Savior gave commission to
his Apostles to go and make Disciples of all Nations, (...).
baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, he adds this, as the interpretation of their discipleship, teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: Implying that their
Profession to be his Disciples (which is the import of their Baptisin) does
signify their engagement to observe his Precepts, and to live like Christians.
To believe in Christ, is to be a Christian; that is, a Disciple if Christ,
which was the first Title of Believers, Act. 11.26. But that Title of (a
Disciple of Christ) without respect to his Precepts, imports contradiction, to
believe in Christ therefore, and not to observe his Commandments is a plain
contradiction. As therefore all Christians are obliged to an explicit faith in
Christ which is the ground of their Title to that name; s^ are they to do all
manner of good Works upon the groun^ of this Faith, with desire and confidence
of pleasin^ God through Christ; and not expecting any acceptan^ of their works,
otherwise than by and through Christ Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, d^ all in the name of the Lord Jesus. 1 Pet. 2.5.

The Original of the first transgression, by which the whole Race of Mankind
fell into a state that need Salvation, was unbelief. Eve by the temptation of
the Devil, was first induced to quit her Faith in Go^ Word, that had said, The
day thou eatest there of, thou shall surely dye the death. This unbelief was
that which made way for the sin of disobed^ ence to the Command: For, had she
not doubted the truth of Gods Word, she could never have been per^ swaded to
taste of that forbidden Fruit. Thus w^ unbelief the prime cause of man's ruin;
and there^ fore the first step and principle of his restoration, an^ Salvation
is Faith: And as unbelief of the threa^ ning, by which the first Law was
fortified, was the cause of our destruction; so the belief of the promi^ of the
Gospel, is the principle of our justification: B^ believing the Serpent, the
Abaddon, and Apollyo^ the destroyer, we were undon; by believing in Jesus the
Savior, we are saved. But as that unbelief became destructive by its effects,
as a practical infidelity, producing disobedience to the Commandment: So is our
Faith effectual to Salvation, then only, when it is sincerely practical,
reducing us to our duty of obedience to our merciful Savior.

If that saying of the Father must stand for a Catholic Axiom, bona opera sunt
via ad regnum, non causa regnandi, I must have leave to interpret the latter
Clause, so, as may import no contradiction to the first; that is, that good
works are the way to the Kingdom, not the Cause (that is, the principle, or
meritorious Cause) of our reigning; for a Cause they must needs be; that is, a
moral Cause, if they be the way; that is, the means of our reigning, as that
signifies not only the Term or End of this way, but the Reward of our walking
in it.

When therefore S. Paul excludes works from justification, I take it, his only
scope is, to secure the freedom, and assert the necessity of Divine Grace
purchased by Christ, and promised by the New Covenant of the Gospel. And when
he says a man is not justified by the works of the Law, he sometimes means
ceremonial works, such as was that of Circumcision, and the obedience to that
whole Law, which a man was made a debtor to keep by his Circumcision, Gal. 5.3.
otherwhiles by the righteousness of works he seems to understand, perfect
indefective obedience to the whole Law, or Will of God: upon which account it
is impossible for a sinner (as he concludes all men to be now, Romans 3.23. Gal.
3.22.) to be justified, because his being so, imports a contradiction to such
Works: Besides, it is observeable, that S. Paul does never say, that a man can
be saved without Works; but that he is justified without them; speaking
generally of the first justification, or being put into a state of
justification, by the free pardon, Romans 4.8. 2 Cor. 5.19.
or not imputing of sin^ past. This Grace he affirms to be obtained by a
sincere Faith in Christ, not only without respect to Works antecedent to this
Faith; bu^ also without, and before any such works as are duly consequent unto
it. All those who were converted from Heathenism, or Judaism, unto the Faith of
Christ were by that first act, and profession of this Faith brought into a
state of justification, before, and there fore without any such works, as
remained afterwar^ to be done, by the engagement of this Faith. But because
this Faith, if it was unfaigned, did imply an engagement of the Believer to all
good works of love, an^ obedience to the commands of the Savior, the Lord
Jesus; therefore this right of justification, conferr^^ upon the condition of
such an engagement, could n^ be beld without works. And consequently Salvation
which is nothing else, but the final conpletion of this justification unto
life, Romans 5.18.
(...) not attainable without them. But sti^ good works have their acceptance,
and validity un^ the reward of Salvation, by virtue of Faith in Chri^ the only
Savior, and his Merits: So that they (...) concur to Salvation, only as
verifications of our since Faith in Christ. It is this Faith that must be the
pl^ of a sinner for his final justification at the last judgment; but this plea
can never be made good, unless the Faith be found free from any contradiction,
or (...) faisance by the works of a man's life.

The two Apostles, S. Paul and S. James, will (...) perfectly cleared from all
reality of contradiction; all, or any of these three things shall be found
true; 1. That they speak not of the same Faith, 2. Nor of the same Works, 3.
Nor of the same Justification. 1. Not of the same Faith; S. James speaking of
an ineffectual dead faith, not only abstracted from works in its notion, but
being altogether without them, Jam. 2.14. What does it profit, my brethren,
though a man say he has faith, and has not Works? And verse. 17. Even so
faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone. And verse. 26. Whereas S.
Paul speaks of a true and living Faith, working by Love. Gal. 5.6. such as was
the Faith of Abraham that offered up his only Son Isaac, at the command of God.
2. Not of the same works, S. James speaking of Evangelical works done in, and
with the Faith of the Messiah, and in obedience to the Gospel: Whilst S. Paul
speaks of legal works, or works of the Law, as such. Nor thirdly, of the same
justification, S. Paul speaking of the first justification of a sinner, upon
his sincere believing in Christ, before the confirmation of that faith by his
works. S. James understanding the continued state of justification, as appears
by his Example of Abraham. verse. 21. Was not Abraham our father justified by
works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar. Abraham was justified
long before that work; yet he is said to be justified thereby, not before men,
but before God: Any one of these differences in the Discourses of the two
Apostles, is sufficient to salve them from any reality of contradiction. But
the exact disquisition of those particulars, not agreeing with the limits of my
present undertaking, must be left to them that are better able to pursue it. It
is more than time to relieve the patience of the Reader, which shall be done
wit^ the addition of this only request, that he will join wit^ the Author in
his hearty Prayer to the Lord of Glory and the God of our Salvation; for such a
blessin^ upon these Discourses, as may render them, at least, i^ some measure
effectual to those blessed Ends, t^ which they are entitled.

ERRATA.
REader, you are desired to take Notice, That the words Part I, in the running
Titles upon the head of the pages, in the latter part of the Book, are wholly
to be left out. And in the first Discourse, Page 16. line 9. read as is, p. 25.
l. 21. dele with, p. 41. in the Margent, r. je renie dieu, maugre de dieu
malgrado de dio.

In the second Discourse, Page 10. line 5. read (...), p. 36. l. 1. r. as is,
p. 46. l. 12. r. the work of conversion or repentance to begin in the
understanding, the ruling faculty, etc. p. 50. l. 10. r. supposition, p. 57. l.
11. dele as, p. 73. l. 16. r. (...), p. 91. l. 20. dele by it, p. 108. l. 8. r.
prevention.

THE Main Duty of a Christian.
1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether (therefore) ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.
AS the highest Happiness of Man consists in the fruition of God and his
favor; So the highest Virtue and Perfection of man, consists in his being
entirely devoted to God, by dedicating and Consecrating all that he is, and all
that he has, and all that he does, to the glory of God, according to the
precept of this Text, which is the most transcendent Rule of Religion, the
prime fundamental Law of godliness properly so called.

In Moral and Civil Conversation, between man and man, that Common Rule of
Equity and Charity, is fundamental, viz. that Eveny Man should do unto others
as he would they should do to him: In Politics, or public Acts of Civil State
and Government, The safety of the People is the supreme Law, and all things are
to be done to that end: but in Religion the Canon of the Text is the only
fundamental; Whether ye eat or drink. etc.

This general Rule is here brought in by the Apostle, upon a special and
particular occasion; viz. by way of Argument to confirm an Admonition given to
the Corinthians, to beware of the Scandal of Idolatry, by Communion with the
Heathens in their Sacrificial Feasts, celebrated to the honor of their Idols.
This Admonition the Apostle had begun at the 8th. Chap. and, after a brief
Intermission, he resumes it in this, v. 14. Where he declares, the main Reason
why Christians should not partake with Heathens in their Idol Feasts; namely,
because that would be to Communicate with, and to be partners in, the
Idol-sacrifices, and so to join in the worship of Demons or Devils to whom
those Sacrifices were offered, v. 20. and therein to have communion with
Devils. As in the Christian Feast of the Lords Supper (which is also a
Sacrificial Feast, or a feast upon the Sacrifice o^ Christ's body and blood,
repesented by bread and wine) they that are partakers of that Supper, are
thereby partakers of the Sacrifice, viz. of the body and blood of Christ v. 16,
17. And as in the Jewiss Feast upon their Sacrifices, they that did eat of the
Sacrifices, were partakers of the Altar; so they that are of the Sacrifices
which by the Heathens were offered to Devils, v. 7. Fxod. 34.15.16. Rev. 2.14.
did thereby participate in their Idolatry, or Idol-service^ Which to do, was
highly to profane the name of God, and provoke him to Jealousy, v. 22. by
joining Devils in a rivality with Him. And whereas some might Object, in behalf
of Christians, that their eating of such meats was not to any such end, they
having no respect at all to the Id^^ or Devil, but eating these as common
meats, without distinction:

To this tacit Objection the Apostle Answers that this they might do, so that
it were without Scandal: as, if it were meat sold in the Shambles (where some
portions of Heathen Sacrifices might sometime be sold); v. 25.
or set before them at a private Table, whereto they were invited, v, 27. in
such cases they might eat freely without any question. But if any man did take,
or give notice of such meat, telling them that it was a portion of an Idol-
Sacrifice, and as such, eaten in the company, with respect to that Sacrifice,
then, and in that case, they ought not to eat of it; for his sake that showed
it, and for conscience sake, not their own, but his or theirs who are subject
to be scandalized thereby, by being confirmed in the sin of Idolatry: which
Scandal is a thing that tends much to the prejudice of Gods glory, which ought
ever to be respected by a Christian, Whether he eat or drink or whatsoever he
does.

Thus stands the Coherence, and Occasion of the Text: Wherein may be noted
these two general parts; Actus, and Finis sive regula:

1. The Actions of men, which are to be regulated and ordered by a certain rule
and end. These are set down, 1. particularly by way of Instance, or Induction,
Whether ye eat or drink: 2. generally, with an universal et caetera; or
whatsoever ye do, Secondly The end or rule whereto or whereby, all these
Actions are to be directed, is, the glory of God: Do all to the glory of God.

This general precept, or Exhortation, reduced into a Doctrinal proposition,
teachethus: that It is the Duty of Christians whether they eat or drink or
whatsoever they do, to do all to the glory of God: which proposition my
intention is to handle in the plainest method of Explication, Confirmation, and
Application.

1. By way of Explication I shall enquire, What is meant by the glory of God,
2. What Actions of men are to be directed to this end; 3. How all such Actions
may, and ought to be regulated by, or directed to this End.

1. We are to consider, What is meant by the glory of God. Answer; Glory is
nothing but the manifestation of some eminent Excellency or Dignity, that
appears in, or is attributed, and ascribed to, a thing, or person: so that it
is either absolute, by way of Inherence or Emanation, or relative by way of
Reflection or Attribution. Accordingly this word Glory in reference to God,
does sometimes signify the high and glorious Supereminency, Majesty, and
Excellency of God, who is all Glory, in his Essence, Acts, and Attributes; In
all that he is, in all that he does, and in all that can be truly conceived or
spoken of him. And as with men, Titles of Dignity are commonly used to
express, or designate, the persons to whom they are attributed; as when we
say, his Majesty, his Highness, his Excellency, Honor, or Worship, we intend
the Person himself; so in holy Scripture by the glory of God, sometimes the
Deity it self, and sometimes the Person of the Deity to which it is given, is
expressed: [As 2 Pet 1.17, Then came a voice from the Excellent glory, that is,
from God the Father] and Heb. 1, 3. Who (Christ) being the brightness of his
Glory; that is of God the Father's glory, and the express image of his Person
or substance; the latter words expounding the former.

2. Glory in reference to God is used also, for all signs testimonies, and
manifestations of his presence, and many times for that peculiarity of praise,
honor, and reverence, that is given, or to be given to God, as Psalm. 29.2.
Give unto God the glory that is due unto his name, that is, the honor, as it
is in the Margin. To give glory to God, is to apprehend, and acknowledge his
glorious Excellency, Majesty, and Supereminency, and to show our reverence
thereof, by Words, and Actions; this is to sanctify his name, and to glorify
him as God, Romans 1.21. To give unto him the glory that is due to his Name, that
is, to Him, (for the Name of God signifies Himself) and to him alone
separately, as the Holy One, that is, the Only God. For he will not that his
Glory (in any part or degree) be given to another. As when the Heathens did
Sacrifice to Idols, if Christians did partake with them in their Feasts of joy
and honor to those Idol Gods, this was to give the Glory of God to Idols, by
acknowledging in them, a kind of Deity, because Sacrifice is an honor, or
worship, peculiar to God; thus should he be robbed of his Glory Which is the
only thing that he is jealous of. This latter Signification of the word is that
which is meant in this Text.

Second Question: What are those Acts of men which are to be directed to this
end? Answer: This Question is fully answered by the Apostle:

1. By way of instance in some Common natural Actions, such as those of eating
and drinking, which were the particular Acts now in question, and which is the
reason of his naming them only.

2. But withal, he shows the Extent of this Rule to be universal, reaching to
all manner of humane Actions, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God.

I shall more distinctly remonstrate the just extent of this rule in the
following Propositions.

1. This Rule is principally to be understood of humane Actions, properly so
termed; that is, such Actions, as are under the direct Government of Reason,
which is the difference of a Man from other Creatures. All arbitrary and
voluntary Actions, i. e. such as are under the Direction and Moderation of the
understanding, and will of man, and so are capable of being designed to an end
these, are all to fall under this Rule.

2. Proposition: By doings in this Text, are comprehended, the Acts of the
whole man, that is his thoughts also, and words, which (though it vulgar
speech, they be ordinarily distinguished from actions, yet) are the most true
and proper Acts of a man, as being incommunicate to other Animals, and
therefore do as much fall under this rule as any outward Actions whatsoever.
Thoughts Reasonings of the Mind, and all elicit, or inward Acts of the Will,
and Affections, are first to be regulated by this end. All manner of Affections
so to be governed, as God may be glorified at least not dishonored, by them; A
Christian mu^ look to all his Affections, and Passions, of love hatred, desire,
delight, grief, fear, hope, etc. tha^ they be so placed, and so managed, and
moderated, as Gods glory may receive some Service, a^ least no dis-service from
them. Whatever we speak or think, we must therein have a due regard to the
glory of God; who may be as much glorified or dishonored by these ways, as by
deeds.

The like Extent has this word do, in that other general Rule of our Actions,
in reference to one another, before named, Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye unto them likewise. That Rule also is to be understood of
Affections, as well as Actions, and to be observed alike, both in thoughts and
words, as well as deeds: and in all these, not only with respect to mere
Justice, but to Charity especially, as appears by the Context in our Savior's
application of that Rule, Luke 6, 30, 31, 32.

Third Proposition: Not only the matter of our doings, is to be ordered by this
rule; but also the manner, circumstances, and all inferior ends; that is, it
behooves Christians to be careful, not only that the matter of their doings be
consistent with, and subordinate to the Glory of God; but also that the manner,
circumstances, motives, and all ends of them, be likewise governed by the
supreme End. For in these things especially consists the morality, and
Regularity of humane Actions; which are good or evil particularly, in respect
of the motives, manner, circumstances, and intendment of them. Hence not only
indifferent, but good actions (in themselves and in respect of the matter of
them) may be so Circumstantiated, and intended, or designed, as God may be much
dishonored by them: This Action of eating things Sacrificed to Idols, was in
it self an indifferent thing, as the Apostle declares in the preceding verses,
but by circumstance of place, or company, it became unlawful, as it was
prejudicial to the glory of God, by way of Scandal. So in common eating and
drinking, it is not the matter, or object of these Actions; but the manner,
ends, and circumstances of quantity, quality, time, etc. that are to be
regulated by this end. In good and religious Actions, the manner and intention
is specially to be regarded, that they be ever done in faith and sincerity,
without negligence, or irreverence, with pure and holy intention, and zeal to
the glory of God; else they lose their Religion, as shall be showed again
hereafter,

But here a Question may be moved, Whether it be possible that all manner of
humane Actions can be directed to so high an end, as the glory of God: For it
may seem that this end is too high for some Acts to be designed unto.

Answer: It appears clearly by the instances which the Apostle has given in
the Text, of Eating and Drinking, (which are no other than natural Actions,
common to brute beasts) that there are no humane actions so minute,
indifferent, or inconsiderable, in their kind, but may come under this Rule,
and be subordinated to this general end of Gods glory: which as it is the only
design of God himself; so, (and therefore) ought it to be the design of all
reasonable creatures, as creatures as you shall hear: And that the height of
this end does nothing hinder the direction, or subordination of the least
actions thereunto, may easily appear, if we will but consider, that all things
in the world though never so low and base in their appearance, do,
notwithstanding, in their kind, and order, reach this same end: not only Man
but the very Beast, may and does glorify God, even in its eating and drinking;
and all creatures else, even to the least and lowest, do serve this end; that
is, they do declare the Glory of God: Not only the Heaven, the Sun, Moon and
Stars in their magnitude, motions, lights, and special influences, do declare
the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. Psalm. 72.19.24. 1, 33.5.104.24.119.64.
but the whole Earth and the fullness thereof, is full of his Glory, in as much
as it is full of his goodness, mercy, riches; every substantial Being, together
with every accident, quality, figure, motion, and operation thereof does
signally declare the glory of Gods power, wisdom, and providence, were it
perfectly understood. Hence the Psalmist calls upon all creatures to praise the
Lord, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, stormy Winds which execute his Word;
Mountains and all Hills, fruitful Trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle,
creeping things and Feathered Fowls, Psalm 148.7, 8. etc. And sure, it is as
easy to understand, and believe that the least considerable of humane Actions,
should be directed to the glory of God, as that the least Creature, Energy,
Accident or Motion of a Creature (even to the lighting of a Sparrow upon the
ground, Matthew. 10.29.
and to the numbering of hairs upon a man's head) should be under the particular
notice and Government of his Providence; as is, or ought to be believed by all
Christians. If the infinite glorious wisdom of God does extend it self to the
taking notice of all that is under him, and all that is in, or done by any of
his Creatures, (as certainly it does) though no meaner a man than Saint Hierom,
Hierom in 1. cap. Habac. v. 13.
by a most incredible Mistake does seem to deny it, as much as Epicurus or any
of his School) much more is he to be thought to have a special regard to all
the Acts of Man, whose Being is the second in honor after his Own. And if God
takes notice of all our actions, they must needs some way or other concern his
Glory, and ought much more to be noted and observed by our selves.

But for a more clear and full Satisfaction to this Objection, I shall now
proceed to the third Question, which only remains to be answered, for the
complete Explication of the whole Doctrine, that is, How the glory of God is to
be respected in all our actions, or, How all the actions of men may, and ought
to be regulated with respect to this end.

1. The first Branch of my answer to this question, shall be that which I take
to be the first intendment, and scope of the Apostle in this place; which is,
that Christians in all their actions, should have such a constant and heedfull
regard to the glory of God, as that nothing be done by them to the prejudice,
or derogation thereof, in any degree; that is, that no dishonor may redound to
God, by, or from any of their actions, in respect of the matter, manner,
circumstances or end of them. This is the most general sense of the Rule, and
that which seems primely intended in this place, as may appear plainly from the
Context: wherein the Apostle admonishes the Corinthians (who lived among
heathens, and were such, till some of them had been lately converted to the
Faith of Christ) not to eat of things offered to Idols, for this reason,
because their so doing, would be repugnant to the glory of God, which ought
always to be respected by Christians, in whatsoever they do.

Now God, is dishonored by the breach of his Law, Rom 2, 23. Thou that make
thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? More
particularly, first by all such Actions as are evil in themselves; or secondly,
by such as (being good, or indifferent in themselves) are evilly performed in
respect of the manner, circumstances, or ends of them; or thirdly by such as
have an appearance of evil. 1. By such actions as are clearly evil in
themselves in respect of the matter of them; by all such actions God is
dishonored, as well such as are committed against our neighbor, as such as are
committed immediately against God himself; whether the eidence of that evil
proceeds from any written Word of God, or only from the common Law of reason,
and humane understanding. For that same Effect of the Law wittten in the heart,
Romans 2.15. (...).
which Saint Paul attributes to the Heathen, being equally common to
Christians, does equally bind them, and cannot be superseded, or made void by
the knowledge of the Written Law, which serves to perfect it. So that whiles the
defect of that Law in the heart is only supplied by the Word, the Effect of it
still remains: And if a Heathen shall be judged for things done by him, only
against the Law of reason, his own conscience accusing him, as the Apostle
says, though he knows of no written Law of God against it; then doubtless so
shall a Christian be, for all such Actions as he shall do against the same Law
of his Reason and Conscience, notwithstanding he either knows not, or cannot
remember any written word against it; For this Ignorance, as to such particular
Actions, is the same in both. For, although the Law of God, which is written in
the Scriptures, be said to be perfect, and thereupon is supposed to declare, in
the Latitude of it is Sense, and the just Consequences thereof, the whole Will
of God, that is, his preceptive Will, in whatsoever he requires, or forbids men
to do: yet because this perfection of Sense, with the Consequences, is not
perfectly understood by any man, much less by all; therefore may there be many
things therein required and forbidden, which will not from thence be
particularly understood, much less remembered at all times. If therefore the
Conscience of a man from clear light of Reason, shall condemn any Action, which
he is any way tempted to do, although he does not remember any particular Text
of Scripture whereby it is forbidden, he is nevertheless bound to abstain from
it, by that Law written in the Heart, and cited by the Conscience.

But to return to the matter in hand, which is the Consideration of God's
Dishonor in that which is done. It is manifest that God is dishonored only by
such Actions, as are contrary to his Will; because no Act which is either
agreeable to his Will, by way of Command or Approbation; or allowed by his
Will, by way of Permission, can be dishonorable to him; unless he can be
supposed to command, approve, or allow of his own Dishonor: From hence it
follows, that God is not dishonored by any such Acts, as are purely
indifferent in their individual existence; because that, Dishonor imports a
Contradiction to such an indifferency, and so destroys it; For it cannot be
indifferent to dishonor God. But whether there be any such individual Acts, as
are absolutely indifferent, is a disputable point, which I may not here stand
to examine.

But, in general, every Act of Transgression of the known Will of God, is a
manifest derogation to his Glory, especially that of his Sovereign Authority.
And especially every presumptuous, i. e. wilful Transgression; for that imports
a plain Contempt of God, and his Authority; Therefore by this Rule, Christians
are especially to be careful to abstain from all presumptuous Transgressions of
God's Will, which way soever made known unto them, whether, by the written
Word, or by the light of Reason, as before was said.

Now those Actions are most apparently contrary to the Will of God, which are
evil in respect of the matter of them.

2. But it is no less manifest that some Actions, both which are indifferent,
and which are good in respect of the Matter of them, may be evil in respect of
the Manner, Circumstances, and Ends of their Doing, as was said before, and is
too evident to need any proof; only this may be added, that as there are some
kinds of Actions which cannot be made good, or indifferent by any Circumstance
whatsoever, as to hate God, to blaspheme, or curse him, to take his Name in
vain, by false Swearing, etc. which Actions certainly are evil, not by any
Arbitrary Law, or Will of God, but by their very Nature, and this Evil, such,
as no possible determination of God's Will, can, or could have acquitted them
from; So are there some Acts (of the Soul especially) which are so
intrinsecally Good, as that they cannot become Evil, by any Circumstance or End
that is consistent with their Being, as to love God above all, to reverence
him, to defire his Glory above all things, etc: Yet I deny not, but that even
in such Actions (as they are now performed by men in the flesh) there is some
Imperfection; and that is an Evil, but not such as denominates the Act to be
so: except we will say, that it is impossible for the holiest man that can be,
to do any such good Act, as is not a Sin. And then it were indeed a vain
Question to dispute, Whether any single Act can be indifferent; For if all such
Acts as have any, or the most goodness in them be Sins, it were a great
absurdity, to imagine that those, which (being supposed indifferent,) have no
Goodness in them, should have no Evil; for then it would be apparent, that one
Evidence at least of their not being Evil, should be, because they are not
Good; because (by this Conclusion) if they were Good, they would be Evil.

3. God is dishonored by such Actions as have an appearance of Evil, and
therefore by this Rule also, Christians are to abstain from all appearance of
Evil. This being the ground of that Precept of S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22: as it is
rendered in our own, and most other Translations. For there is another possible
Translation of the words, which seems to be favored by the Syriack Translator,
and is accepted by some Interpreters, viz. from all kind or sort of Evil:
(...), ab omni specie mali: But (besides that this is a notable abatement of
the sense of the Precept) I doubt much whether the word (...) without Example
else where in the New Testament, or the Septuagint, may be taken in such a
Philosophical sense: Certainly, Christians ought to abstain not only from such
things as are really Evil, but also from all things that may give a Suspicion,
or carry an appearance of Evil: As for Instance; we ought not only to abstain
from Pride and Vainglory, from Covetousness, Deceit, Intemperance, and all
manner of Unchastness; but also from all things that may give any suspicion, or
have any appearance of these Vices: for this Reason especially, because God is
thereby liable to be dishonored.

Now that God may be dishonored by such Actions as have an appearance of Evil
in them, is evident: because look how much appearance of Evil there is in an
Action, so much appearance there is of Repugnancy to the Will of God, and
consequently so much appearance of Contempt, or neglect of that Will of God in
him that voluntarily does it.

Now this appearance of Evil in any Action, may be either to a man's self only,
or to others also, or to others only. For a Christian to do any thing
willingly, which has a probable appearance to his own Conscience, of being
Evil, (though in truth it be not so in it is self) is therefore a Sin, because
it implies a neglect, or want of respect to the Honor of God. Wherefore St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, where he also speaks (as he does here) of
Eating and Drinking, with distinction of Meats, gives this general Rule: He
that doubts is condemned, (viz. of his own Conscience, and therefore also, by
St. John's Rule, 1 John 5.21. by God also) if he Eat. For whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin: i.e. whatsoever is done, without a just and reasonable
persuasion, of the lawfulness thereof, is Sin. Faith here being put for such a
Persuasion, is called Knowledge in the same Matter, 1 Cor. 8.7: A Christian
ought to be so tender and jealous, or zealous, of God's glory, as not willingly
to do any thing that he doubts to be offensive to him. God himself in the
second Commandment, is said to be a jealous God, in reference to his own Glory;
and therefore forbad the Jews (as is conceived) the making of any manner of
Images of their own Invention, to a sacred use; and especially all manner of
outward appearance of worshipping them. And when we thus know him to be so
jealous of his own glory, it concerns us to be as jealous of any thing that
has any reasonable appearance of prejudice, or opposition thereto. He that
much honors, or loves any Person, will be fearful of doing any thing
willingly, which he suspects may disparage or displease him; or that has any
appearance of dishonor, or disrespect to him. And this (as I shall show
afterward) is a special importance of that general Duty of fearing God, that
is, a reverend, and awful fear of doing any thing, that may appear to be
dishonorable, or offensive to God.

2. But if this appearance or suspicion of Evil in an Action be not only such,
to the Actor himself, but to others also before whom it is to be done, the
doing of it will be the more dishonorable to God, because it is scandalous: he
is doubly guilty, that Sinn's openly, because he does not only act, but teach a
Sin; For all visible or known Actions, are exemplary, in their own nature;
though there be no such Intention; yea, though there be a contrary desire in
the Actor, that is, that his doing should not be imitated.

But the main Question is, What is to be done, in case this appearance of Evil
in an Action, be only to others, and none at all to him that is to do it, but
being to his certain knowledge, or persuasion, a lawful Action? I Answer, that,
if this be known, such Actions are ordinarily for that time, and that reason,
to be abstained from, by the Rule of the Text. For such was the particular Case
of Instance, with the Corinthians, to whom the eating of things offered to
Idols, was indifferent in it self, so it were done without respect to the Idol;
but is forbidden by the Apostle, only upon the account of Scandal: as appears,
not only by the foregoing Verses, but also by the words following my Text,
Give none Offense (i.e. Scandal, or occasion of Stumbling) neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles; nor to the Church of God, i.e. neither to Christians; The
same Reason is urged to the same purpose more fully by the Appostle, in the 8.
Chap. 8. v. to the end of the Chapter.

God is dishonored by all manner of Scandal, whether it be taken only and not
given, or given and not taken; but especially by such as is given, and taken;
or by such as is so given as is likely to be taken.

And because by this Text, we are required, as much as in us lies, to prevent
all manner of dishonor to God, which may be occasioned by our Actions,
therefore ought we to take heed of all Scandal, that may be taken thereby; that
is, to prevent it as far as we may.

Now Scandal in the ordinary sense, that is insisted upon by Practical Divines,
is, Something done by any man, that is an occasion of Sin in another: I say
something, because every thing that may be an occasion of Sin in another, is
not a Scandal in their sense, though in Scripture Phrase the word is sometime
so used: But Scandal is given, either by some known Sin, which a man does, or
seems to do before others, or by such indifferent Actions, as a man does
before others, by whom he knows, or has reason to suspect, they are reputed
Evil.

To encourage others by Example (as well as otherwise) to the omitting of any
Duty, or committing any Sin, is Scandal; From which a Christian is to abstain,
in or upon a double Respect; First, to the glory of God (according to the Rule
o^ the Text) lest he should be dishonored by the Si^ of his Neighbor;
Secondly, to the good of his Neighbor, lest he should be thereby induced t^^
Sin, to the hurt of his Soul. So the Two great Commandments of loving God
above all, and (...) Neighbor as our selves, do jointly concur to in hi^ bit
a Christian from all such Actions; such I say as though they be not sinful in
themselves, no^ yet have any appearance of Evil to him that does them, yet will
occasion another man's Sin, by doing that (by the encouragement of his Example)
which will be a Sin in him, because he judges i^ to be so: For he that does an
Act, which he thinks to be a Sin, does therefore sin, because he intends to
Sin, by the consent of his Will to that Action, notwithstanding the
apprehension of Sin.

Q. 1. But it may be demanded, What is to be done in case the Action that has
this appearance of Evil to others, be not indifferent, but commanded either
immediately by God, or by such as have Authority under God, over a man? Whether
is a Christian in such a Case, to omit that Action to avoid the scandal of his
Brother?

I answer, No surely. The reason is plain because such an omission, is a sin,
and so a direct dishonouring of God in it self. But one Sin is not to be
prevented by another. As, a man is not to do Evil, that good may come of it;
so, neither may he omit the doing of that Good, which is commanded, to prevent
others doing of Evil. To omit a necessary Duty, is a present certain Evil; the
Scandal that may be taken thereby, is but accidental, and contingent, though it
be probable: Love both to God, and our selves requires, that, if God must be
dishonored, it should rather be by another, than by a man's self: Besides, the
omission of such Actions, gives generally as great, or a greater Scandal to
others, as it removes from some. Were the Case so, that a far greater Sin, and
Dishonor to God, were like to be done by occasion of this Action, than that
Omission would be; yet were we not allowed, much less bound, thus to prevent
it; Because, there is no possible Consideration which can license, much less
oblige, a man to Sin. The least Sin is not to be done, to prevent the greatest.

Q. 2. But what if the Action be only good, and commendable, and not absolutely
commanded? For, such Actions I think may be admitted (as well under the Gospel,
as in the Free Will Offerings, and voluntary Vows under the Law) without
yielding the Doctrine of Supererogation: If such Actions have an appearance of
Evil, to others, whether are they to be omitted for that only Reason?

Answ. If that Brother, who is suspected to be scandalized by such an Action,
be truly weak, that is, uninstructed, and not proud, wilful or obstinate; and
if that Scandal cannot be sufficiently prevented, by instruction and due means
of rectifying his judgment; I think, the Action should for the present be
omitted; Because, all Actions commanded in their kind, are not always
necessary to be performed; according to the common Rule (...) the School,
concerning affirmative Precepts n^ binding ad Semper, that is, at every time.
Indeed the general Precepts of Believing, and Fearin^ God, and Loving Him and
our Neighbors d^ bind, both semper, and ad semper, that is, at a^ times; but
then, it is to the Habits, not to the elic^^ much less imperate, Acts of these
Virtues that man is always bound: It is not necessary (becau^^ not possible,)
for a man always to Elicit the Act of Faith, Fear, or Love; but the
Disposition a^ Habits, must never be wanting, nor can be, in good Christian.
And if Acts commanded m^ for some Reasons, be omitted at some times, b^ cause
they bind not to all times; then much m^ may such Acts, as, being not commanded
(though good,) are not necessary at any time, be omitted some time. 2. Because
(as before was said) ^^ctions, not only indifferent, but good in themselves,
may become Evil by some Circumstances; amongst which, this may fall out to be
one. 3. Because the doing of such a good Action, not commanded, may bring more
dishonor to God, by the scandal of it, than it will do honor, by the doing of
it: And though we may not do the least Evil, to prevent the greatest; yet may
we omit a less good, when it is not commanded, to promote a greater; 4. Lastly,
that general Rule, that God will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, may be applied
to this Case, where the Soul of my Brother, is probably endangered, by my
voluntary Sacrifice. But,

Q. 3. What if the Act that has an appearance of Evil to Brethren, which are
truly weak, be barely lawful, and indifferent in it self, neither commanded,
nor yet good in its Nature or Kind, but yet necessary for the preservation of a
man's Life, Liberty, Estate or Credit, and cannot be omitted, without notable
prejudice, and hazard to a man's self in these Interests: Whether is a man
bound to redeem the Scandal of his Brethren, with such hazard or prejudice to
himself or his Family? The Arguments producible for the affirmative in this
Question, are to be drawn, 1. From the Consideration of God's Dishonor, which
by the Sin of another (occasioned by this Act of mine) will be procured. 2.
From the Debt of Charity, to the Souls of our Neighbors. For, the glory of
God, and the salvation of our Brethren, ought to be preferred before any
temporal Interest of our own.

Answ. It is certainly true, that the high regard which a man owes to these two
things, will oblige a Christian to do his endeavor, to prevent the impeachment
of them, and therefore bind him to use such prudential means as he is able, to
prevent the danger of Sin in another; which may be done, without forbearing the
Action, which his necessity, or just interest does so much require. Had the
Corinthians, for want of other Meat, been in danger to have starved, or (by not
eating this) any otherwise hazarded their Lives; I think they had not been
absolutely bound to abstain, by the Apostle's meaning in the Directions, which
here he gives them: which do not suppose them under any such Extremity, but
only invited to the Meat. In that Case of Danger, I think, To have protested
against all respect and honor to the Idol, might have acquitted them from the
Scandal, and made their eating that Meat, in such a case lawful; though the
Apostle has not expressed any such Exception, because there was no occasion
for it. And though there were an express Apostolical Interdict against eating
things offered to Idols, Acts 15.
which was one of the esteemed Precepts of Noah, yet it appears by S. Paul's
Discourses in the preceding Verses of this Chapter, and elsewhere upon the
same. Theme, that it was but a temporal, or provision^ Edict, not obliging
beyond the necessity of tha^ Case, whereupon it was made. And this, I think, i^
the Warrant, by which most Christians do not now hold themselves obliged by the
same Edict, to abstain from eating of Blood, or things made thereof which yet
was observed in the Church for so^^ Centuries, and forbidden by some Councils.

It is hard to think, that another man's Erro^^ or weakness (especially when a
sufficient Remedy thereof is offered by me) should restrain me of such use of
my lawful liberty, as is necessary to my own preservation. If I were bound to
redeem every accidental dishonor to God, or hurt to my neighbor's souls by
the loss of those benefits which Gods Providence affords me, it would be scarce
possible to enjoy them at all.

But for a conclusion to this point of Scandal (the full and exact handling
whereof agrees not with the model of a Sermon) I shall only add a short
Inquiry into some of the reasons or causes, whereby men are induced, to imitate
others, in things against their own conscience; the discovery whereof, will be
useful, to resolve some questions in this case. I shall name but two, which are
both grounded upon the mistake of the imitator.

Herein I shall take leave to borrow something both of sense, D. H. H.
and words from a late reverend Author, who has learnedly discoursed upon this
Question.

1. One reason whereby people are sometimes encouraged to do that which is
against their own conscience, is, from their own mistake of the action, or
intention, of him whom they imitate, thinking him to do or intend that which he
does not. Thus it might have happened in the case of things offered to Idols,
i. e. that a Christian eating of such flesh, without any Recognition of the
Idol, or respect to the Sacrifice, might have been thought, by some that might
have seen him eat such meat, to have thereby acknowledged some respect to the
Idol, or approved the Sacrifice. And if the peril of the scandal depends upon
such a mistake; that which is sussicient to prevent, or remove that mistake, or
to clear the action, from such a misprision, (if it prove not sufficicient to
prevent the Scandal, which may be taken thereby, by one that will needs do a
thing which he accounts to be evil, because he believes I did the same,
notwithstanding my protestation to the contrary, yet) to clear me from the
guilt of that scandal it will be sufficient. For if my judgment, may be so
much valued, as to be taken for a Warrant, for the doing of a doubtful action;
my disclaiming or disavowing the action, which another thinks me to do, ought
in all reason to be of greater force, to dissuade him from the doing of it,
than his own bare imagination of my practice, should be to invite or encourage
his.

2. A second reason whereby men are encouraged to imitate another man in a
thing which is against their conscience, and, as they think, against the Law of
God, is, because they think, that it is done by them whom they imitate, as much
against their consciences, and against the known will of God. For an act of
presumption, in one, is apt to encourage the like in a another: And as this is
the common case in such scandals as are taken by known unquestionable Sins,
wherein one man is emboldned by another's Example, in that which both
acknowledge to be evil; so may it be in reputed evils, or the appearances
thereof in indifferent things: That is, another man may be encouraged to do
that which he accounts to be asin, by seeing me do the same thing, which he
presumes I also do know, or judge to be a sin, and yet will adventure to do it:
In this case, I conceive, a sufficient manifestation of my assurance, or full
persuasion of the lawfulness of that which I do, and of my resolution not to do
it, if I thought it to be a sin, will be enough to prevent the scandal, so far
at least as it might be imputable to me.

If the reason why another will dare to do a thing against his conscience, be
because he thinks I do so too; that reason will be sufficiently voided, by my
declaring that I neither do, nor dare so do. So that it will not be always
necessary for me to forbear that action, which to me is lawful, where I have
opportunity to declare my judgment thereof, to prevent the scandal of another:
For if this declaration of my conscience, be believed, it cuts off all
appearance of presumption in me, and consequently all ground of encouragement
to the like presumption in another whose conscience agrees not with with mine.
If it be not believed, that cannot be my fault, nor any consequence thereof
imputable to me: But though it be not absolutely necessary to omit an action
(which by appearance of evil may prove scandalous) in such a case, where a man
has opportunity to do so much toward the prevention of the scandal, as the
forementioned protestation may import. Yet by the instance of the Apostle in
the Context, I conceive a Christian is ordinarily bound in charity, rather to
forbear such actions, than to adventure the scandal of them, with the Antidote
of his bare protestation: which as it might easily have been made in the
Corinthians case, so might it as easily have been advised by the Apostle, if he
had thought it sufficient in such an ordinary case, wherein there was no more
necessity of the action.

Thus much may suffice for the first Proposition, showing how this general rule
is to be observed in all our actions by way of caution, that is, by constant
and diligent care that nothing be done by us to the prejudice of Gods glory:
This (from the Context) seems to be the prime scope of the Apostle, in this
Text: But because this falls much short of a Christian's duty, therefore is it
not to be taken for the entire, exclusive sense of this general Canon. For it
is not sufficient that nothing be done to the dishonor of God, but just and
meet it is also, that as much should be done by us, as may be, to the honor
and glory of God; that Christians should not content themselves with a negative
Religion, of not dishonouring God; but that they should make it their study,
design, and ambition, to honor and glorify him as much as they can: And
therefore,

2. A second Proposition toward the full answer to the question, How the glory
of God may and ought to be sought in all our doings, is this: Gods glory is to
be designed by a general, and habitual, devoting and dedicating of a man's self,
and all that he has, and does, to this End: By such an entire, habitual,
intentional, devotion, or comecration of a man's self, as a Holocaust or
whole-Offering to God, a man makes the glory of God the end of his being, and
well being, and consequently of whatsoever he does in order to any inferior
ends with respect to himself. Thus St. Paul exhorts the Romans to present their
bodies a living Sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable to God; meaning by their Bodies (opposed to the bodies of
beasts used in the Levitical Sacrifices) their whole Persons (else the body
could not be a living Sacrifice opposed to the dead Sacrifices of beasts) which
he would have them present or offer, as a Holocaust, or a Heave Offering to
God: holy, that is (as that word precisely signifies) separate and consecrate
to the glory of God, and therefore acceptable to God: this he calls their
reasonable service of God, both in contradistinction to the oblation, of
unreasonable and brute Sacrifices; and also, to signify; that this service is
eminently Reasonable in it self; There being the highest reason in the world
that men which are reasonable Creatures, and especially Christians, should be
thus separated from the world to the service and honor of God, as I shall show
afterward.

This Exhortation of the Apostle is excellently practiced in that Prayer of the
Liturgy after the Communion, in these devout words: Here we offer and present
unto thee, o Lord, our Souls and Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
Sacrifice unto thee. As, when a man has projected a main Design, and puts
himself upon the way of acting toward it, though he does not in every act
think of this end or explicitly direct every act thereunto; yet may he truly
be said to be acting toward it.

When a man is going a journey, and has determined the end of it, and the
place whither he will go; though he does not think of the place, or of the end,
and design of his journey, every step or every refreshment he takes in the way;
yet may he be truly said to intend that end, in every step of the way, yea even
in those wherein he seems to go out of the way, only to to take in refreshments
to enable him to go on with the more cheerfulness: The common ends of those
Actions-which are named in the Text viz. eating and drinking were the
preservation of life, health, and strength; and men are truly said, to eat and
drink for those ends, although they do not think of those things as often as they
eat. Thus may a man glorify God in his sleep when he does not think of him; by
designing that Rest to his glory, as a means of refreshing the body for his
service. This habitual devotion, of the whole man, to the glory of God, does
mainly consist in two things:

1. In a sincere desire, and purpose of heart to obey the Will of God in all
things, and that for this end, that thereby God may be glorified. For, as it is
true (which before was said) that God cannot be dishonored by any thing, which
is not contrary to his Will; beeause every dishonor of God is a Sin, and every
sin is a transgression of the Will of God: So is it as manifest, that the
greatest honor and glory, that can be given to God consists in the performance
of his Will. For as God wills nothing so much as his own glory, nor any thing
but for it; so neither can any thing promote, or serve his glory, so much as
what he wills: nor any thing at all but what is at least agreeable to his
Will. But whereas there are some things approveable, and agreeable to his Will,
which are not thereby commanded, it is to be noted, that our duty of serving
his glory, does consist especially in doing those things which are commanded;
which Obedience, says Samuel, is better than Sacrifice: Therefore I limit the
extent of this habitual purpose, (as it is a duty required in the Text) to the
matter of obedience; not conceiving, that a man is bound to have the like
general purpose for the doing of whatsoever may tend to the glory of God; For
the Text does not absolutely require us to do whatsoever may be done, to the
glory of God but whatsoever we shall do, to do all to the glory of God. Not
that I intend to deny that a Christian is engaged in point of love, and
gratitude, to promote and advance the glory of God, as much as morally he can:
but that the Duty commanded in this general Precept does not expressly extend so
far; which yet does extend to all the actions, which a man actually does or
should do.

2. A second thing wherein this habitual devotion to Gods glory does consist,
is in an humble and cheerful willingness to submit himself, and all that
belongs to him, to the appointment, and difposal of the Will of Gods
providence; willing that God should serve his own glory, in the disposal of any
thing that is his: and therefore also willing to suffer any thing that the
wisdom of God shall think fit to impose upon him.

3. But thirdly; Men do then act to the glory of God most expressly and
perfectly, when in their particular actings they do actually and explicitly
consider, design, and intend this end; when they have it in their eye, minding
and setting it before them as the highest end of their doings, and are
therefore careful to do such things, and in such manner as may make most for
that end; when a man acts all for this end, denying himself, and all other ends
in comparison of this; when he does set aside all other ends besides this,
acting purely and solely for Gods glory; or when he sets all ends behind, or
below this, and makes them subordinate to it.

For when the Apostle teaches us, to do all to the glory of God, his meaning
is not, that this should be the sole End of all our Actions, but that it should
be the highest End, and that which should Rule and Govern all other Ends;
whereunto all other Ends should be subservient, or at leastwise consistent.
For, God allow's us to love our selves, and requires us to love our Brethren;
and therefore we may propound the good of our Selves, and our Brethren as some
End of our Doings. God himself has propounded to us other ends than this, in
our Well Doing, in his Promises of Reward. Something we may do for the Honor
of our Prince, and Country; yea, and for our own Honor too, so it be without
Ambition and Vanity: This End of God's Honor or Glory, is not inconsistent
with other honest Ends, much less repugnant, but Superior to them.

And as it is not necessary a man should have no other End but this, so neither
is it necessary nor possible, that a man should expressly propose this End to
himself by an actual Intention in every Act of his Life: yet, it is the part of
a godly man, frequently to consider and reflect upon this End, and to have
regard unto it, especially in all serious and deliberate Actions, constantly in
all Religious Actions, and carefully in all doubtful Actions.

I have now done with the Explication of this Doctrine, and am to proceed to
matter of Confirmation; which, though it be not necessary (in respect of the
Evidence of the Doctrine, which is no other than an express Sentence of holy
Scripture; yet may it be useful in order to the urging of the Practice, 1. To
consider how the same Duty is taught and required in some other Scriptures, 2.
To show the Equity, Reasonableness, and Advantage of it, in several respects.

Another Text where this Duty is expressly taught is in 1 Pet. 4.11. That God in
all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ: This is that which Christians
ought to aim at, that, God in all things may be Glorified.

And that this should be the Desire and Scope of every Christian, is to be
noted from the first Petition of the Lord's Prayer Hallowed be thy name that
is, sanctified (for I think the Latin word is better understood than the
English) or, Glorified be thy name: Hereby we are taught, what should be the
first and chiefest defire of a Christiau, namely the honor and glory of God's
name: and that which is or ought to be the first and chiefest of our Desires,
ought to be the highest end of all our Actions: That which men pray for, they
ought in their practice to aim at, and labor for; else their prayers are
hypocritical, as going out of fained lips.

Seeing therefore we are taught before all things, to pray that God's name may
be hallowed, and glorified, this ought to be our study and practice: The same
may be also inferred from the following petitions, wherein we pray that Gods
Kingdom may come, and his will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven. Gods name
is glorified, when his Kingdom is advanced and established, and his will is
done; His glory is the prime object, and end of his Will: the holy Angels in
Heaven do all things according to the Will of God, and to his glory: their only
design, is to promote his glory: and we are to pray, and therefore to desire,
intend, and endeavor, as far as lies in us, that God may be glorified here on
earth, by our selves, and others, as He is in Heaven.

The same thing is taught us in the Doxology in the close of that prayer, For
thine is the kingdom the power [and the Glory,] that is, All glory is due to
thee.

Which may mind us of another Text of the Psalmist, which together with a
Precept for this duty, gives us the general reason, declaring the equity of it,
Psalm. 29.1. Give unto the Lord, the glory, that is due unto his name. Therefore
is Gods glory to be sought in all our doings, because this glory is due unto
his Name; All glory is due to God; and that because all things are from him and
by him as Creator, Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, o Lord, to receive glory and
honor and power, for thou have created all things; and for thy pleasure they
are, and were created. Most just and reasonable it is, the author of any thing
should have the honor of his own work. This reason is expressly given by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God with your bodies and with your souls for
they are Gods. God made all things for himself, that is for his own glory; and
that which was His end, ought to be made ours too: else we shall disappoint
him, as far as lies in us. To strengthen this Argument, we are to consider;
That not only our Being, is from God (which were enough to entitle him to the
honor of all our doings) but also all our Actions, are dependent upon him; we
do not only live and have our Being, from him, but in him we move too, we act
all things by a constant supply of power from him: our meat, and drink, and
every thing else that we use, are his gifts; so is also our stomach, appetite,
and power of eating and drinking; therefore it is most unjust to use them to
his Dishonor, and most equitable to use them to his Glory. We have all from
him jure beneficiario, and as Feudatories; with reservation of service, and
honor to the donor, in the use of them. All rivers run into the Sea. All our
store is from the Fountain of Gods grace, and therefore ought in course of
highest Reason, to be directed again into the Ocean of his glory, seeing we
have nothing but from his bounty, and can do nothing but by his power; it is
most unreasonable we should do any thing by his power, against his honor.

2. But, secondly, It is not only a point of manifest Equity and Justice, to
promote and serve his Honor in all our doings, because we depend upon him, not
only for the original of our Being, but also for, and in all our actions: but
it becomes us upon the same account, in point of gratitude, to honor him: A
most ungrateful part it is, for us, that are so much obliged to him, for all
that we have or have had, to do any thing willingly or negligenly to his
dishonnor. And this obligation of gratitude is increased, according to the
Degrees of Gods bounty and mercy, toward us a^ men, above other Creatures, and
as Christians above other men; and as we have in both respects partaked more of
his liberality and grace, tha^ is, more natural and temporal blessings, tha^
other Men; and more grace, or means of grace tha^ other Christians.

3. And as in point of Equity and Gratitude we are obliged to honor and
glorify God for wha^ we have already received from him; so in poin^ of
prudence, it concerns us to take heed of dishonouring him, and thereby
displeasing, and provoking him, upon whom we still depend entirely, and
absolutely for all that we do, or may need; and all that we may desire, or hope
for Let vulgar Reason judge, whether it be not against common prudence, for a
man wilfully to neglec^ him, upon whom he has such an absolute dependence, or,
whether it be not a point of necessary wisdom, to seek to gain and keep his
favor, by being careful to please him, in that which w^ know to be his only
interest, which is, h^^ glory.

The Equity and obligation of this duty might fu^ther be demostrated from the
Excellency of God nature, from whence he is called the Lord of Gl^ry, Psalm
24.10.29.3, Ephesians. 1.17.
the King of glory, the Father glory and the God of glory. H^^ we no such
dependence upon him as has been mentioned, nor an^ relation to him; yet, ought
he to be glorified for h^^ own excellency, glorious Essence, and work^ Amongst
men, honor is due to them, who a^ nonourable (especially in their personal
qualifications) from them that have no relation to them, nor dependence upon
them.

But our duty of giving glory to God arises most clearly from our Relations to
him, and his to us. For he has assumed to himself all titles of Relation which
require the greatest honor, and respect from their subjected Relatives: such
are the Titles of King, Lord, Father, Husband etc.

If we will demean our selves as becomes good Subjects to their King, as good
Servants to their Lord, Children to their Father, Wives to their Husbands, then
are we in all things to be careful to preserve, and seek his honor, who by
the assumption of those Titles has as well honored us, as obliged us to
honor him.

It were easy to multiply reasons to show the abundant Equity and Obligation
of this duty; but I shall add no more at this time, than the consideration of
two special duties whith every man ow's to God, and whereby in Scripture the
whole duty of man is frequently described; these are, to fear God, and to love
him with all the heart, and, all the soul, and all the might. Neither of which
duties (so often urged in Scripture) can be truly performed without the
observation of this rule, of giving God the glory of all we do; at least in the
first sense, that is Without being careful to preserve the glory of God, and
our respects thereto, in all that we do. For,

To Fear God, as it is an act of Religion (distinguished from that slavish
fear, which is found in Devils and wicked men) is to reverence his Majesty,
and to have an aweful respect to his honor, in all things, being ever jealous
and fearful of doing any thing, that may dishonor or displease him,

It is a fear of Reverence, and highest Honor, which is the duty of men to
God, Rev. 14.7.
as the highest Majesty: such as is that fear which is expressed by the
Attribute given by men to their Sovereign Princes, when they call them Dread
Sovereigns.

The like regard to the glory of God, must needs be in all them that love God,
with that Divine, holy, and peculiar love, which is due to God, as God, that
is, with all the heart, and all the soul, an^ all the might, according to the
tenor of the fin^ and great Commandment. This kind of love is that which
constitutes, and distinguishes, the true filial fear of God. And that constant
respect or regard, to the glory of God, which this Tex^ requires, is, not only
an inseparable concomita^^ of such a Love, but also an essential property
thereof. For as all virtuous love (which the Philosophe^ calls love of
Friendship) consists in affecting an^ seeking the good of the beloved, for his
own sake So the true love of God, must needs consist, i^ the secking of his
honor, and glory, which is the only good, which is competible to him. An^
therefore there is no way for us, to testify our low to God but this; at least
none, wherein this is no^ contained. Therefore what ever pretenses me^ may make
of love to God, who have no since^ affection for his glory, can be no better
than hypocritical. And must needs appear so, to the conscience of the
pretender, if he will consider, the the glory of God, is the only Interest,
wherein (...) is capable of being served. For as we cannot profit God, any way;
so neither can we please him any other way, than by this, of aiming at hi
Glory; or (which is all one) desiring to expres our respect to him. That saying
of the Apostle Love is the fulfilling of the Commandments, is verified as well
of the Commandments of the first table, as of the second; and does truly import
no less, than that love to God as well as men, does confist in the keeping of
his Commandments, according to the words of Saint John, This is the love of
God that we keep his Commandments, and the like of our Savior's, Joh. 4.3.
Joh. 1^.21.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments. But this is not the entire meaning of the
words, but also that the right keeping of the Commandments, is only that, which
proceeds from love to God; so that, were it possible for a man to keep all the
Commandments, without any other love, than that which men have for themselves,
(which must needs be impossible, because to love God is not only one, but the
chief of the Commandments) he could not truly pretend to have kept any of them;
at least not in the Gospel-sense, that is, in Spirit and truth. To serve God in
spirit, and truth (according to the Law of the Gospel, and which I understand
to be a main part of that Reformation under the Gospel which the Author to the
Hebrews mentions,) is, not only to serve him in the doing of such things as are
good in themselves, and, as such, distinguishable from the Ceremonial precepts
of the Law; but also to serve him in love for his own sake, that is, for his
honor and glory. This is it, which distinguishes the good actions, of carnal
and unregenerate men, from those, of the truly faithful. It is manifest by
experience, that not only carnal Christians, but the most barbarous Infidels,
do many actions agreeable to the Law of God; but, in as much as no such person,
makes God the end of his actions, those actions are not sincerely good, nor so
much as acts of Obedience to God, who requires to be obeyed in Love.

Now as these two common Duties, which express the whole service of God,
cannot be truly performed, without the observation of this general precept in
the Text; so, much less can that, which is nothing else but the perfection of
these, that is, the duty of holy Zeal for God. For godly zeal can have no other
proper design, than the glory of God. But I forbear to insist upon this, or to
add any other reasons for the confirming of the point, because I shall have
occasion, by way of motive, to mention the same again, with others, in the
practical Application whereto I am now to proceed.

THe first general use which is to be made of all Pradical Doctrines (such as
this is) is, (...),
that of Examination. As often as we read, or hear of any duty, required from God
and generally incombent upon all Christians, i^ is the proper part of every
man's Conscience, to reflect upon it self, by way of Examination, whether that
duty be, or has been observed, an^ performed by him? This therefore is now to
be don by us in reference to this general rule (...) Christian practice.

Let every one of us consider, and examine, whether we have observed this rule
or no in all our doings. And for the assistance of any Conscience, that may be
persuaded to such a faithful Application, I shall (from the premises already
laid down) draw up the Interrogatories, which each man should charge upon
himself to Answer.

1. Whether have thou had any such regard to the glory of God, as to take heed
of any doing thing, which thou know to be contrary thereunto? Have thou been
careful to act nothing disagreeable to his known Will? Have thou been so
jealous and tender of his honor, as not willingly, or needlessly to do any
thing which had any appearance of evil, to thy self or to others, who were like
to be scandalized thereby? Have thou consecrated and devoted thy whole self,
and all the Interests of thy life, in the desire and design of thy heart, to
God, and his glory? Have thou by a general proposition, set God for the end of
all thy doings? Have thou frequently minded, considered, and thought of, the
glory of God in thy doings; and made it the rule, by which thou have ordered
the matter and manner of them?

These Interrogatories being all drawn out of the main parts of that
Explication of this Rule, which has been premised, are necessary to be put
upon the Examination, by every Conscience that (acknowledging this duty) would
rightly censure it self, in reference to the practice thereof; the Issue of
such an Examination, sincerely made, may be of good effect to the foul,
whatever the answer of the Conscience should prove to be. For, either it will
tend to the Comfort of the Conscience, which shall be able before God to
testify its own performance of these things, though with weakness and
imperfection, or it will be useful, toward a profitable effect of Humiliation,
and Repentance, upon the Conviction of the neglect of so main a duty: There can
be no greater Comfort to the soul of a Christian, than that which duly arises,
from the practice of those premises: because there can be no greater evidence
of Sincerity in the heart, than that of such a practice. For this (if any
thing) is, to be really and truly godly, upright and faithful before God. Such
a one is the man after God's own heart; Who is or can be, a more faithful
servant than he that aims at his masters honor and service in all that he
does? I may therefore with greatest confidence say to such a soul, Well done
good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy Master's joy. The utmost of
spiritual Joy, and Consolation belongs to that soul; which certainly has as
high an Interest in Gods favor, as God has in his heart. There can be no
higher argument or evidence of the fear, and love of God than this; and
consequently, no better title to all those promises, that are made to them that
love or fear God. Oh that we were all able to apply this comfort to our own
souls! Which is to be feared, can be done but by a very few.

I must therefore for an impartial application of this point proceed to such
matter of Reprehension as is due to several sorts of persons for the
nonperformance of this duty. Which Reproof must needs fall most heavy upon
them, who in stead of acting all to the glory of God, do act directly contrary
to this end. It is too notorious to be denied, that most of the Affections,
Thoughts, Words, and Actions of many men, are directly opposite, to the Glory
of God. I speak of such, as not only (by infirmity) do sometimes act contrary
to the glory of God, but do make it their study, work, and main business, to
dishonor him. As if the glory of God were the object of their envy; and that
they were resolved to prejudice it, as much as in them lies, and that, as near
as they can, He should have no glory by them. Herein are wicked men, perfect
children of the Devil, whose whole business it is to procure the dishonor of
God, and to oppose the glory which he should have from men. And though it be
scarce credible, that there are any men, which have any such malicious defign,
against God; yet the practice of many men is as subservient to this Diabolical
design, as if they were professed Confederates, and had indeed combined with
the Devil to this end.

It matters little to the Credit of this Nation that such prodigious
expressions of open blasphemy, and defiance to God, as are said, to be used by
the Je renie Dieu maugre dedieu.
Italian and malgrado dedeo etc.
French Ruffians, are not heard amongst us; so long as the plain sense of them,
is as loudly proclaimed in the lives; and actions, of our Countrymen, as it is
in any of theirs.

To deny God, obstinately customarily, industriously, in our works, or to act
in despite of him, and all his Commands, is nothing less to him (but perhaps
something more) than in bare words of a profane course, so to blaspheme him as
they are said to do.

Others there are whose doings are not so notoriously contrary to the glory of
God, yet have they no respect to it in any thing they do. They are no such
absolute enemies to God, and his glory, as those elder sons of Belial, nor are
they any true friends to him; but do as much neglect the glory of God, as
others do oppose it: so far from doing all to the glory of God, that they do
nothing at all to this end. They have no such design, in any thing they do;
they have other ends, in all that they do; and for This it is the least of
their care, it never enters into their thoughts: They never mind what becomes
of Gods glory, so their own ends be served. Oh how do the greatest number of
men slight, vilify, and neglect, this great Design of the Creator, and his
Whole Creation? How little are they moved with it at any time? There is no
carnal or worldly end, so petty, and inconsiderable, that signifies so little
to them, as this does; or that will not move them much more, than any
consideration of this end. What a deal of study, and pains, will men take for
other ends? how little will they do for this? what a cold Argument it is, to
tell men, Such a course, or such a practice, tends to the glory of God, and for
that end is to be embraced? Tell them of a course that will bring honor,
profit, or pleasure to themselves in this world you move them to some purpose;
But, if you talk of nothing, but the Glory of God, they regard you not. Yea so
far are most people from respecting the glory of God, in all their actions:
that they neglect it in their Religious actions which they perform not so much
for this, as for other ends, which respect themselves, as their Reputation and
Credit, or at best the Peace of their Consceinces which will not allways be
maintained, with a total neglect of Religion.

Hitherto I have spoken of such persons as do not, so much as pretend to the
glory of God, in any thing they do,

But there are that pretend much to this end, who intend nothing less; Pretend
to seek and aim at nothing so much as Gods glory, when their only ends are, no
other than carnal, and worldly interests, as of Gain, Power, and Dominion,
popular applause, and preferment amongst men. 2 King. 10.16
Just as Jehu did when he said, Come see my zeal for the Lord; whiles he sought
nothing so much as his own interest of Power and Dominion. Wretched dust and
ashes, that we should not tremble to make so bold, with the most sacred thing
in the world (the glory of God) as to make it a stale, and decoy, to the
service of our own base lust, and humors.

But yet is not this altogether so abominable, as is the practice of them, that
have had the face to pretend this same sacred End, in such actions as are most
directly opposite thereunto: To pretend the glory of God, as the end of such
doings, which are as highly dishonorable to his name, as the most malicious
Enemy thereof, Satan himself, could suggest, as diametrically opposite to the
will and honor of God, as the Zenith of the highest Heavens, is to the Nadir
of the lowest Hell. What greater wickedness can be acted, than that which has
been done in Gods name, and under a pretense of his glory? Who knows not that
this has been the plea of the very worst of Heretics, Schismatics,
Sacrilegious persons, Persecutors, Rebels, Traitors, Murderers, and all
seditious and factious persons? And that, under the pretense, of advancing the
Kingdom and glory of God, all manner of power, Civil and Ecclesiastical
together with all law, equity, peace, order and right, has been violently
opposed? Yea and (which is the most prodigious riddle of impiety that ever was
heard of) the sacred Articles of Christian Faith, all ordinances of Religion
and all solemn Means, Methods, and Rites of worshipping God, all maintenance
and Ministry of the holy Gospel, have been zealously opposed, upon no other
pretense, than the Glory of God. As the Infidel Jews would have persuaded the
blind man in the Gospel, Joh. 9.24.
to give praise to God, by denying of Christ: So, have men been persuaded to
give glory to God, by profaning his House, robbing his Altar, persecuting his
servants; nay, what if I should say, by blaspheming his Name?

To say, That God may be blasphemed, to the honor of his name, and that the
grossest acts of moral impiety, such as profane swearing, cursing, and all
kind of uncleanness, riot, and drunkenness, may be professedly done to the
Glory of Gods free grace, is no more than has been owned, and asserted, by our
Ranters, and Libertines:

Not to mention the horrid opinions, and expressions of Gods being the cause of
Sin, by necessitating, effectually and irresistibly moving and determining the
wills of men to the worst of sins; by an efficacious decree first ordaining the
sin, and then the eternal punishment thereof in hell torments, and all to the
glory of God in his absolute Dominion and Justice. I hope, the men who have
held forth such expressions, have not meant so ill as their words seem to
signify, to common sense. And therefore, it is not my intention to parallel
them to the forementioned ranks of profane mockers of God and his Glory: Only,
I heartily wish such Teachers, would sadly consider, whether those Doctrines be
like to produce any such glorious conceptions of God in the minds of other men,
as they pretend they do in theirs.

4. But my Reprehension cannot without partiality, determine in such a list of
persons, as I have hitherto described; because it may, most justly, be extended
to a better sort of Christians, and indeed to the best, which are to be found
amongst us. For doubtless, We are all to blame in that we have so little
regarded the Glory of God, in the general course of our thoughts, words, and
actions; In that we have sought our selves and our own ends so much, and Gods
glory so little. How few of us, can say, but that other ends have been more
regarded by us, than this? How seldom, and how slightly, do we mind this end?
how little care have we to secure it, or zeal to procure it? Were this indeed
our chief end, we would be more careful of our ways; we would not be so loose,
so carnal, vain and worldly, in our common Actions; so negligent, cold, lazy
and slight in our Religious Actions. Were the glory of God more precious to
us, other ends would not be so much over-sought by us. We have all cause to be
humbled before the Lord, for this general sin of neglecting his glory; has the
Lord deserved so to be slighted by us? nay, Which of us can say, but he has
infinitely deserved, we should have had all the zeal that is possible for his
Glory? Should he regard us, and our welfare, no more, than we do him, and his
glory, what would become of us? With what face do we expect to appear before
this glorious God, whom we have so much slighted? How can we pretend we love
him with all our hearts, and all our might, whiles we have no more Affection,
for that which we know to be his only Interest? and that which is so infinitely
dear to him, is so little valued by us? How can we expect to be eternally
glorified by him, and with him, that regard his Glory no more than we have
done? Oh let us take the shame of this unkind and ungrateful neglect upon our
selves.

And let me close the Application of this point with a pressed Exhortation, of
all that profess to love and fear the Lord, from henceforth to be more mindful
of this Rule in all their doings: To which purpose (considering the generality
of indisposition thereunto, which has been already declared by way of
Reprehension) I cannot think it needless to reinforce the Exhortation, by some
addition of Motives, and Arguments to the reasons before alleged.

1. As, to know the end of his actions, distinguishes a man from a beast; so
to choose and propose a good end, distinguishes a good man from a bad. As men
and reasonable creatures, we are to have some end in all our doings; and, as
godly men, the glory of God ought to be our chief end, to which all others are
to be subordinate, and therefore ought we not to have any end inconsistent with
this.

Nothing so much dignifies an Action as the end of it, and no end so worthy as
this, by which all actions are sanctified; even the commonest actions while
they are (though remotely) truly and sincerely designed to this end, are
hallowed; and without it, the most Religious action is profaned.

Herein consists the form, essence, and spirit of Religion, properly so called.
Godliness, both name and things is nothing else, but a Religious affection to
God, expressed by such acts, as are agreeable to his will and honor, and done
for this end, because they are so, he that counts or calls any thing Godliness
which has not this end, (that is, which has not God for its end) does not
understand what he says.

This also is true Holiness in the most distinct and proper notion, which
imports a separation from the world, with a devoting of a thing to the sacred
Majesty of God. Look how much a man is sequestered from sin, and from the world,
and devoted to God, and his glory; so much Holiness is there in him. Holiness
is commonly distinguished into inherent and relative; but, to speak strictly,
all holiness in a creature, is relative; importing a singular consignation unto
God. Not, but that there is such an inherent quality, as that which is called
Holiness, in all true Saints; but because the reason of the name, and the
formality of the thing consists in the reference of this quality to God, as the
rule and end of it. That kind of holiness in men, which is commonly called
inherent, or practical, consisting in dispositions, habits, or acts, is such
only in reference to God and his glory, which is the object or end of them. And
therefore no such virtuous Habits, or Acts, as have not this reference,
principle and end, have any thing of the nature of true holiness in them. For
this reason, moral virtues and good actions, of mere heathens, amount not to
the nature of holiness. A relative holiness may be, (and is in Scripture)
attributed to other things, both natural, and artificial; but no creature is
so truly capable thereof as Man; because he is not only capable, of being
separated, and consecrated, to the service of God, by a power, or will,
Extrinsecal to himself, as other things are; but by a proper design,
dedication, and devotion, of his own. Man by by nature is a Sacred Creature,
Ovid. Sanctius his annimal.
having a kind of natural Consecration to God, from that image of the Creator
which is stamped upon him in the Indowment of Reason, Ratio res Dei, Tertul.
which the Father truly calls a Divine thing: So, Man may be called the Priest
of the visible world, out of all the Tribes of living Creatures, elected,
qualified, and appointed to celebrate the glory of God; nor only for himself,
but as it were in the name of all the Creatures of this lower world.

This was his office and dignity according to the prime intention of his
Creation. But, all mankind, being now, by original and personal sin, profaned,
and become unworthy of, indisposed and unable to perform this Priestly Office;
God has been pleased to ordain a new Consecration of Man unto this Priesthood,
by the grace of a new Sanctification in Christ, effected by the Spirit of God,
which is the Unction from the Holy one, 1 John 2.20.27. given to all true
Christians, whereby they are made a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.5.


This is the true nature of holiness; and therefore, as Saints, we are
especially bound to the observation of this Rule: Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2.
And Saints we are by Calling, as many as profess our selves to be Christians:

For to profess Christianity, is to profess a Separation from the profane
world, and the flesh, and to be devoted unto God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, according to the express form of our Baptism. And that we are obliged to
this duty as Christians, may further be inferred both from the Example, and
Precepts of Christ, which as Christians we are engaged to follow. And every man
is so much a Christian, as he is conformable to the Example, and Doctrine of
Christ, or, to speak in the Apostle's phrase, as Christ is formed in him.

But if we look upon the Example of Christ, we shall find that the main design
of his whole life, in all that he did, said, or suffered, was the Glory of his
Father, Joh. 17.5. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do; Joh. 7.18. He that speaks of himself, seeks his
own glory, but he that seeks His glory that sent him, is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. Joh. 8.50. I seek not mive own glory. Joh. 5.30. I
seek no mine own will, but the will of my Father which se^ me. And for the
Precepts of Christ, they are all particularly levelled at this mark, that God
may be glorified in us, as he was in Him.. This Apostolical precept, is it self
no other than a Precept o^ Christ's, who sent his Apostles to teach all tha^
they should make Disciples, Mat. 28.20.
to observe all that he had commanded. That first branch of the Angels Song at
the birth of Christ, does show what was the ultimate end of his Incarnation;
For those Words Glory be to God on high, etc. are not only Voti^^ importing a
laud, or holy vote; but also Ind^cative, and Doctrinal, showing as well wha^
would, and should be, the effects of Christ Coming as wishing that they might
b^ such.

Another Motive to this duty may be draw^ from the Omnipresence of God and His
O^^niscience. It behooves us to have a consta^due regard, to the glory of God in
all our doin^ for this reason, because they are all done in (...) Presence, and
in his Eye: And because he ta^^ particular notice, not only of all our though^
words and deeds, but also of the Designs, E^^ and Intentions that men have in
them. He obse^veth what regard men have to him, and how m^^ he is respected, or
neglected in any Carriage (...) Action of men. And what Subject will not (...)
careful of his behavior, in the Kings present that it may be such, as may show
a due respect to his Honor?

But this is the case of all men: we are continually in the presence of God, we
think, speak, and act all before God; and therefore ought to have a constant
respect to his glory, if we have any respect to himself: For he that respects
not the glory of God, respects not God at all. Men have other Interests wherein
they may be served by their Attendants or Friends, besides their honor; as
pleasure, and profit. Much may be done, to serve an earthly Lord in his
pleasure, or profit, which is against his honor.

But the only interest that God has, is his Honor; he is incapable of any
Profit: therefore when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants to
him. Profit our selves we may (as we shall hear, and no way so much, as by
observing the duty of the Text) but Him we cannot profit. And though we may
please him, yet that can be no otherwise, than by honoring or glorifying him.
Where there is a zealous and faithful affection, it will move a man to promote
the honor of the person affected, in his absence, and in such things as he is
never like to know of: And therefore, if we loved God, we would seek his glory,
though he should take no notice of it. But to neglect this in his presence, and
under his special observation, argues not only want of love but many degrees of
contempt. On the other side, it is not only an engagement, but an
encouragement, to direct our doings to God^s glory, because we know he sees
and observes what respect we have to him, and is ready to reward it. Which
brings me to the last motive that I shall mention; and that is to be drawn from
the benefit of this practice to a man's self: Such should be the disposition of
a Christian, that he should be desirous of Gods glory, though it were without
any benefit to himself; nay, though it were by his own annihilation or
destruction: Such was the affection of Moses, Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
and Saint Paul, in those heroical expressions of highest piety; wherein they
wished to lose their part in their everlasting enjoyments of God's favor,
rather than he should want the Glory of his Mercy in the multitude of their
Brethren: For, though I think it possible, they might also in their wishes
prefer the good of their brethren, as being many, before their own single
felicities: yet, because, by my Text, I know it was their duty, even in such a
choice, to respect God's glory principally, therefore I conclude they did so.
And though I would not intimate any thing to the abatement of their praise in
those expressions; yet do I think it, no extrem hard choice to a religious
mind, to prefer the glory of God, before any possible felicity of his own;
because he may prefer it before his Being, which he knows to be necessary to
such a possibility. I can easily believe, that ingenuous Author spoke very
Cordially, who concludes his Book, Relig. Med.
with that high strain of piety: Let God be glorifi^^ though with mine own
destruction. Indeed, I much doubt, whether it be possible for a man t^ wish, or
be content, to be damned to the Etern^ forments of Hell, and to lie under the
curse and hatr^^ of God, upon this condition, or to this end, th^^ God may be
gloried; But simply to lose Hea^^ and (if it could be) his Being withal, upon
such a condition, I think might be the deliberate choice, of a devout soul. But
because God has not put us upon any such choice, we need not solicit our own
Consciences, with any such imaginary supposition. And though the Rule of the
Text, be indeed a perfect Rule of Self-denial, justly understood; yet such is
the goodness of God, that he will reward the practice of it: and because he
has promised so to do, it can be no part of our duty, to set aside all respect
to the benefit of our duty, because so to do would be to frustrate one end of
his promises, and to slight his bounty, which would be a plain opposition to
his Glory, which we pretend to seek.

They are therefore no such friends to God's glory as they pretend, that say;
Men ought not to respect their own benefit, in any service that they do to God.

Besides the present comfort of a man's own Conscience, bearing witness of his
integrity, and uprightness of heart to Godward, (whereof this constant seeking
of his glory, is the most infallible evidence); 1 Samuel 2.30.
the Lord has promised that he will honor them that honor him, and has
provided a Crown of glory, for them that glorify him: And certainly the
degrees of glory hereafter will be answerable to the degrees of zeal and
Industry that men had here, to glorify God: the more a man seeks God's glory,
the greater shall be his own glory; whereas he that acts not for God, cannot in
reason expect any reward from him, for any thing that he does, how good, or how
much soever it be.

The want of this end, or preferring any other before it, frustrates a man of
the heavenly reward. I say, the heavenly; because some temporal reward may be
received, for well doing, by him that has no such sincere respect to Gods
glory. He that has other ends which he respects either only, orchiefly, shall
have other proportionable rewards, 2 King. 10.30.
as Jehu had. But if thou do all, for the glory of God especially, (though
not only) all thy doings, and all Gods dealings, and men's doings, or dealings
by thee, shall be turned to thy good, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God.

Before I conclude my discourse upon this point (which I have already declared
to be the most fundamental Canon of Christian Religion); I shall add to what
has been hitherto spoken concerning it, 1. Some special Notes or Characters,
whereby it may be discerned, whether a man walks according to this rule, or no.
2. Some particular Directions useful to be observed, in order to the general
practice thereof.

First I shall propound some proper signs, whereby a man may be able to judge
whether he has any such religious affection, to the glory of God, as this duty
requires.

1. He that has an entire loyal heart, to God and his glory, will value Gods
interest above hi^ own, in every thing that he has, or does: This is a
general note of integrity to Godward. If the heart be truly faithful, there
will be no interest of his own, so precious to him, as the interest of God. Men
in the flesh have many interests, ends, and projects, which they seek in order
to the contentment of their various appetites; as bodily life, ease, safety,
liberty, wealth, health, honor and pleasure. Now it is the part, and property
of a godly man, to consider, that as God has a general interest in every thing
that is, or is done, in the world; so he has a more special interest in him,
and all that belongs to him; in respect of the propriety which he has in him,
and his special and peculiar engagement to him, above other men.

The interest that God has in the world, and all things that belong to it, is
universal, and transcendent, infinitely above any interest that a creature can
have in any thing, whereto he may pretend the most absolute propriety. The
Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. Ezekiel. 16.17. etc. Thou have taken
thy fair Jewels of my Gold, and of my Silver; which I had given thee, and
made to thy self images of men, and did commit whoredom with them. And
took' thy broydered garments, and coverd'st them, and thou have set mine oil,
and mine incense before them; my meat also which I gave thee, fine flower, and
oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou have even set it before them, for a
sweet savor -- Moreover thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou
have born unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. No
man's money, meat, garments, children, are so much his own, as they are God's.
God's gifts they are all, and it is he that gives us an interest in them, but
does not destroy or evacuate his own. For God's deed of gift to the creature,
does not alienate the propriety, as man's does; he does never give away any
thing, from himself, and therefore may still command, what ever he has given;
and take it away again, with as much justice, as he gave it with mercy: What
ever we have, we hold by title of frank Almoign, as the Lawyers speak, and as
usu-fructuaries rather than proprietors.

But besides this common interest of God's, as the true and sovereign
proprietor of all things, he has a special interest in his own people, and in
all that is theirs, as his peculiar servants: And this is not only to be
acknowledged by them, but preferred before any interest of their own; and so
will be, by every faithful servant. And therefore he will be content at any
time, to resign and depart from, neglect and disregard, his own interest, to
promote, salve or secure, the interest of God's glory. Agodly man looks upon
all that he owns, as God's, more than his; and therefore will be ready to use
it, or leave it, lay it down, or lay it out, according to the will of God, and
as may make most for his glory.

Agreeable to this first general Note of observing this rule, is the practice
of Self-denial, and Mortification of carnal lusts. Look how much of self-denial
is found in any man, so it be sincere (and not partial, denying himself in one
thing, to serve himself in an other) so much of Religion toward God. For the
greatest Let, that men have from seeking God's glory, is self-love: Carnal
self-love (I mean), or inordinate love of the carnal Self. For there is an
innocent kind of self-love founded in the law of nature, and supposed in all
the promises of reward, to the obedience of God's Commandments, as they are
propounded for motives thereunto. Whiles God does invite or encourage us to
seek, and serve him, with promises of advantage to our selves, by so doing, he
must needs allow us some measures of love for our selves, else such arguments
would be no just motives to obedience, but temptations to sin, if all
self-seeking were so. Such motives could have no effect at all upon our wills,
if we did not love our selves; nor any good effect, if we might not.

Indeed, this natural self love is so far from being a sin, or breach of any
Commandment, that it is the rule, and measure, of the great Commandment of
Charity: expressed in those two general, and equivalent precepts, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor, as thy self; And, What soever you would that men should do
unto you, do you unto them likewise. And though this Self-love be no where
commanded, in express terms, because it needed not; yet the immediate effects,
and instances of it are: As, when we are commanded to lay up for our selves
treasures in Heaven; to seek those things which are above; to work out our own
salvation with fear, and trembling; to use all diligence to make our Calling
and Election sure etc.

But to return from this Digression: Though it be manifest by the premised
discourse, and, without it, by the direct light and law of nature, That there
is a kind of self-love which is more than innocent, and consequently, which can
be no impediment to that love of God, which is to be exercised in the seeking
of his glory, but may be subordinate, and subservient thereunto; Yet that which
is commonly understood by the name of self-love is indeed the greatest Enemy
to the love of God: And the seeking our Selves inordinately is in truth the
only thing that diverts us from the seeking of God, and his Glory. For, though
a man may be turned aside from his duty of obedience to God, by an irregular
love, or fear of men. And though the pleasing of men be an ordinary temptation
to that which is displeasing to God, yet, both that love, and fear of men, is
reducible to self-love as its principle and end. And this vicious Self-love
though it be not the only thing which is understood by the name of Original sin
yet may it fitly enough be so called: in as much as upon strict examination, it
may be found to b^ the root, and original of all actual sin, both of omission,
and commission: So that in what degree (...) man is able to overcome this Let,
in such degre^ he is free and prepared to seek and serve the glor^ of God. And
he that is thoroughly willing, and able to deny himself, shall find nothing to
let him from serving of God.

And yet so true it is, that whiles God wills us (...) have such an universal
respect to his glory, as (...) expressed in this Rule, he does not inhibit us
the love of our selves, that, upon a right understanding (...) the matter, it
will be evident to a true believer. That he loves himself best, that loves God
better. And this is most manifest upon the account of that final happiness,
which is promised in the life to come, to them that love God. And, because this
is the chief and highest interest of a believer, it is certain that the best
way to secure, and promote a man^ own interest, is to secure the Interest of
Gods glory, with the utmost of fide lity and holy zeal.

Secondly, He that has such a true respect to Gods glory as this Text
requires, will be grieved at, and for, the dishonor of God; whether it be done
by himself, or by others.

1. As often as his conscience shall charge him with the doing of any thing
contrary to the glory of God, he will be heartily grieved for it: And this is
that which the Apostle calls Godly sorrow, or sorrow according to God: namely
that only, whereby a man is sorry for the displeasing, or dishonouring of God.

Godly Sorrow is the Scripture-name for that which the Schools call Contrition,
and is the proper effect, and therefore an infallible sign of love to God. A
carnal man, and he that is worse, a reprobate, and a devil, may be grieved for
sin, as it is the cause of Mischief or misery to himself; but not at all, as it
is dishonorable and offensive to God. The carnal man's sorrow, which he
pretends for his sin, is not so much, nay not at all indeed for the sin, as
such; but for the events, and consequences thereof, which he either feels or
fears. And yet this is the only sorrow which the School Doctors understand by
the term of Attrition; which some of them maintain to be sufficient to
Salvation, if it be joined with Absolution, or but the Vote of it: By which
Doctrine, all necessity of love to God, or respect to his glory is perfectly
excluded.

2. But whosoever has a true respect to the glory of God, will not only be
grieved for his own sins, but also for the sins of others, upon the same
account; because thereby God is dishonored. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of tears
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, and v. 158. I beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word. Other men's sins
were his sorrows: He was more grieved for other men's sins, than they were for
their own. Lot in Sodom was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2
Pet. 2.7, 8. A faithful servant, or well disposed Son, cannot endure to see,
and hear his Master or Father dishonored. Nor will any true friend, be
unconcerned in the reproach of his friend. He therefore that has the patience
to stand by, and hear or see the Name of God blasphemed, or his holy Will
violated, without any sentiments of displeasure, can neither be the servant,
child, nor friend of God: And he that has any entire affection to the glory of
God, will desire and endeavor, as much as in him lies to prevent the
impeachment thereof, by others as well as by himself: and that not only by
removing of scandal (as in the case of the Corinthians, which Saint Paul here
speaks of) but by all the offices of spiritual charity, viz. by admonishing,
reproving, exhorting, counselling, etc. and by performing all the duties of his
place, toward such as relate unto him. He that truly loves God, will desire as
many rivals, and make as many friends for God as he is able.

3. He that is truly desirous of and solicitous for, the promoting and
maintaining God's glory, will rejoice in it more than in any thing else. If God
be glorified in any thing that is his, he will rejoice in it more than at the
improvement thereof to any advantage of his own. He will not be contented only,
but glad God is glorified though no other end of his be served, nor benefit
arises to himself: yea, though it be with the crossing of his own interest;
though he suffers much by a good action, yet his heart is comforted, and
abundantly satisfied in the Glory of God.

And not only when God is glorified by his own doings or sufferings, will a
godly man rejoice; but likewise, to see the same event procured by others,
whosoever they be. He that is truly good, would have other men better than
himself: And he is no Saint indeed that envies an other should deservedly
obtain that name. Phil. 1.18.
Moses out of his zeal for Gods glory, Number. 11.29.
wished that all the Lords people were Prophets: Hezekiah rejoiced to see the
liberality and forwardness of the people for the service of God, 2 Chronicles.
29.36. and 31.8. David was glad when they said unto him, Come let us go into
the house of the Lord, Psalm 122.1.

4. An other sign of a man's walking by this rule, is, when he is careful of his
Actions, as well in Secret, as in Public. For a man to be as religious and
conscientious, in secret, where he can have no other witness, but God, and his
own conscience; as he is, or would seem to be, in or before, the greatest
company of men: is at least a very probable argument, and evidence of a pure
and pious intention, and of a sincere respect to the glory of God. Because, so
to do, imports a constant acknowledgment, and sense, of Gods Omniscience,
together with an awful respect, and vigilant care to please, or at least not to
offend Him. By which actual faith, with this holy fruit of it, God is
eminently glorified: where as in public acts of virtue, or religion, a man may
have many ends of his own, not only besides, but without any respect to God.
Though, where God's glory is sincerely intended, it is more advanced by public
acts, than it can be by private; which is the ground of our Savior's Precept,
Let your light so shine before m^ that they may see your good works, and
glorify you Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. Yet it is evidently certain,
1 Pet. 2.12.
that he that respects not God in private, ca^ have no regard to him in
public: unless he can believe that God has no regard to any other of his
actions than such as are public; which is an error, no man that believes there
is a God can fal^ into. He therefore that seems to be religious before company,
but is not so in private, seeks no^ Gods glory but his own: And may obtain so
much of it as to be reputed, and famed for a religious person; but can never
think himself so, without a direct contradiction to the testimony of his own
conscience.

Fifthly, He that is faithful to the glory of God, will make conscience of
small sins, as well as great, never allowing himself liberty in the least
matter, that he knows to be disagreeable to the will of God. As in the
Corinthians case: A good Christian must not only abstain from offering
sacrifice to Idols, but also from eating of such sacrifices. A good man will
make conscience, not only of perjury, but also vain swearing; not only of
pernicious, but also of vain, yea and of officious lies; not only of obscen^
and filthy communication, but also o^ foolish talking, (...). Ephesians. 5.4.
and unsavorie jeasts to cause laughter: Not only of gross slanders, loud
railing, and reviling speech; but also of all uncharitable detractions, and
diminutions of his neighbors credit. The greatest zeal for Gods glory is
showed by the conscience of the least actions, with care not to do him the
least dishonor, or displeasure. He that in small things respects not the will
of God, can have no more than a small respect to him in the greatest. The least
sin, wilfully committed, is a great one: and there is none little absolutely,
if we consider the greatness of that Majesty against whom it is committed.

Sixthly, He that is truly zealous for Gods glory, will studiously avoid all
temptations and occasions of dishououring him, out of a godly jealousy of his
own infirmity; not trusting to the freedom of his will, or strength of his
resolution to resist all temptations to sin, because he knows, that freedom
in the present state of imperfection, leaves him in danger of consenting, in
case he be tempted to a sin, that lies in his power. Whereas if he avoids the
Temptation, he rescues himself from the Danger, in as much as there can be no
consent to a sin, without temptation. And it is the duty of a true lover of
God, at least it is the property of a zealous one, to do what morally is in his
power, to prevent the doing of any thing that may offend or dishonor God. And
the best way of preventing any thing, is to remove the causes; when therefore
we are commanded by our Savior, to watch and pray that we enter not into
temptation; Mat. 26.41.
and taught to pray that we may not be led into temptation; the meaning is not
only (as some interpreters have given it) that we may not be overcome of
temptation; but also that we may not be actually tempted, but delivered from
the danger of temptation: which cannot be without preventing it, because every
temptation brings to the will. And though the name of temptation imports a
seeming contradiction to any compulsion, or absolute necessity of yielding
thereto; yet the same name does also signify a solicitation of the will which
having yet no such confirmation of grace, as that of Angels, and glorified
Saints, is always in danger of being overcome by temptation: Nor is it able by
its own freedom to secure it self from this danger without the grace of God.
And though we have his Promise for a sufficiency of Grace (if we seek and
embrace it) to enable us to resist temptations; yet that promise is not to be
extended to such temptations as are avoidable by our own wills, because it
implies (as all other promises do) the condition of doing what lies in our
power to obtain the effect of the grace.

To be tempted to the greatest sin that can be, is no sin. For our Blessed
Savior was tempted, to worship the Devil: But voluntarily to enter into
temptation, or to consent to the being tempted, is a sin, and giving place to
the Devil, who is the general Tempter. If Original Concupisence were indeed no
more than the Papists would have it in a regenerate man, peccati tanti^m fomes,
only the tinder, that is apt to catch fire, and so break out into sin; yet to
admit any spark of temptation, that might be avoided, to fall upon this tinder,
must needs be a sinful neglect. A chaste wife that regards her own and her
husbands honor, will not admit of any avoidable temptation to the staining
thereof.

7. Lastly he that desires, that God should be glorified in all that he does,
will be sure to give God the glory of his well doing by an humble
acknowledgment of his Grace, with Praise and Thanksgiving. And when he has
done evil, he will yet give glory to God, in such a way as Joshua required
Achan to do, by confessing his sin, Jos. 7.19.
and humbling himself before God for it, by a hearty repentance; so that where
Gods Glory was not the End, it may be the event and consequent of his doings.
If he has done God any dishonor by any scandalous sin, he will endeavor to
repair it; not only by a private repentance, but by a retractation and
acknowledgement of the sin before men, as public as was the sin.

Having now laid down some signs and marks of a due observation of this general
Precept, I shall conclude with a few Additional Directions useful toward the
practice thereof. I call them Additional Directions, because all those, which I
have already mentioned as signs of integrity in this Duty, are also useful by
way of direction to the conscientious performance thereof.

1. Would thou conform all thy actions to the Glory of God? Then labor to
understand, and know the Mind and Will of God: For (as before has been
signified) God is glorified, or dishonored according as things are done
agreeable to, or against his Will. He therefore that will make Gods Glory the
end of his actions, must ^ake his Will to be the rule of them: and there^re is
obliged to enquire diligently into it. It be^oves Christians to take great heed
of determining ^e concernments of Gods Glory, by their own ^aginations, or
opinions. And because the ^ost certain declaration of Gods Will is to be had
from his Word; every one that desires to be informed concerning it, is obliged
to attend diligently to the reading, hearing, and meditatin^ of that Word, as
it is contained in the holy Scriptures, and expounded by the Words and Writings
of the most able and faithful Interpreters. H^ that does sincerely, and
earnestly desire to know the Will of God, for this end, that by doing it h^ may
glorify God, using his best industry to ga^ this knowledge, shall undoubtedly
obtain so much of it, as will be sufficient to render both his person and his
actions acceptable to God. And thoug^ he may in some particulars be mistaken,
or mis-le^^ into some erroneous apprehensions, or misprision of Gods Will, and
thereby also into some action materially disagreeble thereunto; Yet he who
(...) infinitely Wise, and Just, and Gracious, can, an^ will distinguish the
integrity of his intentions and will, from the error of his understanding,
(...) as to accept the one, and not impute the other. Such ignorance, or error
in a practical matter, (...) is Morally invincible, and therefore inculpable as
it is no sin in it self, so neither does it so vit^ the action, as to destroy
or evacuate the vert^ of the good intention.

2. Would thou do all that thou do to t^ Glory of God? It behooves thee
then to p^ earnesty and constantly, that God will teach the and guide thee in
all thy actions, to the service this End: Beg of him Wisdom to discern w^^ is
to be done by thee, and how: That thou (...) be filled with the knowledge of
his Will, in all Wisd^^ and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. Pray (...) the
man after Gods own heart, Order my (...) according to thy word, Psalm. 119.133.
Psalm. 31.3.25.4.
and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. For thy name sake (that is,
for thy glory sake) lead me, and guide me. Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach
me thy paths. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path. Teach
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall (or will) observe
it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for
therein is my delight. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, etc. Teach me to
do thy Will, for thou art my God. There is no one petition, which the holy man
(who had as great a zeal for Gods Glory, as ever any meer-man had) does so
often, and so earnestly offer unto God, as this: And after these divine forms
dictated by the Spirit of God; there cannot be a more exquisite form of humane
invention, than is that Collect in our Church-Liturgy: Prevent us, O Lord, in
all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and further us with thy continual
help, that in all our works begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may
glorify thy holy Name; and finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting life
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. The ex^ressions of that godly Prayer, do
evidently ^elate to the Catholic Doctrine concerning the necessity of the
preventing, operating, and coperating Grace of God, without which nothing ^an
be sincerely done to the glory of God: For ^t is he that works in us to will,
and to do of his good ^easure. This holy practice of constant Prayer ^o God for
his Grace, has a double way of promoting his Glory: First, by the impetration
of his Grace promised to them that so seek it: Secondly, by importing an
acknowledgment, that whatever shall, or can be done to this end, is the entire
effect of his Grace, which gives him the whole glory o^ whatever is done to, or
for it.

3. If thou do seriously and habitually desire to glorify God in all that
thou do, thou can no^ better express it, than by making frequent, actual^
and explicit resignations, and oblations of thy self, and all that thou have,
and do to God, in holy vows; answerable to that, by which thou wen^ first
conse crated to his service in holy Baptism because that is done Mystically and
Vicariously, rather for us, than by us, whilst it is now generally practiced in
the state of infancy: and so, as without our knowledge, so neither with, nor
against our wills: It behooves us, being once come t^ years of understanding
and choice, to recogni^^ renew, and confirm that Vow, by free acts of (...)
own. And though this be religiously done in the solemn Office of Confirmation;
yet because that i^ too much neglected, there being indeed but f^^ that have
the desire, and opportunity of partaking thereof; as also, because the same is
most ordinat^ly passed in years of Childhood, having but a fe^ measures of
choice and freedom above the Baptismal Consecration in infancy; it is the part
of devout Christian, with due reflection upon, and ^cognition of, both those
public and solemn is gagements, to make repetitions of that sacr^ Vow in a way
of private Devotion.

And this will be most conveniently done (...) consecrating every day, and the
works thereof, a^ soon as it begins, to the glory of God; in so^ short form of
Meditated Prayer to that special end, or at least, in an explicit Ejaculation.
As soon as thou awakest in the morning, set God and his Glory before thee, as
the ultimate end of that days work, with a fervent desire, and firm
resolution: First, of doing nothing wittingly, contrary to the Will of God:
Secondly, of taking all opportunities, and improving all talents, that shall be
found in thy hands to honor and serve him. And, lest thou should be
discouraged from such a strict Exercise of Piety, by the fear of being thereby
prejudiced or restrained, in thy secular employments, or at least in the use of
lawful liberties and recreations; thou art to remember, thou have to do with a
wise and gracious Father, who accounts himself served and honored by his
Children, as well in the honest and necessary works of their respective
callings, as in the solemn Exercises of Religion: and is not at all displeased
with a sober and moderate use of innocent recreations, either of mind or body:
But when they are used in his fear, and limited by the known bounds of his
Will, does therein also esteem himself honored: After this morning vow, or
devoting of thy self to God, it will behoove thee to take diligent heed to thy
self all the day, that thou do not break it by any acts of presumption, or
negligence.

And when thou have finished that day, forget not to close it with an evening
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all the good that thou have received,
or done therein. Give him the glory of that days work by a thankful
acknowledgement of his Grace, in all that thou have done well: And by
confessing thy mis-doings, and humbling thy self for thy failing in any thing
which thou have done, or should have done: First, examine thy conscience,
whether thou have been guilty of any presumptuous sin, and let not that pass
without a particular and special repentance; and then add the Prayer of David,
to cleanse thee from thy secret sins: (Psalm. 19.12.) that is, not such as are
unknown to men, but hidden and un-observed by thy self, being the effects of
ignorance, inadvertencie, or forgetfulness.

Lastly, to conclude this discourse: The last Rule of direction toward the
observation of this general Precept, is, that which our Savior, and his
Apostles do require to be joined with Prayer: to wit, the constant practice of
vigilance, or watchfulness over our selves, and all our ways: Watch and pray
(says our Savior) that ye enter not into temptation: Matt. 26.41.
Praying always, Ephesians. 6.18.
with all prayer, and supplication, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance. Col. 4.2.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. Be ye sober, 1
Pet. 4.7.
and watch unto prayer. If it be thy desire, and design to do all things to the
glory of God, let it be thy care to keep a constant guard upon thy self, and to
watch over thy thoughts, words and actions: The neglect of this Duty, is the
common cause of all that dishonor that is done unto God, by such persons as
are not without good affections toward him: And the practice hereof is of such
necessity, as without it, it is clearly as impossible to observe this Rule, as
it is for a blind man in an open Champian, to set every step in a direct Path
toward the place he would go to.

As it is in actions, which are to be directed by the bodily Eye: the reason of
error and miscarriage in such actions proceeds from one of these Causes: Either
from imperfection of the sight, by reason of blindness, or dimness; or from a
wilful rejection, and crossing the direction of the sight, or from a neglect,
or non-attendance to the guide of the eyes. So it is in Moral actions, which
are to be guided immediately by the understanding, or conscience, which is the
Eye of the Soul. All the errors and sins which are committed by men, do proceed
from one of these Causes: Either from ignorance and blindness of the mind, not
understanding its Duty; or from a wilful opposing and crossing the dictates,
and direction of Conscience; or from not minding, and observing what a man
does. And this last is the common cause of their particular aberrations from
this scope, or end of Gods Glory, who do not live without a general aim thereat.

It appears therefore that the constant practice of this vigilance, is
altogether as necessary, as is the general duty we have been speaking of, which
is not to be performed without it; because, if it be rightly understood, it
does formally involve the practice of it: for (as has been declared) the first
thing that can be supposed in this Precept, is, that Christians should have
such a care of their Actions, that nothing be done against the Will and Glory
of God: As the Text is briefly and plainly expounded by one of the Ancients;
Admonitio ut nihil fatiamus contra Deum, etc.
who after his manner of Elucidations of other Texts, puts these Questions upon
the words: If this be a Precept, then he sins mortally, that does any thing at
all, Hugo de S. Vict. Tom. 1. p. 271. E. 308. d.
so much as the moving of a finger, not to the glory of God: To which he
answers, That it seemed to him to be an admonition, that we should do nothing
against God, or with the scandal of our Brethren. And again, in another Tract
upon the same Epistle: The question is (says he) How it can be fulfilled, Sic
omnia opera nostra circumspecte fiant, ut nihil contra Deum fiat.
that we should do all things to the glory of God, seeing we do many things
noturally, and not therefore, that we may please God? He answers again to the
same sense: That all our works are to be done so circumspectly, that nothing be
done against God: What might have been added to these Answers by the Father, is
before declared in the explication of this Duty: The quotation of his authority
is but to confirm the necessity of this circumspection, which without doubt is
the main thing intended in the generality of the practice.

(...).
The Duty of a Christian.
PART I.
Phil. 2.12. -- Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
THe Text is an Exhortation, delivered in such terms as would scarcely have
been allowed to agree with the form of sound words, had they not been
authorized by the same Apostle, whose Doctrine they might have seemed to
oppose. But it is no other than St. Paul himself, (who elsewhere argues so
strongly, and concludes so peremptorily against justification and salvation by
works) who here exhorts Christians to work out their own salvation. And, that
by this work, he intends something more, than such a faith, as consists only
in a confident persuasion, or assurance of a man's own salvation, already
wrought out for him by his Savior, is sufficiently evident from his additional
terms, concerning the manner of pursuing this work, viz. with fear and
trembling.

This Text alone (were there no other to prove it) would be sufficient to
confirm the truth of the Father's words; That he that made us, without us; will
not save us, without us: Our Creation implies a contradiction to any
possibility of our cooperating thereunto, because it imports our being really
Nothing before it: But that humble Nothingness that now we pretend to, must not
excuse us from all care of working out our own salvation, because it does not
deprive us of all capacity of so doing: For, from this Scripture, and many
others, we are taught, that how solidly, and entirely soever, the effect of
man's Salvation, is to be attributed to the free grace of God in Christ; yet,
that it is not to be attained without all manner of cooperation from himself:
I say, from Scripture it is, that we learn, that our salvation is effected by
something wrought by us, as well as for us, or in us.

But the words of the Text are fully salved from all appearance of prejudice to
the free grace of God, by those that do immediately follow them, in the next
verse. For it is God that works in you both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure. Whereby we are taught that the work which is to be done by us, in
order to our own salvation, does indeed necessarily depend upon the good
pleasure of God, that is, upon his preventing, operating, and cooperating
grace; without which, nothing can be done by us, available to this end: But so
far is th^^ (in the judgment of St. Paul) from being any reasonable excuse for
our negligence, or any groun^ of presumption for us, to sit down, and leave the
whole work to God, (as if we had nothing to d^ toward it, but to believe it,
and be thankful for it) that this same Doctrine (concerning the necessity, and
efficacy of divine grace) is by him alleged as a strong reason, why we should
work (...) our own salvation: As appears by that Causal Particle For, For it is
God that works in us to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. The force, and
fitness of which reason, shall be showed in its place: viz. when we have opened
the whole matter of the Exhortation: Wherein are these 3. particulars to be
considered: 1. 1. Finis. 2. Opus. 3. and Modu^ operandi. (...).
The end, or design, and concern of every Christian: which is, his own
salvation. 2. The work that is to be done for the effecting this design, or
obtaining this end; signified by the word, work-out. 3. (...).
The manner of pursuing this work, with fear and trembling. These are the parts
of the Text, which (to serve the common method) I shall reduce into a Doctrinal
Proposition: viz.

That it behooves every Christian to work out his own salvation with fear and
trembling.

Of this Proposition my purpose is to speak plainly, by way of Explication and
Application. First, By way of Explication, we shall enquire, 1. What this
salvation means, which is to be wrought out. 2. What it is to work out our own
salvation; or, what is the full importance of that Phrase. 3. How, or whereby
this salvation may, or ought to be wrought out. 4. What is meant by those words
(which concern the manner of this work) -- with fear and trembling.

First, We are to consider, what this Salvation means: That being rightly
understood, and unfainedly believed, contains so powerful a Motive of the duty
which the Text requires, as makes it scarce possible to be neglected:
especially, if the Philosopher, Arist. 2. Phys. Thom. 1. q. 82. a. 1.
and the School-man, be not deceived, whilst they teach us, that every one
does naturally, and necessarily, desire his own Happiness. For, if that be so,
how can it be, that a man should wholly neglect that thing, wherein, he
understands, and believes his only happiness to consist? So that the general
reason, why this work is so much neglected, seems to be, because either the
end, or the work which is necessary to it, is not rightly understood, or not
duly believed: My business therefore shall be (as plainly as I can) to inform
the understanding, in each particular: that is, both what this salvation is,
and what work is absolutely necessary to the attainment thereof. But, when this
is done; to undertake also, to persuade the belief of it, by any other
evidence, than will be contained in the respective explication and declaration
of the matter of it, from Scripture, (from whence only it can be declared) is
not to be expected by Christians, because their being such, supposes their
belief of that evidence, and is no less than a contradiction to the want of
that faith.

Come we then to the first of our Enquiries: viz. What this salvation is, which
the Text speaks of? For the understanding of that word, a fit rise may be taken
from the interpretation of the blessed Name of Jesus, given by the Archangel to
the Mother of our Savior, the Author of this salvation, Matthew. 1.21. Thou
shall call his Name JESUS; for he shall save his people from their sins. There
can be no doubt, but that this is the salvation, which our Text speaks of. For
salvation properly signifies, preservation or deliverance from evil. And all
the evil that is in the world, is either sin, or the consequent and punishment
of sin. The first, and the greatest evil, is that of sin, which being the cause
of the evil of punishment, that also is comprehended under the name of sin, by
an ordinary Metonymie. But then to confine the signification of the word (Sin)
in the Angel's Speech, to this secondary and figurative sense, (wherein it is
taken for the punishment of sin) with exclusion of the first and most proper
sense, cannot be reasonable; except it may appear to be necessary: which cannot
be, unless the design of this Jesus, were only to deliver men from the
punishment, and not at all from the dominion, and practice of sin. The contrary
whereof, is evident by those many Texts of Scripture, wherein we are taught,
Matthew, 9.13, Acts 3.26.
That he came to call sinners to repentance: That, God sent his son, Jesus, to
bless us, in turning away every one of us, from his iniquities. That, we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.74, 75.
might serve him without fear in holiness, and righteousness, before him, all
the days of our life. That, God has exalted him, with his right hand, Acts
5.31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of
sins. That, he gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4.
that he might redeem us from this present evil world. i. e. from the
corruption and wickedness of the world. That, Tit. 2.14.
he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. That, he loved his Church,
Ephesians. 5.25.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify, and cleanse it, with the
washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be
holy and without blemish. That, he died for all, that they which live, 2 Cor.
5.15.
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them,
and rose again. That, he was manifested to take away our sins, 1 John 3.5, 8.
and that he might destroy the works of the Devil. 1 Pet. 1.18.
That, we are redeemed by his blood, from our vain conversation: unto God. Rev.
5.8.
Who his own self bare our sins ( i. e. 1 Pet. 2.24, 25.
the punishment of them) i^ his own body on the tree, that we being dead to
sins, should live unto righteousness. By all these Texts, and many more of like
import, it appears that the design of Christ, was to save us, not only from
the punishment of our sins; but also (and first) from that which makes us
liable to punishment; that is, from the power and practice of sin.

And as the word save, is thus to be understood in the complete sense of the
Angel's words, beforementioned; so may it be in diverse other Texts: As in Ephesians.
2.5, 8. Acts 2.40.

Accordingly the word salvation, in the Tex^ will receive the most perfect
interpretation, if i^ be admitted to signify both these things. For then, the
sense of the Apostle will be, That Christians, should use all possible
diligence, and ca^ to rescue themselves, from the dominion, and pollution of
sin, by a through reformation of their lives, by the mortification of the flesh,
and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, that thereby they may be secured
from the punishment of sin; and so partake of this double salvation: This sure
is the compleatest sense of the word.

Notwithstanding, because the ordinary received sense of this word, in the New
Testament, is referred to the deliverance of men, from the final punishment of
sin in the world to come; I shall agree, that to be the principal meaning of
it, in this place.

Salvation in the style of the Old Testament, does ordinarily signify no more
than deliverance from temporal evils, whereto men are liable in this world. In
the New Testament it has a higher signification, being there taken for
Redemption, or deliverance, from the peril of everlasting destruction, of soul
and body in hell: 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
from eternal damnation, from the wrath to come, from the second death, the
vengeance of eternal fire, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. This
is that which the Apostle (from the matter, and specially from the Author of
it) calls the great salvation. Heb. 2.3.
And (from the duration of it) the eternal salvation. Heb. 5.9.
And (from the prime subject of it) the salvation of the soul. 1 Pet. 1.9.


This is the ordinary signification of the word salvation, in reference to the
life to come, otherwise expressed by the terms of redemption, remission of sin,
and reconciliation: But this is not all that is to be understood, by the word
salvation; (not a bare deliverance from punishment;) but by ampliation, and
analogy of Scripture, the same word comprehends also, all that happiness, and
blessedness, which the Gospel promises to them that shall be saved, and which
is usually expressed by eternal life. The full importance of the word
salvation, comprehends deliverance from all the curses and threatenings, both of
Law, and Gospel, together with all those exceeding great, and precious
promises, which St. Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Now concerning both these things, I shall only add two Considerations.

1. That both the punishment threatened, and the happiness promised, are
expressed in holy Scripture, by the highest terms that could have been used.
The misery from which this salvation delivers us, is set forth by the most
formidable terms, that can be sounded to mortal ears. Such are those, of death,
destruction, everlasting unquenchable fire, a lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, wherein men are to be tormented day and night for ever, and ever;
where there is nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; utter
darkness, and the worm that never dies, etc. What words can signify any thing
more formidable than these do? On the other side, the happiness of them that
shall be saved, is likewise worded as high, as was possible to be; to wit, by
the terms of everlasting life, eternal joy, blessedness, seeing of God, being
and reigning with Christ, in Heaven, a Kingdom, a Crown of glory; a far more,
exceeding, eternal weight of glory; an incorruptible inheritance, a treasure, a
paradise, a feast, etc. It is certain, there are no words, which can signify
any thing more valuable than those do which Scripture uses (in great variety)
to set forth that happiness by. Let this be the first Consideration.

The second is this, that the infallible truth, and simplicity of Gods Word,
does require, that the respective estates, declared by these expressions,
should be answerable to the height of their signification. That is, that
although many of these expressions, being figurative, do import something
different from the common signification of the words, and that therefore a
perfect, and distinct notion, or understanding of the particular conditions
thereby expressed, cannot be collected or comprehended from them; yet that the
reality of the things thereby signified, is at least equal to that which any,
or all those words, can represent to our present understanding: i. e. The
misery of the one, and the happiness of the other state, must needs be as great
as those expressions, by which they are described, can reasonably signify.

Thus much for the end or object, salvation, and what that means: which I
desire may be remembered, and considered as a most powerful Motive, to the Act,
which in the next place we are to speak of.

We have heard of the end or design proposed in the Text, that is, our own
salvation, which by the precedent discourse is concluded to signify, (besides
deliverance from extremity of misery) the utmost of happiness, which a man is
capable of, and consequently to be the chiefest good, and ultimate end of a
man, which nature, and reason does oblige him to seek. Come we now to the work
that is to be done, in order to the accomplishing this end: Work out your own
salvation. We shall first inquire what that means, and then how it is to be
effected.

1. Work out: (...). Romans 4.15.5.3, 4.
The Original is a Compound Verb, which sometimes signifies no more than the
Simple, and then is translated simply to work, as when it is said, (...).
the Law works wrath; and, Tribulation works patience, and patience,
experience; (or trial, and probation, or approbation.) Operamini salutem.
So the Vulgar Latin renders the word in this Text. But the proper sense of
the Compound Verb is more truly rendered by other Translators, Conficite
falutem. Beza.
agreeing with our English; expressing the force of the Preposition. A man is
then said to have wrought out a business, when he has finished, and perfectly
effected it. So that to work out our own salvation, imports these two things:
First, To make it our work and business, to effect and attain this end, which
the Apostle calls the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.
Secondly, To pursue and follow this work, with all care and diligence, till we
have finished it, and brought it to perfection; that is, not only till we have
attained to a present right to, or interest in, the heavenly inheritance; Heb.
6.11. and 10.22.
or till we come to a certain Plerophory, or full assurance of hope, or faith,
that we are in the state of salvation; but, till we come to the end of our
work: Phil. 3.11, 12.
If by any means we might attain unto the resurrection of the dead: i. e. the
resurrection of the just: Not as though we had already attained, either were
already perfect: But, we are to follow after, if that we may apprehend that for
which also we are apprehended of Christ Jesus: Not counting our selves to have
apprehended: (...).
but this one thing we are to do, forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth ( i, e. contending with all our might and force, like to them
that run a race) unto those things which are before, we are to press toward
the mark, for the prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

It is to be noted that the Exhortation in the Text, is directed to such, as
being Believers and Saints (as they are called in the Inscription of this
Epistle) had already begun this good work, Cap. 1.1.
and were presumed to be in a state of salvation. Yet still the Apostle exhorts
them to work out their own salvation. Thereby teaching them, and all
Christians, that this work is not finished, by any single act, or habit of
faith; but remains to be completed and perfected, by the perfecting of
holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.1.
It Is not a work that may be dispatched, or finished, and laid aside; but must
be pursued to the last, as long as we can work. A man may come into a certain
interest, and right unto salvation, not only before his death, but almost as
soon as he lives, by virtue of an early Baptism; whereby (as our Church
teaches her Catechumens) he is made a member of Christ, a child of God, and an
inheritor of the Kingdom of heaven: But this right being conveyed upon certain
conditions covenanted for in Baptism, cannot be held, much less crowned with
possession of the inheritance, without the performance of those conditions,
which can never be finished, till our life be at end; because the perseverance
in them till then, is part of the condition. For it is part of the condition of
salvation, (and not only of the duty of them that shall be saved;) Heb. 3.6.14.
to hold fast the beginning of their confidence ( i. e. of their Christian
Profession) unto the end: Rev. 2.10. John 15.6. 1 Timothy 1.19. Col. 1.23. Heb.
12.1. 2 John 8.
To be faithful to the death: To abide in Christ: Holding faith and a good
conscience: To continue in the faith, grounded and settled: To run with patience
the race that is set before them: Looking to themselves, that they lose not the
things, which we have wrought; but that we may receive a full reward. Which
last words, do imply, that there is some danger of a Christian's losing the
benefit of his first Profession, if he pursues it not with carefulness to the
end.

Nor is there any controversy in the point, but that the right unto salvation,
must needs be lost, if a man falls away from the condition, by which it is
held. Else an unbeliever may be saved, because he that continues not in the
faith, is no believer. He therefore that gives over the work which the Text
requires, can never be saved. But whether this work once truly begun, can be
given over, before it be wrought out, is a question; and may, for me, rest for
such, in this place; so I may have leave to dismiss it, with entering my most
serious Caution to all Christians, upon the peril of their souls, to take heed
of presuming so far upon the certainty of their perseverance, that, they be
tempted to neglect the duty of the Text; which is still to work out their own
salvation with fear and trembling. For sure I am, that Scripture affords many
admonitions to the best of men, to take heed of falling away, and inforceth
some of them with arguments drawn from the pain of damnation: which is such an
objection against an absolute impossibility of losing the grace of God, or of
not persevering in it, as I shall not undertake to answer: For he that should
at the same time pretend to assure me, that it were impossible for me to die,
and yet labor to keep me in awe of death, by the most serious warnings, and
strong persuasions to take heed of it, would appear to be guilty of abusing my
faith, or my reason; either by a falsehood in one part of his suggestion, or by
a gross incongruity in the other: because I cannot understand what need of
caution there can be, where there is an absolute impossibility of effective
peril.

And now it is time that I should come to the next question proposed in my
method; viz. What this work is, that is to be done by him that desires to work
out his own salvation? which surely is the most important question that can be
moved, and which needs the clearest, and most certain Resolution: and therefore
I think it most safe, to study plainness and solidity, rather than brevity in
my Answer.

It is evident that the only certain resolution of this question, is to be
learned from Scripture; from whence only we have the knowledge of this
salvation. That there is such a state as that of Salvation, before described,
cannot certainly be known, but from the revelation of Scripture; and therefore
the way, and means, to attain it, is only to be learned from thence. We must
therefore search the Scriptures, John 5.39.
for in them we think to have everlasting life. It concerns us to examine
diligently, what works, conditions, or qualifications, are by them required to
attain this end. And to prevent all error in this inquiry, I hold it necessary
to give this Praemonition; viz. That it will not be so safe to rest altogether,
upon the declaration of any one Text, for the perfect resolution of this
question; as it may be, to consider (as near as we can) and compare all Texts
that make mention of any conditions, acts, practices, or qualifications,
required as necessary to salvation. It being known to every one that has read,
or heard the Scriptures with any observation, that the conditions of salvation
laid down in several Texts, are many, and of a diverse signification; some
Texts showing what things are positively required, to be found in, or done by,
them which will be saved; others making mention of such things as do exclude
men from salvation. Some things there are, which (as the (...). Heb. 6.9.
Apostle says) do accompany salvation; that is, which are preparatory to
eternal bliss; and which being found in a man, do declare him to be in a near
capacity of salvation. Other things are named as inconsisten^ with such a
present capacity, and as absolute barn and impediments to that state. Each of
these things are carefully to be observed, to the end a man may acquire, and
perform the one, and eschew or acquit himself of the other. Some instances of
each kind may be found in these Texts, amongst many others left to the diligent
observation of the Reader. 2 Pet. 1.5. to the 12. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19. to
the 25. Rev. 22.14, 15. Col. 3.5. to the 16.

But because it is not reasonable, for me to undertake to set down, much less
to expound all the Texts which are to be found in Scripture pertaining to this
end. I shall take up, with a few of them, and principally with three, to which
all others may be referred; and which are the more remarkable; because they
were purposely designed, by our blessed Savior himself, and the two great
Apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul, for a distinct answer to the question we
have propounded, i. e. What a man should do to be saved?

I shall begin with the resolution of the same Apostle, that directs the
admonition in the Text. When the Jailer (sympathising with the quaking Earth)
with fear and trembling came to him and Silas (his fellow-prisoner) inquiring,
What he must do to be saved? They said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved. Acts 16.30, 31. The same answer was given by our blessed
Savior himself to the Jews, that put the question to him, What they should do,
that they might work the works of God? Which question bears the same sense with
that of the Jailer, as appears by the occasion of it, expressed in the
foregoing verse; where our Savior had bidden them, Labor not for the meat
which perishes, but for that meat, which endures to eternal life. Hereupon
they moved this question, What was that work, which God had appointed them to
do, in order to that end, which he had prescribed them; that is, to obtain that
mean which endures to everlasting life: which is all one with, What they
should do, to work out their own salvation? Jesus answered and said unto them,
This is the work of God (meaning not now the work which God works, but which he
requires of them to work) that ye believe on him whom he has sent. John 6.27,
28, 29. This then appears to be the first and principal work (so called by our
Savior) to be done by him that designs to work out his own salvation, viz. to
believe on Jesus Christ, the Author of salvation. This is the term, by which
the condition of salvation is most commonly expressed, both in the Gospels, and
Epistles, especially of St. Paul; who labors much to confirm the Doctrine,
of Justification by faith in Christ. And, to be justified, is, to be put into a
state of salvation; wherefore also he says, By grace ye are saved, through
faith, Ephesians. 2.8. Jesus Christ being the Author of this salvation, the way to
attain unto it, in reason, must needs be, to believe in him: For nothing can be
more reasonable, than that they that will attain unto salvation, should be
obliged to acknowledge the only Author thereof, and depend upon him for it:
especially, since he has purchased it for us, at so dear a rate as that of his
own blood; it was most highly equitable, that he should have the honor of it,
which is given him by faith; as that imports an affiance or trust in him, for
the attainment thereof.

Faith in Christ therefore, is the undoubted foundation of our hope, and the
prime title to Salvation: And that being so, proves, that every man is as much
concerned to work out his Faith, as he is to work out his own Salvation: Which
that he may do, it is at least very requisite, that he should understand what
this Faith is. Although the end of this Faith, which is the salvation of the
Soul, does not necessarily depend upon the truth of the notion that a man has
of it, but upon the truth of the thing it self: For it is no less possible for
a man to have a true Faith, that has a false notion of it, than it is for a
man to attain unto Salvation, and the felicities of Eternal life, although he
neither has, nor can have, any exact notion thereof in this life: Or, than it
is to have a reasonable soul, and to act reasonably thereby, though a man knows
neither what the Soul, nor yet what Reason is. As the Sadduces that believed
not that there were any Spirits at all, were nevertheless informed with
rational, and immortal Spirits: Yet in as much as the want of a right
understanding of the nature of a true Faith, may render a man liable to be
deceived, as well in the practice, as in the notion thereof, it is hugely
necessary that he be possessed with a right knowledge of this work of God: as I
may take leave to call it after our Savior in the forementioned Text, Joh.
6.29. And after St. Paul, 1 These. 1. Remembering your work of Faith. Which term,
2 These. 1.11.
beside that agreement that it has with my Text, is useful toward the
resolution of that great Question, What Faith it is, to which the Scripture
does so often attribute the effect of justification, and Salvation. For by
these Texts (and many others hereafter to be quoted) we may learn, that the
true justifying and saving Faith, is not, 1. A bare notional, historical, or
intellectual Faith, consisting altogether in the asse^ of the mind, or
understanding, to the truth of the holy Scriptures, and all the Articles of the
Christi^^ Creed: which in it self, or as such, differs not from the faith of
devils, Jam. 2.19. save that it seems ne^ to be so strong and free from all
degrees of doub^ as theirs is, for want of that forcible Evidence sense and
experience, which they have of the tru^ of those things, which they have seen
and fel^^ viz. the Miracles of Christ, his Death, Resurrect on, and Ascension,
etc. Nor yet secondly, the single act of Affiance, reliance, trust, or rolling
man's self upon Christ for Salvation; which indee^ is an eminent act or effect
of Faith; and so mu^^ the more acceptable to God, as it excludes all gl^rying
in our own works, Romans 3.27. Much l^ thirdly, that reflex act, or consequent of
Faith which consists in a full assurance, confidence, ^^perswasion of a man's
salvation by Christ: which Scripture is nowhere (to my understanding) ^^led
Faith. And therefore, although it were inde^ the first notion of faith, that I
was Catechized (...) in English, and seems to be confirmed by the (...)
definition in sense, found in many of the most (...) thentick Catechisms of
reformed Churches; ye^ must profess my self least satisfied with it, of (...)
that I have met with: Because all the assurance salvation, that can ordinarily
be had in this (...) is nothing but a consequence of Faith, ground upon the
promise of salvation, to him that (...) believes. And if I have any assurance
of my (...) vation, I must first be assured that I do believe: (...) then my
believing cannot be my assurance of my salvation. Because that were to make the
same thing the consequent of it self: And imports no less absurdity than this,
that I believe or am assured that I shall be saved, because I believe or am
assured that I shall be saved; For he that says, Faith is Assurance, says
also that Assurance is Faith; and then if my assurance or confidence that I
shall be saved, be grounded upon my faith, (as the condition to which Salvation
is promised) it must necessarily be the ground and reason of it self: which is
so great an absurdity, as has forced most of our English Divines to reject
that definition; not only as improper, but also as dangerous, and
uncomfortable: Dangerous, because it is apt to tempt a man to the pernicious
self-deceit, of presuming, or assuming a strong conndence of his own salvation,
without any just ground; upon this supposition that such a a confidence is not
only necessary to salvation, but gives him an assured right thereunto, as being
the condition of the promise: And a most Uncomfortable notion it is too, not to
him that pretends to have such an assurance, but to the generality of good
Christians. For if it were true that the only saving faith, consisted in an
assurance of salvation, and that a full one, as it is defined; whosoever finds
himself to want that assurance (which very few of the best Christians, will
pretend to) must needs conclude himself to have no true Faith: whereas in
truth, this Assurance is purely accidental to the ^eality of a true Faith,
which is always before it, and most commonly without it.

But the two forementioned acts, of Assent to the truth of the Gospel, together
with a direct Affiance upon Christ for salvation, do indeed truly and properly
belong to the nature of Faith; but do no^ make it complete, perfect, or
sufficient to salvation. For without controversy, a true saving Faith, does
import such a practical habit of assent to the Gospel of Christ, as has an
effectual influence, upon the Will and Affections, and all the acts of the
inward and outward man, And thus much is distinct^ taught, not only by that
large discourse of St. Ja^ chap. 2. where he purposely disputes this point and
positively declares that Faith is made perfect by works, v. 22. And that
without them it is dead that is, null and void, v. 17.26. But also by the
Express words of St. Paul, Gal. 5.6. For in Jos^ Christ neither circumcision
avails anything, nor us circumcision (...).
but Faith which w^^^eth by love. In which Text, (as conceive) it matters not
much whether the original word (...) common to both senses, be rendered
actively or passively, i.e. acting or working by love, (...) we translate, or
actuated, and made effectual, as the Syriack understand it, and as the same
word (...) most commonly used in Scripture: which way ^eever the word be
rendered, the sense is the sam^ And it is evident, that the meaning of the
Apost by the addition of those words, is to give (...) distinct character, or
description of that Faith which justifies a Christian, by way of cau^ on
against any other notion of the word, the abstracts from this Energy, or
efficacy. For the words are Exegetical, and Limitative; As if he ha^ said, Not
every kind of Faith, but the living Ene^getical effectual faith, which acts,
or is actuated (...) love, is the only thing that avails for the hope of
righteousness, that is, the Justification, and Salvation of a Christian. That
this is the true meaning of the Apostle appears evidently from two parallel
Texts, wherein the same sense is thus varied by himself: The first is in the
next chapter of the same Epistle, Gal. 6.15. For, in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. The
second is, in 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. Where it cannot be denied
but that Faith working by love, is all one with the new creature, which is
created in Christ Jesus ( i.e. in the Faith of Christ Jesus) unto good works,
which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. And with the
keeping of the commandments of God: love being the fulfilling of the
commandments, 1 John 5.3. Romans 13.10.

Faith, that works by love is such a Faith as purifies the heart, Act. 15.9.
^ Joh. 5.4.
and overcomes the world: which is therefore by St. Paul called, the obedience
of Faith. Romans 1.5. and 16, 26. The same thing is signified by that Apostle in
his answer to the Goalers questi^n, before alleged: requiring him to believe
on ^^e Lord Jesus Christ, Acts, 16.31. Which can mean nothing less than that he
should acknowledge him for his Lord and Christ, as well as his Sa^our. And
therefore should hold himself obliged ^y his Faith, to obey him as a Lord, and
to be ^ubject to him, as the Christ, the Messiah, the an^ointed King, and
Prophet of his Church. For Faith, as it relates to the Person of Christ, does
not respect him, only as a Savior; but receive him as he is sent by God, and
offered in the Gospel with all his authority, as Lord and King, and Prophet,
Joh. 1.12.

This notion of Faith, is confirmable from that common rule in Divinity, that,
Verba scientiae connotant affectus.
Words of knowledge i^ Scripture Phrase, do connotate, both affections, and
actions agreeable to the knowledge: whereof, in this place, one special
Instance shall suffice, Joh. 17, 3. This is life eternal the they may know
thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent: Where, to know
God and Christ signifies to believe in him. For knowledge of Divine things is
Faith, and Faith is oft-time called knowledge, in Scripture, 1. Tim. 2.4. 2 P^
1, 2, 3. 1 John 2.3. Isa. 53.11. By his know^ shall my righteous servant,
(meaning Christ) jusi^^ many. As to know the true God, imports (...) the duty,
which is due to him, as such; so, to know Jesus Christ, whom the Father has
sent, is to embrace him in the quality wherein he was sent, tha^ is, with full
acknowledgment of his commission from the Father, and with submission
thereunto, by receiving, and observing all that he has comma^^ed in his name;
So runs the Commission that o^ Savior gave to his Apostles when he sent the^
to make Disciples, and to baptize all Nations teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I (...) commanded, Matthew. 28.20. This must needs (...) the
true meaning of those words, This is life eternal that they may know thee:
Because no knowledge that means any thing less than this, can (...) the sole
condition of Eternal life, And so certain it is, that the knowledge of God in
Scripture Phrase, does import obedience to his Commandments, that S. John
says, Hereby we know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that
says, I know him; and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth
is not in him, 1 John 2, 3, 4. And if that be so, what truth can be in him that
says, he believes in God, and keeps not his Commandments. For either our
knowledge of God is the same thing with our belief; and then what is true of
the one must be equally true of the other; Or, if Faith be distinguished from
knowledge, (as in a philosophical notion it is) then our belief supposes our
knowledge, that is, that we have a true notion of his nature and essence,
whereto the right of universal dominion does necessarily belong; and adds
thereunto a firm assent of the mind, Heb. 11.6.
to the verity of his existence, i.e. that he is the only true God, and thereby
obliges our obedience to him. This Notion of Faith is notably declared and
exemplified by S. Paul in Heb. 11.2, 4, 7, 8, 17. By Faith Abel offered unto
God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he
was righteous. By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear prepared an Arc, to the saving of his house; by the which he
condemned the world, and became heir of the righteouness, which is by Faith. By
Faith Abraham, when he was called to go into a place which he should afterward
receive for an inheritance, obeyed, etc. By Faith Abraham when he was tried
offered up Isaak: and he that had received the promises, offered up his only
begotten Son. And this was the Faith which was imputed to him for
Righteousness: that is, by which he was justified before God, Romans 4.3. Gal.
5.6.

But for a final confirmation of this notion of saving Faith, as the only
complete one, (I mean, this practick Notion) I shall add no more Arguments,
than what may be inferred from those Texts of Scripture, wherein there is the
least appearance of expressing it; that is, those Texts, wherein this saving
Faith is described by no other Act, than that by which we believe the verity of
these Propositions, That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that he was
raised from the dead, etc. John 20.39. These things, are written that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing, ye might have life
through his Name. Romans 10.9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved: For, with the heart, man believes unto
Righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: 1 John
5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God: No man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 12.3. This was the
Eunuch's Faith. whereupon he was admitted to Baptism by Saint Philip: I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: Acts 8.37. This was the Faith, for which
our Savior pronounces Simon Peter blessed, Matthew. 16.16, 17. Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. The same was the Faith of Martha, whereupon she
expected the Promise of Life declared by Christ, John 11.26, 27: I demand now,
What kind of Faith it is, that is to be understood in these Texts? Is it no
other than a certain, real, and unfeigned assent to the truth of these
Propositions? and shall every such Believer be saved? or, is he born of God?
Surely, no man that reads the Scriptures, can think so: If then this
speculative, dogmatical Faith, though never so true, in a philosophical sense,
(that is, not only in respect of the Object, but also in respect of the Act of
Assent) be not the true saving Faith; What can ^t be but the practical Faith,
which answers to the forementioned Notion, of a practical knowledge of God;
that is, such a Faith as effectually produces all such affections, and
obedience to Christ, with dependence upon him, as the belief of these
Propositions obliges a man to? I conclude therefore that these Texts, and all
others, wherein Faith is named as the sole condition of Salvation, are to be
interpreted by that single one of S. Paul, above mentioned, Gal. 5.6. For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision, avails any thing, but
Faith which works by Love. So much for that first Resolution to the Question
in hand, given by our Savior himself, and S. Paul, viz. That he that will work
out his own Salvation, must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ: Not as Jesus
only, or a Savior, but as the Lord, and Christ: And to work out this
Condition, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
is that which he calls the Work of Faith: being the Work of Obedience to the
Lord Jesus, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation to them that obey him, Heb.
5.9. that is, to them that so believe in him, as to obey him.

TO this agrees an other Answer which our blessed Savior made to one that put
the question to him in express terms, Matthew. 19.17. and Mark 10.17. And behold
one came, and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may
have Eternal Life; And he said unto him -- If thou will enter into Life, keep
the Commandments: Which words (being the Answer of him who is the Author of
Salvation, and who best knew the Condition, whereupon it was to be had, and had
least reason to utter any thing to the prejudice of his own merits) do plainly
show, that the keeping of the Commandments (in some sense or other) is
necessary for him that will be saved, as well under the Gospel, as under the
Law.

I am not ignorant that this speech of our Savior has received such an
interpretation from diverse modern Interpreters, as seems to imply the quite
contrary to this inference, viz. That these words were not designed for a
direct Answer to the young man's question, as serving to instruct him what he
was to do to enter into Life; but intended rather to discover unto him, his
inability to attain Salvation, by any thing that he could do, and thereby to
draw him to seek it out of himself; and dispose him to embrace the Evangelical
way of Salvation, by Faith in him (the Savior,) without Works.

But this Interpretation (with due reverence to the Authors and Abetters
thereof) seems to me improbable, upon diverse Accounts.

1. Because it makes our Savior's Answer to be indirect, and insufficient, at
least; if not untrue. For, whereas the man's Inquiry was, What he was to do
that he might be saved; this Answer, by this interpretation, gives him either
no direction at all; or such a one, as was either not true, or not sufficient,
and by this Hypothesis, impossible to be performed: The keeping of the
Commandments, was either necessary to Salvation, or it was not. If it were
necessary; Why should our Savior, whiles he seems so plainly to affirm it, be
supposed not to intend it? If it were; How could this be a true Answer to the
Question?

2. Because I neither find any Circumstance in, or about this Text, nor any
necessity from any other, to incline me to prefer such an indirect, obscure
interpretation of our Savior's words, before that which is direct and plain.

3. Because this sense is disagreeable to a second Answer that our Savior
made, to the reply of this Questionist; alleging, himself (how truly, is not
to the purpose) to have kept those Commandments. Jesus said unto him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou
shall have Treasure in Heaven; and come, and follow me. Which last words, do
indeed imply a necessity of Faith in Christ, without which no man can come to
him; but they do also as plainly teach, a necessity of Obedience too, without
which no man can be said to follow him. And the whole Answer does clearly
intimate, that it was not only necessary for him, to endeavor the keeping of
those Commandments, if he would enter into L^fe, but that he must do more than
so, namely be ready upon his command, to part withal that he had, to follow
him, as his Disciples had done.

4. Because the forementioned Interpretation seems to have been devised of
purpose to exclude the necessity of Obedience to Salvation: and to secure the
Doctrine of Salvation by Faith only, without Works, in such a sense as St. Paul
never meant. Therefore I find no such interpretation in any of the Ancients,
before the Controversy about Works was raised.

Lastly, because the same necessity of Works of Obedience to Salvation, that
seems to be taught by our Savior in this Text, is fully and plainly asserted
by himself, and his Apostles, in many other Texts. As Mat. 5.20. Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Where, by the Sequel of his
Discourse, it is evident that he speaks not of a mere imputed righteousness,
but such a one as is inherent and practical, consisting in the observation of
the Precepts there; afterward mentioned by himself, in the same, and the two
following Chapters. And, as it were of purpose to prevent the error of the
Solifidian Doctrine, or a presumption of Salvation by Faith without Works; he
expresses himself most clearly, Chap. 7.21: Not every one that says unto me,
Lord, Lord, (that is, pretends, or professes to believe on me) shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father, which is in
Heaven. The whole Sermon, contained in those 3. Chapters, is a summary of the
Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. The Christian Ethics, or the institutions of the
Christian Philosophy: The main Scope whereof, is to show upon what terms, and
conditions, that Kingdom of Heaven, which he preached, and promised, was to be
obtained: as may appear, both from the beginning, and end of the Sermon. For,
as it begins with the Promise of Blessedness, limited to the endowments and
practice of special Christian Virtues, such as Humility, Meekness, Mercy,
purity of Heart, Peace, and Patience, etc. so it ends with a peremptory
assertion of the necessity of Obedience to the Precepts before delivered. Chap.
7. from verse. 22. to the end: Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of
mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his House
upon a Rock, etc. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does
them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his House upon the
Sand, etc. Which words can signify no less, than that all hopes of Salvation,
that are built upon any other Foundation, than that of Obedience to his
Precepts, as the proper effect, fruit, and trial of an unfeigned Faith in him,
are built upon the Sands: Or, that the study of conformity to his Commandments,
is fundamentally necessary to the hope of everlasting Life. From whence this
Inference seems to be necessary: that, to believe there is no such necessity of
good Works to Salvation, is no less than a fundamental Error, in the Christian
Profession: And so (without doubt) it is, if it be held practically; But
because such an erroneous Opinion, notionally held, may be consistent with the
real practice of Christian Obedience, (as I doubt not but that it is, in many
Lutherans, and some Antinomians) it does not necessarily exclude from
Salvation. For, whosoever hears Christ's sayings, and does them, is by our
Savior likened unto a wise man, that built his House upon a Rock, and
therefore shall undoubtedly be saved, whether he believes his Obedience
necessary to Salvation, or not. A simple error in the Understanding,
effectually corrected in the Will, (I believe) shall never be imputed to the
honest-minded man.

But considering the natural influence of the Understanding upon the Will, this
Heresy (though not in it self to be reckoned in the number of those, which St.
Peter calls damnable) may yet easily prove so. And therefore, though it must
needs exercise the Patience of an intelligent Orthodox Reader, to add to these
express words of our Savior, so many Testimonies of his Apostles, as might be
alleged from their Epistles, for the confirmation of this Doctrine: Yet their
pardon must be allowed for the mentioning of some of them, toward the removal
of so dangerous an Error, as the same Apostles thought necessary to warn
Christians of, by many Emphatical Texts: Saint Paul himself, after he had
msisted so much, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, upon the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, without the Works of the Law, does specially caution
both Churches to take heed of this misprison, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall die; but, if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of
the Body, ye shall live: See Gal. 5.6.21. and Chap. 6. v. 7, 8, 9.15: Be not
deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also
reap. For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap corruption; but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10. St. James, Jam. 2. spends a whole
Chapter to undeceive Christians of this Error: St. John gives the same
admonition: 1 Jo. 3.7. Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is righteous, as he is righteous. He that commits Sin, is of
the Devil; etc. What can be plainer than the words of our Savior? Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. viz. the heavenly
Jerusalem, From whence it is to be concluded beyond dispute, that howsoever
the right to this heavenly Inheritance, be at first obtained by the act of an
unfeined Faith in Christ; yet it is held by the homage of Obedience to the
Commandments.

I shall conclude with that General Doctrine so often delivered, as well in the
New, Romans 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 16.27. Rev. 22.12.
as in the Old Testament: That God will render to every man according to his
Works: Confirmed by our Savior's description of the last Judgment, Matthew.
25.31. to the end of the Chapter. That all men shall fare in the Life to come,
according to their doings in this, L. Herbert E. of Cherbery Lib. de Veritate.
is one of the five Articles of that Faith, which a late Author has
endeavored to prove to be as Catholic, as Reason it self: And therefore was
never left out in any Religion that has obtained in the World. Nor was ever
denied by any Philosophers, that acknowledged the immortality of the Soul, and
any Life after this. No Religion can be made out to be rational in the Theorie,
much less persuaded into Practice, without the establishment of this Principle:
which being established, does certainly infer a necessity of keeping God^s
Commandments, in order to the hopes of eternal Life: which was the thing to be
demonstrated.

But against this Doctrine many things may be objected; as 1. That it seems to
evacuate the distinction of the old, and new Covenants, by confounding the
condition of them, which, by this Hypothesis, seems to be the same, viz. Do
this and Live: 2. That it lays a burden upon Christians, as heavy as that
which the Jews were never able to bear; and gives occasion for the Disciples
Question; Who then can be saved? 3. That it seems to contradict Saint Paul's
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, Romans 4.44.
without Works. 4. And to favor the Popish Doctrine of Merit.

These Objections will be most conveniently answered, after we have considered
the third Text, from whence we designed to complete the Answer to that great
Question, What we should do to be saved? A Question put to Saint Peter, and the
rest of the Apostles, by the Jews, Acts 2.38.39. Now when they heard this, they
were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them,
Repent, and be baptized, etc. The necessity of Baptism to Salvation, (grounded
upon the words of our Savior, John 3.5, 6.) is not here to be discussed,
because it can have no place ^n that Work to which the Apostle exhorts
Chri^ians already baptized. But that other Injunction which is joined with it
(being a special part of the end; and signification of Baptism) viz. to Repent,
is a main part of that Work or Business by which a man is to work out his own
salvation. As appears by many other Texts of Scripture, wherein the necessity
of Repentance to Salvation, is expressly taught: It was the first Evangelical
Precept, the very first word, whereby the Gospel began to be preached, both by
the forerunner, John the Baptist, and by our Savior himself, Matthew. 3.2. and
4.17. So John began his preaching in the Wilderness, saying, Repent ye, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; In like manner Jesus began to preach; and to say;
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Intimating, that whosoever
desired any part in that Kingdom, must qualify himself for it by Repentance:
It was the end of our Savior's coming into the World, as himself faith, Matthew.
9.13. I am come to call Sinners to Repentance. And, when he left the World to
the teaching of his Apostles, his Appointment was, that Repentance, and
Remission of Sin, should be preached in his name among all Nations, Luke 24.47:
For, Him has God exalted, with his right hand to be a Prince; and a Savior,
to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sin. Acts 5.31. Not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. In
these, and many other Texts, the entire condition of Salvation, is expressed by
this term of Repentance: which is therefore called Reptenance unto Life, and
Repentance to salvation: Acts 11.18: 2 Cor. 7.10.

The equity and necessity of this condition, unto the Remission of Sin, is not
(as I conceive) grounded upon any arbitrary, or positive Will o^ God,
supernaturally revealed; but has its foundation in the Law of Nature and
Reason: For natural Reason, if it be not grossly corrupted by Self-love, or
perverted and abused by Superstitions instructions, will certainly teach a man
this Lessons That, to qualify him for, and render him capable of a Pardon,
Luke 17.3.
for any wilful offense, (if it be but against a man) it is necessary he should
Repent the doing of it. Because the want of this Repentance, supposes the
justification of the Offense, or, at least, a wilful continuance in it: which
makes the pardon, without it, to imply an allowance, or toleration of the
Offense, and makes the offended party to be reconciled as well to the iniquity
of the Offender, as to his Person: Which being perfectly unreasonable, shows
the indispensableness of this qualification for the salvation of a Sinner,
which supposes the remission of his Sin.

Hereupon it is to be believed, that Heathens, by the light of natural Reason,
as often as they would attend unto it, could not but understand the necessity of
Repentance, for the averting God's anger, and the hope of pardon for such gross
Crimes as their Consciences were terrified with. And though they might
conclude, more than probably, (from the Goodness of God, essentially included
in the notion of his Being, and sufficiently declared by his Works) that he was
reconcilable to sinners, upon some terms or other; yet, to believe him willing
to pardon foul iniquities, without exacting the Repentance of the Offenders,
was such an absurdity as could not be entertained without notorious corruption
of their Reason. But, by the History we have of their Religion, it appears they
were so much abused with prescription of other ways and means of expiating
their sins (to wit, by Sacrifices, ritual Purgations, and Lustrations,
suggested by their covetous Priests) that there is indeed little mention of
this Doctrine of Repentance amongst them. The very word being rarely to be
found in their books. And no marvel they should be disposed to listen after
other ways of purging their sins (which were recontilable with retaining the
practice;) seeing the whole mass of corrupt Nature is found to be as averse to
the remedy of Repentance, as it is prone to the Sin that needs it.

It was the delusion, and the hypocrisy of the Jews, to trust to other
Remedies of Sin, with neglect of this, as we find by the frequent complaints of
the Prophets. Nor are Christians any better affected to this wholesome Cure for
Sin: but every whit as much inclined to elude the necessity of it, or at least
to cheat their own Souls in the hypocritical pretense of it. But the more
Evidence there is for the necessity of Repentance unto Salvation, the more
necessary it is to have a right Notion of the Nature of it. Because the mistake
in this point is no less dangerous, than in that of Faith. Nor are men less apt
to be deceived in the one, than in the other. And if there be indeed an
indispensable necessity of Repentance, as well as Faith, unto Salvation; the
carnal mind is not so sollicitous to find out the truest as the easiest notion
of them both; that is, such a one sa is practicable, with the least restraint
to his lusts, or most consiste^ with his licentious liberty. Such a notion of
Faith we met withal before, and if there were not some other of Repentance, as
easy; it were scarce possible for men to persuade themselves, they have
repented of their Sins, without any actual sincere reformation of their lives;
Or, to believe that the last hour of their lives is time enough for this work,
when they know such a reformation is altogether impossible.

But I am not in this place to enter upon the common place of Repentance, or to
discourse (...) the various acceptions of the word. My design i^ only to show
what that Repentance is, which i^ necessary to be wrought out, in order to a
man's salvation. And that will be learned most compendiously, from a remarkable
Text of Saint Paul's, 2 Cor. 7.10. For godly Sorrow works Repentance to
Salvation, never to be repented of. Where it is first to be observed, that the
rise or spring of Repentance, is (...).
Godly Sorrow, or ^ Sorrow according to God: which inports, first a due sight
and sense o^ Sin: secondly, a hearty sorrow for it, as it relat^ to God; that
is, as it is a transgression of the Law of God; and so, injurious and offensive
^ Him; and not only as it is noxious, or perilous ^ our selves.

There may be a true Godly sorrow, as well for the sufferings as the sins of
others. But the sorrow which is apt to bring forth repentance, is a sorrow for
our own sins: And two things there are in Sin which are the just matter, and
motive of a Godly sorrow; 1. The nature of it: 2. The effects, and consequents
of it. 1 John 3.4. Romans 2.15.
The proper nature of sin, is, the transgression of Gods Law, whether written
in the Bible or in the Heart, The Effects of sin, do refer either to God, or
to our Selves and our Brethren. Those which respect God, are, his displeasure,
and his dishonor. For all sin is both displeasing, and dishonorable to God,
upon the same account; because it is a transgression of his will. Those which
respect our selves, are ^ll manner of evils, privative, and positive, that may
accrue to us, from sin, either by the nature, or by the punishment thereof. Now
albeit these ^atter events of sin, be just matter of sorrow; and that sorrow
may also conduce to the effect of ^epentance; yet is not this properly called
Godly sorrow, because it is not a sorrow for Gods cause, so ^uch as for our
own. And the root of it is self-^ove, rather than the love of God. I conclude
therefore, that the proper object, and motive of ^odly sorrow, is sin, as sin,
considered with ^^e event that necessarily proceeds from it, as such, ^^z. the
dishonor of God, with his just displeasure: which being the greatest evil in
the world, is the ^^^test matter of Sorrow. The glory of God, and his ^^vour,
are the most desirable good things, and ^^ght to be the highest ends, that we
should pro^ound to our selves, and most to be rejoiced in. and therefore the
contraries of these things, (his ^ishonour and his displeasure) ought above all
^^ings to be averted, and grieved for. And the ^^rrow for sin upon these
considerations, is the ^ost Godly sorrow, because it implies a love to God,
with a conversion of our wills unto his will, from which by sin it had been
averted. This is tha^ Sorrow which is signified by the Scholasti^ term of
Contrition, the abstract of the concre^ word, so often used in Scripture
(Contrite) to express the disposition of a penitent heart. The Latin word
Poenitere, and the English to Repe^ do first and most properly signify to be
sorry ^ a thing done amiss. And the word Repentan^ in Scripture does sometimes
signify no more the this. But in this Text and all others, where (...) has
the promise of salvation, or remission of ^ annexed to it, Repentance has a
further signifi^ tion. Which is,

The second thing to be observed from ^ Apostle's words, toward the
rectification of me^ judgments, concerning the notion of Christian R^pentance
which is available to Salvation, viz. that is not a bare sorrow for sin, though
it be a goesorrow, much less every kind of sorrow. A n^ may have sorrow for
sin, more than enough, a^ yet be as far from repentance to Salvation as Ju^
was, who is expressly said to have repented h^self, Matthew. 27.3. His heart was
desperately, (...) mortally wounded, with the sense of his ^ and sorrow for it:
But a godly forrow it was ^ that brings forth repentance to Salvation, but ^
quite contrary, the sorrow of the world that br^ forth death; Act. 1.25.
and hastened his disp^ to his own place; where there a good store of such
penitents, weeping, and waing, and gnashing their teeth, without d^ for their
sins that brought them thither. Jud^ case was indeed very miserable; if we
consider a repentance, wherein there seems to be a distinct example, of all
three parts of the Scholastical repentance. As first, such a deep Attrition,
as, by the Pontifician Doctrine, seemed to want nothing, to have turned it into
Contrition, but Absolution; which, considering his free and particular
Confession, (the second part of his Repentance) I have sinned in betraying
innocent blood; and that joined with a voluntary satisfaction, (the third part)
in his bringing again the thirty pieces of silver) was unmercifully denied him
by the chief Priests. Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.
But Judas his conscience could not be satisfied, much less his sin discharged,
with all this repentance; which yet was a great deal more than that which is
commonly presumed to be sufficient. For most people think, if their consciences
be pricked with the sense of their sins, so that they can say they are sorry
for them, let it be upon what consideration it will, they are truly penitent,
especially if this sorrow be but distinguished from that of Judas, by a
presumptuous hope and confidence of pardon. And much more, if they can but
deceive themselves, into a present slight purpose of some amendment of their
lives: Then they think they are out of danger, and may build upon the promise
of the Gospel, for a certain Pardon. Whereas by the necessary sense of this
Text, it is perfectly evident, that the most sincere sorrow for sin, is not, in
it self, a complete repentance, but a cause, and a preparative to it: For,
Godly sorrow works repentance; But the cause, and the effect cannot be the
same thing; nothing can produce it self.

But because Godly sorrow, if it be right, will work repentance, therefore it
may in some case (where there is no time for any works to be brought forth) be
accepted for Repentance, upon the same account, by which the will is accepted
for the deed, when it is a sincere, firm, and ratified Will; which God only can
judge of, and which it is scarce possible for any man to know of himself,
without some reasonable trial.

And therefore there is small comfort for any man in a repentance that has
proceeded no farther. God may indeed see it to be sincere without any trial,
and therefore may accept it: And therefore we are not to judge any such
Penitent, but leave him to the judgment of God, and hope the best. And so we
may do in our own case; But we can have no better assurance of the validity of
our repentance, than we have of the sincerity of our own hearts, which are
deceitful above measure.

But, that Sorrow for sin alone, is not repentance, may be confirmed by the
forementioned woe d^ of St. Peter, Act. 2, 27, 28. When he had convinced the
Jews of their heinous wickedness i^ the murder of the Lord Jesus, it is said,
They were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and brethren what shall (...) do? which surely does sufficiently
express the sorrow for their sin: And if that had been all th^^ goes to
repentance, might not he have spared tha^ precept in his answer (Then Peter
said unto them, Repent) and have contented himself with his additional advice,
and be baptized every one of y^^ in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
^ sins.

I conclude therefore from the evidence of these Texts, that a bare sorrow for
sin, is not repentance: much less is it a bare acknowledgment, or confession of
sin, which may be without any such sorrow; and of it self signifies no more
than that a man has cause to repent, not necessarily that he does so: It
imports a conviction of the consciene, not any conversion of the will, For a
man may acknowledge himself to have done evil; without any intention of ceasing
from the practice: Judas, and Pharaoh, and Saul, Mat. 27.3. Exodus 9.13. 10s 16.
1 Samuel 15.24.30.26.71.
did all confess they had sinned but were no true penitents: There are none
more impenitent, than many of them who make formal confessions of their sins
privately and publicly, often enough. Papists have a general custom to come to
confession once in a while, with some formal shows of Contrition, whereupon of
course they must be absolved, without and before any other testimony of their
repentance: And then they think they are clear with God Almighty for all that
is past: and being so, they think they may make bold to run on the score again
for a time, with a purpose of acting over the same penance again, when time
serves for their new sins. And this is taken by the vulgar people to be the
business of repentance, sufficient to save them; from Hell, at least; though
not from Purgatory: So that, if they be not prevented at last (by sudden death)
of time or opportunity to act this repentance, they are safe enough, though
they live in a course of sin: And against that fear they have also this Salvo,
that, if it should so fall out, their intention and desire of confession shall
be accepted for the deed. And this Doctrine wants nothing but the seal of
Infallibility, to make it the most Comfortable to flesh, and blood, that can
easily be invented: However, though it be no Article of Faith, yet it is safe
enough to believe it, because it wants not the warrant of a probable opinion,
from the judgment of the Doctors that have taught it.

But to make the worst of it; how false and pernicious soever this Opinion, or
Practice be, it is altogether as true, and as safe, as that which is commonly
followed by us. The only difference is, that we have the advantage of them for
ease; whiles we can excuse our selves, of all their trouble and shame of
confessing our sins to a Priest, and satisfy our consciences with doing it to
God only, with as little sincerity, and less regret, than they do to a man.
For, what is more ordinary with us, than for people to make solemn Confession
of their sins, jointly in the public Congregation, and particularly, after a
fashion, in their private Devotions every day, and to ask God forgiveness, and
then return to them again, as constantly as night and day, light and darkness,
do succeed one another: As if it were a matter of course, as necessary for us
to do, as to sleep and wake. How many are they in both Churches, that do
persuade themselves, that the Duty of Repentance, is sufficiently discharged,
by such a formal customary practice of confession; which (so performed) is so
far from the effect of a true Repentance (that is, from availing any thing
toward the remission of sin) that it must needs be a great aggravation
thereof: in as much as it can signify, before God, nothing more than a
continued practice of impudent hypocrisy. For what else can it be for a man
daily to confess his sins, without any real desire, purpose, or care to
forsake them? And this hypocrisy is very much augmented by the formality of
such devout petitions as are usually joined with such confessions, viz. that
God will grant them hereafter, to live a sober, righteous, and godly life, to
the glory of his holy name: and that the rest of their life, hereafter may be
pure and holy: that they may hereafter serve and please God in holiness of
life, and the like: which prayers going out of fained lips (as they must needs
do, whiles the things prayed for, are neither designed, nor desired) are turned
into sin: being an open flattering of God with their lips, whiles their hearts
are far from him: What else can it be but a plain mocking of God, and taking
his Holy Name in vain, for a man with such seeming devotion, to pretend an
humble, and earnest desire of his grace, to enable him to perform such things
as he never intends to go about? This Repentance therefore consisting only in
such formal confessions, and petitions, is nothing but an addition to the sin
of the hypocritical penitents, and therefore far enough from the right notion
of repentance to salvation.

But hitherto I have insisted only upon some gross mistakes about the matter of
repentance, whith remain to be rectified by a right description of the true
nature of that duty: wherein, it must be acknowledged that the forementioned
things ( viz. sorrow for sin with confession thereof to God) being supposed to
be sincere, and joined with an unfeigned purpose of forsaking all known sin in
the contrary practice of a holy life, are not only true and real parts of
repentance, but do amount to the effect of a true repentance inchoate or
bebegun: whereunto nothing is wanting to complete the being of it, but the
entire performance of such a purpose, in the sequel of a man's life: As may be
learned from the words of the Baptist; Matthew. 3.8. Bring forth therefore fruits
meet for repentance; and the like of S. Paul, preaching to the Gentiles, That
they should repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance, Acts
26.20. Both which Texts do signify, that repentance has a kind of existence
(as it were in its root) antecedent to the fruits, and works thereof. And the
latter of them does specially declare wherein the true notion and nature
thereof does consist, viz. in turning unto God. Repent, and turn unto God; the
latter phrase is exegetical, declaring the sense of the former. To repent is to
turn unto God; which supposes an aversion from God, as the antecedent
condition, and posture of every penitent sinner. And so much is signified by
the name of a sinner; Sin being nothing else but an aversion or turning away
from God.

So that Repentance being the same thing with Conversion in Scripture-sense, is
a relative word, having a double term of relation, a quo and ad quem, from
which, and to which The latter is expressed by the Apostle in the forementioned
words, (...).
Repent, and turn unto God. From whence it is called Repentance toward, or
unto, God, Act. 20.21. The former is signified by the same Apostle, He. 6.1.
Repentance from dead works, that is, from sinful works, called dead works
because they are the acts of a man Spiritually dead and destitute of Spiritual,
and Divine life. These two things make up the entire signification of
repentance, viz. turning from sin as sin, that is, all known sin; unto God,
that is, unto the universal duty of obedience unto his will: most fully and
plainly expressed by the words of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.21. But if the wicked
man will turn from all his sin which he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die, This I take to be one of the plainest, and compleatest descriptions of
Repentance which is to be found in Scripture: Wherein the same general duty is
otherwise set forth, in great variety of expression: As, to rent the heart, to
circumcise the foreskin of the heart, to abhor our selves, to cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, To crucify the old man, and the flesh, to mortify the
deeds of the body; to cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God; to put off the old man, and
put on the new, to cleanse our hands, and purify our hearts, to deny all
ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in
this present world, etc. Whereunto the general terms of Regeneration,
Sanctification, and the new Creature, are materially equivalent.

These and many other expressions there are of the same general duty: all of
them signifying an essiectuall change of the whole man, inward and out ward;
beginning in the mind or understanding; (...).
by which all humane affections and actions are governed from whence both Greek
and Latin names are derived which primarily and properly signify a change of
the mind, or intellectual part of the soul, but are understood practically, as
before I showed, cencerning Faith, and Knolwedg, in Scripture-sense: Thus is
Repentance expressed by the Apostle to be, a renewing in the spirit of the
mind; Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Romans 12.2.
a transformation of a man by the renewing of the mind; putting off the old man
with his deeds, Col. 3.10.
and putting on the new man which is renewed in knowledge: These expressions
(with other like) do signify this work of conversion, (...).
to begin in Repentance or the understanding, the ruling faculty in a man; the
prime recipient of all grace which therefore is sometimes called light, Ephesians.
5.8. Heb. 6.4.
illumination, and inlightning: as, on the contrary, sin is termed darkness
very frequently. Repentance comprehending the whole work of grace, is begun in
the mind, but has its most proper effect, and seat in the Will, as sin also
has. It is the effectual, habitual, conversion of the Will that makes out a
true Repentance; that being the only faculty which is capable of command, and
most directly and immediately obliged to obey, having also the power of
commanding the affections and actions of the whole man.

And upon this account it is, that Sorrow for, and Confession of sin, do
sometimes signify a true Repentance, having the promise of pardon annexed to
them: because where they are sincere, they do infer such a change in the Will,
as amounts to Repentance. For a true godly sorrow for sin as offensive to God
and repugnant to his just and holy Will, cannot be separated from a real
purpose of forsaking the sin. Because it is impossible for a man to be
sincerely sorry for that which the Will allows, either as already done, or to
be done hereafter. And therefore also such confession of sin as proceeds from a
godly sorrow, does necessarily imply a conversion or change of the Will; which
if it be so radicated, and fixed, as will prove effectual upon the trial,
(which God only knows) is nothing less than a true Repentance begun in the
Heart. But this may seem more than enough, to have been spoken by way of
Explication of so ordinary a Point: whereunto therefore I shall add no more in
this place, but this one advertisement, to apply it to my Text; That, seeing
Repentance is a work of absolute necessity to Salvation, whosoever desires to
work out his own salvation, must be careful to work out his Repentance; which
is done only by bringing forth fruits, or works, worthy of repentance: which
can be no other than the works of a holy life: Seeing the work of Repentance
can only be said to be begun, by godly sorrow, and confession of sin; and that
only, when those things are joined with a firm and sincere purpose of
reformation: it is evident that the entire duty can no otherwise be wrought
out, than by a constant, and faithful performance of that godly purpose.

Having now laid down from Scripture the nature of Repentance, I come to the
Answer of the Objection before mentioned, consisting of two Branches: 1. That
the urged necessity of obedience to the commandments, as part of the condition
of the New covenant, destroies the distinction of it from the Old: making both
of them to in these general terms of, Do this and live. And the consequence of
this, is 2. That the burden, hereby laid upon Christians, is intolerable, in
as much as the keeping of the Commandments, is a yoke too heavy, for the
shoulders of lapsed nature, though strengthened by grace.

My answer to this Objection, shall be grounded upon the Doctrine of Repentance,
as that is no other than a peculiar precept, and privilege of the New Covenant:
Repentance (as has been shown) in the complete sense of the word, and extent
of the duty, requires obedience to the commandments, (as Faith also does); but
not the same obedience, which the Law requires. I say therefore, that
repentance is a precept of the second Covenant, and not of the first; a precept
of the Gospel, not of the Law, as such: For to repent supposes Sin, which by
the condition of the first Covenant (supposed to be made with mankind in his
innocence) is indispensably excluded: Repentance cannot become a duty, till a
man has broken the Law, and therefore cannot be a direct and absolute precept
of the Law: I say, a direct or absolute precept of the Law in its prime
intention, Repentance is not. But a consequent hypothetical, indirect precept
it is, of a second intention. That is, upon supposition a man has once
transgressed the Law, he is implicitly bound by the same Law to repent: as
Repentance signifies a cessation from sin, and a return to the duty of
obedience. Otherwise a man might be discharged from the obligation of the Law
by breaking it. Romans 4. 1 John 3.
And then he that had sinned once, could sin no more; because, where there is
no Law, there is no transgression. But that Law that binds a man to perpetual
obedience, does not only bind a man from sinning once; but, supposing that he
has done so, it must needs oblige him to cease from continuing in his sin; But
properly and directly, Repentance is a precept of the Gospel, directed to the
transgressors of the Law, as a remedy for the breach of it, and a condition of
pardon, not allowed by the Original Law. And therefore, it is not a precept
only, but a privilege, peculiar to the Gospel; being a gracious dispensation,
and mitigation of the rigor of the Law, Act. 11.18. God has granted to the
Gentiles repentance unto life. That a sinner upon his repentance (through Faith
in a Mediator that has expiated his sins) should obtain remission of his sin,
and be discharged from the penalty of the Law, is a new grant, grace, and
privilege of the second Covenant.

The difference therefore between the first, and second Covenant, lies not in
the common sense of those general terms; Do this and live: as if the second
Covenant required nothing at all to be done (which is contrary to our Text and
all those which have been alleged for the explication thereof) but partly in
the special signification of the Word this; and partly in a gracious promise of
Grace, sufficient to enable a man to perform what ever is to be understood by
that word this; which cannot be so interpreted as to signify the same thing in
reference to both Covenants: Because, though something be required to be done,
as a Condition of the new Covenant, as well as of the old: yet not the same:
For, something was required in the old, which is not in the new, and something
is required in the new, which was not in the old: and something is required in
both. For instance; The old Covenant indispensably required perfect innocence,
in an entire fulfilling the whole Law, written in the heart of man, or declared
(or to be declared) by divine Revelations; leaving no place for any such thing
as Repentance to be admitted for a Remedy of Sin: But, this perfect Innocence
is so far from being required in the new Covenant, as the very Supposition of
it prevents and destroys the end and design of the New; which imports a plain
contradiction to such sinless innocence: In as much as the new Covenant is
nothing else but a Remedy provided by the grace of God, for the want of such
innocence: Were it possible to perform the condition of the old Covenant, the
new could have no place: because, that supposes a man a transgressor of the
old. And if now it were possible for any man to obey the whole Law, without any
new transgression, yet he that is already a sinner, Romans 5.18, 19.
(as all men are by the first transgression) could not be saved by that
Covenant, because his being so, renders him incapable of pleading performance
of the Condition thereof. This therefore is a main difference between the two
Covenants. The first exacts perfect Obedience and Innocence, the second admits
Repentance.

A second difference of these Covenants, is in the first and principal Article
of the new Covenant, which is consigned, upon the Condition of Faith in Jesus
Christ, as a Savior to save us from our Sins. Which also imports a plain
Repugnance to the Condition of the first, in as much as it implies a violation
of it. Faith in a Savior, to save us from our Sins, could be no precept of the
old Covenant; because, that does neither declare nor admit any such Savior.
These are two main things, whereby the two Covenants are distinguished in their
Conditions; and it is not requisite in this place to name any more.

But with these Differences, there is also something common to both: and that
is, the general Obligation of Obedience to the Commandments, according to the
express words of our Savior before alleged: If thou will enter into Life,
keep the Commandments: And this I take to be a duty of such necessity, as could
not be discharged or dispensed with by any positive Will, or Covenant of God,
upon any Consideration whatsoever: No not upon that of a most perfect
satisfaction for the breach of the Law, with an entire fulfilling of it by a
Surety, for, and in the stead of the Transgressors: I say, that neither upon
this, nor any other Consideration, the Duty of Obedience to the Moral Law of
God, could be discharged, or dispensed with: For these Reasons;

1. Because such a discharge or dispensation, is contrary to the Sovereignty of
God, which imports an Authority to command all Creatures that are capable of
receiving, and obeying any commands. This Authority being essential to the
Divine Nature, He cannot divest himself of, by any positive Will, no more than
he can destroy his own Essence: But, to discharge a Creature capable of the
duty of Obedience, from all obligation thereunto, were to put off that
Authority; because, Where there is no obligation to obedience, there can be no
authority to command. If therefore God should discharge a Creature of his duty
of Obeying his Commands, he should thereby quit his Sovereignty over that
Creature, which is altogether impossible.

2. Because such a liberty granted to any part of mankind, is contrary to the
Justice, and Holiness of God, in as much as it implies a license, and
toleration of the utmost wickedness, that could be committed by them that had
obtained this liberty: For, where there is no restraint put upon the wills of
men by any binding law, there must needs be the utmost of license.

3. Because this Liberty is contrary to the nature of Man, as he is a
Reasonable Creature. Because, as he is reasonable, he is capable of receiving
Commands, and Laws from his Creator; and as he is a Creature, he is naturally
bound to be subject to them: The relation of a Creature naturally importing
such a debt of subjection to the Creator, as can never be discharged;

4. And lastly, Because there are some Divine Laws which are in themselves
indispensable to a reasonable Creature: Such is that which is commonly called
the Moral Law, in the strictest sense, signifying (not all Precepts, that
concern the manners of men, but) the same thing with the Law of Nature, and
right Reason; Which, as it teaches a distinction of Good and Evil, contained
in the nature of some actions, antecedent to any positive or express Law of God
or man, so does it indispensably oblige to the practical observation thereof.
(...)
This is that effect of the Law written in the Heart, Romans 2.15. (...).
which cannot be blotted out by any abrogation, without blotting out the
reason, that is, the nature of man. That which is in it self Evil cannot
without contradiction become indifferent, or lawful; But that which is not
restrained, or forbidden by any binding Law, must needs be lawful. Therefore
the opinion of Libertines, and Antinomians, affirming Christians under the
Gospel, to be discharged from the duty of Obedience, to any Law or Command of
God, as such; is not only false and heretical, but also impossible to be true:
in as much as it imports a repugnancy to the nature both of God and man, and
all distinction of Good and Evil; and withal it evacuates all pardon of sin,
by concluding an impossibility of committing it: For, where no Law is, there
can be no Transgression: I conclude therefore, that the duty of Obedience to
the Moral Law, is common to both Covenants: And that when Saint Paul says, We
are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.15. his meaning cannot be, that
we are not under any Obligation of the Law, but that we are not under the
rigorous Exaction of the Law, requiring perfect obedience, without affording
either pardon, for any Offenses against it, or any sufficient aid of Grace to
perform it. Christians by the Covenant of Grace, which now they are under, are
delivered from that desperate state, which the Law leaves them in, that are
under it; being relieved by a double Grace, first of pardon of Sin upon
Repentance; and secondly of ability through the assistance of God's Spirit, to
yield such obedience to the Law, as will be accepted.

And so to the Objection of the burden of that Obedience, which by the
premises has been asserted necessary to Salvation, I answer; That God's
accepting (by the new Covenant) Repentance, joined with Faith in Christ,
instead of perfect Obedience required in the old, is a sufficienu abatement of
the intolerableness of the old yoke, and as ample a dispensation, as could be
afforded to Sinners, to qualify them for salvation: which will further appear
upon these Considerations;

1. That Repentance (supposing men to be sinners) admitted by the Covenant of
Grace for the Condition of Salvation, affords a remedy for Sin, and a capacity
of Life, to them that by the old Covenant are absolutely excluded from all
hopes thereof.

2. That Reformation of life and future obedience, which Repentance signifies,
is not the same which the Law exacts; that is, not absolute, and perfect,
without any manner of defect. Not the not-sinning at all, but the not wilfully,
and presumptuously sinning, and abiding therein impenitently, after the
receiving (...).
the knowledge (or acknowledgment) of the truth, Heb. 10.26. A sincere desire,
and faithful endeavor of obedience, is accepted for Repentance: which may
consist with some such things as the Law condemns; as, sins of ignorance (not
affected,) sins of Infirmity, and surreption, Imperfection in the performance
of duty, sincerely endeavored; with many frailties, which a Christian labors
under, and against, but cannot perfectly overcome. Such things as these,
although as transgressions of the pure and perfect Law of God, they have the
nature of sin, yet by the tenor of the new Covenant, and through the mercy of
God in Christ the Mediator thereof, they shall not be imputed to the penitent
sinner, that by a true Faith lays hold upon that Mediator. So that there be
some sins which do not make void the effect, and benefit of Repentance, but are
consistent with the truth of it, and a regenerate state.

But because it is difficult to determine precisely and exclusively what they
are, it concerns every true penitent, to take as much heed as he can, of all
sin, and not to presume of any indulgence, for the least, that can be avoided
by him; And whiles it is said that some kinds of sin, are consistent with such
a Repentance, as is available to salvation, it is employed that others are not
so; and such are all gross, wilful, and presumptuous sins. But,

3. Neither do such sins as these, after a man has once truly repented,
exclude a sinner, from the benefit of the Gospel: But are still capable of the
same remedy, which is allowed for all sorts of sin, which a man is found
guilty of before his first Conversion: Although such sins do evacuate the
benefit of his former repentance, so far as to render him incapable of
expecting, or claiming the Remission of them thereby, suspending his pardon for
the present, till he has renewed his repentance, or repaired the breach of it.
Herein consists the abundance of Gospel Grace, and the benefit of repentance,
that it is never out-dated; not being restrained to one general pardon, (as the
Novatians heretically taught) nor limited to any number of Repetitions. There
is no sin at any time unpardonable under the Condition of Repentance; For that
against the Holy Ghost, is supposed to be so, upon this account only, that it
excludes that Grace, by which a man should be enabled to repent.

These three things (relating to the doctrine of Repentance) duly considered, I
conceive to be sufficient to answer the Objection before suggested. Especially
if that be added which I take to be agreeable to the doctrine of the Gospel,
viz, That whosoever imbraceth this second Covenant, shall be sufficiently
enabled by the grace thereof, that is, by the Spirit of Christ that helps him,
(though not to keep the whole Law exactly, and perfectly without sin, yet) to
do all things which by that Covenant are required of him to work out his own
salvation. This sufficiency of Grace, I take to be supposed in the Exhortation
of my Text, and confirmed by the Reason that follows after it. For it is God
that works in you to will, and to do of his good pleasure. Of which,
afterward.

Thus far we have proceeded toward the resolution of that great Question (What
is to be done by him, that desires to work out his own salvation) from the
distinct Answer of our blessed Savior, and two of his Apostles, to the same
Question. Believe in the Lord Jesus, says Saint Paul; Repent, says St. Peter;
Keep the Commandments, says our Savior. These three Answers, comprehending
whatever is required of a Christian, in order to his salvation, might suffice
for a complete Answer, to that Question. But considering the infinite weight
and moment of the Question, some further Enlargement of the Answer, (from 3. or
4. selected Texts) is not to be counted superfluous.

And the first of these additional Texts, shall be that of the Apostle St.
Peter, urging the same Exhortation with that in our Text, in other words, 2
Pet. 1.5. And besides this giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and
to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience, and to patience godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness, charity: viz. to all Men as well (...) Strangers and
Enemies as Brethren, to distinguish it from brotherly kindness, or kindness to
the Brethren, that is, to all Christians, (...). For if these things be in you,
and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Wherefore the rather, Brethren,
give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: for if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. For so an Entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Where, note these three things:

1. That to give diligence to make our Calling, and Election sure, is the same
thing as to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling: For Calling,
and Election, do signify the free Grace and Mercy of God, whereby Christians
are called, and elected, to the state of Salvation, by him that has given unto
us all things that pertain to Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him
that has called us to Glory, and Virtue, verse. 3. Life and Godliness, Glory
and Virtue, are the things, that comprehend the full sense of the word
Salvation, first declared, as it signifies, The being saved from our Sins, that
is, from the power and practice of Sin, as well as from the guilt, and
punishment thereof. And, to give diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure, is, to take care that this Grace (by which we are Called and Elected) may
prove effectual, (...).
firm, and permanent, and that we may obtain the benefit which was designed us
thereby.

2. The Direction given by the Apostle to this end, is, to add to our Faith,
Virtue, etc. that is, to apply our selves with all diligence to the constant
practice of all these Virtues, and to labor for a proficiencie in them; If
these things be in you, and abound, and if ye do these things, etc. which
agrees with the interposition of those words in the Vulgar Latin, and some
ancient Greek Copies, verse. 10. Wherefore the rather Brethren give diligence
(...).
by good Works, to make your Calling and Election sure: Our Calling and
Election, is to be made sure, that is, firm, and effectual, by good Works, in
the practice of the abovenamed Virtues: And this is to work out our own
Salvation.

3. This Direction is urged with an Argument drawn from the assured success in
the use thereof, in those words, If ye do these things, ye shall never fall.
(...).
For so an Entrance shall be ministered (or afforded) unto you abundantly into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ: The latter words do plainly
show that the assurance of our Calling and Election, (...).
expressed verse. 10. does not referr only (if at all in this place) to that
certitude of the Subject, as it is ordinarily called, that is, to our being
assured or confident, that we are Called and Elected, or to our acquiring a
certain Plerophorie of faith or hope, that we are at present in the favor of
God, and in a state of Salvation; but signifies also, and rather, a certainty
of the Object, that is, that our Calling and Election shall be and remain firm
and effectual, See Romans 4.16. and 15.8.
unto our entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of Christ: which certitude
arises from the performance of the conditions of the Promise of entrance into
that Kingdom.

A second Text of like general direction to this end, is in Tit. 2. v. 11, 12,
13. For the grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, (...).
has appeared (or has appeared to all men: For the Greek words are
indifferent to either Reading) teaching us, that, denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present
world: looking for the blessed Hope, etc. Where, we are taught by the grace of
God that brings Salvation, that is, by the Gospel, what manner of
Conversation is required of them that look to be partakers of this blessed hope
of Salvation; to wit, that, denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, (not
indulging themselves in any known Sin, against first or second Table; they
should live soberly, (in reference to themselves and their own Bodies,) in all
temperance and chastity; and righteously toward all others, in all acts of
Justice, and Charity; and Godly, to Godward, in all Piety and Holiness, of
inward, and outward worship, both private and public. Hereunto agrees that of
S. John, 1 John 3.2. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. And a complete paraphrase of that Text, we have in
the words of S. Paul 2 Cor. 7.1 Having therefore these promises (dearly
beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Salvation is promised in the Gospel,
under condition of sanctification; 2 These. 2.13. And is therefore no otherwise
to be wrought out, than by a through cleansing of our selves, from all kinds
and degrees of pollution, both of Soul and body, as far as is possible, and
laboring to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

I shall mention but one Text more, by way of general Direction, what a
Christian should do to work out his own Salvation: and that shall be from the
Apostle: 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved brethren be ye steadfast, and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. The word therefore referrs to the
precedent discourse, that takes up the whole chapter, containing an ample
confirmation, and explication of that grand Article of Christian Faith, viz.
the Resurrection of the Faithful to Everlasting life, and the final
accomplishment of their Salvation from sin, and death: The truth of which
Doctrine, to him that believes it, affords an argument, abundantly sufficient
to persuade and encourage him, to all that may be necessary, or profitable to
the attaining unto this blessed estate, wherein his labor will be so fully
recompensed. And therefore together with this argument, from the certainty of
the reward, the Apostle concludes his discourse, with special directions how it
is to be attained: showing, 1. What that work is, which is to be done to this
end, 2. How it is to be persued. viz. with all constancy, and diligence.

1. He shows what that work is, which is to be done by him that looks for
this reward. It must be the work of the Lord: and what is that? our Savior has
told us in the Text before quoted: Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him, whom he has sent. But this Faith, as has been declared, does
not exclude other works, but necessarily require them, as it is effects, and
consequents. By the work of the Lord, therefore, must certainly be understood,
all manner of good works, that is, all such as are agreeable to the known Will
of the Lord. For albeit no man may expect to be saved by, or for, any merit of
his works: yet the Scripture frequently declares that every man shall be
judged by and according to his works. And though Faith be the prime condition
of justification, and gives a man a title to Salvation; yet is this title to be
held under the Condition of good works, without which this Right cannot be
maintained. Because such a Faith as gives this right cannot be maintained
without them: Jam. 2.14.22.
For Faith without works is dead: that is ineffectual and vain. What will it
profit a man to say he has Faith and have not works? Can Faith save him? No,
for Faith is made perfect (that is, effectual and saving) by works: To work out
a man's Salvation then, is to do all manner of good works that are in his power,
and to abstain from evil, upon a principle of Faith in the Lord Jesus, working
by love. And this must needs be all that can be done by a Christian in order to
this end: Provided that this work be persued in such manner, as is directed by
the Apostle's Exhortation, in the first words: Be ye steadfast, and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord: wherein two things are prescribed
concerning the performance of this duty; the first is Constancy, expressed in
three words steadfast, unmovable, always. The second is Diligence, and Zeal
signified by the word, abounding.

First, to be steadfast and unmovable, is, to stand fast in the Faith: and to
be constant in the work of Faith. And so much is implied in the word work out
your own Salvation, which (as before was observed) supposes the work already
begun, and yet remaining to be perfected, by a continued perseverance,
whereunto only the promise of Salvation is made: He that endures to the end,
shall be saved, Mat. 10.22. And when the Apostle says, God will render to
every man according to his works, he interprets himselfs in the next words, To
them that by patient continuing in well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and
immortality, (God will render) eternallife. To. 2.6, 7.

Secondly, He that will work out this end, is advised by the Apostle to labor
to abound in the work of the Lord; which is the same thing that S. Peter
teaches us, when he exhorts to give disigence (by good works) to make our
calling and election sure: And though the abounding in good works, be not
absolutely necessary to the attaining of Salvation, as it is to the qualifying
a man for the Degrees of the reward; yet it is, without doubt, the safest
course to secure the Title it self: which a few good works, with the neglect of
others, will not do. If these things be in you and abound (says S. Peter) they
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful. A field or tree is
judged barren and unfruitful, though it does bear some fruit (as suppose,
there and there, an ear of Corn or an Apple) if there be no proportion between
the ground, or the tree with the respective cost bestowed upon them, and the
crop that they yield: So certainly will men be judged, by the proportion of the
ablities that God affords them, to their good works; else, almost every man
would be saved; because there is scarce any man so bad, but he does or has
done some good works, at least materially good,

Thus I have shown at large from Holy Scripture only, what that work is by
which our Salvation is to be wrought out: and shall finish my Answer to that
Question, with the addition of one Advertisement more: which is, that, none of
this work can be done, without the assistance of Divine Grace, as we are taught
by the words immediately following my Text; For, it is God that works in you
to will, and to do, of his good pleasure: of which something more afterward;
At present, I only observe this consequence from them, agreeable to the
question in hand, viz. That, seeing there is such an absolute necessity of Gods
Grace to the performance of this work, it follows, that, Whatsoever is
necessary to obtain this Grace, must be equally necessary to work out our own
Salvation. Seeing therefore that Prayer, Hearing, Reuding and Meditating on
Gods word, and the frequent participation of the Holy Eucharist, or Supper of
the Lord, are the ordinary means, instituted by God for the obtaining of his
grace, it is necessary, that a Christian should diligently apply himself to the
practice of these duties, not only as good works, but as the means of grace to
enable him to do what ever else is required of him to work out his Salvation.
But of these things more hereafter, in the Application.

Come we now to the third Question; viz. What is meant by those words with
(...).
fear and trembling,? We have spoken of the matter of this work wherein that
consists. These words are added to express the manner of the performance of
this duty: And it is not to be imagined that there is any material difference
in the sense of these two words, though the latter of them, does properly
signify the effect the former: (...) Christ.
For, Trembling is the effect of fear. But here, they are no other than
Synonymous expressions; the general use whereof, is only to fortify, and urge
the same sense.

The meaning of the words will best be understood, partly from the opposites of
such a disposition, as is thereby signified, and partly from the use of the
same words in other Texts of Scripture. Now the direct Opposites of fear and
trembling, are presumption, and self-confidence, or vain confidence, together
with (...) Chrysostom. in Ioc.
negligence, and spiritual sloth. Fear and Trembling is first opposed to
presumption, and self-confidence and so signisies humility, modesty, and
reverence. From an humble sense of our own weakness, aptness to neglect, and
inability to perform this work, without the special assistance of divine grace,
Romans 11.20: (...), Be not high-minded, but fear. This agrees with the
subsequent words, declaring the reason of this disposition; For it is God that
works in you to will and to do, of his good pleasure: And with this sense of
these words agrees the use of them, in Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear,
and rejoice with trembling, i. e. with all humble reverence, and dread of his
Divine Majesty, as Heb. 12.28. Let us have grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence, and godly fear.

And without doubt a second thing signified by this fear and trembling, (...).
Chrysostom.
is diligence, care, and solicitude, upon the due apprehension, and
consideration, of the infinite weight, and moment of this work, in order to its
end; as also, of the difficulty of performing it by reason of our own weakness,
and the many impediments, we have from the Devil and the world in the persuance
thereof. These two things, humble reverence, and diligent caution, are
signified by the same words, used by S. Paul, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient
to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling,
in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; i. e. with a careful reverence (not a
slavish fear); and with an honest sollicitous diligence and caution, lest they
should offend or displease, neglect or do any thing amiss: So, 2 Cor. 7.15.
Titus bears witness to S. Paul, of the ready obedience of the Corinthians to
his Orders, and how they had received him, with fear and trembling; that is,
with all reverence, carefulness, desire and zeal, to approve themselves unto
him, verse. 11. So are the same words to be understood in our Text: Work out
your own Salvation, with fear and trembling; that is, with all humility and
reverence, in dependence upon God's grace, not trusting to your own power and
ability, and yet doing your duty with all care and diligence.

To this purpose are many Precepts, and Exhortations of our Savior and the
Apostles, agreeable: to be here added; not so much to confirm the Obligation,
as to press the Performance of so important a Duty. Such is that of our
Savior, Lack. 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Where may be observed,
first that the word Strive (being a Metaphor borrowed from those laborious
Combats and Games of the Greeks, (...).
wherein the Combatants were engaged to strive with might and main, for the
Victory) comprehends the sense of these two words with fear and trembling; that
is, with the utmost of care and industry. And 2. The necessity of this Labor,
is urged from the straitness of the Gate, i. e. the difficulty of Entrance into
Life. And 3. from the Miscarriage, and ill success of many that seek to enter,
who through presumption or negligence, (the opposites of this Fear, and
Trembling) shall not be able to enter. Let us therefore fear (says the
Apostle) lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you
should seem to come short of it: Heb. 4.1. A gracious Promise is left us, in
the Gospel, of a blessed Rest in the Kingdom of Heaven, typified by the Land of
Canaan, promised to the Israelites, toward which they were led by the Conduct
of Moses, in a laborious March through the Wilderness; representing the Race,
or Life of a Christian, through the Desert of this World, under the Conduct of
Christ, the Captain of our Salvation. But, as then it fell out, that many that
were brought out of Egypt, carried through the Red Sea, and led on the way
toward the Land of Promise; fell short of Entering, through their Unbelief, and
Disobedience: So does it come to pass, that many that have received the Promise
in the Gospel of entering into the heavenly Canaan, and are brought out of Egypt
(the state of Bondage under Sin, and Death) through the Water of holy Baptism
(figured by the Red Sea) by which they are saved, that is, put into a way of
Salvation, will at last fall short of obtaining this Promise by the same
Unbelief, and Disobedience. And so many such Fallers there are, that there will
be few left at last, to enter into that Rest: because there are indeed very few
that will take the pains to work out their own Salvation, begun by their
Baptism. And that being so, we have reason to fear, lest we be found in the
number of those that will come short. Let us therefore (...)
labor (that is, use all diligence) to enter into that Rest, lest any man fall
after the same Example of (...).
Unbelief, or Disobedience, v. 11. which is the Exhortation of S. John. 2 John
8. Look to your selves, that we lose not the things which we have wrought: for
want of laboring to work out our own Salvation by a perseveing diligence. So
run that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.

Saint Paul himself was not without this sollicitous Fear, or Care, when he
said, I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway, 1 Cor.
9.27. And when he used those anxious words, If by any means I may attain unto
the resurrection of the dead, (i. e. the Resurrection of the Just) Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect; But I follow after,
if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; But this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high Calling
of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14. Thus does the holy Apostle
testify his pressing diligence, labor, and solicitude, that he used, to save
his own Soul, when he had already as much assurance of it, as is to be had on
this side Heaven: And if so much labor was still necessary for him, (as sure
it was, except we will say, it was needless pains that he took) is it not at
least as necessary for us? Shall we presume of gaining the Prize, with more
ease than he durst trust to? Was he superstitious? or ignorant of the free
grace of God, and the terms of Salvation? I will conclude with the words of St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.17. If ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons,
judges every man according to his works, pass the time of your sojourning here
in Fear. Great reason there is that they that call God Father, should be
careful, as obedient Children, to be holy in all manner of Conversation, as he
is holy, v. 15. And should walk reverently, strictly, and watchfully, all the
time of their Sojourning in this World: knowing that God does, and will finally
judge every man according to his works: lest if they should be found careless
and negligent in the work of the Lord, they should receive that severe Sentence
of the wicked and slothful Servant, Matthew. 15.26.30. Cast ye the unprofitable
Servant into utter darkuess, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

Now omitting all other Texts of Scripture, together with the many Reasons that
might, (and shall afterward in the Application) be added, I shall here take up
with the special Reason, which is annexed by the Apostle in the words next
after my Text. For, it is God that works in you to will and to do, of his
good pleasure. Which words being added by the Apostle, by way of Argument or
Reason, to enforce the premised Exhortation, are so to be interpreted as will
best agree with the Scope and Intention thereof: And therefore are not to be
understood in such a sense, as destroys the freedom of the Will, in regenerate
persons, to whom only the Exhortation is directed: For that would make void the
Exhortation, as St. Chrysostom argues upon the Text. For if it be so, that the
Whole Work is done by God, irresistibly, without any liberty left to our Wills,
to neglect it, why are we exhorted to do it our selves? If nothing can be done
in this Work, without irresistible Grace; then nothing, that can be done, can
be neglected: No more good can be done by any Christian than is done; nor, no
less.

But I have no disposition to enter upon the Controversy, raised about the
sense of these Words: But shall plainly, and briefly declare, what I conceive
to be the scope, and meaning of them, in reference to the antecedent
Exhortation.

Therefore ought we to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling, that
is, with an humble dependence upon God, and with a diligent care to accept and
improve his Grace; because, It is God that works in us to will and to do, of
his good pleasure: i. e. It Is he, (not only that begins this work in us, by his
preventing Grace, whereby we are at first converted, and effectually called,
but) that carries it on, Phil. 1.6.
and inables us to work it out, by his cooperating Graces: So that it is
certain, we can do nothing without his Grace; which he gives to the humble, i.
e. to them that are sensible of their need of it, and depend upon him for it,
with fear to want it by their neglect of it. And though the first Grace which
is the Seed of God, by which we are Regenerated, and called to believe, be
given absolutely, without any Condition; yet, additional grace, whereby our
Salvation is to be wrought out, is not promised without the Condition of
Improvement of that Grace, which we have already received. According to the
words of our Savior. To him that has, (i. e. improveth his Talent which he
has freely received) shall be given, and he shall have abundance; But from him
that has not (i. e. that does not so) shall be taken away, even that which he
has. Matthew. 25.29. Seeing therefore, that without the grace of God, we can do
no good Work, much less work out our own Salvation; It behooves us to take heed
of Presumption, and Self-confidence, that we do not presumptuously trust to our
selves, and our own abilities, but labor for the grace of God: Whereby we may
serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Secondly, of Sloth and
Negligence, that we receive not the grace of God in vain, Romans 12.11. Heb.
6.12. 2 Cor. 6.1.
nor forfeit the assistance thereof, and provoke him to withdraw it from us, by
our unprofitableness; and so being left to our selves we shall neither be able
to will nor to do. It concerns us, to beware that we quench not the Spirit of
God, by resisting Him; that we be always fearful of our selves; and careful,
not to neglect the grace of God, which he gives freely of his good pleasure,
having not bound himself to bestow it upon every one, much less to continue it,
whether he will make use of it or no.

So these words do afford a just and weighty Reason, why we should work out our
own Salvation with fear and trembling; because it is God's Work, not only as
commanded by him, (which is one reasonable Consideration to move us to a
reverend diligence in the performance) but also as it is to be effected by his
special Grace, without which, it can never be done.

But I shall not deny, but that the same words may have another sense, which I
find given by the Greek S. Chrysostom.
Father, and more generally received by modern Interpreters, viz. as affording
an Argument of Encouragement to the forementioned Duty, from an assurance of
God's effectual assistance, that shall never be wanting to them, that go about
it, with such humility and diligence, as is signified by that fear and
trembling: For so may we be confident of this very thing, that he that has
begun a good Work in us, will perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ, Phil.
1.6. This confidence is no more than may be assumed by any Christian, upon the
general Promise; To him, that has shall be given; Romans 11.29.
And, The Gifts and Calling of God, are without Repentance: Therefore although,
in respect of our own insufficiency, we have reason to pursue this Work with
fear and trembling; yet are we not to be discouraged therein, seeing it is not
our Work only, but God's. It Is not an Undertaking of our own, upon our own
heads, or our own strength; but, it is God that sets us awork; else it had never
been begun: Nor is it only begun by him, and then left to us to work out, by
our own strengths or by that stock of Grace which was given us at the
beginning; but carried on by the power of God, whereby we are kept through
Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. So that, be we never so weak and
insufficient, of our selves, for this Work, we are sure, God has
all-sufficient power to enable us to go through with it. And this power of his
Grace is engaged by his good Will; For so God works in us to will and to do
(...).
of his good pleasure. His good Will to us, testified by the beginning of this
Work in us; and his Pleasure and good Will to the Work it self, which is highly
pleasing to him, are very great Reasons, why it ought to be pursued with all
care and diligence; not as our own Concernment only, but as God's Work which he
has set us about; (For, Cursed is that does the work of the Lord negligently;)
and is no less pleasing to him than advantageous to our selves. Thus it appears
that this received sense of the words, is not at all exclusive of that which
was before mentioned, but additional, and agreeable to it.

Thus much shall suffice for the Explication, (...)
and confirmation of the general Doctrine: That which remains, is matter of
Application, wherein we must have leave to speak plainly, and freely; in the
just reprehension of diverse sorts of people, for the notorious contempt, or
neglect of this so necessary a duty, both in the matter and manner of it.

1. And first, What shall we say to such persons as act directly contrary to
the matter of this precept? Being so far from working out their own Salvation
with fear and trembling, that the Main of their work tends to a quite contrary
end, leading and disposing them to everlasting perdition, and damnation. How
many such are there, amongst them to whom the Gospel of Salvation is preached,
and that do not pretend to any doubt of the truth of it; who notwithstanding,
do not only sometimes, by accident, through infirmity, or inadvertency, act such
things as are opposite to this end; but make it their constant work, study, and
chief business so to do: Living so, as if their design were to work out and
assure their own damnation: As if they were not only contented to be damned,
but ambitious of preferment in the Kingdom of darkness; Treasuring up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Instead of laboring to be
reconciled to God, they strive continually to augment the anger of God (who is
a consuming fire) and make themselves irreconcilable to him; blowing up the
fire of his wrath: instead of studying to fulfill the conditions of the
Promises, they do as it were set themselves to accomplish the conditions of the
Threatenings: Working with both hands earnestly (as the Mica. 7.3.
Prophet speaks) i.e. with might and main such things as they do themselves
believe and know to be inconsistent with any present hopes of Salvation. How
many Gallants are there, that think they have nothing else to do, no work that
they can or will find, Tit. 3.3.
but to serve diverse lusts and pleasures? Are there not many that make it
their whole employment, and travail, to pursue ungodly designs of lawless
pleasure, ambition, covetousness, malice, revenge or saction: Yea and many so
professedly vicious and debauched, as to glory in their wickedness, striving to
outvie other men in sin; that affect and are ambitious to seem more vile and
vicious than they are, greater Drunkards, Whoremasters, or Cheats, than indeed
they are! Making themselves guilty, by their vain pretentions of many acts of
sin, which they never were able to commit. Hear, o Heavens, and be astonished,
o Earth! that men that are reasonable, should, as it were, in despite and
affront of their own reason, wilfully prefer the depths of Eternal misery
before the utmost Height of all possible Felicity. That they should despise
all promises that are valuable to an immortal Soul! nay that they should fly
from Salvation and ^urt their own Destruction! That, they should be ^ love with
death, and be so zealous for Hell. that men should be so malicious to their own
^ouls! such Abaddons, and Apollyons, to them^lves, as to combine with the Devil
to bring ^emselves, into the same cursed state with him! (...) is the Devil's
business to work out the final and ^recoverable damnation of men; and because
he ^nnot do it alone without their own assistance, he ^^s men a work to do it
themselves. Oh that men should be so caitively disposed, as industriously to
^dermine, ruin, and utterly subvert their own Salvation! How dreadful it is to
see, (...). Basil.
^ow men will cark, and care! what ^fficulties, perils, and pains they will
undergo, to assure their own ^erdition! what vehement distasts ^hey have to
holiness, purity, and ^iety? what passionate doting affecti^ons to vice? How
impatient, and angry they will be at any thing, or person, that hinders their
progress toward the mouth of the bottomless pit.?

2. With these are to be joined, such as do not only refuse to work out their
own Salvation, but under, and discourage others as much as they can from this
work, by mocking and laughing at them that are so solicitous, so careful for
such a melan^holy design: that are so tender-conscienced as not ^o run with
them to the same excess of riot: that are so fearful of doing any thing that
may bar them from Salvation, or leaving undone any thing that may be necessary
to attain it; that are so scrupulous of their words, and actions; that make
such a do about this business of saving their Souls, and spend so much time in
the works of Religion, Praying, Fasting, Watching, Reading, Hearing,
Meditating: Such also as tempt, and solicit men to neglect this work, and to
addict themselves to contrary practices. Oh that these men would consider whose
agents they are! What direct adversaries they are to the Gospel? taking up Arms
against the design of the Savior of the world; joining with the Devil to
oppose the Salvation of Men, and to promote their damnation! How exactly
Satanical they are! How they out-malice the Jews and Turks, and vie malice with
the Devil himself, whiles they tempt men and women, to act contrary to that
Gospel which they believe to be true, as he does: whiles they mock, and
discourage men from doing such things as they know to be good, as the Devil
does: And, like him, are not willing to be damned alone, but ambitious of
gaining Proselytes to him, and filling up the Regiments of that Prince of
darkness! I have no words sharp enough to pursue the reproof of these men; And
therefore must leave them to the more powerful rebukes of their own
Consciences, Which, if they be not possessed with a dumb Devil, cannot but tell
them, they must never look to be saved, til that comfortable heresy of Origin
be approved for sound Doctrine: that is, That God (not only would have all men
to be saved, but) will save all, Devils and all, at last.

3. An other sort of men there are, not altogether so desperate as these elder
sons of Belial, no such zealous servants of Beelzebub; but yet as negligent in
the service of God, as these are diligent in the Devil's work as careless in
the working out their ^wn Salvation, as others are despeate in seeking their
^wn destruction: Men that are something afraid ^f Hell, but have very cold and
faint affections for deaven: Men that could be content to be saved, ^ather than
be damned to Everlasting fire; but ^ave little or no ambition, care, or
solicitude for their own Salvation. They dare not make such post ^ast to
Hell-ward; but withal, have as little have toward Heaven. That live as if
they were indifferent, whether they be saved or no: That can ^^^ and hear
Preachers discourse of Heaven, and ^alvation, with as little or less affection,
than they will hear or read a good Tale, or a Romance; and regard it no more
than if it were but a Poetical description of the Elizian fields, a Platonical
Idea, or a good fashionable piece of religious Invention, and speculation; a
good honest Fraud devised to ^osen men of the pleasure of their lusts, and to
fright or flatter them into a civil life. That seem by their carriage to
imagine, we are not in earnest when we persuade men to take so much care for an
other world.

O how do the greatest number of Christians by profession, slight, vilisie and
neglect this great Salvation, and all those rich and precious promises of the
Gospel, as if they were some inconsiderable trifles, not worth the regarding!
whereas if it be but a carnal or worldly interest that a man has to work out,
some good purchase, or bargain, a good place of preferment; or some choice
piece of pleasure; he will never leave working, by himself, and his friends,
till he has effected it, his head will be waking and plotting night and day to
bring it about. He will spare no travail, no pains to gain his end. How does
the Covetous man cark, and care, and drudg to get wealth? The ambitious man to
get honor? The voluptuons man to satisfy his brutish sensual appetite? Whiles
this spiritual eternal Interest is so generally neglected as if it were a
matter of no valuable concernment. Whereas no common notion, or principle of
truth can be more evident, than this is, That this Salvation (if men admit the
truth of it) is the only true, and supreme interest of a man, as a Man. The
common interest of all Creatures, is, Their safety, and welfare. Now, who is
there, that understands, and believes any thing meant by this term of
Salvation, that does not know that it is that wherein consists his only
possible safety, and happiness? There are indeed some other petty points of
temporal safety, and content, in this world; which some men call happiness. But
in truth, he deserves not the name of a Man, much less of a Christian, that
does think his chiefest Good can consist in any thing that this world can
afford: Nay that does not consider (which is something more than to know) the
notorious vanity of all this worlds goods, both in regard of the imperfection
of the matter of them, and in respect of the uncertainty of the duration; Who
does not know, that it is utterly impossible to secure his temporal enjoyments,
for any definite time, though never so short? But if that could be, it is not
possible for any man of the largest fancy in the world, to name, set down, or
imagine what portion of worldly things, would fully content him: so that if he
could work out the obtainment thereof, his desires would be so fully satisfied,
as not to extend any ^urther, as to any more of the same, or to any other
things. Doubtless it is experimentally, and sensibly evident to all, but Idiots
and Infants, that all the Objects which this world affords, are ^o more able to
fill the capacity of humane De^ires, than a pint of water would be to fill up
the whole channel of the Sea; or to satisfy the thirst of the droughty Earth.
On the other side, he that believes the Gospel, cannot but believe that this
Salvation, once effectually wrought out and obtained, secures a man from all
possibilities of evil, and brings with it as perfect a fullness of happiness as
the nature of Man is capable of: and that this safety, and happiness, in this
state of Salvation once possessed, is secured to Eternity, beyond any fear of
mutation. And is it not then a stupendous piece of irrationality, for any man
that knows, and believes all this, to neglect the working of it out? that is,
either not at all to regard it, or to make it no more than a mere by-business,
the least part of his care! Yet, what is more common than this extremity of
folly, even amongst them, who are not the worst of Christians?

When they go about any thing toward this end, how pitifully do they go to
work? Instead of this fear and trembling, this spiritual shaking palsy, they
are possessed with a torpedo, a dead palsy; or numbnesse, as if every faculty
of the Soul and Body were crampt. When they come to hear the Gospel of
Salvation, and to receive instruction how to work it out, which is the main end
and scope of our preaching; what lazy, listless, yawning postures do they
appear in? How wearily do they sit? If they pray, how cold, heartless, and
Zeal-less, is their formal devotion? If they give Alms how penurious, how
degenerous is their charity? Notwithstanding that the Author of this Salvation,
has so frequently and particularly described this, as a special means of
working out ou^ Salvation: Yet except men can find out some other end,
advantage or motive for their charity, what a poor pittance is it that they
will part with upon this design?

When men are frequently admonished, exhorted, and persuaded, by the most
powerful applications of Gods word, to the duties of mortification,
self-denial, watchfulness, holiness of conversation; how will they strain their
wits, to invent excuses, and pretenses to evade the necessity of these
practices? There is nothing that we have so perfectly learned from our first
Parens, as the art of excusing our selves from our Duties, and our Sins,
Nothing that men so vehemently desire, as to evade the power of Divine Grace
when it makes toward their Souls, by the preaching of the Word. When the holy
Ghost makes toward them to overshadow them, to the end, that Christ might be
conceived, and formed in them, How strongly is he resisted? How does the harlot
mind strive to prevent the conception of Grace, or to force abortion? Such a
desperate aversness there is in the Carnal mind, to the kindness of the Divine
Spirit, flying from his approaches, loathing his embraces, despising his
allurements, sleighting his rich presents, and bountiful promises, struggling
against all his importunities. Whereas let but the unclean Spirit come with any
slight temptation, to corrupt and deflowr the Soul; no common Strumpet is so
ready to prostitute her body, as the carnal man is to abandon his Soul to the
lusts of the Devil.

And what is the reason, why the spiritual, and heavenly promises of the Gospel
are so much despised? Why! There is a double prejudice, which the nature of all
men has against them: 1. Because they are promises of future Happiness. 2,
Because that Happiness is spiritual, and heavenly.

1. Because they are but promises of Happiness to come in another world, and
those generally confronted with some variety of present enjoyments in this
world; which must be relinquished, either in whole or in part, by him that will
build his hope upon those promises. Without doubt, the consideration, which so
much abates the sense that carnal men have, both of that extremity of Misery
which is threatened, and also of all that Felicity which is promised in another
world, is the futurity of both, at such an uncertain distance of time. And
consequently, this is one of the chiefest reasons of all that stupidity, which
is shown in their so great neglect of this Salvation. So impotently childish,
and sottish are the passions of men, that a dram of present pleasure, appears
more valuable to them than a thousand talents of future gain: which is a
judgment so perfectly brutish, as deserves not to be confuted by sober Reason.

2. An other Prejudice that carnal men have against the promises of the Gospel,
is from the matter of them, which is spiritual, and heavenly; having nothing
of the Turkish carnal Paradise in it: Nothing that flesh and blood, the
habitual sinner, can tell what to make of. Those high raised privileges of the
Beatifical Vision, the inheritance of the Saints in light, heavenly glory, the
Crown of life, and those things which are above, where Christ fits at the right
hand of God, are things that have no juice, no taste in them to carnal minds;
who are not easily brought to understand, or believe, there can be any true
felicity, or pleasure, in any thing which is not carnal and sensual. But this
is not only an infallible Symptom of Infidelity, but a degree of Sottishness,
beneath that of the better sort of Epicureans.

There is yet one branch of Reprehension remaining; and that belongs to the
presumptuous. The persons I have hitherto been speaking of, are such as do
either obstinately oppose, or wretchedly neglect this duty; as not having it in
design, to work out their own Salvation: and so are most directly peccant
against the matter of this precept. But there are others no less to be reproved
for their deficiency in the manner of performing it: Being such as do indeed
project, and expect to be saved, but are extremely far from any such thing, as
that fear and trembling which the Text requires. But instead of that, they are
transported with presumptuous confidences and vain hopes, built upon the sands
of their own Imaginations, promising themselves to be saved upon far easier
terms than those which from the Gospel have been declared. As upon a mere idle
fruitless faith, that is, either an historical dogmatical belief, of the truth
of the Gospel of Christ, that indeed there was, and yet is such a Person, as
Jesus Christ, and that he was a true Prophet sent from God, and the Messiah,
the Son of God; and that which is written of him in the Gospel is no fable, but
real truth: (Some of which things are as well believed by Turks, and all by the
Devil, more effectually, than by them; for the Devils believe and tremble): Or
else, nothing but a certain fiducial confidence in Christ as a Savior only,
without regarding him as a Lord, or having any respect to his precepts, as of
any necessity to Salvation: Hereupon they never doubt of their Salvation; or,
if they do against their wills, they account it their greatest sin, as if it
were indeed no less than the doubting the truth of Gods promises. This has
been taught by many, to be the only true justifying saving Faith: And no wonder
that men have been apt to entertain such an easy Doctrine; and that, having
entertained it, they are carried away with presumption, to think nothing else
of necessity required to qualify them for Salvation. Certainly, flesh and
blood cannot wish an easier way to Heaven than this is. But this error, in them
that can and do read or hear the Scriptures of the New Testament, (as well as
the Old) can be no other than wilfully affected. There being so many hundred
Texts of the same Scriptures, (altogether as clear and positive as any that can
seem to favor this Doctrine) that require other conditions and qualifications
for Salvation, than that of Faith: besides many that do sufficiently declare
that this is not the Faith to which Salvation is any where promised. I say
hundreds of Texts are found in Scripture, which do as plainly and as positively
(as is possible) declare that Repentance, Holiness of Life, Mortification of
fleshly Lusts, with all Duties of Piety, and Love to God and our Neighbor, are
Conditions of Salvation, no less necessary, and indispensable than Faith is;
And many Texts (before alleged) that do clearly show the true justifying
Faith, to be no other than such, as works all these things in the unfeigned
Believer, and therefore comprehends them all in those Texts where it is made
the sole Condition of Salvation. Faith that purifies the heart, that overcomes
the World, that is obedient to Christ: If these Texts be as good Gospel, and as
Authentic, as any of those which make mention of Faith alone, without any
additions, or interpretations; what can it be but wilful presumption, to expect
Salvation upon such a Faith, as is not joined with these Conditions?

Others there are, who do quit themselves of all this fear and trembling, all
the solicitude which the Text requires, upon a summary Consideration and
Confidence of God's mercy. Let their Lives be what they will, God is merciful
they are sure, especially to such as trust in him, and that they are resolved
to do, whatever Duty else they neglect. And though they do not deny his
Justice, yet they will hope in his Mercy, even against Hope. And why may not
the Devil do so too, if he could? Does not he know that God is merciful? O but
he knows, He will not be so to him! And how does he know that? Has he any
greater assurance of it, than this Revelation of his Will? And is not his Word
so? Yet, they will never believe, that God will be so severe in his Last
Judgment, as he seems to be in his Threatenings: but that his tender Mercies,
Psalm. 145.9.
are above all his Word, as well as his Works; That he is more merciful, than
not to save his own Creature; though he says the contrary: (He that made them
will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them, Isai. 27.11.
will show them no favor;) more merciful than just, or true, or holy; more
merciful in his Deeds, than true in his Words. That he does not mean as he
says (though he swear to it) when he threatens damnation to men, Heb. 3.11.18,
19.
and that they shall never enter into his Rest. Diverse other grounds there are
of Presumption, whereby wretchless Souls (in favor of the Flesh, to ease
themselves of the Yoke, as well of the Gospel, as of the Law) are wilfully
deceived. Such are all single Instances of partial Virtue, as Temperance,
Continence, just Dealing, some Works of pretended Charity, some particular
practices of External Piety; an outward Profession of Religion, siding with
Parties, Forms of Godliness, without the power thereof: Freedom from some kinds
of gross Vices, that others live in: The Pharisee's plea, They are not as other
men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. they are no Murderers,
Thieves, common Drunkards; no Heretics, nor Schismatics, nor Rebels, etc: And
what then? Why, without doubt (if they say true) they shall not be damned for
any of these Vices; And therefore they shall be saved. They Fast and give
Tithes, and Alms too, (yet have no Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3.) as did the Pharisee:
And shall not they be saved? No, surely, if our Savior must be the Judge, and
will keep to his Word: For I say unto you, (says he) that except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.20.

But I shall conclude my Application, with a serious endeavor to give force
and efficacy to the Exhortation of my Text; first by some powerful Arguments;
Secondly, by some general Directions, for the practice of this so important a
Duty.

I shall begin with the Arguments, or Motives; whereof the first is to be drawn
from the Consideration of the infinite Concernment of this Business. The
infinite weight, worth, and moment of this End, has been already declared in
the beginning of this Discourse, in answer to the first Question, viz. What
this Salvation means. And the sum of the Answer, collected from diverse
Descriptions thereof in Scripture, amounted to this; That it could signify no
less than, first, a Deliverance from the greatest Evil; and secondly, an
Obtainment of the highest Perfection of Happiness, that the nature of man is
capable of: And this I call, an infinite Concernment, without an Hyperbole,
because in the extension of it, it is no less; as being Eternal, in both parts;
a deliverance from Everlasting Death, unto an Eternal Life. Now it being
perfectly reasonable that the intention of men's Affections, should be
proportionable to the real value of their Objects; it follows, that that
solicitude and care, which the Text requires (though it cannot so much exceed
that which we have for other things, as the worth of the Object does, because
we have no Capacity of such an Excess; yet that it) should really and
effectually surpass all other Cares. And, if it does not so, it must needs be;
either because men do not Consider the Value of it; or, because they do not
believe the truth of it.

There are (I fear) not a few pretending Christians, that, to save themselves
the trouble, and the care of working out this Salvation, do reject the Faith of
it: To dis-ingage themselves from the bonds of Religion, especially the
Christian (which indeed is the strictest,) will needs persuade themselves, It
is but a politic Fiction, a mere Invention, a handsome Philosophical Fable,
imposed upon men's Credulity, to keep them civil by the common Engines of Hope
and Fear. They hold it to be against their Interest in this Life, to believe
there is any other, though it be not safe to deny it in this part of the World.
From such persons I shall turn away; leaving them to the Conviction, which they
will only admit, viz. that of their own Senses in another World. Their own
senses, I say, because our Savior has told me that no other will move them;
If one should come from the Dead (to tell them what he had seen or felt there)
they would not be persuaded. Luke 16.31.
For they have, not Moses and the Prophets only, but all the Apostles and
Evangelists, and all the Martyrs, together with an infinite number of Miracles
(witnessed with as much Evidence, as any matter of Fact is capable of) to
persuade their belief. And if all this be insufficient, I am not so vain as to
hope to give them any better Evidences of the Truth. But have reason to pass
them by, with the Censure of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.8. As Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth; men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the Faith: The Motive which I am urging to persuade men to
the work which the Text requires, supposes their belief of this Salvation; and
needs nothing to make it effectual, but a serious Consideration of the
transcendent excellency and necessity of this Design above any other. The
matter that is put to issue, the question in short is, Whether we desire to
live for ever in Glory and Happiness, with Christ and his holy Angels in
Heaven; or have our Portion with Devils and Reprobates, in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone, the place of utter Darkness, where there is nothing
but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. Now, were there no more than a
mere possibility, or probability at most, of these Events to a man, without any
convincing Evidence of their certainty; yet were it extremely unreasonable to
neglect them: especially when as the means requisite to the securing them, are
so inconsiderable, in comparison of the value and importance of the ends; and
otherwise so highly valuable in themselves.

To him therefore that has any Doubts arising in his mind about the truth of
those things which the Gospel declares concerning the Judgment to come, Hell
and Heaven, and is thereby tempted to neglect them; I shall only propound by
way of Advice toward his rescue from such a fatal hazard, these three
Questions, to be deliberated upon, before he abandons himself to such a
desperate Course.

1. Whether there be any impossibility in the substance of these Doctrines;
that there is another Life after this, with a General Judgment to come upon all
men? that there are Eternal Rewards and Punishments for men in that future
Life, proportioned to the Actions of this Life? Can it be demonstrated that the
futurity of these Events, does import Contradiction to any known Verities?

2. Is there no probability of the truth of them? Do not all the Testimonies
and Arguments that have been alleged for their confirmation, with the general
consent of almost all the Nations of the World, as well Heathens as Christians,
amount to so much as a probability of the truth of them? And if they be
possible, and in any degree probable, does it not follow that they may be true?

And then my third Question, that I would advise such a doubtful person
seriously to consider of, is no more but this; What if they should prove true?
And, if after these Considerations he can be so desperate, as to continue in
the neglect of these Events, without any care to provide for them, and can
arrest his mind with Hester's Resolution, If I perish, I oerish; Who can help
it? So much for the first Motive.

The second is from the necessity of man's Working to the obtainment of this
End: which is a thing not to be had or hoped for without Seeking, Laboring,
Working, Striving: Not a thing that comes by Fate, or Fortune, or by any
absolute inconditional Decree. All the hopes we can have of this happiness, are
grounded upon the Promises of the Gospel, and those limited by the Conditions,
which have been before declared in the Explication of this Work. There is no
Promise of Salvation to be found in Scripture, wherein some or other of those
Conditions are not expressed, and all the rest understood. Or, if there be any
semblance of an absolute Promise, it ought certainly to be interpreted by the
Conditional, by which it is limited. For, What if it can be found in Scripture
that God has said, He will save some, to wit, a certain number of Elect
Persons, without mention of any Character, by which they may be distinguished?
That sure is a Prediction, rather than a Promise; or, if we will call it a
Promise, yet it can never be capable of any Application to a particular person,
in such indefinite terms; nor till it be explicated and determined by some
conditional Promise.

But against this necessity of working for Salvation, it may be objected that,
Salvation is a gift of free grace, Romans 6.23. The (...).
gift of God is Eternal Life. Therefore it is called the Grace of Life, 1 Pet.
3.7. By Grace ye are saved, (...).
Ephesians. 2.8. And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is
no more Grace. But if it be of Works, Romans 11.6. and 4.4.
then it is no more of Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work: Now to him that
works, is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt.

1. The Answer to the Objection from these Texts, is clearly suggested in the
last of them: (wherein the strength of the Objection chiefly lies) to wit, in
the specification; First of this Gift or Grace, by the relative term of a
Reward; And secondly of the Work, as being such as makes the Reward to be of
Debt: 1. Thus Grace is termed a Reward, as it is also called in other Texts,
The Reward of the Inheitrance: And the Recompense of the Reward: Rev. 22.12.
(...). Col. 2.18. and 3.24. Heb. 11.26.
My Reward is with me, to give to weary man, according as his Work shall be. A
Reward cannot be without respect to some Work: A free Gift may be without any
Condition, but not such a one as is reckoned for a Reward: Whereas therefore
the Apostle says, To him that works the Reward is not reckoned of Grace but
of Debt, He cannot be understood to speak of all manner of Work (without
contradiction to himself in the term of a Reward,) but of such only as is
inconsistent with Free Grace, that is, Meritorious Work, and such as makes the
Reward to be a due debt: But no such work can be done by a Creature. Though God
may oblige himself in point of Truth to his Creature, by his free Promise; yet
he can never be obliged by it in point of Justice, by any Work of his Creature,
to any Reward (much less to such an one, as is so infinitely disproportionable
to any possibility of their Works.) Because all that can be done by a Creature
in conformity to God's Will, (that is, all the good that can be done by him) is
a due Debt to the Creator. But where the Work is a Debt, the Reward (if any be
given) can be none: Besides, it is absurd, to think that any man can be bound
to reward his own Works. But every good Work is the Effect of God's grace; For
it is God that works in us to will, and to do, of his good pleasure: So that,
this Condition of Evangelical Works, does not evacuate the freedom of God's
grace, nor yet diminish it, but rather advance it: Seeing those Works, as well
as the Reward, are the Effects of his grace.

2. But how little moment there is in this Objection, must needs appear to him
that first believes, (that which no body but an Atheist, or an Epicurean will
deny, viz.) that there is no temporal Salvation of the Body, Life, Health, or
any other good thing in this World, but is also the gift of God: And secondly,
considers, what necessity there is of humane industry, care, and pains, to the
obtainment of some (at least) of these Gifts.

And this Answer, if it be duly adverted, will suffice to solve an other
Objection, against the necessity of Working, in order to Salvation drawn from

2. Object. the Doctrine of Predestination. Because that Salvation which the
Text speaks of, is not only a free Gift of God; but such a one as is given to
none, but them to whom it is predestined: And to them it is so certain, as
can never fail, without the frustration of the Divine Decrees; What need then
of our solicitude or labor to work it out? Is it our part to take care that
God be not deceived in his Providence, or disappointed in his Decrees?

They that make this Objection, as to eternal? Secondly, supposing they do,
What need is there of any work or care of man's, for any end or purpose
whatsoever? What need so much toil of the Husbandman to plow and sow, and
mannure his ground, seeing his Crop (if he shall have any) is predestinate?
What need any working for meat, drink, or raiment? Nay what need of Meat,
Raiment, Physic? what need of Eating, or Drinking, in order to the presevation
of life, or health? what needs any care or defense to preserve the body from
the most imminent danger that can be? seeing that all preservation of life, and
health is decreed by God? The answer which any sober man can make to himself,
as to these questions, will fully suffice to discharge his mind from the
temptation of this old Objection. Seeing he cannot but understand, that it may
be altogether as true, that no body is predestinate to Salvation, but he that
endeavors to work it out with fear and trembling; as it is, that no body is
predestinate to live, in bodily health, and safety, but he that eats, and
drinks, and avoids such things as would necessarily destroy his life. And that
the certainty of the End does not take away, but rather infer, the necessity
of the Means,

3. The third Motive, may be taken from the equity and reasonableness of this
work: There is nothing required of us in order to the obtainment of this great
Salvation, but what, as reasonable men, we must conclude to be altogether just;
and indispensably necessary. To believe in the Son of God, (after that he has
been sufficiently declared to be so, by all reasonable evidences); obey Him, to
whom all power in Heaven, and Earth is given, and whom God has made Lord of
quick, and dead; To repent of, and to forsake all known sin; To deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; To love God with all the heart, and all the soul, and all
the might, and our neighbors as our selves; To do to others as we would they
should do to us: These, and whatever other Christian duty, is required, as part
of the condition of Salvation, are things so apparently just, and reasonable,
as will admit of no color of exception against them.

Let us but examine what those things are, which are required of us, to render
us capable of Salvation, and judge, Which of them, we could wish with any face
of reason to have been abated. Would we be saved by Christ without believing in
him? without acknowledging him for a Savior? without any dependence upon him?
Would we have the Son of God to be sent from Heaven, on purpose to preach the
Gospel of Salvation to us, and our selves not bound to believe on him? Or would
we be bound to believe his Doctrine to be the Will of God, but not be obliged
to practice it? Would we believe in him for a Savior, and have liberty to
reject him as a Lord? Would we, that he should have nothing to do to exact any
service or obedience from us, that has bought us with the price of his own
blood? Is it reasonable to accept his Promises, and refuse his Precepts? Or,
would we have a pardon for all our sins past without the condition of
Repentance; that is, with a license, or dispensation to continue in them still,
if we please? Would we be happy but not holy? Would we be Devils in this world,
and Angels in the next? serve the Devil, the professed enemy of God, and our
own Souls, whiles we are here on Earth; and yet expect to have communion with
the most pure and holy God, hereafter in Heaven? Can we contrive a way, How
light and darkness, righteousness, and unrighteousness, should have fellowship
one with an other? Would we have God to be reconciled to us in the free pardon
of all our offenses, and we not reconciled to him, but still be allowed to live
in a course of rebellion against him? Would we enjoy his favor, and love, and
not be bound to love him? or would we be acknowledged to be true lovers of God,
without any respect to his commandments? Would we enjoy the grace of adoption,
the blessing of sons, and the inheritance of the Kingdom, with a despensation
for the duty of filial obedience? If these terms be so unreasonable, as no man
can have impudence enough to own the desire of them; What objection can we have
against any of the conditions of Salvation? which consist in no harder matters,
than those which our own Reason is forced to acknowledge so just, and
indispensable, that, if we had been called to counsel about them, and had had
our negative vote in the passing of them; or, if we had been left to our
selves, to have set down our own terms, for our Justification, and Salvation;
we could never have set them lower, than they are set in the Covenant of the
Gospel.

The fourth Motive to the utmost of diligence to be used in this work, is to be
drawn from the difficulty of performing it. If we have a design to work out a
business of much difficulty, is there not a great necessity we should attend it
with proportionable diligence? Most true it is, in respect of the equity, and
reasonableness of this work (above declared) there is indeed nothing in it that
is hard, considered in it self; which is enough to verify the words of our
Savior, My yoke is easy and my burden is light; Matthew. 11.30. 1 John 5.3.
as well as those of his Apostle, His commandments are not grievous. Christ's
yoke is not like that of a cruel or hard Master, nor his burden like that of a
tyrannical Lord: His commandments are no harder than such as become the most
gracious and merciful Father: so far is he from requiring any thing of us,
which is either impossible or unreasonable.

Certainly it imports notorious repugnancy to the name and notion of the
Gospel; if not blasphemy of the Divine Goodness, therein proclaimed, to say,
or imagine that God should abuse mankind, with pretenses of such infinite grace,
and mercy, promised under such conditions, as we are in no capacity to perform:
as having neither any sufficiency thereunto of our selves, nor any ground of
expecting it from him, who only is able to afford it. If it be the Will and
command of God (as without doubt it is) that every one to whom the promise of
Salvation is made known, by the Gospel should (not only believe the general
truth of it, but also) make particular application of it to his own comfort;
(else how is it a Gospel, or Glad tidings?) certainly that very command
(without any new promise) implies a just warrant of confidence in him that
gives it, to supply us with a sufficiency of ability to perform the conditions
of his promise, if, being willing to undertake them, and sensible of our own
insufficiency, we shall sincerely seek this ability from him. But (to balk all
matter of Dispute) it is without controversy, that such persons, are as the
proper objects of this exhortation (that is, such as have, by the grace of God,
already begun this work) have as sure promises of sufficient grace to go
through withal, as they have of the Reward of it, being once finished: Phil.
1.6.
The promises before mentioned (by way of interpretation of the words after my
Text) are indeed sufficient to secure us from any insuperable difficulty in
this work. But do not therefore infer that there is none; but rather the
contrary; Because, if there were no difficulty, we should need no such security
for our assistance to overcome it.

But of the Difficulties which are to be expected, and incountred, in the
pursuance of this work, we are sufficiently advertised, as well by Scripture,
as by our own sensible and continual Experience, Strive to enter in at the
straitgate: Luke 13.24.
(says our Savior) For many; I say unto you, will seek (he does not say
strive) to enter in, and shall not be able; And (in another Evangelist) Strait
is the gate and narrow is the way: which leads unto life, Mat. 7.14.
and few there there be that find it. In which words there are no less than
three several Intimations of the difficulty of entering into life eternal.
The first is in the word (...).
Strive; the second, in the Epithets of the Gate, and the Way; Strait and
Narrow; the third, in the paucity of them that enter, and the ill success of
many that seek so to do. Few there be that find it, and many shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able: The word Strive in the Original, is borrowed from
the Olympic games, wherein the parties contending for the victory, were
stoutly opposed, and therefore engaged to put forth the utmost of their
strength. And with the same Allusion, the Christian Course is by Saint Paul,
compared to three several kinds of those Games, viz. 1. to Running; (...).
2. to Fighting, (or cuffing with the fist); and 3. Wrestling: 1 Cor, 9.24.26.
Know ye^ not that they that run in a Race, run all, but one obtains the
Prize? So run that ye may obtain. I therefore so run, (...).
not as uncertainly. So fight I, not as one that beats the air. (...).
But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
means, when I have preached to others I my self should be a Castaway. And
Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh, and blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers etc. 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of Faith.

Christianity is a Warfare, and Fight, against spiritual adversaries within,
and without. Within, against fleshly lusts which war against the Soul: 1 Pet.
2, 11, Jam. 4.1. Without, against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness (or wicked
Spirits) in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. All this matter of Combat, Strife,
Wrestling, is supposed in that repeated promise of the heavenly Reward to him
only that overcomes, Rev. 2.11.17. etc. And (to quote no more Texts in so
evident a matter) whosoever understands what this work is, cannot be ignorant
of the difficulty thereof, Wherein so many strong lusts of the flesh, are to
be mortified, the Old man to be crucified, Self to be denied, the Cross to be
taken up: So many duties to God, Our selves, and our Neighbors, to be
diligently performed. An infinite number of temptations, impediments, and
snares, must be overcome: even as many as can be raised, or laid, by the wit
and malice of the Devell, by all the variety of worldly things, both good, and
bad, that may be desired, or feared, to the prejudice of this design; and by all lthe men that we converse with in the world; The evil examples, inticements,
discouragements, and seducement of bad men; The errors, infirmities and
scandalous miscarriages of good men. There is scarce any person or thing in the
world that we can have to do withal, but may minister some kind of temptation
to divert us from the strictness of a holy life. But to all those difficulties
that can be created to us from without, the greatest addition is given by our
Selves, from our own manifold imperfections, infirmities, corruptions, and
carnal dispositions, comprehended under the general name of the flesh. For the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the thing that ye
would. Gal. 5.17. By all which considerations, it is abundantly evident, that
this saving work is full of difficulty, and therefore not to be finished
without great diligence.

Neither ought it to be a wonder that such an immense reward, as that of an
eternal felicity, should be charged with so much difficulty, as is enough to
exercise the best of our diligence: it being Proverbiably true amongst men,
that all excellent things are difficult to obtain; and if they were not so,
they would be of no such esteem. A cheap and easy Victory gives not so much
joy, as a difficult one. So undoubtedly the difficulties that we meet withal
in the way of Salvation (being overcome by the Grace of God) will much advance
the joy of that victory, and render us capable of greater degrees of glory than
otherwise we should be: That glory, as it is promised in Scripture, being to be
dispensed by way of reward, will bear proportion to the labor, and difficulty
of the work, not as meritorious in a strict sense, but as the effect and
exercise of Divine grace: For, glory is the Crown of grace, not as that
signifies a gift, habit, or infused quality, but as it works, or is exercised
in us, by the cooperation of our own wills, effectually assisted thereby:
Hence it is that both Scripture, and Catholic sense of the Church, does
attribute a special eminent degree of glory to Martyrs above other ordinary
Saints. I say, ordinary Saints, conceiving there will be as great a distinction
of Saints, as Scripture intimates there is of Angels. As in the Catholic
Church here below, there is a plebs, or vulgus; a populacy, and a Nobless; Some
(...). Act. 17.11.
more noble than others in the perfection of holiness: Some Heroes, such as
Enoch, and Elias; Ahraham and David; Peter and Paul, and their colleagues So
will it be in the Kingdom of Heaven; One Star will differ from anothr in
glory And though Infants and Idiots (baptized especially) will be saved, yet it
is not probable that their glory will be equal to that of other Saints, who had
less of Innocence, but more of virtue in their Lives. And upon this account, it
is justly desirable that Infants Baptized may live to adult years (though
therehy they cannot but incur some hazard of that salvation, whereof they
were for that state secured by their Baptism, as including the whole of the
condition, or qualification required in them) not only that they may glorify
God here (which is the end of our Being and therefore ought to be desired); but
also that themselves may be qualified for a further degree of glory, than their
baptismal grace, never proved or excercised, can be concluded to give them.

Upon the same reason, I suppose it not to be the interest of Christians, to
desire to get to Heaven with the least difficulty that may be: Not only,
because thereby we shall glorify God so much the less by how much the less
the exercise and trial of our love, and obedience, shall be: But also, because
by that means also, the state, and degree of our future glory and happiness,
may be abated, and that (for ought we know) to all eternity. This consideration
may afford great encouragement, and consolation to Christians, against the
special and extraordinary difficulties that they may meet withal in the way of
Salvation above others: Namely that all their labor of love will be
undoubtedly considered, in the free and bountiful reward.

But now against all the difficulties, and impediments that are to be met with
in this great work, we have also this further comfort and encouragement, viz.
That as we have many sorts of temptations, many lets, impediments, and
difficulties to pass through in this business; so have we as many (and indeed
more variety of) helps, aids, succors, assistances, and encouragements,
toward our inabling to go through withal. The means of gra^e are more
various, and more potent than the motives to sin: For in opposition to the
three general principles and causes of temptation, the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil, we have more than so many counterforces, strengths, auxiliaries, and
motives, to withstand those temptations.

As for instance, to encounter the Flesh, and corrupt nature, every Christian
has the promised assistance of the Spirit and grace of God, For the spirit
lusts against the flesh. Besides to oppose the inordinate lust of carnal
affections, and passions, every man has the faculties of Reason, and
Conscience; which if they be not rejected, or neglected, will do him some
service in this spiritual warfarre.

Against the temptations of the World, that is, of the things of the World,
good or evil, by way of desire or fear; a man has (if he believes the
Scripture,) first, the same kind of things of both sorts, to confront his
temptations, in the Promises of Blessings in this Life, to him that, denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, will live soberly, righteously, and godly, in
this present World, (For Godliness has the promise of this Life;) and in the
Threatenings of all sorts of Punishments in this World to him that does not so.
And secondly, he has, besides this, the things of an other World, both good
and evil, to desire and fear, infinitely greater than any thing, wherewith he
is liable to be tempted in this World.

Then, against temptations from the men of the World of all sorts, we have also
the Exhortations, Counsels, Admonitions, and Examples of good men, together
with the Prayers of the whole Church, to strengthen our patience, excite and
encourage our affections and endeavors to constancy in a holy life: Besides
the examples of punishments upon bad men.

Against the evil Spirit, we have the good Spirit of God, which is infinitely
stronger. Against the Devil and all wicked Spirits, we have the ministry of
good Angels, who cannot be supposed to have less power and will to assist and
further us unto all well doing, than the Devils have to hinder us, or tempt us
to evil. The opinion of an Angelus-Custos.
Angel-keeper allotted to every good man, is more received, and more probable,
than that of the evil Genius, or the Et tentans.
tempting Angel. And if neither be certain, as to the particularity, yet the
common assistance of the one, is as credible as the opposition of the other
sort of Spirits. But that which gives us the most certain advantage, is, the
promised assistance of God himself, by his all-sufficient grace, if we will
seek, embrace, and improve it. The Father is our gracious Father, ready to hear
and help us, knows our weakness, and how to deliver us from, or out of,
temptation. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Son, has overcome both World and Devil,
John 16.33.
not for himself only, but for us; having merited for us a sufficiency of Grace
to do the like. As our Head, and King, he is able, and willing to assist us
against all temptation, and to furnish us with all grace for grace. John 1.16.
The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head. Genesis 3.15.
And, The holy Spirit, abides in us (if we be true Christians) to work in us
to will and to do, what ever is required at our hands.

Besides all these, we have the Holy Word of God to teach us our Duty by way of
instruction, and to excite us to the performance thereof by rich and precious
promises, and to deterr us from sin by severe threatenings: And special Promises
we have too, in the same Word, (if we will take any care to observe the
implicit conditions of them in our own endeavors); Romans 6.14.
That Sin shall not have dominion over us; That God will beat down Satan under
our feet; Romans 16.20.
That he will not suffer us to be tempted, above that we are able, but will
with the temptation, make way for our escape: 1 Cor. 10.13.
that we may be able to bear it. All these things considered, and compared, it
is evident that those that are with us are more, and stronger, than those that
are against us. Our aids, and our Counterforces against temptations are
stronger, than all our Enemies: which abundantly clears the Justice and
Goodness of God, in permitting, and ordering all the temptations which we meet
withal in this World: And leaves us without excuse from any of them: Affording
us a sufficient encouragement to the work we have to do.

5. A fifth Motive to the prosecution of this Work with fear and trembling, is
to be drawn from the shortness, and uncertainty of the time, wherein it is to
be wrought out, which we all know is indispensably limited to the term of this
life: And therefore, that which our Savior says concerning himself ( Jo. 9.4.
I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day: the Night comes,
when no man can work,) does as much concern every one of us to consider: and
something more, in in respect that he knew the length of his Day, and the
certain Hour of the Night's approaching, which is impossible for us to do. We
are sure, There is no Work nor Invention in the Grave, whither we are going;
and how near, we may be to the brink of that, we cannot learn without a
Revelation; which no man in his Wits, will expect. They are in a sad condition
then, that have all this work to do, when they know not whether they shall have
an hour to dispatch it in; but they in a sadder, that will still deferr it.
Certainly, there is no instance of presumption in the World, that can parallel
the desperate folly of this dilatoriness in a Business of such infinite
Concernment.

And because I know, it is not in the power of words to express the madness of
this practice; I shall not make any further attempt to such a purpose. But,
instead of a weak declamation against such a folly as is above all measures of
rhetorical aggravation, I shall only (in compassion to the Souls of men)
propound, to them that may be persuaded to weigh them, a few serious
Considerations.

First, that although we be fully assured, by our Savior's Parable, that he
that comes in at the eleventh hour, may possibly find time enough, to finish
this Work: Mat. 20.6.12.
yet that (for ought any man can know) that hour may be already past with him;
yea, and the very twelfth may not want many minutes of being spent already;
with which the day of Salvation must necessarily expire; and to recover any
minute of it, will be as impossible, as to recall Yesterday.

Secondly, It is worth the inquiry, Whether those persons that came in, and
were accepted, at the eleventh hour, had ever been called before, and refused
to obey: For if they had not, or it cannot appear that they had, their Example
is vastly different from the Case of such, as have perhaps been called every
hour of the day, and have always refused, with a pertinacious wilfulness,
presumptuously deferring their obedience to the last. And though the negative
of their former Calling, cannot be fully proved, yet there is a strong
presumption for it, from their own words, if they signify any thing in the
Parable, Matthew. 20.6, 7. And about the eleventh hour, he went out and found
others standing idle, and says unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
They say unto him, Because no man has hired us: What these words should mean,
is scarce accountable, if they do not signify that that was the first time
they had been called to work.

And for the Thief upon the Cross, who came not in, till the end of the twelfth
hour, and yet had the privilege of accompanying his Savior, the same day,
into the Heavenly Paradise; it is no less uncertain, whether ever he met with
Christ before, or had heard so much of him, as could rationally oblige his
Faith. Besides, there were so many singularities of Circumstance in his Case,
(impossible to be found in any other) as, being considered by one that is not
willing to deceive his own Soul, can afford no more than a bare Remedy against
absolute Despair at the last Moment.

It is doubtless, a very rational truth, that one heroical act of Virtue, may
have a just Equivalency to a multitude of ordinary ones. And the service of a
quarter of an hour, may possibly, by it is degrees of intension in the zeal, as
well as by the extraordinary matter of it, be as considerable as that of many
years: Such perhaps is that of a sudden, free, and zealous Martyrdom; whereof
there is some store of Examples in Ecclesiastical Story. And whether the
acknowledgement of Christ, with so full and free Confession of Faith in him, by
one that had been so much a Stranger to him, at such a time, when the Faith of
all men, was so much discouraged, and that of his own Disciples, so much
shaken; was not equivalent to that of any Martyr, is a reasonable Problem: That
is, Whether upon all due considerations, it were not as great a Faith to
believe in a dying Savior, as it can be to die for a living one. It seems to
me a very evident truth, that the strength of this man's Faith did exceed that
of any person living in the World, except the Blessed Mother's. True it is, the
Heathen Centurion, and some others, that were with him, did make a verbal
profession of a like Faith in him, when they said, Truly, this was the Son of
God: Matthew. 27.54. But it is observable, that that persuasion was raised in
them, only by the sight of the many Miracles, and Prodigies which followed his
death, which the Thief lived not to see. Besides (to dismiss this Example with
one Consideration more, from the Circumstance of the time when it happened) for
any wilful impenitent Sinner to presume of Pardon at last, notwithstanding his
present delays, by the encouragement of this singular Example, has apparently
no more of reason in it, than it would be in a common Malefactor to adventure
upon Capital Crimes, upon the hope of a general Pardon, by the Example of such
a thing once granted by his Prince, at his Coronation.

A second Consideration against the delay of this Work, is to be drawn from the
multitude of Examples of such as (by unexpected Circumstances in their Death)
have been prevented of all possibilities of doing any thing toward it: by
reason of suddenness either of Death, or (which makes the Case perfectly equal)
of the loss of Understanding. Were the Examples of such a fatal pretension, as
rare and singular, as that of the dying Thief's effectual Conversion; yet,
considering the infinite moment of it is Consequence, they should in reason be
far greater Motives of Fear, and Caution, against Delay, than that can be of
Hope or Encouragement in it. But this Consideration is much to be advanced by
the innumerable contingencies, and possibilities, that may cause such an
absolute prevention: or at least may shorten, and determine that remainder of
time that a sinner can hope to have, to work out his salvation. Certain it is,
that every man's glass is turned for his Life, but what the Content of it is,
is impossible to know: Whiles every man knows that the contingencies of it is
being broken, or suddenly exhausted, are more than the number of Sands in the
biggest Glass that is: To go about to collect the number of Casualties by which
the life of man has been cut off, were an endless business: and yet so far
short of the possibilities by which it may be, as is not imaginable.

A third Consideration against delay in this Work, may be this: That seeing
nothing does provoke the wrath of God so much as presumption in Sin, it is
justly to be conceived that the measure, and continuance of such presumption is
the most probable thing that can be, to determine the extent of God's patience,
and to move him to give up a sinner to such a penal, invincible hardness of
heart, as will make it impossible for him to repent. We read of God's hardening
the heart of Pharaoh, after he had so stubbornly hardened himself, against all
the admonitions that had been given him by the mouth, and hand of Moses. Now
God's hardening Pharaoh's heart, does undoubtedly signify the withdrawing of
that Grace which was necessary for his Conversion, which left him under a
necessity of perdition. And this punishment (the severest that a man is capable
of, out of Hell,) is therefore justly to be feared by him that wilfully delays
his Repentance; because so to do, is an extreme presumption; And though it be
possible for such a person, (notwithstanding this provocation) to obtain Grace,
not only sufficient, but effectual to Salvation; yet no person is more unlikely
so to do. Such persons have least reason to hope for that Grace, and most cause
to fear the privation of it.

Every man that believes any thing in the matter of Religion, must needs be
convinced that he ows his whole Life to the service of God. Now for him that
cannot but acknowledge, he owes all his time to God's service, and has already
wasted the greatest part of it, in following his own lusts, and in a course of
rebellion against God, still to withold, deliberately, and presumptuously, that
unknown part of it, which remains, is such a degree of wickedness as, though
God may pardon, no man can tell, Whether he will or no. And though we are
assured he will accept the Work of his own Grace whenever it takes effect;
yet we have little reason to hope he will afford that Grace, to such as desire
not to partake of it, till it cannot be serviceable to him: let this then be
the fifth Argument or Motive, to stir up Christians to the diligent pursuit of
this Work; The shortness of the time that we have to finish it in, together
with the extreme hazard of delaying it.

6. I shall add but one Argument more, which is to be drawn from the infinite
love and mercy of God, which he has showed in this Design of our Salvation,
contrived and procured by the Incarnation of his Eternal Son; and effected by
the shedding of his most precious Blood, Who gave himself for us, to redeem us
from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works. For we know, that we are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver
and Gold, from our vain Conversation, but with the precious Blood of Christ.
And shall we now neglect that great Salvation, that infinite Grace, that cost
so dear the procuring? Ought we not to estimate the Worth and excellency of
this end, by the means, whereby it was effected? Will any wise Agent bestow
more Cost upon a thing than it is worth? The infinite worth of the Means, used
by so wise a Contriver, does fully confirm the excellency of the End: which in
it self does so much transcend the hopes of such poor Mortal Creatures. The
height and dignity of that far more exceeding eternal weight of Glory, the
Felicity of that State, together with the Immutability thereof, is rendered
credible, by the Means whereby it was purchased. For, had it not been a
glorious and immutable thing, surely God would never have designed to bring it
about by such an Infinite Project: And though God needs not the glory of our
Salvation, no more than he does that of our present Service; yet how much he
values both, is to be estimated by the Price that was given for it, Now then,
to despise or neglect this End, that was procured by such a costly Means, how
heinous a Sin must it needs be, To tread under foot the Blood of the Son of God!

I shall conclude my Discourse, with some special Directions how to prosecute
this Work with the best advantage.

1. Because (as we read in the following verse) It is God that works in us to
will, and to do, of his good pleasure, it behooves us to pray earnestly,
frequently, and constantly, for the effectual assistance of his grace. That
Godly fear and trembling which the Text requires, serves to drive us to God, in
the humble sense of our own danger, and impotency: And we have a promise that,
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10.13, Not
that this is all that is required to Salvation, but that he that does so, shall
not want any assistance of Gods grace necessary to Salvation. And that he will
give the holy Spirit to them that ask it, Luk 11.13. Always supposed that, we
ask aright, with sincere, and earnest desire to receive and improve the gift;
which requires, that we be careful, not to receive the grace of God in vain,
not to resist or quench the spirit: as is usually done by many that daily pray
for his grace in a formal, and hypocritical manner. The success of our
prayers, depends upon the sincerity of our desires which is only verified by
our diligent endeavors to obtain the things we pray for.

Secondly, Because the Word of God, and especially the Gospel is the power of
God unto salvation, able to save our souls, to make us wise unto Salvation, it
concerns us to attend diligently to the reading, hearing, and meditating of
this Divine Word: and that not only because it affords unto us direction how to
attain this end, by informing us concerning the conditions thereof; but also
because it is a powerful mean to work them in u^ The holy Spirit, by which God
works in us both to Will and to do, breathes in the Word and is ordinarily
conveyed thereby, into the souls of men.

Thirdly, Because, although this work cannon be done for us by any other
persons, yet it may b^ promoted by their assistance, we have great reason to
desire the assistance of Christian brethren, by their charitable admonitions,
counsel, conference, and prayers. And this help is most desirable from them
that are best qualified to afford it; and therefore, especially from our
spiritual Pastors and Teachers: without neglect of faithful brethren. It is
Saint James his advice, Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for
another, Jam. 5 16.
the effectual prayer of a righteous man avails much. When men are to work
out some temporal interest, to save themselves from danger, or to obtain any
preferment, they will desire the assistance of others, especially such as are
most able to further them in it: And have we not as much, and a great deal more
reason to do so, in this spiritual design?

Fourthly, It behooves us to take great heed (not only of all such things as do
directly oppose this work, as being contrary to it, such are all sinful
practices and customs, but also) of all hindrances, and divertisements from
it. Such as are found in the world: The men of the world, and the things of the
world.

First, The men of the world, by their vain company, evil example, and
otherwise, are great impediments to the serious prosecution of this work. And
therefore it behooves Christians, to have as little familiarity with them as
they may. Depart from me (says David) for I will keep the commandments of my
God: Psalm. 119.115.
it is not an easy thing to keep the commandments of God in the company of
evil doers: I have not sat with vain persons: (says he again) neither will I
go in with dissemblers: I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will
not sit with the wicked. As we shall have none of their company in Heaven, so
neither should we desire or delight in it on Earth, because it hinders us in
our way to Heaven.

Secondly, The things of the World are very great encumbrances, and lets in
this holy work: The profits, Pleasures, and Preferments of this world, though
innocent in themselves, yet do very much ^ivert men from the pursuit of true
holiness, and happiness. They that will be rich (says Saint Paul) fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9.
which drown men in destruction and perdition. 2 Timothy, 2.4.
No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he
may please him, who has chosen him to be a soldier. Take heed of being too
sollicitous for thy portion in this world, lest that prove to be all that thou
shall have; The generality of men lose all the treasures, joys, and glories of
Heaven, by being too covetous of the supposed lawful riches, pleasures, and
honors of this world. Remember the words of our Savior: how hard a thing it
is (though not impossible) for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
If thou would be sure to save thy soul, Love not the world, nor the things
of the world, 1 John 2.15. If thou would once be happy indeed, content thy
self here in this world with the hopes of it in an other life; and do not seek
to anticipate it in the enjoyments of this world.

Fifthly, Examine thy self often and seriously, whether this work be truly
begun, and how it goes forward: It is the exhortation of the Apostle; Examine
your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, 1 Cor 13.5. It
behooveth Christians to put the question to themselves, whether they be in the
right Faith, whether they be true believers or no: whether they be duly
qualified for this Salvation, according to the conditions declared in the
promises: Do I indeed believe in the Lord Jesus with an unfeigned Faith,? How is
this Faith perfected or verified by my works? Have I truly repented, and
brought forth fruits worthy of repentance? Do I live after the flesh or after
the spirit,? Is it my study and diligent endeavor to cleanse my self from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God? Am
I in the right way to Heaven or no? This practice of self examination, is so
much the more necessary, as it is easy to be deceived in a man's pretended
title to this salvation: multitude of persons are deceived, and will finally
perish, that make account to be saved, and do not suspect their own condition.
This is certainly the case of most men. For, almost all men do hope to be
saved; and yet our Savior tells us, that the gate is so narrow, and the way so
straight, that they are but few that will find it. How much then does it
concern us, To work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, to be exact and
curious in this business, and to take heed of flattering our selves with vain
hopes, and false grounds?

6. Lastly, To secure this work, let us remember and observe carefully the
precept of our Savior and his Apostles: Mat. 13.13.
Take heed, watch, and pray. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith: 1 Cor. 16.13.
Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, 1 Pet. 5.8.
as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. 1 These. 5.6.
Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober. Take heed of
spiritual sloth, and that thou fall not asleep in sin, and security. Remember
the parable of the foolish Virgins, that slept away their opportunity of
meeting their Lord, and were shut out of his company. There is no general
practice so useful, and necessary to the keeping of a good conscience, and the
perfecting of holmess, as this of constant watchfulness over our selves: The
want whereof is the cause of men's neglect of, and miscarriage in this work.

THE END

