A PREFACE, LECTURE, And a SERMON, Preached by that famous Servant of God, Mr.
JOHN WELSH, sometimes Minister at ^ERINGRAY, Preached near to GREENOCK:
^^^^shed by a Friend to the poor Church of SCOTLAND.

^rinted in the Year, MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
MY Friends give over your speaking, and let no voice be heird hear, but the
voice of the Lord, in the mouth of his Servant, I kow you are not ignorant,
upon what hazard we come and preach: and upon what hazard we come and preach:
and upon what hazard you come and hear, this meeting ye know is contraire to
the Laws of our Land, and ye know how they are reproached, and what names they
have given unto them: that they are called the randivoues of rebellione, and if
ye would be furnished with ane answer in case you be called in question for
this days meeting, I will tell what all of you upon good grounds, may answer:
the answer, I think you may give, is this, that our blessed Lord Jesus Christ,
has engaged our lands in a soleme sworn Covenant, with lifted up hands, to
the most high God: that we should own his Governmnet, and that we should own
his Gospel, and that we should give no concurrance to them that are intruded
upon the congregations, where his faithful Ministers, have been thrust out,
with very great trueltie, without so much as bringing before them, as to pass a
sentence upon them: if they had been wrong, yet inflicted that penalty upon
them, that they should desert congregations that they were entrusted with, and
not only so, and to leave there houses but that they should cease to exercise
that Ministry that was given them by

Jesus Christ and by his Servants, the Lord putting it in the heart of his
Servants to come and offer themselves to preach upon hazard, it was your deuty
to come and hear upon hazard, this is Gods public Standart set up in the
feilds, a piece of the testimony that we have, that we desire to be found
faithful in his Covenant, and that the intrest of our immortal souls calls for
it, because that we cannot expect the blessing, but from his sent Messengers:
we have immortal souls that most be lost or saved: and these are the means by
which we may be directed, how to get our souls saved. Therefore be the hazard
what it will we are bound to follow their means and when done with our work
wear willing then to die upon a scoffold for it, for you that are come out, we
shall not pry into what has brought you hither, that lies between God and you,
and he will examine you upon it, bu^^ ame afraid, that it be with maney as it
is recorded in the 12. Chap. of John's Ghospel: 9. verse.

I think I may say, there is a piece of curiosity, that draus maney, it may be
some to see such a man, that his been so much persecuted, and in such hazard,
upon whom the rullers has given so great encouragement, to any that should
undertake it, what sort of person he may be, alas Sirs ye will get no thanks
if this be all your earrand, and if this be your earrand you are fair to meet
with a disappointment, and that which ye should be looking after and should be
seeking for, to meet with Jesus Christ. Christ had raised a man from the dead,
and the preservation of man from death is somewhat very remarkable in time, but
now Sirs ye are come together, we say we shall not dive into your ends and
motives that his brought you heir, but now you are come, I would ask some few
questions at you, and desire you to chairg your consciences that are heir that
ye would consider how you would answer them if God asked them at you.

The Questions we are to ask at you, it may be seem very strainge how we ask
such Questions, I ask at your first, do you believe that there is a God, or
not, why, you most give me leive to ask this Question at you, that call your
selves Christans, why, because there are many so called, that lives as they did
not believe that there were a God, let the drunkard say what he will, let the
swearer say what he will, he will hardly make a man that understands what
beliving is, believe that, that man believes, that there is a God, how is this
made out? they are corrupt, they do abominable works, they seek not God: they
persecut his people, Psalm. 14: and 1. v. there are some that the Holy Ghost
chairges with this infidelity, the fool his said in his heart there is not a
God, and so its made out as I told you before, they are corrupt they do
abominable works, they seek not God, they persecut his people, and these
arbrought in as evidences, that the man has said in his heart that there is
not a God, if this be the evidences of unbelieve, then sure we may chairge this
upon maney, and question it, do you believe that there is a God? the man that
makes a sport of sin, believes he that there is a God, does the man that hears
the threatenings of God against sinners: and that wrath that is laying above the
heads of sinners, and does not flee from the wrath that is to come: does that
man believe that there is a God? no verily, he believes it not.

There is a 2d. Quest. I would ask at you, and you will think this may be as
strainge, do you believe that you have immortal souls, that you have souls to
live in a world to come: that there is such a piece within you, that when your
body goes to the dust and rots there, yet that will be living eather in Heaven
or in Hell, do you believe this Sirs, if there were the says of this fixed
sollidly upon the soul, then surly ye would be at some pains, to know, where
your soul shall live after time, whither in everlasting happiness or in
everlasting misery, that man that has all his craire for back and belly, that
man that never boved a knee to God in prayer, let never that man say that he
belives that he has ane immortal soul within him.

3. Do you belive that there will be a day wherein God will bring, Adam, and all
his posteretie, to a reckoning, for what they have done in bodies do you
belive that the judge is standing at the door? do you belive that it is
ordained for all men to die, and then to come to judgment, do you Belive this
judgment, that, at that that day there will be such a seperatione made among
the Sons of Adam, that there will be such a sentance past upon maney, as this,
depairt from me ye workers of in iquitie; do you belive that this sentence
shall be execut without all mercy? that there will be no reversing of it? if
this were belived, could it be, but the man that had the faith of this, but
they would be taking some pains to prepar for that day, the little preparatione
that is a mong the sons of men, for that day, says that this is not belived,
do you belive that there is such aplaice of torment, for the reprobat, that God
has appointed: ^^d such a plaice of joy for them that are his people, that are
walking in the ways of holiness? if this were belived: would there not be more
cair and pains takne to be found in him, in peace and without spot; and
blemish. what sall we do for you firs? there ar some of your faces declaires
that Satan has hardened your hearts, and sin has hardened your hearts, that
their words that are spok^e takes little effect upon you, o what may this
prognosticat, to see a company of men heiring of matters, of so great
importance and yet so little affected: with what they hear, weel Sirs, there will
be ane awakning, for this, and a dreafdull a wakning to maney a soul, we think
we have as much in our instructions, as might make our messag to have greater
force and effect then it has, we preduce the word of God, for what we say, the
word of him that cannot lie and yet you do not regaird it, we produce the,
strongest reasons for what we say, and your consciences cannot but be
convinced, that there is reason for it, and yet it has no effect, we have your
consciences upon our side, sometimes telling you, as you may find it indeed,
tath what we heared spoken by the Minister is true, and what I heared was my
case and conscience most do its office, and who knows but it should have some
etfect, with what we speik to you, but alas our experience makes out the
contrare to us, and we have sometimes your own experience to help us to press
something, that we are pressing upon you, we are telling you that when death
comes that it is a time very unfit to set a bout the work of repentance, and
when you have come neir death and ye have found that your sickness is so great,
that ye could not mind the caise of your souls, and your experience tells us
this, and our experience tells you of it we would not leive it to this pas, yet
we find you do so, my friends I most tell you two things, for to putt you in
some frame, if the Lord would tell them to you, and give you the faith of them;
first I most tell you this, the Lord is this doy amongst us, he is heir in this
congregatione, he is going up and down among this meeting, and observing every
one of you, what will he find, that ye are cariing rightly before him, alas
the contraire is much to be seared, that he mark out this man heir and that
woman there, and say they do not more regaird what I am speaking to them, then
I were a lier to them, God is nou keeping silence, and does not execut vaingance
speed lie, and men may make a wrong use of it, and therefore there hearts is set
in them to do, that because he does not presently execut vaingance and they
think he is not still angry at sin as the minister tells us: read it sirs in
the. 50 Psalm.: at the close: I kept silence but I will let you know, that ye
have being in the wrong, and ye have mistaken the measure, I will reprove you
and sert your sins in order before you, consider this ye that forget God leist
he tear you in pieces, and there be non to deliver you o Sirs but its ill
getting wind raised, o but you are hard to work upon. We have found in some
places, where the providence of God has tristed us, that the very face of a
Minister, that it would have helped the people to a frame, and the very face
of the people would have helped the Minister to a frame, but we most tell you,
you make us dull to see your dullnes, o friends why come ye heir, are you come
heir to add this to all your former guilt, that ye will come and cast all his
words behind your back, if you do sadly will your reckning be, but heir I am as ane unworthie Servant of Jesus Christ, to declair unto you, that you
will be brought before the Tribunal of God, and so will I be brought there also:
we will be examined for this days preaching, and for this days hearing, and
it shall be ashed at me, did you tell the people there sin, what did they with
it, made ye ane offer of Christ it is to them, did they accept of me: we most
tell as it is, we most not stand upon feed ore favor of aney, we spoke but you
folk did not hear, and they regarded not, what we said, we told them that there
was a day coming, that thou would judge them, yet they never regarded us, no
more then we hade be in reading a History of David lindsey, ore out of ane
other book: weel sirs, as I said be for, you shall eather get a blissing to
go home with you, or a curse clapped upon your haed, I cannot tell who will get
the blissing but these that has bein wrestling for it, may Look for it, but
these that have come upon aventure, I cannot tell what they may meet with, o
wretched soul, if you go away from this place, and get not some thing in they
arms: if you get no hunger and thirst after Christ it will be sad: but I
shall say no more by way of Prefacing. Let us pray.

THE LECTURE In the second Chap. of Jer. at the 12. verse. We begin to read two
or three Verses.
I Shall but speak a short word upon their Verses, we shall take up their words
that we have read in these three things: First, you have a heavy and a Sade
chairg given in against Israel, what was that? they had forsakne the fountain
of living waters and had dug unto themselves, brokne cisterns that can hold
no water, there is Gods chairg.

Secondly, ye have what the Lord does in that the chairge he gives in against
them, may affect them, what does he, he crayes nnto the heavens, as they had
ears to hear, he speaks to them and crayes to them, O Heavens be astonished at
it is, O Heavens be ye horrably affraied, that my people that had entered
themselves in covenant with me, that they should have thus forsakne me, and
forsakne me for that which they receave no advantage of, as it is in the former
verse. Has a Nation chainged there Gods, for that which does not prophit them.

Then thirdly there is in the words a Lamentation that the Lord takes up, so we
may take up these words, or seondly achallinge, that he gives to the enemy,
what says he? how is this that ye guide my people, and how is this that my
people suffer themselves to be thus guided, what is Israel a Servant, what
think you, is Israel a home born slave? why then if he be a sone of mine, and
if he be free borne why is he spoiled thus? why deall ye with Israel as if he
were a slave? or it may be spoken by way of Lamentation, alas! how my people,
how they are guided, is Israel a Servant? he is not a Servant, he is not a home
borne slave, for that is the import of the Question, a strong negation, you are
mistaken to think, that I will not have respect to Israel, I will cause you yet
answer for the spoill of Israel; why then is he spoilled.

And then you have this particularly laid out what it was that enemies did to
Israel, the young Lions rored upon them, and yelled, and they made his land
waste. His cities are brunt without inhabitant, I have seen, for all that is
done to my Church I will take order with it, ye shall find that I lay claim
to Israel, and then I have sad chairges and challenges to give in against them,
yet I will give no thanks to them that has spoilled my poor people, my sons
that I have such respect unto.

Then is 5. or 6. words of observations that we shall give of them and close
this exercise and enter upon another. The first Obs: is this, that the Lord
has sometimes very heavy and sad verbal chairges, to give in against his
Church, the Lord has very much to charge upon his Church that he is ill
pleased with, look to the 4. Chap of Hosea at the begin: ye will see there like
the controversy: what is the chairg: because there is no truth mercy nor
knowledge of God in the Land, 2. verse, by swearing and lying and committing
adultery they break out, and blood tutcheth blood, and therefore the Lord has
a contraversy with Israel, no truth, no sincenity in the Land, etc. There the
chairg and 81. Psalm. there a sad chairg given in against Israel from the 10.
verse. I a me the Lord the Lord the God that that brought to the out of the Land
of Egypt, and out of the house of Bondag, opne thy mouth wide and I will fill
it, but what is the chairg, but my people would not harkne to my voice, and
Israel would non of me, and Deuteronomy, 32. and 5. There a sad chairg given in
against Israel, the chairg is this, they have corrupted themselves there spot is
not the spot of his children, they are a pervers and a wicked generation, and
here a sad chairg given in against them, they have forsakns me the fountan of
living Waters, add have dug to themselves brokne cisternes that can hold no
water, o! says he, this is a verbal horrible chairg that I have to give in
against this Church of Israel, now this God never had more terrible chairges to
give in against a Church then the Church that we live in, o but we have behaved
unworthely, God planted us a noble vine, but we are become a degenerat plant
unto him, God ingadged us in a solemn Covenant to be for him and with lifted
up hands to God, we did swear, how is that Oath kept, how is it but the Lord
may chairg us with horrible perjury, some hatht akne the Declaration, that is
ane opne way of a woued perjury, and some has takne this bond that there
posterity will think shame of, if it should be reakned to them, that there
fathers should have done it, o horrible chairg that such should put Christ out
of Scotland I shall say no moor to this point

The 2d obs: that I shall give you is th is, that when the Lord is chairging
his people with horrible things, he would then have his people affected with
what he chairges upon them, he would not have them making light of his
chalinge, therefore when hespeaks in that. 1. of Isai: to the people he eraies
here o heavens what a chairg I have to give in against my people, the ox knows
his over, and the as his masters cribe: but my people does not know, nor Israel
does not consider, ah sinful nation says he, a seed of evil doors childrene,
that are transgressors etc. God would have a people when he is chairging aney
thing upon a church that is horrid wickedness, he would have all men to be so
much affected with the chairg, as that they might lay it to heart, there are
some folk that will lay nether sin nor judgment to heart, God would not have
folk doing so; but laying both to heart, There was in the. 42. chap: of Jsa: and
24. they did not consider who gave Jacob to the spoill, and Israel to the
robbers and that it was the Lord: and that it was because they had finned
against him, and he set them on fire round about yet they laid it not to
heart.

The 3. thing in the words, be astonished o heavens, and be horrible afraid,
holds forth a great stupidetie to be in sinners, that is not affected with all
the guilt, that is chairged upon them, o if ever there was a stupid generatione
since the world began, it will be found this day, that make light of all the
chairges, that is given in against them this day, I spoke to them, but were they
at all ashaemed, when they did such things, no says he they were not at all
asheamed. Jer: 8. and 6. J harkned and heird but they spoke not aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying what have I done, eve^ie one turned to
his course: as the horse rusheth to the battle, they arre never so much as once
brought to a serious thought, as to speir the questione, what have I done?

The 4. thing that I not is this, that when God Sumonds up folks faults, he
will find two faults and see two where men sees but one, you see heir they
committed two greatievels, wha^ was that some would think that that was but
one evel, they have forsakne me the fountan of living waters, and they have
made brokne cisternes that cane hold no water, that was there faults, there was
two faults, it may be looked upon as one, yet God will find it two and very
gross two faults, and God will look upon it as two before long, let us look to
the chairg, they have forsakne me the fountane of living waters, two things
there. 1. Christ Jesus is the Fountain of living Waters, what is that, he is the
Fountan of all the refreshings of his people, all the consolations of Israel:
they have all there arise from him, all the conforts of his people whil under
sufferings, all there arise is from. Jesus Christ, he is the Fountan of all
there confort and consolation.

The nixt thing that I see is this, if he be the Fountane of our consolation,
then we take always the wrong way, when we are under a disconsolat Estate:
when we turn not to him, for our consolatione, are you not going to your
prayers to God to get your consolation, he is the auther of all these, and the
Fountane of living Waters, and he is the arise of all thy cosolation.

Another word that we shall say, that which they were chaged with, they turned
there backs upon God, that was the Fountain of living Waters, then we come to
this, Is Israel a servant, is he a home borne slave, why is he spoilled, the
Lord he turns now again to his enemies I have a quarrel with my people, but
for all the quarrel I have against them, I allow you not to quarrel with them.
I will own Israel, you most not think that I will not own Israel, is Israel a
servant to do what ye would have him to do, is he a home born slave, if so be
he is not so, why is he spoilled then, I will find you guilty, and chairg you
for it. I will cause you reckon for all the robries and spoil that my people
meits with.

Two Observations that I shall not from hence is, 1. the Lord is very angry and
displeased, to see his people of a base servial covardly spirit, that subjects
themselves to all impositions, that the enemis imposes, what says he this is
not like Israel, he should be a man of ane other spirit then that he should
carry like a home borne slave, to bear the burdens that enemies lays one, o
but this is sad at this time, there is asses backs and asses dispositiones in
his peoples dispositione, that they bear what enemies lays upon them, its not
patience no, its stupifiednes in them, o but its sad that it should be so: when
this comes a longs that there is a bond, and the man caries like a slave to the
enemy to them that lay on the burthin upon the conscience, and when Cesses is
laid on by our enemy, to bind a snair upon men, that these cesses arre laid
upon maney, for reasing up such for to thrust the Gospel out of the land, and
to put down these rebellions meetings (as they call them) yet to see such a
slavish disposition, in these that proves them selves to be the people of God,
that they should subject them selves to such burthings; why then is he spoiled:
this is matter of lamentation sas if he would say to see the people so
servial, I am angry at you my friends, to be of such a slavish temper and
disppsitione, I am angry at you for it, and there was never a time that his
people manifested a slavish temper and dispositione more, then they do in their
days, and as he is angry with his people for having of it, so is he angry
at the enemies for dealling so with his people, as slaves and there was never a
time where in his people were dealt more with as slaves, then they have bein in
our days, but I shall go no further in this exercise but sing. Psalm. 94. and
4.

A SERMON. THE TEXT. In the Song of Solomon 3d. chap, and 11. verse.
Go forth o you Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown,
wherewith his mother crouned him in the day of his Espousals, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.
IN the beginning of this chapter, we have the exercise of the spous under a
deserted condition, she seeks him upon her bed whom her soul loves: she seeks
him upon the stteats, she arises to seek him, she goes to the watchmen to seek
him: and still she meets with disapointments, now she finds him, she begins to
look weel to him in the ninth verse, I may not stand in prefacing there we have
a description of the brydgroome, of the King, of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
description given of him, is this, he is called a King, and made himself a
Chariot of the wood of Lebanon, he made the pillars thereof of Silver, the
bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof paved
with love: for the daughters of Jerusalem, there you may get a sight of Christ,
in his steatly ryding in this Gospel. In the last verse there is ane exhortation,
to the people of God that are called here the daughters of Zio^^^ and the
exhortatione given to them is this, that the^^ would go forth and behold king
Solomon, and the^^ you see kow he is adorned, with a croun, whe^^ with his
mother crowned him: it is that whi^^ his Church crounes him with we remember
there (...) three crouns that he wears. 1. the croun that his father crouned him
with, and that he wears, and that the father dignifies him with: that sets hi^^
down at his right hand: a bove all his enemies.

And a 2d croune that he wears, is that which his mother crouned him with
(meaning the church) in the day of his espousals, in there closing with Christ,
which is the day of the gladness of h^^ heart.

The 3d croun that he wears, is that croun wh^^ with his enemies crouned him
with, which (...) plaited of thorns, o that croun of thorns, that (...) was
made to wear, when was he was crouned, in (...) day of his espousals, in the
day of the gladness of (...) heart. 4. ore 5. things I shall speik too and close
t^^ exercise and dismiss you.

The first thing, is the style that Christ ge^^ here, he is called King
Solomon, and he gets the style not only to be a King, but he gets this style
^^^kne from Solomon, for ye know that Solomon w^^ the rarest King, that ever
was before ore after hi^ there was non like him.

First he was a King that had very much pour, (...) his enemies round about
were made to subject, a^ bring presents to him; he was of a great deal of
w^^dom, so is our Lord Jesus Christ he is the Ki^^ only wise, and he was a King
that had a great d^^ of glory, look but to his thron so maney steps up to it,
and so maney lions guarding the thron, a glorions thron all lyned with pure
gold. he is a glorious King in these respects and Solomon he was a very rich
King, and he was such a King, that he made all his subjects to abound with
wealth, he made in his day, Jerusalem the corner stons thereof to be as silver
and gold.

Now, what his desing is, by giving these styles to King Solomon? that was Jesus
Christ, he is a glorious King, the Father had appointed him, Solomon was
appointed by a divine decree: to be King of Israel. So our Lord Jesus Christ, is
appointed by a divine apointment to be King and head of his church. Psalm. 2. I
will declare the decree, thou artt my King, thou art my son, this day have I
begottne the. I will give thee arod of jron, to break thy enemies, he is a King
of great power and wisdom, and a King of great riches, and a King that
inricheth all his subjects. Now, sirs, its a sad matter that this King, should
have met with such a meeting, from our King and our rulers: that this Crouwn
should be taken of his head, and set upon the head of a poor sinful man and as
it were his kingly power exauterat, and that usurped and taken by a man, this
is that which we have to regreat this day, in stead of loialety to him, the
most pairt of all the nations are turned rebels to him, and turned against him,
and his been active to divest him of that power that he was clothed with.

But nixt the style given to the believer, to the Daughters of Zion, go forth
ye Daughters of Zion, (that is to say) ye that are borne into the Church, and
borne by the immortal seed of his word. I would have you that are the members
(...) the Church and has any respect and kindness (...) King Solomon, I would
have you goeing forth, that leaving all your enjoyments and pleasure an^
Profeets, and taking a look of this King.

And the observation I shall speek to is this, th^^ it is the deutie of the
people of God, to be takin^ maney looks of King Jesus what are you come he^^
for sirs: Is it not to get a look of the King in thi^ ordinances, is not this
your end and earrand, if you have not this for your earrand, you will get little
thanks and weelcom from him, but and if th^^ by your earrand to get a sight of
the King, as h^^ rides in the chariot of the Gospel, then you ob^^ the command
given to the Daughters of Jerusale^^ and the Lord will not be straeng to give a
looke^^ himself, if you be in earnest, to go forth and behold him. There the
not.

That it is peoples deutie, when the Lord com^^ in the chariot of the Gospel,
to make ane offer (...) himself, they should go forth and leave all th^^
enjoyments, and leave all behind hem, and get (...) sight of Christ in his
ordinances, And therefore (...) espetialie that are mor eminent in the world,
(...) our Masters name we weelcome you, if you c^^ say that is the thing ye
would have done to get a sight of King Solomon, Christ in the chariot o^ the
Gospel, it is for that earrand I come heir, to get a sight of him: that I may
keep him for mane^^ days, I have stepped out of all my enjoyments (...) may be
I will heir tell of it after this, yet I cair not (...) I have gottne a sight
of Christ in his ordinances, (...) say in our Masters name you are welcome
heir, an^ you will get a blissing, if you have a mouth open^^ to receave you
shall get it, it is your duty to behold him, but say ye how will I get a sight
of him, there are 4. of 5. glasses that he shines in, through which you may
get a sight of him.

First, in his word there get a sight of him get a sight of him in the preached
Gospel, there get a sight of him in his Chariot, that is all paved with love.

Nixt, get a sight of him in his atributs, you may see what are these, and you
may get a sight of him in his offices, and sufferings, that he under went for
sinners. Therefore, o ye Daughters of Jerusalem or Zion, ye that live in this
corner, will ye come forth this day and leave your enjoyments, and take a look
of him in the Chairot of his Gospel, here he is come this day to make a visit
to Greenock, o if you were forced to cry out, how lovly is thy Tabernacles? how
lovly are thy Ordinances? where thou art in the midst of them: and to be seen
there.

Now, Sirs, there are some upon the other hand, that they will not come out for
fear of a fine, and for fear of there Land, Tho the Lord be craying to all sorts
of men, to come forth and take a look of Christ this day: and see his garments
dyed all red for sinners, take a look of him in his wounds and hands and feet,
and take such a look of him till your heart be ravished with the sight of him,
and look to him, and take a look of him till ye get a sight of your neid of
him, for he is coming fnrnished with all things that will make his people
happy. Come and beyold King Solomon, come this day and take a look of our
King, ye that was ever beholding vanety and looking after lies, will you be
persuaded to come and take a look of Jesus Chaist, o Sirs, if Heaven can be
gotten by a look its sad to loss it, for he has said look unto me allye ends
of the earth and be ye^ saved.

What are you a poor blind body, take a look of him, he will give eyes to the
blind, they looked to him in that 34. Psalm: and were enlightened, and were not
asheamed. They get light to look to him, and a sight of him will make that
hard heart melt witin you, come to him and look to him, they shall look to him
or upon him, whom they have pierced and mourn for him as one mourns for his
only begotne Son, o therefore look to him then, and if you would have life and
light and further what is it, that you stand in need of, its all that God calls
for, its that man that would come and take a look of him, and I think its a sad
matter, that your hearts are little stirred for all that we say to you. What is
Christ come in the Chariot of the Gospel, and in all these glorious properties?
and have you never looked to him? o Sirs, is he saying look unto me and be ye
saved for I am God.

We see this nixt, go forth says he ye Daughters Zion, and behold King
Solomon, what will you^ see of him, you will see a glorious sight, a Crown that
ye will take pleasure into, see him with the Crown that his mother crowned him
with a glorious sight if ye would behold him.

There are three words that I shall say. First, I shall say this, that there
are some particular days in the Church: that are days of Espousals, betwixt
Christ, and sinners and ends, wherein he espouseth sinners to himself.

2. That whoever they are, that are espoused to Jesus Christ, they putt the
Crown upon his head, they putt glory upon him, for they witness, that they
believe the record, that the Father has given of him.

3. That a sinner is content: to be espoused to Jesus Christ and closes with
him, in a marriage Covenant, is the day of the gladness of his heart. These three
words I shall speak of to you and close this exercise, considering the time we
have to spair, we shall contain all in half ane hour.

The first thing that we shall say, that there are some particular seasons, and
times, that the Lord makes remarkable for espousing sinners to himself: to take
it thus, that there are sometimes that he makes the Gospel to take this effect,
that menre forced to yeald themselves to Jesus Christ, that they can hold forth
no longer they most yield to him, they cannot stand out, anay longer, there are
sometimes that a sinner will stand it out against Christ: and say again and
again and a thousand times though he should streatch out his arms never so
often. And yet we see how maney have holdne Jesus Christ coming to them and
crying to them, o sinners will ye break my heart, o why will you not come to
me, and get a look of me, seeing I am content to take you and marry you,
black as ye are. What makes you stand out and will not yield: But there are
sometimes some particular seasons, that the Lord will win in upon sinners, nil
they will they, he will cause them make a bargan, and it shall be a day of
esposals. It is a wonderful thing, that one preaching will work upon a heart,
that a thousand preachings before has not done it has not bien before, why is
this? Why? Gods day is come, that he will have sinners espoused to him, and he
will no longer be put out, and he will put in his hand, at the handle (...) the
lock, and he will say eather open the door, ((...) I will stand no longer)
eather open to me, or else (...) will lay the door upon the floor: if you open
it not (...) this is sometimes that our Lord comes with ane ir^^sistable power,
that he will not have a nay saying (...) Luck. 5. and 17. there was a day,
(christ preache^^ many a day to the Scribes and Pharisees) But never the
better, but a remarkable day that he preached unto them, and he wrought upon
them, and his power was present to heal them. So I say sinners will get many
offers of the Gospel, and sit this day, and the second day, and the third day:
But there is some times God will come with the power of the offer o^^ the
Gospel, that there shall be no more sitting, but that ye should come forward
and close with the offer of the Gospel, that he makes offer of in this place, o
when shall the day come to this place? O whe^^ shall the day come that they
shall be made a willin^ people in the day of his power: that you shall not b^^
able to stand out longer, that ye dowe not sit^^ longer, that you find your
hearts all ravished with his love, every Church has there day and every person
hes there day of espousals to all their nations; noble men and gentle men, and
all men to come into a Covenant with the Lord, to be espoused to the Lord, so
he hes come with the Gospel sometimes: some hes lived. 40. Years under the
Gospel, but h^^^ resisted it, but he has come one day and come with power,
that he was not able to resist it now, O Sirs when will this day of power come,
O will it never come to this day with you, ye heard much of it, and many words
of it, but will not the day of espousal^^ come, O Sirs, let it be now, it may
be you shall never have an other day, therefore let it be now.

I come to speak to the 2d. thing that I may hastne, the great earrand of the
Gospel, is to espouse sinners to himself, he is coming in the Chariot of the
Gospel in the 9. and 10. verses he is coming out in the Chariot, a glorious
Chariot, what says he? go forth, says he, and meet him, and what says he
more? make up the marriage before you come home again, this is the end of the
Gospel, to make up a marriage betwixt him and sinners: 2 Cor. 11: and 2. look a
word to this purpose, for I am, jelous, over you, with Godly Jelousy, for I
hay espoused you to one Husband: that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to
Christ, says Paul, my great desing in sending the Ghospel amongst you was that
I may espouse you to one Husband Jesus Christ. There is the Scope of the
Gospel. Wherefore sent he the Gospel here before there was a world, and before
time was, you behoved to come heir the day, and you shall heir ane other offer,
and the end of his Chariot coming to Greenock, to this mountan side is to make
ane offer of Christ, and that there be a marriage, and that there may be such
ane union as man and wife, that there may be a mutual intrest in all that you
have, and that there may he mutual communications of love, one with ane other,
as love betwixt man and wife, from this, day forward, the Lord has trysted you
here. Before there was a stone laid in this world, this day was determined, end
you were the man and woman that were to be heir, and you were the people and
this behoved to be the place, and this behoved to be the Preacher and this
behoved to be the Text. And therefore seeing it is so, I come heir as Christ's
Minister, to take up all your names, betwixt Christ and you, and to proclaim
to you, that Christ has a purpose of mariagee betwixt him and you, and if this
be the day of marriage, and his effectual working, you will say put up my name:
and you will say put up my name: and you will say I have a purpose of marriage
with him, and I have a mind to take him.

What says the Lord? I am jelous over you with a Godly Jalousie, but I have
espoused you to one Husband, a chaste Virgin, but it was my great work says
Paul. once to get that day, set, and and a contract subscrived, and the great
marriage day so solemnized at the day of Judgment. What say ye, Sirs, is there a
spouse for Christ heir? who will not take him, and believe in him, ob: O glad
would I be to take him, but I kno not if he will take me, let not that be your
fear, there are in Heaven that were as you are that were heirs of Hell, imps of
the Devil, Devils limbs as you are wretched as ye are, sold under sin and under
wteath and such as you are, but to you I say be but willing this day, and if ye
give but your consent this day, if you say this day even so I take the upon the
terms, that thou offers thy self, I declaire in my Masters name you are
wealcom, and for this end, has he sent me to this place, as his Ambassador to
you, to invite you to come, and rouse your selves, and espouse yourselves and
let it be seen, that there is a bride upon this hill side the day, that will be
espoused to him, and will be his bride, and give your hand to him, and give up
your selves, and be faithful to him, and do all the duties of a loving spouse;
Now, Sirs, O! say ye, do but this little favor, clear this a little, this is a
great word to be married to Christ, the Fathers only Sone, how can ye instruct
that this is your work, what can you say, I fear that he cast at us, we have
nothing, what will he see in the shullamit, bnt as the Company of two Armies,
what will he seein us that he may desire us yea says the Lord, for as vile
and abominable as you are, yet come your way I am content, to come and jovne
in marriage with you, upon these conditions, that ye will subscribe my Contract
that I shall make: there are three things that we shall clear a little, and make
a wordof application.

For the first thing is this. how is this evident that Christ is content to
marie sinners? know you, Sirs, what Christ did Christ he came out of Heaven to
show his willingness to marie you, he took upon him the nature of sinners, the
nature of Abraham and took not upon him the nature of Angels, but of Adams
seed, and a reasonnable soul he united these two in his divine nature, in one
person, and married them, and makes you not to doubt of his willingness, but that
he is content to mary and be espoused to you. 2. I would urge you not to let
this good offer go by, have ye much debt upon you, heir a Husband that will
pay all your debt for you, and will never cast it up to yon. 4, of Jeames if
aney man lake wisdom, let him ask of God that gives liberaly, and upbraideth
not. though he took you of the midding and you had nothing; he will upbrade no
man notwithstandinh all this. Nixt thing your Husband has goed skill of
Physic, you are ane unclean and unwholsom body, so full of sores, mary him and
he will make ointments and make plasters that will heal all your diseases.
Psalm. 103. he will heal all your diseases. 3. Mary him he is very kind Husband,
O but he is kind, he will d^^ offices that non other will do, he will make all
the^^ bed in there sickness, he will season there bed, wi^^^ much of himself, a
kindly Husband that is very smuch taken up with the love of his people: and
(...) they have love to him he will bear with mane^^ faults of them and not
cast at them, o say ye I will play the harlot, yet, says he, for all that
return unto me, will ane other man take in a harlot again, but yet says he
return unto me, say^th the Lord, though you have played the harlot with maney
lovers, yet return unto me.

Now I shall make a word of use, and this is th^^ use, what say ye to it, I am
come in Christ's name as his Ambassador, and this is my negotiation this day^^
are you contenr to marie him, he will give you (...) brave dury, he will give
you Heaven, he wi^^ give you anough: are you content to go forth an^^ take a
look of him, O will ye take a look of him (...) and get a sight of him, and
ye will cray forth, (...) that he would mary you. I will give you two things
for incurragement to the text.

First, you put a Crown upon his head, if yo^^ mary him, our rullers have taken
the Crown of hi^^ head: but will, ye put the Crowu upon his head (...) you do
it if you mary him. O are you content (...) heir such a man has put the Crown
upon my head (...) and has come and believed, all my promises, and did all my
commands and yealded to me, this looked to as a glad day.

Nixt it is the gladness of his heart, this is glead news to him, let yon
Ministers blood go for it, tho he should be takne he has gained some souls
to me, and has a day of espousalsto me, it is (...) day of the gladness of my
heart let the man's (...) rune what is the matter, seeing it is such a glade
day.

You have made him maney a fad heart, o will ye make him a glad heart, and let
this be the day, and make the bargan and it shall be gladness of heart to him.

I shall come and make a word of use and it is this, do not think that we ae
come to you this day in a light matter to you, and the shoures are goeing round
about us this day, and when he comes to offer us a day of the Gospel, the Lord
has bound up the clouds wonder fully, and this day he has called a meeting
in this place, and its to lay out a bussines that he is much concerned with, a
bussines in his heart a long love, he loved you before the mountans were, prove:
8. now this long love vented it self in the fulness of time, and Christ would no
longer starie he behoved to come from heaven to earth to suitea bride and he
is gone to heaven again, to prepair mainsions for his oun people and has sent
out Ministers of the Gospel, whereof I am one of the un worthiest of them all
to present unto you a mariag, and make ane offer of him to you, sis I dar not
leave you till you give a peremtorie answer to Jesus Christ, will ye close with
him, what say ye? we come to demand it, shall this be a day of espousals
betuixt Jesus Christ and you, you are gathered together heir, old men I require
of you, upon the aleadgance of God, come in heir old men and old women, come
and make a bargane, the world and those things has holdne you so long, therefore
come now and make a bargan with Jesus Christ, shall this be a day of espousals
shall this be a day of (...) I assure you that you are not far from the kingdom
(...) heaven, I assure you as the Lord livith and as he is in heavne, it will
be a worlds wonder, if ever ye^ get the like of this day again, therefore what
is he seeking of you? o sirs he might have left Scotland and suffered our
Parliaments to have takne away the Ministers of the Gospel, but he behoved to
give this offer to you at this time, therefore he is craying will you marie me,
his bloed is craying will you marie me, see what proof he is giving you, will
you refuse Christ will you crucify him again, by giving him a new refusal, o
sirs what say ye what stands in your way of this mariag let it be heird, have
ye^ ought to object against Jesus Christ, may he not be a match, would you have
a better husband, he i^ altogether lovlie, and beutiful, would you have (...)
rich husband, he is the heir of heavne, he is the heir of all things, would
ye have a credible husband he is thine, he is all your credit would you have
such a match, then here is it, o then what say y^^ to it he has set a day
her of espousals he has called to it, would ye send him away with a glad
hear^ and send us away with a glad heart, and you to go^ away with a glad
heart, let us see it in your wall and conversatione, and in your tenderness,
that yo^ are edefied, whatt will you loss him who will speil^ for you if you
refuse fuch a match when the Justice of God bringes you to the rekoning, there
was th^^ man and the woman within a mile to greenock that had the offer of the
Gospel, and Christ came ou^ in the chariot of the Gospel to them, and they went
away and made not the bargane did not give him the full consent, what shall we
return for answer, I take that sun that shines and this hill that we are upon,
and takes every one of your consciences, against you, and every on of us to
be witneses against one ane other, and for all the wrongs that ever you did to
Christ, yet Christ is content to make out ane offer to you this day, and a
marriage, this is my sutting day, and may be, I never see your face again, (who
knoues) ore you me again, but I knon we shall all meet again, in the day of
Judgment, I assure you Sirs, there are some heir of you, shall never hear ane
other preaching some of you shall take your dead ill, before ye hear ane other
preaching, o Sirs, therefore say what you will do if you would make us a glad
heart this day, then turn from your swearing and and swear no more, and ye that
have neglected prayer in your famelies and in secret, fall to in earnest now,
ore else ye shall be looked upon as neglecters of this great offer, and yet that
are neglecters and slighters of the Sabbath, do so no more, what say ye off it,
will you give Christ ane answer I will have no answer, but look up to God and
give him your answer, what say ye? go say ye, I will have non of him, I will
not forsake my lusts, and I will not forsake my drunkenness for him, stay till I
come to death bed, then I will give the my consent but as the Lord lives, he
will clape a curse upon your head, if you do so, o Sirs, what mean ye, are you
keeping all your tears, till you go to ^^ell, there is abundance there, will you
still refuse Christ? what have you a mind to do? to close with him ore not,
what say ye we most give him ane answer this night of you, we most give your
answer to him, that sent us to you, shall we say that their people looked not
like it, and some that had there hearts leaping within them, were saying O I are
(...) to take him. o Sirs give up your neams unto the (...) and say you are
content and he will be content (...) you, come with all your faults, and ye
will find (...) a friend, and easy to be entreated, if you con^^^ this to him,
shortly we shall chose, O Sirs (...) says the Lord, kno this is our earrand,
noth^^ would be so joyful to us, as that ye would ac^^^ of our Master as
Eliazer said, we most come (...) take a wife to our Master, Abraham's son, so^^
come to a fitted place to the loins of Adam to se^^ wife to be married to Christ
O Sirs will ye putt (...) out will you not yeald now, you have stoodene (...)
enough out and let it be seen that ye have made a (...) venant with him let
God hear what you say, (...) let you tell your tale to him, he is near at
(...) head, round it unto him, he will hear you (...) enough, and so if you do
it you will make him (...) de heart, and you will make the devil a sad he (...)
and wicked men a sad heart, and prelates a sad (...) we will get no mor good of
these folk say they; (...) have lost them, we will get them no more fre^^^ to
us, we will be friends to a persecutted caus^^^ his Gospel, say to it, Sirs we
are come to th^^^ answer, we shall say no more, the Lord him (...) work upon
you and work you up to this fram, (...) cane only speik to you, but no more,
Paul (...) plant and Apollo may water but the Lord mo^^^ ve the increas, the
Lord bliss what has bein^^^ kne, and to his name be the praise.

FINIS.

