The Case of the Right Honorable Henrietta Maria, Lady Wentworth, Daughter and
Heir of Thomas Lord Wentworth, and Granchild and Heir of Thomas Earl of
Cleaveland, an Infant, in reference to the Bill presented to the Honorable
House of Commons, for giving the Barons of His Majesty's Exchequer, a further
power extrajudicially to settle the said Earls Estate.
THat the said Earl and Lord Wentworth, having contracted great Debts, by
reason of their Loyalty to His Majesty, and His Royal Father of blessed memory,
secured by Mortgages, Statutes, Judgments, etc. which Debts being exceedingly
increased by length of time at interest, and Sequestration of the profits; And
the Creditors getting into possession of their whole Estate, so that they had
nothing left to maintain themselves, or to prosecute the Creditors to bring
them to account, did the 12th. of His Majesty that now is, apply themselves to
Parliament, who took their Services and Sufferings into consideration; and for
their relief, did then pass an Act, by which the Barons of His Majesty's Court
of Exchequer, were authorized for seven years, in a summary way, without Bill
or Answer, to state Accounts between the said Earl and his Creditors; which
being done, the Trustees in the said Act named, were to sell Land to pay the
said Debts in the said Act mentioned.

That in the said Act the pretended Debt of 6000 l. to the Lady Ann Pool, and
Dorothy, and Lucy Withypoole is not named.

That the Earl being advised by his Council, that the powers in the said Act
were too short to obtain the said end, did the 13th. of His Majesty's Reign,
prefer another Bill in Parliament, which after it was engrossed, the Proviso in
the said second Act, touching the said pretended Debt, was presented, but never
Committed or Examined; and the Earl to his dying day, did constantly affirm,
that he owed no such Debt, nor knew how the said Proviso came to be added to
the Bill.

That by the said Proviso, the pretended Debt of 6000 l. therein mentioned, is
not to be paid until the Debts in the said former Acts were first satisfied.

That by another Act, passed the 18th. of His said Majesty's Reign, the said
Barons powers was enlarged for two years.

That the said Earl during all the time of his life, made it his constant
business and labor to bring his affairs to a conclusion by the power the
Barons had by virtue of the said Act.

But the said Barons found so many difficulties in proceeding by the said Act,
being out of the ordinary course of Equity, That nothing was done by them by
virtue of the said Acts; but both the Creditors, and the Lady Wentworth in the
behalf of her Self and her Daughter, were left to the ordinary ways of Equity,
both in the Exchequer and Chancery: Whereupon Decrees did ensue, and the Lady
Wentworth, by the Credit and Assistance of her Friends, and by great sums of
Money taken up at interest, and great Thrift in living, has purchased in some
of the Mortgages, and others having eat out themselves, the Mortgagees have
obtained Decrees for their quiet enjoyment; so that during these fourteen years
since the passing of the first Act, some hundreds of Conveyances, Fines,
Decrees, and Settlements, have passed in the said Estate; Purchasers for
valuable considerations, and many Infants besides the Lady Henrietta Wentworth
are concerned, and diverse Discents cast; so that if the Parliament by any Act,
should unravel Estates so long since, and for such valuable considerations
settled, no man would dare to purchase any thing, nor could tell when he should
be safe if he did.

That during the nine years in which the said Barons had power to proceed in a
Summary way, by virtue of the said Acts, Neither the said Lady Poole, or Mrs.
Dorothy, or Lucy Withypoole, made any application to the said Barons, or
commenced any Suit either in Law or Equity for the said pretended Debt; or so
much as demanded the same of the said Earl (as the Lady Wentworth has ever
heard) although he lived above six years after the passing of the said first
Act; nor since his death has commenced any Suit against the Lady Wentworth,
or the Lady Henrietta her Daughter, or ever demanded the same of them or either
of them, until about a month since, by Mr. Powell a Member of the Honorable
House of Commons. Nor did they ever claim the said Debt at Worcester house in
the late usurped times, where all the said Earl's Creditors did claim their
respective Debts, and had satisfaction ordered them; and neither they, or any
other Creditor of the said Earl, need give themselves the trouble to pursue an
Act of Parliament for the same, in regard the Courts at Westminster Hall are
open to them, where they may apply themselves; And the Lady Wentworth and her
Daughter will wave her privilege, and answer them, or any of them, either in
Law or Equity. And as hitherto they have received no benefit by the said Acts,
neither do they desire any, but are willing they should be repealed, and that
themselves and Creditors, should be left to the Law.

And therefore humbly hope and pray, that after all the Miseries and Sufferings
of the Earl of Cleaveland and his Family, the Parliament will not put such a
note of distinction upon them from all the rest of His Majesty's Subjects, but
suffer them to enjoy the benefit of the Law, as all others do and not provide
an unusual remedy for the Lady Poole, or any other Creditor of the said Earl,
who have the same with all His Majesty's Subjects for the recovery of their
Debts.

