By the King.
WHereas we are given to understand, that since our entry into this Kingdom,
many of our Subjects of our Realm of Scotland, and some also of England (who
by ancient Laws and Customs of this Realm are bound to bring all such Goods
and Merchandises as pass between the two Realms, either to the City of
Carlisle, or Town of Barwicke (if the same be carried by land) or else to ship
the same at some Port, whereby our Customs and duties may be justly answered
to us, do not observe our Laws, but to the intent to defraud us of our said
Customs, do go with their Goods and Merchandises over the Fells, and other
by-Passages, whereby great damage has been done to us, and more is like to be,
if the same be not prevented: We have therefore thought convenient hereby
straightly to charge and command all our Subjects, as well of the one Realm,
as of the other, That none of them presume hereafter to pass any Goods from
each Realm to other, but either shipped at some known Port, or else through
our said City of Carlisle or Town of Barwicke, under pain of confiscation of
all Goods that shall be seized passing any other way. And we hereby straightly
enjoin all Lieutenants, Deputie-Lieutenants, Justices of Peace, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and all
other our Officers, ministers, and loving Subjects whatsoever, to have a
special care and watch to the observation of this our pleasure, and to be
ayding and assisting to any that shall give them information of the passing of
Goods by indirect ways, and to seize or cause the same to be seized to our
use, as they will answer the contrary at their uttermost peril.

Given under our hand at Wilton, the fourth day of November, in the first year
of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and the seven and thirtieth of
Scotland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1603.


