depiction of England's coat of arms, 1625 HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

By the King. A Proclamation to inhibite the Sale of Latin Books reprinted
beyond the Seas, having been first Printed in Oxford or Cambridge.
WHereas, for preventing the common errors of the Press, which have heretofore
happened in Printing the Books and Works written in Latin, for the public
advancement of Religion, and Learning, in Our Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, there has been for many years a special Printer allowed and
authorized at either of Our said Universities, that the Authors of those
Books, being themselves at hand to take care of di^^^^eeing the Print, might
send forth their Works in their own original purity, without corruptions and
blemishes of misprinting; We are now informed by the humble Petitions of the
Chancellors, Masters, and Students of both Our said Universities, That diverse
Books of that kind, after they have been well and carefully first printed
here, in good Paper, and with good Letters, have been afterward in the parts
beyond the Seas reprinted very erroneous, and sent back from thence into this
Our Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and vented here as true Copies,
at lower Rates, in respect of the baseness of the Paper and Print, then the
Originals here can be afforded; whereby the Authors have been enforced to
disclaim their own Works so reprinted, the first Printers much impouerished,
and Our own people much abused in laying out their Moneys upon falsified or
erroneous Copies: The ill consequence whereof has not only discouraged many
of Our loving Subjects, (good Scholars of both Universities) from publishing
in Print, diverse good and useful Books of Latin, by them prepared for
advancement of good Letters, and the truth of Religion; But has also disabled
the Printers to undertake the charge of the Press for publishing of the same,
till some other course be taken for preventing the like abuse in time to come.

We therefore, out of Our Princely care hereof, as of a matter concerning Our
own honor, and the public good of Our Subjects, have thought fit, (by, and
with the advice of Our Privy Counsel) by this Our Proclamation, straightly to
charge and command, that no person or persons, of what estate, degree, or
condition soever he be, do presume from henceforth to bring into any Our
Dominions for sale, or vent, or put to sale, upon any pretense whatsoever, any
Latin Authors, Book or Books, printed in any the parts beyond the Seas,
which have been, or shall be formerly and originally printed in either of Our
said Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, upon pain of Our high indignation
and displeasure, and confiscation of the Books so brought over, or offered to
be put to sale, and of such further penalties and punishments, as the contempt
of this Our Royal commandment shall be found to demerit: And that no person or
persons; under the like pains and penalties, do presume to buy any such Book
or Books so reprinted in the parts beyond the Seas, so long as the said Book
or Books of the Print of either of Our said Universities shall be of ordinary
sale. And to the end it may appear what reprinted Books We intend by this
Our Proclamation to prohibit the buying or sale of; We do hereby require and
command the Printers of both Our said Universities, within one month next
coming to cause Certificate to be made under the hands of the Vice-Chancellors
of Our said Universities respectively, and delivered to the Master and Wardens
of the Company of Stationers London, for the time being, of all such Books
originally printed at either of Our said Universities already extant, and in
ordinary sale; And to cause like monthly Certificate to be made of all such
other Books, as shall be hereafter from time to time originally printed there.

Given at Our Court at Saint James, the first day of April, in the first year
of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Printed at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXV.


