woodcut of England's coat of arms, 1609 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.


By the King.
A Proclamation concerning Wire, Thread, and other Manufactures made of Gold
and Silver.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, being careful and desirous to prevent and
avoid all unnecessary waste and consumption of Coin and Bullion within this
Realm, has published sundry Proclamations, for suppressing all irregular and
unlawful Melting and Fining of Gold and Silver, and the making of Gold and
Silver Thread, Gold and Silver Foliat, and other Manufactures, whereupon much
Coin and Bullion was found to be consumed: But not finding any amendment
answerable to his gracious expectation, for that the offenders, being many of
them very poor, and making their whole gain and living thereby, did
adventure, against all Law and Authority, to continue their works, though in
a more secret and close manner then before. And therefore his Majesty, upon
mature advice with his Privy Counsel, finding it a matter of so much
difficulty utterly to suppress those Manufactures, as that it was not to be
effected without much severity and rigor to many of the poorer sort of his
Subjects, has resolved of a more moderate and fitting course, by reducing
those Trades under order and government, whereby the inconveniences may be
prevented, and yet the Trades (being the liuelyhood of so many men) not wholly
banished: And to that intent his Majesty, by advice of the Lords, and others
of His Privy Counsel, has granted a Charter of incorporation to the
Governor, Assistants, and Commonaltie of Gold-Wyer-drawers of the City of
London, containing sundry politic and good Rules and Orders, as well for
preserving of Coin and Bullion, as for regulating the said Trades, and
avoiding such deceits as may arise thereby to his Majesty's Subjects.

For the better strengthening whereof, his Majesty does hereby straightly charge
and command, First, that no person or persons whatsoever, (except such as are,
or shall be of the said Company, or Corporation) do at any time hereafter use,
exercise, or put in practice any the Trades, Mysteries, or Manufactures of
spinning, or making of Gold and Silver Thread, Purles, Plates, Oes, Spangles,
or Foliat, or the drawing of Wire for any of those uses or purposes, or for
Damasking, or inlaying, or the drawing of Wire for Cloth of Gold or Silver, or
do, or put in practice any other thing belonging to the Art of a Gold or
Silver Wyer-drawer, or do Melt, Fine, Prepare or disgrosse any Gold or Silver
for any of the uses aforesaid, or do set up any Milles, Engines or Instruments
for, or to the uses or purposes aforesaid, or any of them.

Secondly, That no person or persons of the said Company or Corporation, nor
any other whatsoever, do at any time hereafter make within this Realm of
England, or import, or cause to be imported into the same, or any part thereof,
any Gold or Silver Thread, or Wire, being counterfeit stuff, or made of base
Gold or Silver.

Thirdly, That no person or persons whatsoever, now being, or which hereafter
shall be of the said Corporation, do or shall make, buy, sell, utter, or put
to sale any Gold or Silver Wire or Thread, but according to such Powers,
Limitations and Provisions, as are mentioned and contained in the Charter made
to the said Corporation. And that no person or persons whatsoever, do or shall
buy or sell, or cause to be bought, uttered or sold, any Gold or Silver Wire,
or Thread, before the same be sealed with the Seal for that purpose, to be
appointed according to the intent of the said Charter, upon pain, that all
person and persons offending in any the premises, contrary to his Majesty's
Pleasure herein expressed, shall incur his Majesty's indignation and censure
in his high Court of Star Chamber, and such further punishment by
imprisonment, or otherwise, as may by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or
his Majesty's Prerogative Royal be inflicted upon them for their offenses, and
contempt of His Majesty's Royal Commandment.

And His Majesty does hereby Command, and give power and Authority unto His
Attorney General, for the time being, upon Information given unto him of any
offenders in any the premises, to prosecute all and every the said offenders
in the said Court of Star Chamber, that they may be there censured and
punished according to their demerits.

And His Majesty does further by these Presents will and require the Lord
Mayor of the City of London, for the time being, and all other Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and other Officers and
ministers of His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to see that this His
Majesty's Proclamation be in all points executed, and to be aiding and
assisting unto the said Governor, Assistants and Communaltie, and their
successors, and unto such person and persons, as by them or any of them shall
be assigned and appointed, in and about the due execution of the foresaid
Charter to them granted, or any thing contained therein, as they tender His
Majesty's Pleasure; Any former Proclamation, or any provision, restraint,
matter, or thing whatsoever to the contrary of the premises, or any of them,
in any wise notwithstanding.

Given at Our Court at Greenwich, the sixteenth day of June, in the one and
twentieth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXIII.


