depiction of England's coat of arms, 1625 HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the King. A Proclamation for the continuing of Our Farthing Tokens of
Copper, and prohibiting the Counterfeiting of them, and the use of all other.
WHereas Our late dear and Royal Father, King JAMES of blessed memory, did
out of His Providence and Princely care for the poorer sort of His Subjects,
take order and provide, that in stead of unwarranted Farthing Tokens, then
formerly used by Vintners, Chandlers, Tapsters, and other Traders and
Retailers, to the loss of His loving Subjects, there should be others made by
His own Warrant, under His own Royal Name and Inscription, and a constant
rechange settled, whereby the Subject might have the lawful use of them with
much ease, and without loss, which having since had general passage through
Our Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, have brought with
their use a general benefit to all sorts of people; We therefore, no less
tendering the good and ease of Our loving Subjects, have resolved upon the
continuance, use, and rechange of the said warranted Farthing Tokens, And do
hereby publish and declare Our Royal pleasure and Commandment, that no
Farthing Tokens, or other Tokens whatsoever heretofore made, or hereafter to
be made, shall be used, given, or received in exchange upon any pretense
whatsoever, within Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Our Dominion of
Wales, or any of them, other then such only as have been heretofore made by
the authority of the Letters Patents of Our said late dear and Royal Father,
or as shall be made by Our authority and Letters Patents thereof to be granted
under Our great Seal of England, To Our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cousin, Frances, Duchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox, and Our trusty and
well-beloved Servant, Sir Francis Crane, Knight, during the Terms in the said
Letters Patents contained: To which end We do hereby straightly charge and
command, that no person or persons whatsoever, do at any time hereafter
presume to make any other Token or Tokens, or to use, utter, or receive any
such Token or Tokens, or any thing in the name or nature of a Token or Tokens
whatsoever, either already made, or hereafter to be made, other then such
Farthing Tokens only, as are or shall be made by such authority, as aforesaid,
according to the Warrant and direction set down in the said several Letters
Patents; Nor shall counterfeit, or attempt, or go about to counterfeit any the
Token or Tokens, so made, or to be made by authority aforesaid, or any the
Engine or Engines, or Instruments whatsoever, wherewith the same have been or
shall be made, wrought or stamped, nor shall import or bring, or cause to be
imported or brought into this Kingdom, any Farthings, or Farthing Tokens,
made, or coined in any foreign parts beyond the Seas, nor shall use, utter or
disperse any such foreign Farthings or Tokens, upon pain of Our heavy
displeasure, and such further punishment to be inflicted upon him or them,
which shall be found to offend herein, as by Our Laws, or Our Prerogative
Royal, may be inflicted upon them, for their contempt and disobedience to this
Our Commandment; Willing and commanding all and singular Majors, Justices of
Peace, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Our
Officers and Ministers, to whom it shall or may appertain, to do their
uttermost endeavor for the discovery and searching out of all offenders and
delinquents concerning the premises, and to be aiding and assisting to the
said Patentees, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Deputies,
Factors, and Servants, in, and about the due execution and performance of Our
Royal pleasure and Commandment above declared.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the thirtieth day of May, in the first year
of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
God save the King.
Printed at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXV.


