An Act to stay the reuersing of Vtlaries after Judgment, and to put in Bail
upon Writtes of Error, and reuersing of Outlaries before Judgment, and to
prevent other abuses committed by Vndersheriffes and Attourneys.
Grieuance. AFter long time spent with great expense of money in the
prosecution, the Pl. obtains a Judgment, and after proceeds to the Vtlary
after Judgment, being the utmost proceedings of the Law in all personal
actions: Notwithstanding upon some sma^l error found in the proceedings, these
Vtlaries are oftentimes reuersed, without satisfaction, or taking any order
with Plaintiffes to th^^r great damage and prejudice.

Remedy. Forasmuch as the Law has not as yet provided any remedy herein,
that it may be enacted, that no Vtlary after judgment be reuersed for any
cause whatfoeuer in the Court of Common Pleas, before the Pl. be satisfied, or
the debt or damages otherwise brought into the Court, to satisfy the Pl. if
it shall appear to the Judges to be a true debt, and not satisfied before.

Grieuance. After much time and money spent in suing to the Vtlary before
judgment, upon Reuersals, and Writs of Error allowed upon these Vtlaries, the
Law has not provided any sufficient Remedy for the Defendants appearance, and
putting in bail to the Pl. Action, whereby the said Pl. are exceedingly
delayed and hindered in their suits.

Remedy. To be enacted, that no Vtlary before Judgment be reuersed, nor any
Writ of Er. or allowed thereupon, before the Def. put in good Bail to the Pl.
suit, unless he does make it appear to the Court that the Pl. ^s agreed
witha^l before, as is used upon the Statu^ of 31. Eliz. etc.

Grieuance. All ^one as the Defendants our lawed be arrested upon Writs of
Vtlary to the Pl. tu the^^ cha^ges. Vndersheri^tes their Cle^kes, and
Bailif^es, for their own gain do presently inlarg* them without taking any
order with Pl. whereby creditors are not only much delayed in their S^^ts, but
oftentimes defrauded of the^^ lawful debts, to the great dishonor of his
Majesty's Laws.

Remedy. To be enacted, that no Sheriff^, upon pain of xx li shall enlarge
any pers^n arrested upon a Capias vt^egat. before Judgment, before he has
taken bond of the Def. with two sufficient sureties, that the Det. shall
appear upon the return of the Writ whereupon he was arrested, and put in good
Bail to the Pl. suit.

It does also prohibit all Attourneys of the Common Pleas, for to sue forth
Writs of Trespass, and other fained Writs, where the true cause of Action is
Debt, for that it breeds many inconveniences and mischiefs to the subject as
by the Bil appears, and is expressly against the Law and ancient practice of
that Court, which has ever continued constant and certain to the subject, in
the ground and foundation of their suits, until of late years.

Also by expressing the Fees mentioned in the said Act, It does ease the
subject, of the payment of some unnecessary Fees now demanded and taken, and
does restrain, limit, and make certain other Fees hereafter to be taken by
Sheriffs and other Officers about the reuersing and executing of Writs of
Velary, which before were uncertain and grievous to the subject.

The other clauses and prouisoes mentioned in the said Bill, are dependant and
incident to these grievances aforesaid, and are only expressed therein, for the
better declaring and resolving of all doubts that might otherwise arise
thereupon.


