September, the 16th. 1681. AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE Insurance-Office for
Houses, etc.
THese are to give Notice, That the Office and Security, formerly proposed for
Insuring Houses from Fire, after the Rate of Six Pence per Pound for
Brick-Houses, and Twelve Pence for Timber, is NOW Perfected and Settled; and
the Persons concerned in the Security, will Attend every Day at their Office on
the Backside of the Royal Exchange, from the Hours of Nine till Twelve in the
Forenoon, and from Three till Six in the Afternoon, to Subscribe Policies for
all Persons desirous to Insure their Houses, as far as the Number of Three
Thousand Houses.

Much Labor, much Time has been spent in Settling this Affair: It being above
a Year since the Propositions for Insuring Houses from Fire were first made
Public. This has occasioned several Discourses, as if it were a Project in
its own Nature, not to be Practiced; and would prove like the Abortive Conceits
of several Others, in this last Twenty Years, on this Subject. But whosoever
considers the Ways and Means that were at first Proposed to be followed in
Settling this Design, such as were thought absolutely necessary to give that
Satisfaction, which the Greatness of the Concern did require, will believe this
Affair could not have been otherwise, or sooner Effected.

The Way and Means to Settle this Design, as it was first Proposed, was thus;
That there should be General-Meetings of all Persons, that had any Thoughts of
Insuring their Houses, and were Well-Wishers to such a Design, before any
Security was Settled: At which Public Meetings, the Value and Nature of the
Security, Manner and Method of Settling it, and all Things else that could be
offered either to the Advantage or Disadvantage of this Design, should be
Debated, and Regulated.

This Scrutiny this Office was to pass: For though some Public Designs* whose
Fund have been Reputation, and Personal Credit, have Thriven best without
Examination, and (of a sudden) Raised Themselves into great Reputation; yet
sometimes ( Mushroom-like) they have had their Duration and Rise equal: their
Creditors having lost their Money, before they had the Leisure to consider why
they Trusted them. So, on the contrary, those Designs, whose Fund are in Land,
being Real and Certain, can have no greater Advantage, than to have their
Foundation Examined by those that Trust them: And though such Deliberation may
make their Beginnings and Growth slow; yet They will be like the Oak, Durable.

Many General-Meetings, upon Public Notice, were held at the Office, where
several Gentlemen, and Eminent Citizens were present. The first Debate was
about the Value of the Security, Whether Forty Thousand Pounds was Sufficient
to Secure Ten Thousand Houses, as it was first Proposed, with the Addition of
Ten Thousand Pounds for every Ten Thousand Houses? This, after much Debate,
appeared to be Sufficient to the Majority; because though Ten Thousand Houses
are of greater Value, than the Fund; yet being supposed that they will stand at
great Distances, they could not be Destroyed by any One Fire: Yet because some
Gentlemen questioned it, and it being the Design of those Persons concerned in
the Office, to give full Satisfaction to All; it was at last agreed, That the
Security of Forty Thousand Pounds then Proposed, should be only for the
Insuring of Five Thousand Houses, with the Addition of Ten Thousand Pounds, for
every Five Thousand Houses.

The next Debate was the Nature of the Security, which was proposed to be in
Ground-Rents: This was agreed by all, to be the best sort of Security, and
least subject to Alteration in Value: Those that were Proposed, were the
Ground-Rents of Essex-Buildings, being about One Thousand and Fifty Pounds per
Annum; the Ground-Rents at the Lower-End of St. Martins-Lane, being about Three
Hundred and Fifty Pounds per Annum; and the Ground-Rents of
Devonshire-Buildings without Bishops-gate, being about Seven Hundred Pounds per
Annum, when they are all Built on: But because They were not all Finished, that
was made an Objection; but Answered; That it was probable, they would be
Finished before the Number of Five Thousand Houses were Insured: Yet to avoid
that Scruple, it was agreed to Settle (at present) only the Ground-Rents of
Essex, and St. Martin's-Buildings for Three Thousand Houses; and when the
Ground-Rents of Devonshire-Buildings are Finished, to Settle them for Two
Thousand more.

The Manner of Settling this Fund was debated; which was; that these Estates
should be conveyed to several eminent, and known Persons, whom the Company
should approve of in Trust for this Use: Several Gentlemen were named; and
those that were pleased to accept of the Trust, were, Sir Joseph Sheldon (since
Deceased) Sir George Treby, Recorder of the City of London, Sir Michael
Heneage, Sir William Warren, Sir Richard How, Lieutenant Colonel Rich, William
Thompson, Esquire; George Bradbury, Esquire; both of the Middle Temple; Edward Maynard,
Esquire; Mr. Ralph Hartley, and Mr. Nathaniel Hawes.

Last of all, the Method of Settling this Design was debated, which was agreed
to be referred to such Council, as should be then Chosen; there was also a
Committee chosen of several Gentlemen then present, which were desired to
Attend the Council, and see the Execution of all things debated, and agreed to.
The Council Chosen, were Sir Francis Pemberton, now Lord Chief Justice, Sir
William Jones, Sir Francis Winnington, Mr. Williams, late Speaker to the House
of Commons, Mr. Mosier, Mr. Polixfen, Mr. Saunders, and Mr. Whitaker: The
Council were all Attended several times by the Committee: And at last, at a
general Meeting of the Council and Committee, after a due Examination of the
Title, and of all other things that were Debated, and Proposed to them. The
Council did all agree to the Conveyance; but altered the Proposition for
Re-building; so that if a House Insured be Burnt, the Loss must be satisfied in
Money; for the Office is not to Re-build; though both were at first Proposed
(to be at the Election of the Insured.) This was thought necessary to avoid
those Disputes, which might arise about the Dimensions, Form, and
Substantialness of Building.

The Form of the Policy was also Settled by the Council; and the Names of those
Persons that are to Subscribe them, are Mr. Samuel Vincent, Dr. Nicholas
Barbon, Mr. Benjamin Bartlet, Mr. Samuel Tookey, etc. And any Two of them
Signing, make good the Policy.

This was the Method that was followed in Forming this Design, and although all
Endeavors were used for dispatch: yet through the Weightyness of the Affair,
Number, and Greatness of the Council; it was last Trinity-Term, before the last
perusal of this Settlement, had passed all the Council; Since, the Time has
been spent in Engrossing the Conveyances, Sealing, and Inrolling of the Deeds,
and Attornment of the Tenants, according as Council Directed. And although some
Persons, who have had the Misfortune in the Interim, to lose their Houses for
want of the Office being Settled; (they being since Burnt) have Cause to think
it Tedious; yet the Generality of Men will agree, This Design could not have
been sooner perfected.

THese are to give Notice, That whereas several Gentlemen, to show their
willingness to Encourage this Design, have Subscribed to Insure their Houses,
as soon as the Conveyances were Settled; upon which Account it was Proposed, as
an acknowledgement for their Encouraging the Office, that they should have a
Years Purchase Gratis: That is, That they should Insure Eight Years for Five
Paid, Twelve for Seven. Twenty-One for Nine, and Thirty-One for Ten. And,
Whereas many more would have Subscribed, had there been due Attendance given at
the Office: And because it is now Vacation; It is therefore thought fit to
propose; That those Gentlemen that shall Insure their Houses, and take their
Policies before the First Day of November next, shall have the same Advantage
with those that did Subscribe

FINIS.

