C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish
unicorn and thistle on the other
Mid. ss. Ad General. Quarterial. Sessionem Pacis Domini Regis tent. per
Adjornament pro Com. Midd. apud Hicks-Hall in St. John-street in Com. praedicto
die Veneris, scilicet Quarto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi nunc Angliae, etc.Tricesimo tertio.
WHEREAS by a Statute made in the Seventeenth year of the Reign of His Majesty
that now is amongst other things it is enacted, that all such Persons, who take
upon them to Preach in any unlawful Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under
color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom, shall not at any time come within Five miles of a
Corporation, nor any person teach School, who shall not frequent Divine Service
established by the Laws of this Kingdom, as by the said Statute more at large
appears, under the penalty of Forty pounds for every offense. And whereas by
another Statute made in the Two and twentieth year of the Reign of his said
Majesty, it is amongst other things enacted, That if any person of the age of
sixteen years and upwards, shall be present at any Assembly, Meeting, or
Conventicle, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other
manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England,
where there shall be assembled five persons or more, over and besides those of
the Household: And every person who shall take upon him to preach or teach in
any such Meeting, Assembly, and Conventicle, shall forfeit for every such
offense, as in the said Statute is provided: And whereas Papists, Seminary
Priests and Jesuits may likewise in Conventicles and Schools, withdraw his
Majesty's Subjects from their Obedience, and corrupt them both in their
Religion and duty to his Majesty; And whereas the Justices are informed, that
diverse Houses have been lately erected and built within this County, for such
Conventicles and Meetings, and frequented by great numbers of persons
inhabiting in the said County and others, to the great disturbance of the
Government, and may be of dangerous consequence, and if not timely suppressed,
such public Conventicles not being permitted in any Christian Country; no, not
in these very Countries where most Religions are tolerated; And whereas the
Justices are likewise informed, that diverse persons keep School within the said
County contrary to the said Statute, and other Laws, by whom ill principles
will be planted in young Children, which will grow up with them, and thereby
continue the Separation and Division which is in this Kingdom, to the certain
ruin and destruction of his Majesty's Peace and the established Government.
Now for the prevention of the mischiefs which may arise by the said
Conventicles and Schools, the Justices are of opinion that the said Statutes of
the Seventeenth and Two and twentieth of this King ought to be put in due
Execution, and do esteem themselves obliged by the Oaths which they have taken,
to see them duly executed; And that they may do, all that in them lies, in
order thereunto, They do declare that all Housekeepers within this County who
keep Alehouses and other public houses for Entertainment by virtue of any
License from the Justices of the Peace of this County, and shall not go to
their Parish Church and receive the Sacrament according to the practice in the
Church of England, and shall after the Nine and twentieth day of October
instant go to any such Conventicle as aforesaid, contrary to the said Statutes,
shall have their Licenses taken from them, and the Houses of Entertainment
suppressed; and if any such for the future happen to be licensed, as soon as
they shall be discovered, they shall likewise be suppressed. The Justices
further declare, that if the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, shall
dispose of any of the Parish money by way of Pension or otherwise to poor
people who frequent Conventicles, and do not come to their Parish Church, and
receive the Sacrament there (except in case of sickness and necessity to be
allowed by a Justice of Peace) the money paid to such people shall not be
allowed by the said Justices in the Accounts of the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor, because such persons who never come to the Parish Church
ought not to be reckoned of the Parish. The Justices further declare, that they
will appoint some fitting persons to prosecute all Offenders against the said
Statutes, such public houses being the place where factious persons meet to
keep Clubs, and consult together how to disturb the Government. It is Ordered
by this Court, that the aforesaid Declaration made in Sessions be published,
that all persons concerned may take notice of it, and that the Ministers of
each Parish in the County be desired to publish it in his Parish Church. It is
further Ordered, that an humble Address be made to his Majesty, humbly to
beseech him, in order for better settlement of the Peace of this County and his
Majesty's established Government, that all manner of persons who now are, or
hereafter shall be, in any Employment in this County under his Majesty
immediately, as likewise those who act under them, or by any authority derived
by or from them, may be such as go to their Parish Church, and receive the
Sacrament there according to law. And it is further Ordered, that the Chairman
Sir George Jeoffryes wait upon his Majesty on Saturday morning next with this
Address, and that the Justices of Peace attend upon him; As likewise
congratulate with his Majesty upon his safe Return to London.

per Cur. Adderly.


