ADVICE FROM A CATHOLIC To his Protestant FRIEND, Touching the Doctrine of
Purgatory.

By way of Letter.

Printed in the Year, 1687.

Price Two Pence.

Advice from a Catholic to his Protestant Friend, etc.
SIR,
THOUGH at our last parting, I found you obstinate in your Unbelief, as to the
matter of Purgatory, yet as I think my self bound both as a Christian, and as a
Friend, to combat that dangerous Infidelity of yours, so I shall now undertake
that Province with some new Efforts: Nevertheless I will not venture to Engage
you singly with my own strength, but borrow the necessary forces from such as
have been most versed in such sort of Conflicts. Wherefore to begin, I must
tell you That your Repartees upon me when we last discoursed this point, rather
spoke the Libertine than a Professor of Christianity. Purgatory (you deridingly
cried) is not so hot as Folk talk. Who ever came back to tell us News of it?
God is merciful; think you he takes delight to burn his Children, and to cut
off the Price of his Son's Passion, who satisfied for our Sin. When I heard
this I was afraid you would have proceeded and joined with Atheistical
Philosophers, in saying, That Death is the Remedy of all Evils, and that tht
Soul separated from the Body has no more to suffer. What could I less expect,
when you so diametrically oppose not only the General Consent of all Ages, but
also the General Opinion Practice, Sentence, and decisions of all the Church,
in such sort, That there is not any Truth of our Faith more fortified.

As to the First, the Gentiles who lived out of the Law, were sensible of the
noble extraction of the Soul, and knew it to be defiled by the Body, and by
sensual Works. On this account had they recourse to feeble Elements to purify
it: One while washing themselves in virgin-streams, another passing through?
Flames, and sometimes contriving other means to cleanse themselves from the
Pollutions of the Flesh. And they were not content to purge themselves in this
Life, but extend it to the Souls of the Dead, constantly believing they stood
in need of Remedies to free themselves from Bodily stains. The Hebrews the
Egyptians, the Greeians and Romans all contended for Prayers for the Dead and
the Truth of Purgatory. The Hebrews three times in the Year Celebrated the
Feast of the Dead, and their Priest mounting up into a Apiece Pulpit made
on purpose and Ceremoniously to represent the City of the Blessed, according to
S. John, rehearsed aloud and Apoc. xxi 16. Civitas in quadro positas est.
audibly the Names of the Dead, to recommend them to the Prayers of the present
Congregation. Prayers so familiar amongst them, that they wrote them upon
Tombs, instead of Epitaphs, in these terms: Sit Anima ejus colligata in
Fasciculo viventium. Let his Soul be bound up in the Posie of the Living. As if
we should say, all the Souls of the Saints were as an odoriferous Posie,
whereof every Elect constituted a Flower.

The Egyptians were so possessed with the Opinion that Souls were to be purged
in the other Life, in as much as they had been drenched in the voluptuous
Pleasures of the Flesh, that in the Funerals of the Dead, having opened the
Body, they took the Heart out of the Breast, and put it into a little Casket,
then on the Bank of Nilus, where ordinarily Tombs were erected, a Herald
holding the Casket, and showing it to the Eyes of Heaven, protested before all
then present, the Deceased now in Question had lived piously, and according to
the Laws of his Ancestors; that if he had offended through Bodily Pleasures,
they wished his Soul might be as well cleansed, as they went about to purge the
Stomach, the Instrument of the Lusts of the Living, thereupon they threw it
into Nilus.

What need I mention the Grecians, their Prime Man Plato, nay termed the
Divine, in his Phaedon spoke so perspicuously for Purgatory, that he seems to
have had his Education in Christian Schools. And as for the Romans, Quintilian
in the very Infancy of Quint. Declam. 10.
the Church, when as some of the Apostles were yet living, in a certain Plea.
urges the Truth of Purgatory by saying, The Soul being purged by Fire, went to
take place in Heaven. Besides Julius, a very ancient Author, speaking of the
Death Julius, Florileg. lib. 3.
of a Lady named Podon, observed in plain terms, That her Husband, who was one
of the most ancient Christians, made Offerings for her, which he calls Gifts
for Ransom of the Soul: Answerable to which Tertullian writes, it was the
Custom of the Ancient Church to Pray for the Souls of the Tertul. in Exhort. ad
Castitat.
Dead, yea, and to make annual Offerings for them.

Thus when we see a^ Universal Agreement in a Proposition, it is not one man
speaks, but the Mouth of Heaven, which utters this Verity. And also observe
when the Holy Fathers produce an Example of Pagans, it is not to set us the
Pagans for our Instruction, but to show, that to waver in the Belief of things
they generally held by the sentence of Nature, is to be worse than a Pagan.

Having thus proved the Universal Consent of all Ages and Countries, I now
proceed to show it to have ever been the Universal sense of the Church. For
this purpose in France view the Council of Chalons upon Saone, for Prayers for
the Dead, and the Truth of Purgatory. In Spain that of Praga? in Germany that
of Worms; in Italy the Sixth General Council held at Rome, under Pope
Symmachus; in Greece a number of Synods collected by Martius: In Africa, the
Third of Carthage; and lastly, the Three Ecumenical of Lateran, Florence and
Trent, which say the same. A man that has but the least sense, surely needs no
more than this to be possessed with the truth.

Ay but you object, That Jesus made Purgation of Sins, and said to the Good
Thief, Thou shall to day be with me in Paradise. A goodly Consequence! Jesus
purged Sins, there is then no Purgatory! Might you not as well say Jesus prayed
for Remission of our Sins, then we no longer stand in need of Prayer or
Penance. Besides you would seem to intimate by saying, the Good Thief went
directly to Paradise without feeling Purgatory, that we assert it was necessary
for all the World to pass that way. No, make your Self a great Saint, and the
Purifying Flames will have nothing to work on. But you say this Doctrine came
but lately into the World, and is the Invention of Self intercsted Pfiests; But
consult the Scripture and the Fathers, and they will satisfy you to the
contrary.

When St. Paul said that the day of God, (viz.) the day of Judgment, be it
general or particular, shall be manifested by Fire which shall put every One's
Works 1 Cor. 3. Chap.
upon Trial; and that he who upon the Foundations of Jesus, shall build with
Wood, Straw, or Hay, to wit, with vain and slight Works, shall be saved as by
Fire, he clearly declared the Doctrine of Purgatory, unless you be more
illuminated than S. Basil, and S. Ambrose, who have judged it so, for the first
says, He threatens the Soul not with Destruction, but Purgation. And the
other plainly expresses, He speaks of the Pains of Fire, which God had
appointed to purify Souls. And the objection is as frivolous to say, as by
fire, and not by fire; as when S. John wrote in the first Chapter of his
Gospel, That Men saw Jesus as the only Son of God, that he were only a Figure
of it, not a Truth; or as when S. Paul witnesses, he was found as a man, we
might infer, he were no 2 Chap. to the Philip.
man. Does not S. Bernard prove our Doctrine from S. Bernard's 66. Hom. upon
the Cant.
the mention of One Sin which shall never be remitted, either in this World, or
in the otber. Does In S. Matthew. Chap. 12.
not the Evangelist himself mention a Prisoner which shall be put into a Place
from whence he shall not come till he have paid the last Penny. Whereupon S.
Cyprian says plainly, it is one thing to be a long time purged for Sins by the
Torment of Fire, another by the Purgation which is made by the Passion of
Tobit, Chap. 4.
Jesus Christ. What is written of Bread to be put upon 32 Hom. upon S. Mat.
the Graves of the Dead, S. Chrysostom refers to the Custom of the (...)
Church, which called both the Priests and the Poor purposely to pray for the
Dead. The solemn Fast made for Saul, S. Bid makes no question but it was for
the quiet The 4th. of Kings.
of his Soul. And the Great S. Austin cries; My God, Aug. in Psalm. 37.
make me such in my Life, that I may not need the Fire of Purgatory after my
Death.

But grant the force of these reasons you will say, you understand not where this
Purgatory is, and how Souls are there Tormented? Now School Divines commonly
place Purgatory in a subterranean Place, of which there is great probability.
It may also be, That Souls may be purged in the Air, in the sphere of Fire, and
in diverse parts of the Elementary World, according to the Opinion of S. Gregory
Nys^n, S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory the Great, Nevertheless the Church walking
warily in its Ordonances, ever grounded on the Word of God, only obliges us to
hold as an Article of Faith, a Third Place for the Purgation of Souls, which is
neither Paradise nor Hell. As for the Circumstances of the Place and manner of
sensible Torments, it has Decreed nothing thereof as an Article of our Belief.
It depends on the Prerogative of God's Power and the Ministry of Angels.

As for Punishments, it is most certain the first consists in suspension from
the sight of God, a matter very dolorous to the Soul, which being out of the
Body, and far absented from its source, naturally desires to rejoyn it self to
God, and the least retardation it feels from such Felicity, is most sensible
unto it. The second is the pain of sense which is exercised by Fire, and
sometimes also by other ways. If you say you cannot comprehend how a material
thing works on a spiritual; I ask of you again, this Soul which is in your
Body, is it of any other kind than those in Purgatory? And yet see you not how
it daily suffers in the Body? See you not how all the Dolours of Mortal Flesh
rebound back again by a most necessary amorous Sympathy to the bottom of our
Soul? Is it not true our Soul contains in it the root of Understanding, and
all sensible Knowledge, framed and accomplished by help of the Bodies Organs?
Is it not true that being in the Body it understands and feels with
dependence on the Body? And when separated it certainly understands with
independance of the Body: And tho there is no more Corporal organ, which is as
the Chariot of feeling, yet surely God may by his Power supply the Organ of
Body, and necessitate the Soul immediately to feel the sharpness of fire, as if
it were still in the Body. And further, the fire not being contrary of its
nature to the Spirit, might for all that be chosen, and appointed by the
singular Disposition of Providence to be unto the Soul an Afflicting sign, in
that it represents to it in its flames the Anger of an Offended God.

But hoping you are now pretty well convinced of the Truth of our Doctrine in
this point, I shall trouble you no farther at this time than with one Example
of the Apparition of Souls in Purgatory* But first let me mind you, that he who
believes nothing above Nature, will not believe a God of Nature. How many
Extraordinary things are there, with whose effects Experience has made us
acquainted, and yet of which God hides the reasons from us? Who can tell why
the Theamede which is a kind of Adamant, draws Iron on the one side, and
repelleth it on the other? Why do the forked Branches of the Nut Tree, turn
toward Mines of Gold and Silver? Why do Bees often die in the Hives after the
Death of the Master of the Family, unless they be elsewhere transported? Why
does a dead Body cast forth blood in the presence of the Murderer? Why do
certain Fountains in the current of their Waters, and in their Color carry
presages of Seasons, as that of Blomuza which waxes red when the Country is
menaced with War? Why has so many Noble Families certain signs, that never
fails to happen, when some one of the Family is to dye? The Commerce of the
living with the Spirits of the Dead, is a matter very Extraordinary, but not
impossible to the Father of Spirits, who holds total Nature between his hands.

But to come to the point, Histories tell us, the Apparition of Souls in
Purgatory are so frequent, that he who would keep an account, may as soon
number the Stars in the Sky, or leaves on the Trees. But as it is not fit to
be too credulous in all may be said there upon, so a man must be very impudent
to deny all is spoken of it, and to oppose as well the Authority of so many
great Personages, as the Memory of all Ages. Now for the present I shall only
single out one instance to you.

Peter of Clugny, surnamed the Venerable, and in his time esteemed as the
Oracle of France, Who for his Wariness and scrupulous Consideration in these
Matters, cannot but be thought of unquestioned Authority. He relates how that
in a Village of Spain named the Star, there was a Man of Quality called Peter
of Engelbert, must esteemed in the World for his excellent Parts, and abundant
Riches.

Yet when in years coming to understand the Vanity of all Sublunary things, he
withdrew into a Monastery of the Order of Clugny, there piously to spend the
rest of his Days, as the best Incense is said to come from old Trees. He often
talked of a Vision he had had, which made the General of his Order, then in
Spain, question him in the presence of the Bishops of Oleron and Osma, and
conjure him in the virtue of holy Obedience, to tell him punctually the truth
touching the Vision he had seen, whilst he led a secular Life. And this man
being very grave and very Circumspect, accordingly did so to this effect.

At the time of Alphonsus the younger's Wars in Castile, in the persuance of
the Edict, I sent one of my menial Servants, named Sancius into his Army. The
Peace being made, and he disbanded, returning home he was soon seized with a
sickness, which in few days took him away into the other World. He had the
usual Obsequies done him, and about four Months after, as I lay one Night broad
awake in my Bed, I perceived a Phantome in the form of a man, who stirring up
the ashes of my hearth, opened the burning Coals, which made him the more
easily to be seen. Although I found my self much terrified with the sight of this
Ghost, God gave me the Courage to ask him who he was? and for what purpose he
came thither to lay my hearth abroad. But he in a very low voice answered:
Master, fear nothing I am your poor Servant Sancius, I go into Castile in the
Company of many Soldiers to Expiate my sins in the same Place where I committed
them.

I courageously replied, if the Commandment of God call you thither, to what
purpose come you hither? Sir, said he, take it not a miss for it is not without
the Divine permission. I am in a state not desperate, and wherein I may be
helped by you, if you bear any good will toward me. Hereupon I required what
his necessity was, and what secours he expected from me. You know Master, said
he, that a little before my Death you sent me into a Place where men are not
ordinarily sanctified. Liberty, ill Example, Youth, and Temerity, all conspire
against the Soul of a poor Soldier, who has no Government. I committed many
outrages during the late War, robbing and pilling even to the Goods of the
Church, for which I am at this present grievously tormented. But Good Master,
if you loved me alive as one of yours, forget me not after Death. I ask no part
of your great Riches, but only your Prayers, and some Alms for my sake, which
will much assist to mitigate my pains. My Mistress owes me about eight Francks
upon a reckoning between her and me, let her bestow it, not for my Body, which
has no need of it, but the comfort of my Soul, which expects it from your
Charities.

This Discourse emboldened me, and made me more desirous to entertain it, than
to fear the Apparition. I demanded whether it could tell me any News of one of
my Contry*men, named Peter D^jaca, Who died a while since. To which he made
answer, I need not trouble my self with it, for he was already in the number of
the Blessed, since the great Alms he gave in the last famine, had purchased
Heaven for him. From thence I fell upon another Question, and was Curious to
know what had happened to a certain Judge, Whom I very well knew, and who had
lately passed into the other Life. To which he replied, Sir, speak not of that
miserable Man, for Hell possesses him through the Corruption of Justice, which
he by damnable Practice Exerciced, having an honor and Soul saleable to the
prejudice of his Conscience. My Curiosity carried me higher, to Enquire what
became of King Alphonsus the Great, at which time I heard an other voice that
came from a Window behind me, saying very distinctly, it is not of Sancius you
must demand that, because he as yet can say nothing to the state of that
Prince, but I may have more experience thereof than he. I deceasing five years
ago, and being present in an accident which gave me some Light of it. I was
much surprised, Unexpectedly hearing this other Voice, and turning, saw by the
help of the Moons brightness which reflected into my Chamber, a Man leaning on
my Window, whom I entreated to tell me where then King Alphonsus was. Whereto
he replied, he well knew, that passing out of this Life, he had been much
tormented, and that the Prayers of good Religious men much helped him, but he
could not at this present say in what state he was. Having spoaken thus much he
turned toward Sancius, sitting near the fire, said, let us go, it is time we
depart. At which Sancius making no other answer, speedily rose up and redoubled
his complaints with a Lamentable voice, saying; Sir, I entreat you once again
remember me, and that my Mistress perform the request I made you.

The next day Engelbert understood from his Wife the Case to be so as the
Spirit had told him, and with all Observation disposed himself speedily and
charitably, to satisfy all was required.

Here I shall respit from further Arguments and Instances, till such time as I
am sensible of the Operations of these: In the mean while believe me Sir,
sincerely

yours, etc.

THE HISTORY OF Pope Joan AND THE WHORES OF ROME.

Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit. Terent.

The Second Edition.

LONDON,

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here presented thee some few Remarks on two grand Scandals thrown
upon the Church of Rome. Satan, it is true, wus from the beginning, and always
will be, a Calumniator, (for so his very Name imports in the Hebrew Language)
continually endeavoring, by Lies and other wicked ways, to prucure, as he
does, many Proselites. But without doubt, Truth will at last prevail, and then,
down goes Dagon: which inestimable Jewel, Truth, we ought all of us to search
after and purchase; and having obtained it, how glad will every one be when he
sees himself disabused? As in the two following Stories; the first of which
thou will see here crammed full of as many Contrarieties, ridiculous Fables,
and Untruths, almost as the Turkish Alcoran, which nevertheless has been
wonderfully and maliciously defended and improved by Heretics and Polities,
that have been Flatterers of such Emperors as were professed Enemies of the
Popes, and who made it their Business wholly to misprise the Glory, and
an^^h^lat^, if possible, the Authority of the aforesaid Church.

What Platina, so much esteemed by Protestants, says of this Story, in his
Lives of the Popes, I here give thee as it is lately Translated by Mr. Ricaut,
who had done well to have taken his Annotator Onuphrius along with him, who
Detected and Corrected many of his Errors; and among the rest, this of Pope
Joan.

And as for Martinus Polonus, the first broacher of this Story; what a simple
Historian he was, may be seen from Onuphrius.

Then as for the Story of the Whores of Rome, that is as good current Coin as
the rest, as thou will perceive by what follows: which that I may not keep thee
too long from, or make the Gate seem too big for the City, I bid thee

Farewell.
THE HISTORY OF POPE JOAN, etc.
CHAP. I.
I. Of her Birth and Education; her several Names, and how she came to be
Chosen Pope. II. Short Remarks upon the Premises. III. Of her being brought to
bed in open Street, etc. and of the Porphyry Chair. IV. Remarks upon the
Premises, etc.

I. FIrst then it is related that this Androgyne, or Hermaphrodite, was a poor
English or Germane Girl, they know not which, they story it so differently. Nay
some of these Gentlemen Reporters are so blinded that they will tell you she was
an English Woman born at Mentz; and that she having been Educated at several
Universities, by dissembling her Sex, and often changing her Name; (for they have
given her more Names than either the Great Mogul, the Grand Seignior, or
Emperor of Persia, ever attributed to themselves) for sometimes they call her
Agnes; and some say her Name was Isabella, others Gilbert, others Jutte; and
some call her Dorothy; but at last they will needs have it that she took upon
her the Name of John the Englishman; in favor, forsooth, of a Gallant of hers
that was that Countryman, and came with him from Athens (after having studied
a while there) to Rome; where she taught publicly in the Schools, for two
years say some; others say six: where, for her knowledge in sacred letters, she
had but few her equals; and none her superiors: so that she acquired so great
renown there, by her reading and disputing so learnedly and accutely, that
after the decease of Leo IV. say some, others Leo VI. she was, by consent of
all, Chosen Pope. See here good Reader, a very fine plausible Romantic Story
at first entrance.

II. But here be pleased to take a few short Remarks with thee, hereupon. First
then Note that some of them say she was an English woman, born at Mentz; when
as Mentz is a famous City, situate upon the Rhine in Germany. Then as to her
studying in Athens, as they formally story it; you are to understand, upon the
Authentic Testimonies of Zonaras and Cedrenus, that Athens was at that time
ruined, and the whole Country overrun with Barbarism, And Corn grew there
where Athens stood. and consequently no more place of studying there at that
time, than there is now at S. Pancras Church. Then as to her being Chosen Pope
after her so short a time of Residence at Rome, it is like the rest; for I Will
assure thee, it is a certain truth, that from S. Peter's time, to those days,
and after, till Formosus, who was the Eighth Pope, after this pretended Pope
JOAN; none were chosen Popes, that was not Educated from their Cradle, in the
Roman Church; and was first made Presbyter or Deacon-Cardinal. How then is it
likely that an unknown Woman; of as uncertain an Origin and Country; and
without any Order, or Testimony of her Life-past, should attain to the highest
Ecclesiastical Dignity in the whole World? Then lastly, there was no Custom of
public Reading or Disputing at Rome in those days neither.

III. Then, in the next place, they tell you a very formal Story of her being
got with Child; but here is the mischief on it, they cannot agree by whom; some
saying it was by one of her Servants, others say 'twas a certain Cardinal did
the deed; and that she being ignorant that she was so far gone with Child, in
the time of her Popedom, was brought to Bed in the open Street, going in
Procession from the Vatican to the Lateran, and there gave up the Ghost, upon
the Spot: and that the Popes have ever since gone another way in Procession,
for very shame of such an Act. And that to avoid the like Error* for the
future, when any Pope is then placed in the Porphyry Chair, which has an hole
made for the purpose, his Genitals are handled by the youngest Deacon.
Goodness? what heaping is here of Lies upon Lies?

IV. But here we have a few particulars also to take notice of. First, that is
it probable or possible, can any rational Soul imagine, that this Hermaphrodite
should conceive and conceal her great Belly so closely, that no mortal Creature
could in the least perceive it? No, not any one, either of the Church, or Court
of Rome? Can any ingenious Person ever believe that such a wise Nation, as the
Romans are, and always have been, could be so grossly imposed upon; or that they
should be so Sottish or Stupid, as not one of them to know a Woman from a Man;
neither by her Voice, Countenance, nor Gesture? And is it not very unlikely,
that she should be got with Child now in her declining Age, at which time the
Popes are ordinarily Chose? And that she should be ignorant of her being so
near her Time, as to venture to go in procession so far on Foot? All very
probable, or rather ridiculous Romances. Then as to her going in Procession
from the Vatican to the Lateran; they have here expressed their Ignorance, as
well as Malice, to some purpose: as not knowing that the Popes, at that time,
lived not at the Vatican: No, not till Pope Boniface the Ninth's days, which
was several hundreds of years after the Death of this Pope Joan. Fine Coherence
in Chronology, is it not? So that it is certainly true that this mistake in Time
will ruin all, as a very honorable and most worthy Person said, not long
since, to a certain Person, in another Case. Then as to their telling you, very
formally; how that the Popes ever since, go another way in Procession; I will
assure you it is upon another Account (viz.) by reason of the narrowness of the
Ways, and difficulty of passage for so great a Number of People and Horses,
they since go a more open and safe way; and yet there have been Popes that have
gone that way in Procession, since that time.

Lastly, as to the pierced Porphyry Chair, you must Note that it is usually
placed near to the great Door of St. John Lateran's Church, on the Day the Pope
takes possession of his Charge in that Church; wherein he is Seated a while,
and when he rises again the Quire Sings this Verse of the 112. Psalm, Suscita^
de pulvere egenum; and de stercore erigit pauperem. And though Platina, one of so
great esteem with Protestants at this day, deny not the Story about the
Procession; Yet he ingeniously Confesses, That the true use of this Chair is
only to mind him, who is placed in so high Authority, that he is not a God, but
a Man, and obnoxious to necessities of Nature, as of easing his Body, whence,
tho it be made of Porphyry, it is called Seeds Stercoraria. And Zonaras and
Cedrenus will tell us that the Grecian Emperors, had, on the day of their
Coronation a great many Marble Stones, of several Colors, presented to them,
to choose which of them they would make their Tombs of: which was only to put
them in mind of their Mortality, amidst their glorious Exaltations.

CHAP. II.
I. Of the place assigned her among the Popes, and II. Of Pope Leo the IX's
Letter to the Patriarch of Constantinople. III. When and by whom this Fable was
published, etc. IV. The occasion of its Invention. V. The little Credit it has
with the most Learned Adversaries of the Catholic Church.

HAving thus discovered a number of manifest Untruths, Improbabilities,
Contrarities, and Ridiculosities, in the former part of this Story; let us see
if they can acquit themselves any better in the latter.

I. First, then as to the place these Historians allot her among the Popes, I
find as grand a disagreement therein as in any other Passages before; for some
modern Authors place her between Pope Leo the IV. and Benedict the III. whereas
Anastasius Bibliothecarius and Ado of Vienna, occular Testimonies, say
expressly, that after Leo the IV. there was but only fifteen days of vacancy,
and Benedict the III. was immediately chose Pope; to which all of that Age
agree that wrote the Pontifical History, (viz.) Regino, Hermanus contractus,
Lambertus, Otho Frisingus, Abbot of Versperg, Joannes de Cremana, and others.
But her Historians and Advocates say, some of them, that she held the Chair a
Year and eight Months, others but four Months, others a Year and an half; and
others two Years, one Month, and four Days. Fine Concordance again, is it not?
Then some will have her succeed Leo the V. others Martin the I. and some
Nicholas the I. some call her John the VII. others Jobn VIII. But it is most
certain, that John the VII. was a Grecian, and was Pope nineteen Years before
this pretended one; and John the VIII. was a Roman, and presided twenty Years
after, and held the Seat ten Years: so consequently these two John's were
neither Englishmen not Germans.

II. Then here occurs a very remarkable thing to be seriously considered,
wherein may farther appear the improbability of this Story, (viz.) that about a
hundred Years after the pretended Being of this Pope Joan, Pope Leo the IX.
writing to Michael, then Patriarch of Constantinople, about the Precedence of
the Church of Rome, to abate his Pride, reproaches him, which a Woman and an
Eunuch's, he means Nicbolas and Ignatius, holding the Patriarchal Seat of
Constantinople; the which certainly he durst not have done, if the Church of
Rome had been tainted with the same Ignominy; and, without all doubt, the
Grecians would have been very glad to have had such an opportunity, wherewith
to have censured the Western Churches, if there had been the least appearance
of Truth in the Story.

III. And here we may easily perceive another very evident sign of the falsity
of this Story, viz. in that all the Authors that lived in this Pope Joan's
time, and for 400 years after, make not the least mention of any such Person:
for the first that published this Fable was one Martinus Polanus, who wrote in
the year 1320; and this Pope Joan lived in the year 870. And indeed, neither
did they, nor most of those that wrote after them, relate it as for a certain
truth; but speak of it rather as a Fable: all of them reporting it with
uncertainty, and as a mere common Bruit.

IV. Then as to what gave the occasion of the invention of this Story. I would
have the Reader to consider, that any one that shall impartially and
judiciously read the Lives of the Popes, even from St. Peter, shall certainly
find, that there were three sorts of them in general. One sort of them were
certainly very eminent for their Sanctity and integrity of living; but had not
that singular Art or Prudence of Managing or Administering the Affairs of this
World; that is, they were not so well acquainted with the Temporal Concerns of
the World. Another sort of them there were, who, though they were their
Crafts-masters in these Mundane Affairs, and knew excellent well the manner and
method of ruling these Temporal things, with all Prudence and Justice; yet
these were not endued with so singular a Sanctity of Life, as they should be,
but, on the contrary, were rather addicted to their disordinate and irregular
Affections; and Pleasures, and had but little Zeal, for the things of the
Spirit. But then there have been certainly a third sort, that took something af
the best from both; and so Governed both with Prudence and Holiness. Of this
worst and middle sort then was Pope John the Twelfth, who leading indeed a kind
of Debauched Life, and permitting himself to be Governed by a Debauched Woman,
whose Name was JOAN, gave the People, at that Time, occasion to say, That it
was not the Pope, but the Papiss, that Governed all things.

V. Lastly, to let you see the folly of this Fable; I shall show you what
Credit it has with the most learned of the Church of Rome's Adversaries, and
plainly prove that it is worse than an old Wives Tale, by their taking this
Story for a mere Fable. First, then Mr. Blondel, a French Minister; and one of
that account and esteem in Paris; that he was chosen above all, to Answer
Cardinal Peron's learned Book; this Mr. Blondel, I say, has written a Book, in
French, whis was Printed at Amsterdam, 1647. on purpose to show, that this
Story of a She Pope, called Joan, was a mere Fable. And that we may not think
that Blondel alone, of all Protestant Ministers held this for a Fable, Monsieur
Seravius, a great Calvinist, and Councellor of the Parliament of Paris, in a
Letter of his to Salmasius, having mentioned to him this Book of Blondel's,
adds these words: Noli autem credere, etc. don't believe, says he, that Blondel
was either the first, or only Man of our Persuasion that was of this Opinion;
although perhaps no Man has handled this Matter with more forceable Arguments:
for there have been famous Divines of the Reformed Religion, of the same
Opinion; and there are yet living in this City, Men famous for Fidelity and
Piety, who heard this History, vulgarly credited, accounted fabulous from
Chamerius's own mouth. I my self lately saw Letters of yours and my very good
Friend, the Learned Peter du Moulin, wherein he affirmed, that he always
believed the same. I have Letters by me also of Bochart's, wherein he averrs
that whatsoever was hitherto Published in favor of this Affair, to the World,
was merely Vain and Fictitious. This Mounsieur Seravius wrote in a private
Letter (though his Son, after his Death published and printed it) to a Friend of
the same persuasion. And thus you may plainly see how this Fable, tho highly
maintained by the Adversaries of the Catholic Church thus Expired at last, as
all Lies do, and was carried to its Grave upon the Shoulders of Four the most
Famous French Ministers, (viz.) Blondel, Chamier, du Moulin, and Bochart.

The Life of Pope Joan, as it is written by B. Platina, is as follows.
JOHN the VIII. says he, was of English Extraction, but born at Mentz, and is
said to have arrived at the Popedom by Evil Arts: for disguising her self like
a Man, whereas she was a Woman, she went, when young, with her Paramour, a
learned Man, to Athens, and made such Progress in Learning, under the
Professors there, that coming to Rome, she met with few that could equal, much
less go beyond her, even in the knowledge of Scriptures: and by her learned and
ingenious Readings and Disputations she acquired so great Respect and
Authority, tbat upon the Death of Leo (as Martin says) by common consent she
was chosen Pope, in his Room. But suffering afterward one of her Domestics to
lie with her, she hid her big Belly a while, till as she was going to the
Lateran Church between the Colossean Street (so called from Nero's Coloss,) and
St. Clements, her Travail came upon her, and she died upon the place; having
sat two Years, one Month, and four Days, and was buried there without any Pomp.
Some say the Pope, for shame of the thing, does purposely decline going through
that Street, when he goes to the Lateran; and that to avoid the like Error,
when any Pope is first placed in the Porphyry-Chair, which has an hole made
for the purpose, his Genitals are bandled by the youngest Deacon. As for the
First, I deny it not; but for the Second, I take the Reason to be, that he who
is placed in so great Authority, may be minded that he is not a God, but a Man,
and obnoxious to the Necessities of Nature, as of easing his Body; whence that
Seat has the Name of Seeds Stercoraria: This Story is vulgarly told, but by
very uncertain and obscure Authors: and therefore I have related it barely, and
in short, lest I should seem obstinate and pertinacious, if I had omitted what
is so generally talked of. I had better mistake with the rest of the World,
though it be certain, that what I have related may be thought not altogether
incrodihle. Thus Platina.

THE HISTORY OF THE Whores of ROME.
CHAP. I.
I. Of the Pope's allowing and permitting the Whores of Rome. II. Of his taking
money of them. III. Of his Countenancing them.

HAving removed the first grand Scandal thrown upon the Church of Rome by its
Enemies, concerning a Chymerical Pope Joan, with its Appurtenances, (viz.)
Improbabilities, Lies, Ridiculosities, etc. let us now see how they have handled
the second, concerning the Romantic Story of the Popes of Rome allowing, and
taking great Sums of Money of the public Whores that inhabit that City,
toward the maintaining of his Grandeur, forsooth, etc.

I. First then they endeavor to possess the World, That the Popes of Rome
allow these Creatures free exercise of their Trade, paying him, at certain
times of the Year, such Sum of money as are Taxed upon them by the said Popes.
But in very truth, the Popes of Rome allow of the Sin of Whoredom no more than
the Sin of Drunkenness is allowed in any Protestant Kingdom or Commonweal:
which Drunkenness is the greater Sin of the two, because it rides double to
Destruction, and carries Luxury behind it. Drink not Wine, in which is Luxury,
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. And if a certain English Writer has published that
the Popes both permit the Whores, and take money of them too for that
permission.

First, I answer, that is as true as a thousand other such fabulous Stories and
Lies, as that of Pope Joan, before mentioned, and published to the world by
those who think it not un-lawful in the least; so they think that there-by they
may but make the Popes and Church of Rome odious and infamous to the world. But
most certain it is, that all unbyassed and impartial persons that ever were at
Rome, will testify the contrary; if by Permitting, you mean Allowing and
Approving them in that course of Life. For you must consider that there is a
considerable difference between allowing and permitting a thing. For Moses,
that most just Lawmakers, did not allow of, though he permitted, that Libel of
Divorce to the Jews, by reason of the hardness of their hearts, Matthew. 8. So
Usury is permitted in several Countries at this day; for Trade-sake and other
Conveniences, but not allowed of.

II. Then in the next place they will tell you, that the Popes do not only allow
these Creatures to live such a manner of debauched Life, but he also takes
money to help enrich his Coffers thereby, etc. But the plain truth of this is,
that this money is taken up upon Credit by these Romancers, and not by the
Pope. For most certain it is, that he is so far from receiving any money of
these Drabs, that he is at great Cost, Charge and Trouble, to hinder their
Trading. For some of these good Old Gentlemen, the Popes of Rome, to hinder all
young Girls from being naught in turning Whores, have founded Hospitals, on
purpose, where they are carefully brought up, till they be either married, or
made Nuns: Nay, and not only so, but they give them Dowries also to choose
which they please, whether they will be married, or made Nuns. And to that
purpose do they distribute yearly, upon our Lady Day, in Lent, in the
Dominicans Church, a purse of money to each young Girl, to the number of three
hundred; who are presented to the Pope then in Being, by the Overseers of the
said Hospital. Neither is this all, for these Old Gentlemen the Popes, cause
young Girls of tender years to be taken away from their suspected Mothers, that
are poor, to prevent, lest their being so should cause them to sacrifice their
Virginity to Rich Men's Lust. And moreover, these Popes have caused a Monastery
to be built in Rome to receive those unfortunate Women in, who would leave that
infamous course of life, if they had but means to live on without it. Nay they
do grant Indulgences to any that will marry any of these Women to free them
from their lewd ways, and make them mend. All this they do, and much more:
which certainly would be a destroying of their own Trade and Gain, if it were
true, That they allow of and permit the Whores for their proper Gain. For
Millers surely do not use to turn aside the current of waters from their own
Mill.

III. Then as to the Popes countenancing the Whores of Rome, that also I will
assure you they do the clean contrary way. For if that be a countenancing them
to forbid them to be at public meetings, and to appear at Assemblies where
Women of Honor meet; as at the Corso in the Evenings; or at public Marriages,
or at the sung Opera's and the like; then they countenance them. If it be a
countenancing them to forbid them to go in Coaches in the day time, and to stir
out of doors in the night time, then they are countenanced by the Popes. If to
forbid them to live together, where they might encourage one another, and pass
their time more cheerfully; be a countenancing of them, then you may say the
Pope countenances the Whores of Rome. For these Souls live alone, for the most
part, condemned to the melancholic horror of their Crimes, and the solitude of
seven whole weeks in Lent; all which time, upon pain of rigorous punishment and
imprisoment, they dare not admit of any Customers: the like rigor is also used
against them in the time of Advent, to the intent that during the space of
those holy times, those wicked Women may have time to consider of themselves,
and their condition; and admit of God's holy Inspirations for their Amendment.
If likewise it be a countenancing of Whores, to oblige them to enter their
Names publicly in the Register of Whores; then are they countenanced by the
Popes of Rome. But the great Statesman and Historian, Tacitus, Annal. 2.
thought it was a sufficient punishment for unchaste Women, their only
professing themselves to be such, before the Eddes: and if that Great Man
thought so, one cannot surely but imagine it to be a great punishment to
Christian Whores (who are, at least, as sensible as the Heathens, of the
horrible disgrace of having their Names listed) to be thus defamed for ever, by
remaining Whores upon Record. Then moreover, that which is the most dreadful
thing of all to be considered of, is, whether that be a countenancing of them,
to deprive them all their Lifetime (as long as they continue Whores of the
benefit of the holy Sacraments, and not only that, but after their Deaths also
to ^^prive them of Christian burial? or whether seriously and indeed, it be not
rather a severely punishing of them, and deterring them from Vice, to have
their Bodies thrown, when they dye, into an obscure place, out of the Walls of
the City; as if they deserved no other Burial-Places than that of Beasts? In
fine, if it be a Countenancing of them* not to suffer them to make any Will or
Testament, but to leave all their Goods Confiscated, either to the Hospital of
the poor honest Girls abovementioned, or toward the maintaining of those
Guards that are to watch over their deportments. If these things be
countenancing of Whores, then let the Popes of Rome be said to countenance the
Whores of that City.

CHAP. II.
I. Why the Popes do not wholly root out the Whores of Rome? II. Of the Popes
ruling us an Ecclesiastical and Temporal Prince. III. Of the Church and Convent
of the Repenting Whores at Rome.

I. NOW if any shall ask, Why these Popes do not punish the Whores of Rome more
severely, or root them wholly out by Banishment? I will assure them, that this
has been attempted by several Popes, and in particular by Pope Pius Quintus,
as that great Historian Thuanus tells us: but there being greater
Inconveniences and greater Sins that followed thereupon, Prudence, which is the
Salt that ought to season all our moral Actions, thought it not either fit or
convenient to carry on that Design with such rigor: nor yet allow of
Fornication neither. So that at last, all the Permission the Pope of Rome
allows the Whores there, amounts only to th(...) (viz.) The not Punishing them
with the utmost rigor, and even that too, for a very good End, to wit, to
hinder greater Evils.

II. But here methinks I hear some Puritannical Politic saying: Oh but the Pope
being both an Ecclesiastical and Temporal Prince and Governor, he is bound to
break through all oppositions, and to settle Innocence and Purity in the World.
Now this is Zealously spoken indeed, and it would be certainly wished by all
good Catholics that it could be effected: But what says that very wise Man and
great Master of Morals, Seneca? He wishes, says he, a difficult thing, who
wishes for the Innocence of Mankind. And if Princes sometimes do not punish
their Factious Subjects, when they see that the punishing of them would pull
the whole State to pieces about their Ears, and put the whole Government in
danger; as it did, for instance, in France, in Henry the Third's time, upon his
causing the Duke of Guise to be killed in Blois. And if Generals of Armies take
little or no Notice of some Treacherous Commander, who is universally beloved
of the Soldiers, lest the punishing of him lose them the love of the whole
Army; as was lately seen in the Case of Lubemirsk^, how truly Guilty not fully
known: as also some years ago in Walstein's Case, his punishment had almost
undone the Emperor. Why may not then the Pope, I pray, without approving the
Sins of the Whores, prudently wave the punishing them with all rigor, when he
sees that such proceedings would certainly cause greater disorders in that hot
Country, and in that City where all Nations seem to club Vices, as well as
Virtues, Hence the Learned Abulensis a great Divine says, Licet leges humanae,
aliquae mala permittant non puniendo; nullum tamen malum permittunt statuendo.
That is, Although human Laws permit some Evils by not punishing them, yet they
permit no Evil by allowing or establishing it.

Then if any shall be so silly as to say that the Pope should not Govern
according to human Policy, or human Laws or Examples: I shall tell them they
pretend a great deal of Zeal indeed; but not according to Knowledge, for if
they did, they would take her Sister Prudence along with them, as our Blessed
Savior did, who when he heard his Disciples desiring him to let them call down
Fire from Heaven upon the Criminal Samaritans, answered them very calmly, You
know not of what Spirit you are? Luke ix. Nay, I pray does not God himself, who
being able to punish all Criminal Persons, and to root them quite out of the
World, suffer both his Sun to shine upon Sinners, and Sinners to offend in his
Sunshine, and often by it? Hence that Great Dr. of the Church, S. Thomas
Aquinas says much to the same purpose, 2. 2. q. 10. art. 11. Humanum regimen,
etc. Human Government (says this Angelical Dr. so called from his great
knowledge he had of the Angelical Natures) is derived from Divine Government,
and we ought to imitate it! Now God, although he be Almighty and highly Good,
yet he permits Evil to be done in the world, which it were in his power to
hinder; but then by taking away them, greater Goods would be taken away, or
greater Evils would follow.

III. And now after all this, to return to our discourse of these Whores; There
are many of them that do unfeignedly repent of their lewd Lives, and are
heartily sorrowful for their Sins; and for these the Popes of Rome have founded
a Church and Convent on purpose, where such Souls are received and kept all
their Lifetime, at the Convents Cost and Charge; where they are locked up
indeed, but it is with their own Request and Consent: whereas in Amsterdam it is
true Whores are there locked up also, but it is by force and violence. Then in
Rome these poor Women do great Acts of Austerity and Penance, as the bloody
Walls of their Cells when they were laid open by Fire, testified to the whole
City; but at Amsterdam they laugh and are merry. Here no man is permitted to
speak alone with them, except their Confessor and Physician; but there many go
to prattle and pass away their time with these wanton Girls, whose Faces are
plainly seen bedeckt with black Patches, the others hid with a Vail, and all
signs of true Repentance, but there none.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF H. H.

With the Relation at large of what passed betwixt him and the Tailors Wife in
Black-friars, according to the Original.

(...) likewise particular Remarks of his Behavior ever since. Which proves
(tho times change) him to be the (...)ame H. H. still.

LONDON, (...)nted for T. S. in the Year 1688.

To the Reader.
Reader,
HEre is presented to thy view a description of the hearts great Apostasy and
deceitfulness; together with the discoveries of Gods great grace and goodness
to a soul exceedingly declined and Apostatized from him: wherein God has
indeed made good what himself, Romans 5. 20, 21. But sin abounded, grace did much
more abound; that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life, etc. And that his actings are not as
the proceedings of men, Jer. 3. 1, 2. They say, if a man put away his Wife,
and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return to her again?
shall not that Land be polluted? But thou have played the Harlot with many
Lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord, etc.

Satan in these last Ages of the World, has had several forms and dresses
whereby he might deceive unstable souls: nay, if it were possible the very
elect.

I have with much grief of heart been an observer of the Authors Apostasy from
God and his ways, and well know the grounds thereof to be what he has herein
expressed, and much rejoice at his return: hoping it is reality and truth: and
that the end of his publishing this to the World, is to own his own shame, and
caution others, that they be not such as wax wanton against Christ, and his
pure (though despised) ways: Which if it shall be matter of warning to any, the
Author has his end, and it shall be my request to the Lord, for all that
pros^ess his fear, that they may watch unto Prayer, being steadfast, unmovable,
yet always abounding in the work of the Lord.

William Kiffen.

A Premonition to the Reader from the hand of a Friend.
REader, whosoever thou art that may light upon this Prodigals Confession,
who (through the goodness of God) is now come to himself; was dead, and is
alive again, was lost, and is found; who went out full and came in hungry; As
thou art entreated to take notice (from what the Scripture speaks) what the
fruit of sin is, so also believe the experience of those that have felt it
biting like a Serpent, and stinging like an Adder. If thou be one that have
turned the grace of God into wantonness, and give thy self over to
lasciviousness, as this poor man has done: It is a miracle if mercy if ever
God bring thee back to his house, to seek bread there, as he has done this
straggling Prodigal. Sweet meat must have sour Sauce, I think he has
experienced it; and blessed be God that his Servants meet with sauce, when sin
is the dish that they would be feeding upon, or rather poisoning themselves
withal. I beseech thee take heed, think on sobriety, run not out after vain
speculations and notions, as this (returning wanderer has done, to his cost.
Thou that rejectest the Scriptures, and wilt seem to plead all experience;
Consider, it is good to try experiences by Scripture-testimony: but I pray thee
let the experience of this returning outcast be noted by thee; and be sure the
rod wherewith he has been whipped, and a more sharp one too, shall light upon
thee, if thou account vice virtue, and wickedness thy liberty* as he has done.
Now his heart is burdened, and his life is full of troubles. But let me tell
thee, there is more joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, than over 99
such as thou art, that art pure in thy own eyes, and think thou need no
repentance. Thou that love not Scripture wholesome expression, but only such
as are dished out with n^w notions; lo here is a new experimental exposition of
the Scripture he speaks to, and I hope really from his heart; would thou
would consider it.

And you (dear Saints) that have seen this man in our Fathers house, and whose
hearts are grieved, that for such miscarriage (as he was guilty of) he must
needs be turned out and saw his going out with sorrow: let me tell you,
methinks the things that are here written, do come from some impressions of God
upon his heart, and that his repentance is real. God forbid that I should
excuse any one in sin, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my
arms fall from my shoulder blade, rather than mouth or pen should do that: but
to be tender toward returning sinners, I think it is all our duties.

I beseech you confirm your love to him, lest he should be swallowed up of
sorrow; for you are not ignorant of Satan's wiles.

Two things (it may be) some will object, I shall briefly speak to them.

1. That he has fallen from so much light, and sinned against so much
knowledge and love, and such glorious profession, and been so stubborn in it,
that it is a question whether he can ever be pardoned or no.

I say it is true, he has done so; but yet if Christ give repentance, there is
no question but he will give remission too, Acts 5.

And to me it appears the one is given, and why then should I question the
other? Truly I think a soul must go far indeed, before any man conclude he is
past cure. Remember it was once Moses fault (though zealous for God) that he
d^^paraged mercy; I think the Prodigal living in his Fathers house, knew much
of his mind, and of the order of his house, and sinned against Romans 6.
abundance of light and love: And yet the time was not out of date to forgive
him, when once he came to himself and returned: where sin reigned to death,
there Grace reigned through Jesus Christ to eternal life. Peter went very far
(you know, if the case be well considered yet the sweet gracious looks of
Christ brought him to himself again. And methinks the case of Manasses (if
seriously considered) was as desperate as this man 's, and yet if I mistake
not, God gave him both repentance and pardon.

Besides consider, the Devil that was not afraid to set upon Christ, knows
well that if he can deceive any soul that has knowledge and parts, such a one
is like to do him the best service, when once deceived; therefore his assaults
upon him might be the more violent, being such a one.

The 2 d. thing that may be objected is, That his repentance may be questioned
where it be true, because it is not voluntary; Job. 36.
but imprisonment, troubles, fear of the law, etc. has extorted it from him.

I answer, I cannot conclude so, having heard him express his grief for sinning
against God, whom he has tasted so gracious; Against his Wife, when he had no
cause so to ^rong her. But friends, if God will work Hos. 2.
^n such a way, and bind him in fetters and ^hains, and then open his ears to
discipline, and command him to depart from iniquity; ^all we say it is not
right? Is not this some^imes Gods way? did not he thus bring ^ome Manasses? did
he not pine out the ^rodigal; when do you think in likelihood ^e would have
come else? If this be Gods ^ethod, to hedge up Isreal's way with ^orns that she
cannot find her paths, ^d wall her with hewn stone till she ^oncludeth it is
best to return to her first ^usband; shall we say the work is not ^ght because
God went not in another way? ^et Gods love to us teach us to be loving and
^aritable toward other; I for my part ^nnot but rejoice in the return of the
foul^ sinner in the world, and magnify the love (...) God when he heals the
backsliding of ^y. I say no more; But the Lord establish ^ose that stand, and
grant that every one of (...) poor wandering sheep, may be brought back to the
sold, and may be willing to c^fess and forsake their sius, as this retur^ing
Prodigal has done; And I shall^joyce at the Music in our Fathers hou^ at the
return of any poor starved Prodig^ and remain through grace

July 15 1672. The Servant of Chri^ and of his Saints. Daniel King.

(...) all the Saints in General, distinguished by what Name or Title soever.
DEarly beloved in the Lord, it is for your sakes chiefly I became willing to
discover this my folly: The which for a ^g time I withstood, and prevailed ^er
such thoughts, saying, I had al^^y made my self a laughing stock ^d by word
among all that either ^ard or knew of me, or at least such ^th been my
demeanor, or rather my ^sdemeanor, as I could expect no less; ^at reason had I
then to add more ^ell to such a fire?

But observing the dealings of God ^th me, and finding by sad experience, ^ery
thing I took in hand was dissipa^ in reference to my liberty; I made (...)
strict enquiry between God and my ^n heart, what iniquity 'twas I yet Psalm. 66.
18.
^arded, that the Lord did not hear my ^ayer, in not blessing, but rather
blast^g all means I took in hand tending to ^y liberty: I found it nothing less
than ^y duty to acknowledge my iniquities as to God, so my neighbor, to
my^versary, before men, against whom li^wise Mat. 5. 25. 1 Timothy 55.
I had dealt treacherously and wi^edly.

Whereupon presently I resolved acknowledge and discover to the Lev. 26. 40
most I was able, my iniquity which had committed both against God a^ man, in
writing both to my Adversa^ and publicly to the World, the which had no sooner
covenanted and conc^ded Mat. 10. 32.
within my self to do: but the Lo^ was pleased (and that even before I h^ began
to write) to raise up a mea^ (even when all my friends failed m^ even when I
was without hope, and ev^ where I least expected it; whereby(...) imediately
procured a little liberty(...) follow my calling at home at my o^ house;
without which, in the eye(...) reason, both I and a family of seven p^sons had
been e're this utterly ruined.

The which I had no sooner obtaine^ but began, like the Children of Israel(...)
old, to turn my back upon his great merci^ as to send Manna from Heaven, rath^
than I and my Family should perish, an^ grew slack and careless in my performi^
what I had promised, only a little slightly once or twice spoke to some friend^
(...) speak with my adversary on my be^lf; and once or twice sought to be
re^ncil'd to my brethren whom I had of^ded. And having one day a violent ^hting
within me, about my neglect ^d carelessness in performing what I ^d covenanted
to perform, fell imme^tely to writing for some two or three ^urs: but a day or
two after, upon (...) relating to some what I was about, ^ey replied there was
one about such work already; whereupon I imme^tely diverted my thoughts another
^y, being glad I had such an oppor^ity to be silent.

But the time of my liberty being ex^ed, I returned to prison, expecting ^d
indeed not questioning) I should ^e renewed my liberty as before. But ^s by
Divine Providence frustrated ^rein; and not only so, but have been ^er since in
all I have taken in hand in ^er thereunto; at all which being a^zed to behold;
I called to mind my ^mer promise and intention; upon ^sideration whereof, I had
that say^ brought to my remembrance, when (...) vowest a vow unto God, defer
not to Eccl. 5. 4.
it; upon which crying out of the ^ness and earthliness of my base unworthy
heart, that no longer then t^ Rod was on my back my eye was t^wards my God; I
fell to wrighting, a^ writ a Letter to my Adversary, a co^ whereof is annexed
to this followi^ Treatise.

The which has been so far from b^ing a means of obtaining my liberty;(...)
that my Adversary has more violen^ then ever before, labored since to h^der
me thereof, so that I upon no te^ could procure the least liberty since.

The which severe just hand of G^ on me, caused me to make a new a^ more
stricter search into my heart, upon which I found I had as yet perfo^med my
promise but by halves; A^ not hearing of any else; who for the p^venting of
others from running of the sad race, that have taken that pains,(...) to
discover any of the subtle Wile^ Satan whereby in this our last age(...)
deceives many poor Souls; and(...) knowing but that my discovering a^cording to
that small ability God ha^ given me, what the subtilties were(...) which the
Devil captivated and carr^ed me into those far Countries, mig^ be a means to
prevent others from running into the like snares; and for ev^ ^o stand amazed,
admiring the unspeak^ble love of God toward me, where^y I was snatched, as a
brand out of the ^ternal fire of Gods wrath and fiery in^ignation.

The consideration of all which (I ^ay) has now at last prevailed with ^e to
present to your view this ensuing Treatise, The which though it be rather like
a Chaos, in respect of my laying ^own of things so disorderly and indi^tinctly,
th^n a world wherein every thing is brought forth into its right ^rder.

Let me therefore take that boldness, ^s to entreat you to be warned by this ^y
sad experience; And to take the wise-mans counsel; Keep tby foot when ^hou
go to the house of God, and be more Eccl. 5. 1:
^eady to hear, then to offer the Sacrifice of Fools; for they consider not
that they do ^vil.

Remember when you make a step toward Heaven, you must put off your ^hoes, you
must turn your back upon all Ex. 3. 5. Jona. 2. 8. Acts 14. 15.
^he vanities of this wicked world.

Have your eyes always upon your ^eet when you approach toward God, that (like
the peacock) you may there^y Isa. 57. 15. Mat. 5. 5 and 11. 19.
be kept abased in your own self, remembering that with the humble and meek God
will dwell; and that he resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
Jam. 4. 6.


That it is the heart God requires, 1 Samuel 16. 7. Gal. 6. 7.
therefore be not deceived, God will not be mocked: Do not think 'twill serve
your turn to be a constant hearer of Gods word, and not a doer; to draw Jam. 1.
23. Mat. 15. 8. Mat. 7. 6.
near him with your mouth, and to have your hearts far from him, to come to his
house amongst his Saints with your bodies, and to leave your hearts at home, to
have them in the mean time abroad in the World: for where your Luke 12. 34.
treasure is (that which) you are most delighted with and in) there will your
hearts he also: where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles fly.

Nay remember that you who profess Mat. 24. 28. 110. 26.
the name of Christ, ought even so to walk, as he before you has left you a
pattern: ye should study to walk spotless 2 Pet 3. 14.
and blameless in this present World therein to let your light so shine before,
men, that they seeing your good works, Mat. 5. 16. Phil. 2. 15.
may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Romans 1. 10 and 6. 2. 10. 11. Gal
3. 2 and 5. 24.


That the way toward Heaven is upward, and not downward, rising continually
from the death of sin, dying continually to sin; being daily weaned more and
more in your affections to this present World and the vain pleasures thereof;
and living daily more and more toward God; your affections more and more daily
in love with righteousness and holiness toward God and man.

And herein be not deceived, thinking it is enough if you but grow in the
knowledge of righteousness, if you be but able to speak or make a description
of such a condition; though your heart be as much after the World and the vain
pleasures thereof, as ever Mat. 6. 21.
before; though you have no more Power over your corruption, than you had
before; only you find that knowledge is a brave thing to make you appear famous
amongst men; and therefore (it may be) your heart may be running out after
knowledge, which before was running out only after the World, and the pleasures
thereof; and this is all the change that is wrought in you, that you have left
off running after the World, and the pleasures thereof; whereby to become great
and famous amongst men, and now your hearts are run out after the knowledge of
the things of God, but for the same self end as before, to wit, to cloth and
adorn this body with spiritual riches, or rather pride, that so Luke 12. ^1.
^m. 5. 3.
you might be admired and applauded amongst men.

Now since my intention in writing it is only for my performing of that which I
judge nothing less then my duty. If God shall be pleased to make any thing
therein a means to advance his glory, either in preventing thereby any from
being entangled in these or the like snares, or in causing others to exalt God
the more in their hearts, by reason of their beholding what great love he has
most freely manifested to me vile unworthy wretch; being satisfied in my own
heart, that what I have written is not a fiction or imagination of mine, but
the truth of what I both by sad and joyful experience observed, and found in
these my sad travels; he has obtained his desire who is,

Your unworthy servant in Christ, Henry Hills.
From my sad (as to the outward man) and miserable yet most just Captivity in
the Fleet, Jan. 28. 1650.
THE PRODIGAL Returned to his Fathers House.
THE sadness of this our last Age being such, as that it Epist Jude Luke 15.
has brought forth many (which that the Scripture might be fulfilled must be,)
who like the Prodigal have left their Fathers House.

Left the Society and Fellowship of the Saints; left their being obedient to
any, ^ay all the Commands of God: left the Temple or House of God, their own 1
Cor. 6. 19.
^odies; left being any more at home in their own hearts; not taking the least
^are what becomes of the Temple of God, Jer 7 Mat. 21. 13. Jer. 5. 27.
what pollutions and defilements its fil^ed with; nay, suffer it to be made a
^en of Thieves, a Cage of unclean Birds; a stie where only are kept Swine: Nay,
not only so, but have traveled so far, far indeed both from peace, truth,
righteousness and holiness (which as it only becomes the house of God, so no
where else is it to be found) they have spent all their Portion, and are so
necessitated for Bread, as they would gladly fill their bellies, with the Husks
that only Swine feed on.

Yet finding but few of those many, that at last come to themselves, and
considering that in their fathers house is Bread enough, return to their
Father, confessing they have sinned against Heaven and before him, and are no
more worthy to be called his Sons: Yet would Psalm. 84. 10.
fain be entertained into his house again, though but as onc of his hired
Servants, finding with David, by sad experience, That it is better to be a
doorkeeper in the house of God, than to dwell in the tents of wicked men: And
finding none of those few, that have returned from that sad, dangerous and most
perilous journey that have (for the preventing of others from running of that
sad race) declared either the danger or misery which attends it, or discovered
any of the subtle snares of Satan, whereby he catches, and carries them into
those far Countries.

And though it has been my sad portion to be one of those Prodigals in these
our last days: Yet since the Lord out of the riches of his mercy toward me,
has been pleased to make choice of me to be one of those few which at last
came to themselves (though such was the stubbornness of my base heart, as I
endured to be beaten with many stripes first, and considered that in my Luke
12: 47
fathers house was bread enough; yet mercy enough, notwithstanding my Soul was
eaten through with hunger, by reason of the abounding of my Iniquities, my
redoubled iniquities, to patdon them, all tbem; that there was Psalm 57. 7
water enough to wash me as white as ^now through my inipuities I have made my
self as red as Crimson: Yea not only to consider or remember, but to resolve to
go to my father.

And no sooner was my heart and eye set thither-ward, crying out with David,
Psalm 2 5. 11.
Pardon my iniquity Lord, why, as if God should have replied) not because they
be little or few, but because they be great or many; as if he should ^ay, Lord
take advantage by the greatness of my iniquity, to discover thy masterpiece,
thy great love, thy Son, thine only Son, the richest, the choicest of thy
mercies: I was (I say) but a while here, but I found him, (to his praise for
ever be it spoken) no less a Father to me then he was a Prodigal: for while I
was yet a far off, scarce gone two or three steps, scarce cried out from the
earning of my sad unworthy heart, two or three times unto him; but he saw me,
when I was yet a far off: far indeed from peace, truth, holiness or
righteousness; being in the midst of of nothing but Swine, my own base filthy
Psalm. 12. 8. and 13. 13.
lusts, and beset therewith on every side: Yet here he saw me, even thus far
off.

[And come runing] came indeed so swift, as I saw him not till he met me, Can.
6. 12.
and fell on my neck, and kissed me: until he took my sad heart up from his bed
of misery, and kissed me with the kisses Can. 1, 2. Psalm. 19. 20. and 119. 103.
8. Pet. 1. 8.
of his mouth: which indeed are better than wine, and sweeter they were to my
taste then the honeycomb: filling me on a sudden, with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory.

Wherefore I jadge it nothing less than my duty, to discover, according to that
small ability God has given me, (though indeed the unfittest amongst the sons
of men for such a work,) the subtle snares of Satan, whereby I was carried into
those far Countries. And Luke 15.
the parable of the Prodigal being that, by which the Lord was pleased to
discover unto me the sad condition I was fallen into; I shall endeavor by that
parable to discover it unto you.

First, You find the Prodigal to be a Luke 1. 5. 12.
Son. Secondly, The youngest Son.
1. A Son: That is, such a one as God according to the visible declaration in
the Gospel, had owned to be his Son; a believer, one of the Family or Church of
God.

2. The youngest Son. By youngest may be understood, the last converted, or
least knowing in the house of God: But to proceed.

The first thing we meet with in this Parable to our purpose is, in verse 12.
where we find him asking for his Portion: saying, Father give me my Portion.
Psalm. 12. 2. and 39. 25* Ecles. 1. 11


Man having lived along time in darkness, being acquainted with nothing but the
vanities of this World: coming at ^ast through mercy to behold some glimps of
the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ shining in and upon his dark Joh. 9.
heart, is immediately set on fire of zeal after more of the knowledge of God
Mark this well.
and his truth, thinking that he is able now to eat any meat, that there is
nothing to be done by him, but to get up to the top in knowledge of all the
mysteries of the kingdom of Christ: whereby in him is hindered the effecting of
that work, which God intended by his sending and giving of him that glimps; to
wit, The discovering in him the filthiness and wretchedness of his own heart,
how continually in all its actions it opposes and runs from God and his truth;
loving its own darkness rather than that light, which lightens every man Joh.
3. 91. Joh. 1. 9. Acts 6. 19. 25. Joh. 3. 19.
that comes into the World; fearing lest its craft should be discovered; and
therefore it loves darkness rather than light, because its deeds are evil.

Man herein being too hasty catches only the Shell, leaves the Kernel behind
him, whereby he becomes filled with nothing but air; puffed up with spiritual
Pride, instead of spiritual truth and righteousness; yet thinks, that because
he is now filled with zeal, (not knowing that there is zeal, not according to
truth or knowledge, nor what the meaning of the Apostle was, by saying,
knowledge 1 Cor. 81.
puffs up) and that only after the knowledge of the things of God; when
formerly his heart was set only after the World and the vanities thereof, That
without doubt his condition is good; he goes on firm ground, where three is no
need or fear of his slipping or falling; wherefore he cries out,

Father give me my Portion; Give me all knowledge, that I may be able to
dispute for, or against all opinions; able to answer all objections, etc.

To please this foolish young man, that he might take his fill of the pleasures
of the world, as to appear great and famous in the eyes of men; his Father
gives him his Portion, his desire, lets him attain to great knowledge, it being
the alone mark his spiritual proud heart aims at, the only garment desirous in
his eye, as having a glorious luster, far transcending those filthy rags of
drunkenness, swearing, etc. the which he formerly was only acquainted with, and
did wear, and that even a holy days.

Immediately after, or a while after, (as some translations render it) he
gathers all together.

Attains to the knowledge of all mysteries, even of the resurrection it self,
or at least he thinks so; which so puffs him up, as he imagines he is what he
knows: when it may be he never had the least inward experience of the power of
God in subduing any corruption, and in bringing forth fruits of righteousness
and holiness from within, but is only at present so busy in following
spiritual pride, as that it has caused him to cease from gross and outward
abominations: Next [He takes his Journey.]

He thinks now because he has gotten this great knowledge, as that he is able
to talk and make a description of a state and condition without sorrow:
Imagining of that condition which the Scripture speaks of, when all sorrow
shall Rev. 21. 4.
be wiped from their eyes, etc. Having builded a Castle in the Air, which is
(as he thinks) a true description of that condition: being so puffed up, as he
cannot tell whether he be in the body or out of the body, that he discerns nor
^. Cor. 12. 2.
knows no difference, betwixt knowing and being what he knows, imagines he is
got into that condition; whence he concludes, he is now no more to know any man
or thing after the flesh: that is 2 Cor. 5. 16.
(says puffed up man) not to do any service either to God or man with his body;
but lay that aside as useless, especially in his doing any thing that is
commanded him by God.

Hence he comes to leave off his obedience to all the commands of God, saying,
what a poor thing it is to be praising and praying to God? That Is milk fit only
for Children, and the like; that is only for such as live at distance from God
and Christ; only enjoying Communion with God and Christ by Faith, having not
received the promise: But says he Heb. 11. 39.
I have passed all this; I am acquainted with a condition beyond all this; I
live in the enjoyment of that which you only live in hope of, etc. And thus he
spends his Portion in rioting and wantonness, which great swelling words of his
2 Pet. 2. 18.
make him greatly applauded and admired by men.

By this time you may perceive he is on his journey: well, the first City he
enters into, is spiritual Sodom and Egypt; Rev. 11. 8.
where is a people fit for his Company, where is a people who neither speak,
act, nor do any thing, either spiritual or temporal but as the spirit moves
them (as they say,) not that I would have any mistake me, and think I am one
who mock at the spirit, and at man for following its motions; no, I own praying
with the spirit and with understanding, as the Apostle exhorts; But finding 1
Cor. 14. 15
by sad experience that many; nay, the most of those that pretend so much for
the spirit, have no rule (meaning such as lay aside the Scripture as a dead
letter, etc.) either for themselves or others, whereby they be able to
distinguish betwixt the motions of the spirit, and the motions of the flesh;
but without questioning rather (thinking they have no other life, and so
consequently no other motions in them but the spirit of God) what moves them,
to go on, indeed following only the motions of the flesh and the lusts thereof.
To. 1. 24.


Amongst which people presently he is as forward as the best, getting him
immediately (having a portion by him to purchase it) a garment made of that
fashion, trimmed with the richest trimming that in that City is to be got, That
is, he has such a large capacity, as that he hears no high flown opinion from
the most knowing amongst them (which he only looks after) but immediately it is
^is own, he not minding any thing else, ^ut wholly making that his work.

And now being got into the fashion, and arrayed with the richest, and (if
possible) excelling them, He begins to keep company with the best; and being a
young man scorns to be base, spends freely, and by his good will, will pay all
the reckoning, call for what you will; That is, would have all the talk, being
willing to appear a man able to dispute for or against all opinions; answer all
objections, and that to the purpose too.

But it may be by this time Conscience may a little prick, he may look back
toward his Fathers house; In detestation of such a thought, as if he were
angry with himself, he replies.

What have I ascended almost into Heaven, and shall I now come down again Luke
9. 62
to Walk on the Earth? Have I set my hand to the plough, and shall I now look
back? (you need not wonder that he uses the Scripture, or rather abuses it;
for you may find it was of old the Devils wonted course, when he thought he
should meet with his match, to come with Scripture in his mouth, as when he
tempted Christ.) As an antidote or poison against such a thought, he musters up
all the failings and imperfections of the Saints: and it may be he has been a^
eyewitness to some, and they not smal^ ones neither: As perhaps he had
formerly been a member of some Church, and notwithstanding he a long time
walked apart from them: yet so cold and careless were they (the which is an
evil too common among the Saints in this our last Age, with shame do I speak
it) in that their great duty which by God is required of them; to wit, to watch
in love over their Brethren, and Luk 15. 4. Mat. 18. 11.
with the good Shepherd missing but one sheep only, leaves the ninety and nine,
seeking that which is lost, if possible to find it, telling him his faults
between them two, etc. As that they do not so much as come once at him; much
less express toward him that love in performing their duty as of them in that
case was required, with (it may be) many more failings which he of late only
took notice of; whereby he for ever afterward stops his Conscience from
speaking any more, looking either not at all on or toward them except it be as
they be represented through their imperfections to his eye; whereby he never
afterward speaks of them, except in upbraiding of them, saying, they be a
people who have the form of Godliness, but want the power, To. 2. 20. 2 Timothy 3.
5.
and the like. But to proceed,

Being now in his own conceit, attained to such a height of perfection (though
in truth filled with nothing but spiritual pride) he thinks he is ready to meet
the son of man at his second coming: like those Malachi speaks of, who say,
where is the God of Judgment? When comes he? and the like; Not minding what is
in the next Chapter, where God answers them, saying, I Will Mat. 2. last Mal. 3.
1.
send the Messenger of my Covenant, etc. even he whom ye delight in (at or lest
profess so) but see what follows; But who shall abide his coming, and who shall
stand when he appears? Why, as (if they should reply) what is the matter? Its
greater then you are aware of. For he is like a ver. 2
Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap: You are exceedingly mistaken about his
coming, not but that he will come, but in the manner and end of his coming: for
if you did with the Apostle rightly understand the manner and end of his
coming, ^^u would say, what manner of persons (...) we to be? we ought to be
all 1 Pet. 3. 11
silver* for he in his coming is like a Refiners fire; not only fire, but the
searching of fire, a fire wherein nothing will remain unconsumed but pure
silver. Bu^ to return.

As Satan never is wanting in mean^ whereby to accomplish what he hat^ begun,
nor never kindled a fire, but likewise will provide fuel to continue(...) with:
so at last this Prodigal comes t^ hear of one or other, who are on a sudden
filled with strange raptures and revelations, as that the last day is at han^
and they be commanded to triumph(...) forth, etc. After which man immediately
he run, crying out, none but he; o^ whom it may be he hears a thousan^ strange
notions and novelties more which like a fresh gale of wind blow^ on his Sails
which he has alway^ hoistered, and that as he thinks for n^ other Haven, but
Heaven it self.

Upon which waves (indeed being only his own fancy and imagination) h^ having a
long time been tossed to an^ fro, even till his portion begins to gro^ small,
his great confidence begins to fa^ him, he is put to his last shift, havin^
spent all his portion, all his hopes being gone of ever arriving where h^
thought he had been so nigh: being pu^ now to use his wits, he looks about hi^
and behold though all his portion be ^ent; yet he has a great many good ^uits
of Apparel yet left him, which ^ay a long time stand him instead, if ^e do turn
them the inside outward; (...) more plainly thus.

The Devil (it being the last Card he ^ath to play) tells him, he has no such
^use to be so troubled, for he is arrived ^fe where he desired: only he is
mis^ken, looking too carnally upon things; ^r Christ's second coming, which he
^oks so much for, is not carnally, but ^ritually to be understood; saying, ^he
Jews of old, by being tainted with ^s thy error, rejected Christ at his first
^ming, I say by reason of the carnalness (...) their expectations, who expected
he ^uld have been some great Monarch (...) earthly King: which dangerous error
(...) thine let me therefore rectify thee in, (...) thou proceed in rejecting
of him, ^w he is come, and so with the Jews (...) ever in vain to expect him
hereafter. (...) Thy expectation is for a second com^ of Christ in the clouds;
now herein ^hy mistake, Christ's second coming ^l not be visible to men, but
only spi^ally Joh. 14. 17
in men. Wherefore do but turn ^se thy Garments the inside outward; do but
spiritually look upon things, and you shall find he is not in Heaven, nor
beyond Deuteronomy. 30. 13.
the Seas, that thou should thence expect him, but he is near thee, even in
the heart, and in thy mouth, he is within thee, etc.

Now the poor Prodigal being almo^ spent, having run himself out of breat^ to
keep his credit, is willing to use an^ shift, begins to follow his advice.

But there arising a great Dearth] h^ has no sooner turned his eye inwar^ upon
the inside of his Garments, b^ behold there is nothing but filth, o^ more
plainly thus,

He no sooner comes to turn his e^ within himself, but behold, whilst(...)
slept, whilst he has been all this tim^ Mat. 13. 25.
abroad, never having so much as cast h^ eye homewards before, Satan came(...)
sowed there tares: he having been inde^ a long time one of those sluggards
m^tioned, Prove. 24. 34. whose field and ga^den, for want of manuring and
dressi^ was, the one overrun with Thorns a^ the other with Nettles, and the
ston^ wall thereof broken down. The behol^ing of which unexpected dismal sig^
his falling into such company on a su^den, his finding in him nothing but(...)
pany of base Lusts, inviting of him it may be to Curse, Swear, Blaspheme, etc.
to let these things come forth he is ashamed and loath, saying within himself,
shall I who have made such a high profession, as of living above with God and
Christ, of having my Conversation in Heaven, etc. shall I now disgrace my self
thus? no says he, I Will dye first.

But being necessitated, having now spent his portion: and being in this far
strange Country, he must either work or starve, life being sweet: he is willing
to any thing rather than perish, become a servant; And he goes and joins
himself to a Citizen of that Country (which is the Devil) who sends him to his
Farm, (meaning the Prodigals heart) which is now become the Citizens or Devils
Farm, to keep Swine: (you do not read of any thing else the Devil had there but
Swine.) That is, he sent him to his own heart, to keep his base Lusts (which
his heart is now full of, and of nothing else) which lie ravening within him to
come forth like Swine, who for want of Meat, will run crying and ravening up
and down.

Next you find, He would fain have filled his belly with the husks the Swine
did eat, but no body gave them him: Two sorts of Husks I find the Swine has to
eat, which the Prodigal would fain have filled his belly with.

First, all his great knowledge which the Prodigal had for a long time embraced
as something, he sees now to be but husks, though he would fain have filled his
belly with them he cannot; but Swine eat them up before his face; that is, they
be now turned before him into nothing but Drunkenness, Whoring, Swearing,
Cursing, etc. which he now finds compassing him about.

Secondly, by husks I understand vain pleasure, which is represented to man's
eye as to be had in acting of those abominations, as Whoredom, etc.

For I conceive there appeared to the Prodigals eye something in the Husks
which might serve him to satisfy his hunger with: For we find the reason why
he desired them, was to have filled his belly with them; or it may be the Devil
might beget this opinion in him, that it were better for him to let his
corruptions come forth, for that was in order to healing, saying, it would be
in vain for him to go about to administer a heavenly Plaster, until all the
corruption was drawn forth from within.

Or lastly, the Devil might (in regard he had brought them into this far
country, far from all light and truth of the Gospel of Christ,) persuade him
that God was a God of more purer eyes than to Heb. 1. 13.
behold iniquity, saying, the meaning of that is, it is only the impure eyes of
man that sees iniquity, it is only the weakness of man's eye, which causes him
to think he sees good and evil; it being only the imagination of man, which is
indeed a lie; and therefore, says he, that saying is evil to him that evil
thinks; do but you leave off such thoughts, and presently you will see that all
actions and things are like, upon which man swallows presently iniquity as a
fish swallows water.

He would fain have filled his belly with the husks, but no man gave them him;
even so it is with the poor Soul, that though he see nothing but filthy Swine,
and they feeding on nothing but filthy Husks, base Lusts, which hurry him into
this and the other abomination, which pretend and make a swelling show of
substance or pleasure to be had in them; but in the using appear to be nothing
but emptiness, rather choking than filling the belly; fain would he have
filled his belly with those husks, but no man gave them him, so must I needs
confess to my shame, that such was the wretchedness of my unworthy heart, as
that I would fain have filled my belly with those husks, let any abomination
come forth, and indeed did begin to eat of those husks; and as we find the
reason why the Prodigal did not fill his Belly, was not because he would not,
but because no man gave them him; so the reason (as to my shame, so to the
Glory of God for ever be it spoken) why I did not finish up in sin that it
might have brought forth eternal death and woe, was not because I would not,
but because I was prevented by the love of God, which made me come to my self,
to weigh things in the balance of Truth, searching (like the wise Bereans) the
Scriptures (the which before I Acts 17. 11.
had laid aside as a dead useless thing, imagining I had gotten that unction
whereby I knew all things, and needed not that any man teach me, needed no man's
writings, 1 John 2. 27.
no not the Apostles and Prophets themselves, but that I had teaching enough;
nay was able to teach others, etc.) whether those things were so or no, I began
to be amazed and confounded in my self, to behold what madness, folly and
vanity I had a long time been carried away with.

That I was so foolish as to believe I was traveling toward heaven and
happiness, when my own conscience, (if I had but suffered it to speak) would
have told me that the way I went was quite contrary, that it was the broad
Road-way to destruction, and not only my own Conscience, but the experience of
the Saints in all Ages, and above all, ^he Scriptures themselves would most
^lainly have made it manifest to me: ^aying, Can a man gather grapes of ^horns,
or figs of thistles. Mat. 7. 16.


O that I should be so foolish as to ^hink I could carry coals in my bosom
Prove. 6. 27, 28.
and not be burnt therewith; That I should have nothing but thorns and ^histles
growing in my heart, and yet should expect in summer to gather thereof grapes
and figs, that I should do nothing but evil, and yet expect good to Mat. 12.
25. ver. 33.
^ome thereof: no, says Christ, if a king^om be divided against it self, how
can that kingdom stand? either make the tree good and his fruit good, or the
tree evil and its fruit evil, make both alike.

When I came to my self, I no sooner ^egan seriously to weigh and consider my
condition, but I began to cry out for my self, wondering the wrath of God had
not ere this time swallowed me up. O! That I should be so foolish, as to run
after the shadow, leaving the substance behind; That I should follow nothing
but the foolish imaginations of my own heart, and not only so but to call them
the motions of the spirit of God.

That I should pretend to worship Joh. 4. 24.
God in spirit and truth, when I wa^ running from God, and leaving off hi^
Saints and people, turning my back upon all the commands of God.

To think with Saul, I was zealous for God and his truth, doing God good
service, Joh. 16. 2.
when I was persecuting his servant^ and Saints, backbiting and speaking evil
o^ them; watching that if possible I might cause any of them to stumble and
fall, i^ leaving off their obedience to the commands of God; rejoicing at their
infirmities; being glad when I could tak^ any just occasion (by reason of any
o^ their failings) to speak evil of them.

That I should be so foolish as to thin^ Mat. 22. 11.
I was prepared to meet the bride, o^ Christ at his second coming, when I ha^
no wedding garment on, nay instea^ Mat. 22. 11.
thereof was clothed with nothing bu^ filthy rags, base lusts, my heart running
out after nothing but vanity and lies.

That I should think 'twas the way to life and happiness, in order to healing,
to let what abominations would come forth, to be obedient to any, nay to every
lust.

And not only to act all this at home 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16.
in my own heart: to fill the Temple of God with all these idols, but to
manifest this my folly to all the World, and to contend for them as things fit
to be minded.

I say when I came so to my self, as seriously to behold all this, finding that
I was gotten into a way, which was as the wiseman says, Prove. 16. 25. There
is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end (or issues) thereof are
death; though it did seem to me right, even that which would bring me safe to
my expected end, glory and happiness, yet I find the issues thereof was nothing
so; and came at last to see the way I was in, led to destruction.

I said with the Prodigal,, how many hired servants of my Fathers have bread
enough, and to spare, and I perish here with hunger? How many are there, which
as yet know not that they be adopted sons of God, as know not their interest in
Christ; who though they do believe, yet they cry, Lord help my unbelief, to
whom Christ has not given an answer: yet such is the fullness of my Father^
house, as they have bread enough and to spare, have so many secret upholding^
and whisperings of the spirit of life and truth in them, as keeps their spirits
from fainting, and moreover gives them many causes of rejoicing: all which at
present to consider, wounded me the more; I perish here for hunger. But through
mercy, having some hope yet left as to know those God loves, he loves to the
end, and that his mercies endure for ever. I said, I Joh. 13. 1.
will arise and go to my Father, and confess I have sinned, etc.

I will no longer lie in this bed of filth, I will arise, I will no longer go
after the Ps. 105. 8. and 111. 9. and 119 8. 9.
lusts and abominations of my base heart, but go to my Father, go and be
obedient to all the commands of God, throwing my self down at the foot of God,
saying, Lord though I perish, yet will I trust in thee, yea though thou slay
me; for there is mercy in thee that thou may be feared.

And say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am
no ^re worthy to be called thy Son, etc. I ^ve sinned against Heaven: against
the ^ecious Gospel of Jesus Christ; not^thstanding thou unbosomest that rich ^e
of thine unto me, as when I was in (...) blood, cast out to the loathing of my
^rson, and no eye pitied me, even then Ezekiel. 16. 6.
(...) casting the skir^ of thy mercy over ^e, hiding thereby all my nakedness
and ^formity* against this Heaven, all this ^ercy and love have I sinned.

2. Against Heaven, against the Saints ^d people of God; in causing the way
(...) truth to be evil spoken of, thy Saints ^braided and contemned, and thy
^me dishonored; and slighted all thy ^ecious commands and ordinances, and
^rned my back upon them, despising ^d trampling them under my feet: against
Heaven yet more than all this; ^ot thinking it enough that I disobeyed ^l thy
commands, despised all thy Saints ^d people, casting contempt on them, ^ut
invited, (as much as in me lay) ^aused others to do the same.

3. Against Heaven, notwithstanding ^ou in mercy gave me many regrets ^f
Conscience by the word and spirit; ^et by all these was not I stopped, but
^earkened to every call, and yielded my self up a servant to sin and Satan,
ma^ing my body (that should have been h^ly and spotless, not suffering any
defil^ment to have come to thy temple,)(...) Cage wherein were all manner of
u^clean birds, a stie full of nothing(...) filthy swine, spent that portion
tho^ gave me with a Harlots.

Lord how have I trampled under m^ feet that holy Ordinance of thy Ma^riage, in
not being thankfully contented with what thou out of thine infini^ wisdom
createdst for man in the begi^ning, one woman, that they twain mig^ be one
flesh, the which being nothing le^ Gen 2 18. 24.
then a figure of that heavenly inten^ment of thine, the Son of thy love Chri^
Jesus, one Spouse or beloved: But despised and slighted this thy institution
choosing rather to follow the voice o^ Satan and my own base lustful heart, an^
from thence concluded, 'twas lawful for me to have more than one Wife, an^ not
only consented within me to this abomination, and violation of this thy law,
but brought it forth into action* taking into my bosom another beside^ my
wife, nay herein redoubling my iniquity, taking even one that was then Wife of
another man; And not only ^one all this wickedness in thy sight; ^t called this
my detestable abomina^on, righteous and good, contending ^r it before men,
though it be that which the very heathens abhor, and ^e very brand and
character of those whom thou intendest shall never ^e thy face, thy love, thy
son, Heaven ^d happiness, but for ever be cast ^th into utter darkness, as the
Apostle ^ul said to the Corinthians. Know ye 1 Cor. 6. 9.
^t that the unrighteous shall not in^rit the kingdom of God? be not de^ved:
neither fornicators, nor Idola^s, nor adulterers, etc. Shall inherit ^e Kingdom
of God, etc.

Yet O! Lord herein have I sinned a^nst Heaven, and done all this wick^ess in
thy sight, notwithstanding I Luke 12. 47. 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. Jer. 32. 40.
^ew thy will, yet I did it not: though ^as one that thou set before thee
(...) thy delight, to dandle in the lap of (...) Love: from whom thou intendest
^er to turn thy face; even here be^e thee have I sinned and done all this
^ckedness in thy sight: though I knew ^u wast a God from whom no thought, ^ch
less action could be hid: Lord ^at shall I say, my sins are as the sands ^he
^^a, who can number them? So vile, so wretched am I, as I am n^ worthy to be
called thy Son: n^ worthy any more to sit at thy table yet Lord I will fain be
entertained^gain into thy house, though but as o^ of thy hired servants, but a
door-ke^per, though but as one that must n^ go into thy house to behold and
parta^ of thy rich mercies, but stand at t^ door: for it is better Lord to be a
doo^ Psa. 84. 10
keeper in thy house, than to dwell(...) the Tents of wicked Men.

But when he was yet a great way(...) his Father saw him, etc. I had(...) gone
far in confession and forsaki^ but was hedged up by my iniquitie^ ready to be
swallowed up by them eve^ moment; so that if I went into(...) field, into the
World, there present one object or other presented it self my base lustful eye,
which like thor^ pricked and wounded my heart to b^ hold if I looked into my
garden,(...) heart, which should have bin filled w^ all precious flowers of
divine pleasur^ Pro. 34. 24.
behold, there was nothing but nett^ nothing but restlesness, and unquiet^
stinging and wounding me; nay furth^ if I Looked about my heart, beho^ the
stone-wall was broken down: Prayer, watchfulness, nay all power, which formerly
I had against sin and corruption, whereby in some measure they were subdued and
kept under in me, was now broken down; so that now I was ready to be led away
with every lust: But even while I was thus far off from my body, being the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, as it was become the Temple of Idols, a cage of
unclean 1 Cor. 6. 19.
birds, My father saw me, and not only so; but had compassion on me, was
pleased even when my Spirit was ready to fall before him, with power to bring
that saying to my heart, Malachi 3. 6. I am the Lord, and I change not,
therefore you sons of Jacob are not consumed; appearing indeed a God of truth,
who said, He would not always contend with man, lest his spirit should fall
before him; but delights rather in Genesis 6. 3.
showing mercy; even when I was crying out in my own heart, (from the sight of
my being ready every moment to be carried away with one temptation or other) My
God has forsaken me, bringing that saying with power to my heart, Isai. 50.
from the first to the fourth.

Thus said the Lord, where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have
put away? or to which of Creditors is it I have sold you? Behold for your
iniquities have you sold your selves, and for your transgressions is your
mother put away; Wherefore when I came, was there no man? When I called, was
there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all that it cannot redeem? Or have
I no power to deliver? Behold at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers
a wilderness, their fish stinketb for water and dies for thirst; I cloth the
Heavens with darkness, and make Sackcloath tbeir covering.

All which was unfolded before me thus, O foolish man, why do thou say God
has forsaken thee, has sold and given thee up to thy own lusts and to Satan;
divorced thee from being the Spouse and beloved of his Son? who says so? where
is the Bill, which lust, nay the devil himself let him if he dare, if he can
produce the Bili: which of my Creditors is it to whom I have sold thee? Behold
look well about you, consider, you will find you are mistaken, you charge me
falsely: for your iniquities have you sold your selves; you will find all the
fault is in you, what is done, you have done your self; you have sold your
self; the distance that is between us, your iniquities have made, it is they
have separated between you and your God.

Wherefore when I came, was there no Man? What was the reason think ye that I
so often by my word and spirit called to and within you, and you made me no
answer? If I had been the cause of your being gone, why then should I call? and
what was the reason there was none to answer, but only your being separated by
your iniquities, being taken up with them, you became regardless of my calls?

Is my hand shortened at all that I cannot redeem? you know I was able to redeem
you out of, and from your corruptions, and what is the matter now? have you
tried me, and found me unable now to redeem you, is my hand shortened? Is there
any reason why you should not come to me? Or have not I power to deliver? what
think ye?

Are your sins and inquities greater and deeper then the Sea? What if they be?
there is no reason for all that why you should despair of coming to me; Behold,
At my rebuke I dry up the Sea, though you be sunk as deep into sin as the Sea
is of water, yet one word of my mouth can dry up that Sea: though you now swim
in your iniquities like a fish in a River, yet I can dry up that River, and
make those corruptions in you perish for want of water: And make those Rivers a
wilderness, a place where indeed you may solitarily travel, and in your travel
be put to great streights, yet a place where you shall see me work Ex. 16. 15.
wonders; where I Will rather send you bread from Heaven then you shall perish,
Ex. 17. 6.
and cleave the rock rather then you shall faint for want of water.

And I was followed with this saying. That there was no variableness, no not so
much as a shadow of changing in him there was not the likeness of any such
thing in him, continually having that saying before me, return unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 1. Isa. 55. 7.
and he will have mercy upon you, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon: to which in my heart I replied, What shall I do? whither shall I
return? Upon which I had this saying brought to me, Come out from among all
those base lusts, and touch no unclean thing. To which I replied, how can I
come out from amongst them* when I am compassed about with them on every side?
Lord I cannot turn my self, but do thou turn me, and I shall be turned, etc. To
which I was answered in my own heart! All that is required of thee, is only
that thou would be willing; do but resign up thy will unto the will of God,
its enough: To confirm the Truth of which to me, I had those sayings brought
with power to my remembrance, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, to
Mat. 8. 2.
which Christ immediately replys, (as if he should say then there is nothing
Mat. 20. 32. Luke 5. 13.
wanting,) I will be thou clean: and immediately it was so: as if Christ should
have said, I am always willing and ready to do you any good, and wait only for
an opportunity for you to be willing.

And likewise that saying of Christ, Jo. 3. 14. As Moses lifted up the serpent
in the Wilderness; even so must the son of Man be lifted up, That whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. What manner of Person
soever he was, though never so wicked, never so vile, yet if he would but give
one look up, but throw himself into the arms of his mercy, but say with his
heart there is no life to be had elsewhere: and if I periish, I Will perish here:
if he but say, Lord I believe, help my unbelief; I believe, there is mercy
enough in thee, and that it is there placed on purpose, to save sinners: help
mine unbelief; do thou put ^ut those doubts of mine, by giving my life, by
healing of me: and you need not question but you will find him a God of Truth;
for he in that particular chellenges all the World, saying, who is he that has
sought the Lord in vain? and therefore look up to me all ye ends of the Earth
and Isa. 45. 19. Prove. 1. 6. 20. Ps. 37. 40. Isa. 45. 21.
be ye saved. But to proceed.

He came running and met me; so swift was he in coming, as that I saw him not
till he fell on my neck and kissed me. O how sweet is it to have the divine dew
of Heaven to be distilled upon a poor frozen heart! of what value is it! how it
makes the soul to melt and cry out with the Spouse, Can. 2. 5. Stay me with
Flagons, and comfort me with Appeals, for I am sick of love! Redoubled love!
such as spared not to restore me again and again, such love as seems to swallow
up and forget all my redoubled iniquities; which discovers it self so freely,
as if I had never been an offender against it!

And as the next thing we hear of the Prodigal is, that his father said to his
servant, bring forth the best robe and put it on hm, and put a ring on his
hand, and shoes on his feet, etc.

So though I have no cause of boasting; but rather for ever to humble my self
in dust and ashes, because of my abominations, they having been such as the
wise man says (and I by sad experience have found true in part already) my
wound and dishonor to be great, and my reproach such as shall not be wiped
away, Prove. 6. 33.
yet will I not be ashamed to own and acknowledge his infinite mercies, which he
has been pleased as a robe put on me; most sweetly being pleased to take my
sad heart out from its flesh and mire, in which it lay wallowing, and fill it
with holy and heavenly meditations and contemplations of his rich love; making
me as to loath the ways of my own sinful heart, (which before I took pleasure
in) so now to be meditating on his law, making nothing else delightful or
pleasant to me, but rather trouble and vexation of spirit; Teaching me now that
lesson to commune with my own heart, and be still; to be continually (at least
desiring so to be) as beholding his rich love, so my own vile wretchedness, the
which causes me to be so far from thinking any thing of my self as not to
suffer such a thought; but to be still, as rather being ashamed to appear or
speak, except to my own shame.

Now I find the slipperiness of man's heart to be such, as that he which thinks
he stands, had need take heed lest he fall: that man had need watch and pray
continually, lest he fall into temptation. Now not wondering why Paul,
notwithstanding 1 Cor. 10. 12.
he had so much of the power and Spirit of God, cried out so because of the
body of sin he bare about him, saying, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of Death? nor yet why he should immediately Romans 7.
24.
as if 'twas but the turning of an eye, but looking up to the Brazen serpent,
but presently he tells you other news.

Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord; cause of giving thanks, and
that for deliverance too: now not wondering verse. 25.
why, as soon as Christ does but a little slumber, the ship should be
immediately covered over with waves, as that the disciples cry out Master, save
us, we perish: finding now that Christ is pleased to sleep a little, and to
suffer Satan to raise on poor disciples such waves, storms and tempests, on
purpose to try his Disciples faith, and befool Satan, so to show his power and
Exodus 14. 15. 1 Samuel 12. 16.
willingness in all straights to help them; and likewise to inform them where
their strength lies, that their eyes might be always thitherward. And now in
some measure I behold the needfulness to that Joh. 5. 28.
saying Paul uses to the Ephesians. saying, Put on the whole armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. As if he should say,
you being Christians, are not therefore to think you are safe; that you have no
enemy to fear: for you being but now to have an enemy: he that before was your
bosome-friend, Mat. 10. 23.
is now become your enemy; that he may be able to stand against the wiles of
the Devil: the Devil now is become your adversary, therefore now you must be a
Soldier: you must learn to keep watch, to stand centinal, and not only so, but
you must be armed too: Mat. 26. 14.
your enemy is one who is so strong as you are not able to withstand him,
except you be armed: And it is not any armor will serve you neither, it must be
armor of proof: put on the whole armor of God; it is not a piece of Gods
armor will serve thee: for thy adversary is such a cunning warrier, that if
then have never so little a place left naked, and unarmed, he will be sure to
shoot all his darts there, and wound thee there; therefore put on the whole
armor of God: Never think thou art safe till then, nay you must not sleep nor
ly still then neither, but must when you have put it on expect to fight, for we
fight not, etc.

Therefore let us not sleep, for those that 1 These. 5. 6, 7, 1.
sleep, sleep in the night, etc. for we are Children of the day, therefore let
us watch and be sober: But to return.

The next thing in the Parable, is, he calls for the fatted Calf to be brought
in and killed, to make merry.

In regard this is partly included in what went before, it being only an
illustration of the height, depth, breadth, and length of the love of God in
Christ, unbosomed, and freely held forth unto the worst of sin: I shall say no
more of it but this. That such has been the goodness of God to me, as that he
has been pleased to bring forth and bestow on me his great rich love, by which
(notwithstanding I was fallen from, and become a rebel to it, was gone so far
from him, into such a far Country, even to the very brink of Hell; was dead,
nay twice dead, dead before I was his son, and dead again afterward) he
recovered me, brought me back, raised me from this death; my son was dead, and
is alive was lost, is found; notwithstanding the darkness I was in was such
thick Isa. 44. 21.
darkness, as I was lost in the midst thereof; yet such was his love, as there
he found me, and from thence brought me forth into the light, and made merry
with the music of his sweet love: O! I want an enlarged heart to admire it,
and the Tongue and Pen of Men and Angels to set it forth.

Lastly, His eldest brother was in the field, and as he came and drew nigh to
the house; he heard Music and Dancing, and he called one of his Servants, and
asked what these things meant? and he said thy brother is come, and thy father
has killed the fatted calf, because he had received him safe, and sound: And
he was angery and would not go in, etc.

It Is not much I have experience of this last part of the parable, having not
as yet been entertained again by the society and people or house of God from
which I went; but whether the reason was because my eldest brother murmured at
my Father for killing the fatted calf for me, who had wasted his Estate with
harlots, who notwithanding he had manifected his love in Christ to me; I say
had given me this portion, I spent it all, sinned against this his mercy, my
eldest brother did question whether my Father had dealt justly in that he
(notwithstanding all this my wickedness) rather then I should be lost, that he
might receive me safe and sound, does not spare, but kill his fatted calf,
manifest to me (vile wretch) such a piece of love, as he never discovered to
his eldest son, who had always been with him; kept close to all his commands
and ordinances: whether the reason why they rather concluded (or at lest some
of them) I had sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, and so 'twas not possible
for me to be recovered by and into the love of God; and so did not believe what
I said, but at present refused both it and me; and not only so, but that (as
ever I heard) they never so much as inquired after me since, though I have been
shut up in prison and could not go to them: whether (I say) it did not flow
from my eldest Brother murmuring. I leave to them whom it concerns to judge;
waiting and longing to re-injoy likewise that mercy, as to have again
fellowship and communion with the Saints; knowing it to be the place; (where
two or three are gathered together Mat. 18. 19
in his name, that he will be in, and that in the midst of them: and likewise
finding by sad experience, that so backward Heb. 10. 24
and drous^e is man, as he had not need let any thing be wanting that may
provoke him to love and good works, it being likewise that which as God
commands it, so he takes special notice of his people that observe so to do; as
we may find Mal. 3. 16. Then they that fear the Lord speak often one to
another: and the Lord harkned and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name.
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I gather up
my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spares his only son that serves
him. What? does the Lord take notice of poor wretched man that fears him, that
is tender of every command of his; though he but stammer before him, because he
knows it is his pleasure, Yea, he will be sought unto? I the Lord take great
notice, he harkned and heard it, and not only so, but a book of remembrance was
written before him: such is the infinite love of God toward his poor despised
people, that though the world frown upon them, and not think them worthy their
taking notice of, yet the Lord he takes such notice of them, as that they
cannot meet together, but he will cause a Book of Remembrance to be write, and
that before him; that so he might be sure not to go or do any thing, but that
he might behold them, that they might be his choice ones at that day when he
gathers up his jewels.

Does God take such care for his poor people, that when he brings forth and
gathers together his rich choice mercies out of his treasury, gathers together
his Jewels, as he would be sure none of his people should be wanting, or
forgotten, but before him; that then he might gather up them amongst his
Jewels, be as careful and tender of them as a man of his son, that serves him?

O! who would leave such a God, such a Father, for the vanities of this World,
which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven.

FINIS.
A true Copy of the Letter mentioned in the Epistle which I sent to my
Adversary.
SIR,
I Must confess, such has been my incomparable detestable wickedness toward
you, as has most justly kindled an unquenchable fire of fury in your breast
against me vile wretch, most justly causing me to feel the truth of that
saying, Prove. 6. 34. For jealousy is the rage of a man; therefore he will not
spare in the day of vengeance: So I must needs say, most just is the Lord, in
bringing to open view these by my hidden works of darkness. Sir, I must needs
out of the shame and bitterness of my unworthy heart confess, that that injury
done by me to you is of so notorious a nature, as it is not in the least
repairable by me; nay if I should leave Ages as your slave, and all that time
do for you the worst of slavery, it would not be of weight sufficient to
counterpoise with that unparalleled injury done by me to you; how much less am I
(who have not left me (except the mere mercy of some Creditors) not the worth
of a penny, nor wherewithal to get a penny) able in the least in that case to
treat with you: But being through mercy made to behold the greatness of my
iniquity against God, and injury done to you, as made astonished, ashamed, and
confounded in my self, at the beholding of the riches of the love of God, which
Paul well said, passes understanding, if it had not, I had ere this been
consumed; and God himself gives the alone reason, saying, I am God and change
not, therefore you sons of Jacob are not consumed; and knowing it my duty so
far as it lies in my power to satisfy all wrongs by me done to or committed
against any, to the utmost of my ability, therefore endeavoring (if possible)
to be at peace with all men; I am imboldened to tender you the largest
satisfaction, that either you or any else can out of my labors, above the
maintaining of my poor Wife and Family, whom in the first place the laws both
of God and nature teach me to provide for; And how much more in this case I am
bound to have respect to my poor wife, who with you in this case (and that in
an unspeakable manner) has so deeply already suffered, I leave to you to
judge. And Sir, I must humbly desire you to be pleased to consider, that your
keeping me in Prison, does not only make me incapable of giving you the least
satisfaction; and if I alone who merited it, did suffer, I should be so far
from having a thought of reaping any mercy from you, as I should rather yield
up my self a sacrifice, to be consumed on the altar, you will, by the fire of
your fury most justly by me kindled: But O! when I behold other suffering for
my abominations, it enforces me to cry out, (as secretly to God) so to you now
to look being an instrument in his hand scourging those for my iniquities who
were not sharers in them with me) though not upon me, yet upon them, with an
eye of compassion; and I beseech you, lest the consideration that you destroy
the just (in this case) with the unjust, (if you go on) stay your hand; O spare
but them, and command what you will of me to the utmost extremity, I shall be
willing not only to the utmost of what at present I am able; but for ever think
the utmost I can do, too little, in recompense of your mercy in this particular
toward my poor Wife and Family, much less to satisfy that injury which in
vilest nature I have done you. O Sir, I beseech you, consider God, who delights
in showing mercy; and does afflict, not that he might utterly destroy, but that
thereby he might make us the fitter to receive and prize his mercies; and how
honorable a thing it is to be an imitator of so heavenly a pattern, in at last
saving those by your mercy, who else are likely to be destroyed by your fury.
So (Sir) only giving you to understand, that herein I have written nothing but
the plain truth, and sincere desire of my heart, humbly desiring you seriously
to read it; and upon mature consideration, as between God and your own soul:
and if you shall please to send me an answer, it will oblige him who is,

SIR, Unworthy to be your Slave, H. H.
From my Captivity in the Fleet Dec. 12. 1650. For Mr. Thomas Hams Living at
Mrs. Morice 's in Swan-Alley Blackfriars. These.
View of part of the many Traitorous, Disloyal, and Turn-about Actions of H. H.
Senior, sometimes Printer to Cromwell, to the Commonwealth, to the Anabaptist
Congregation, to Cromwell 's Army, Committee of Safety, Rump-Parliament, etc.
A Little before the Rebellion in England, His Father a Ropemaker in Maidston.
He was brought to Town out of * Kent, and served Harrison (one (...) the
blessed King Charles the I's. Bloody ^egicides) in the Capacity of Postillion,
though very young) who preferred him to ^r. John Lilbourn; who was much taken
^ith him, being so very tractable and fit ^r his purpose; that he put him out
an ^pprentice to a * Printer for his better Symonds and Pain then Partners.
1642.
^alification to serve the Cause, etc. As ^terwards it proved He did to all
intents. (...) He run away from his Master, (a Prin^r) and Listed himself in
the Rebel-Army ^der Essex, and fought fiercely with ^word and Musket, (for he
was not ^et mounted) at Edgehill against King ^harles the I. Then becoming
free of four ^rades (viz.) Rebellion, Treason, Rapine ^d Murder, he got on
Horseback, and advanced in a very towardly Progress* so that, in

He commenced Leveller; but tha^ Independent, and became so considerabl^ among
them; that Cromwell wanting(...) Printer for the Horrid Remonstrance* (which was
the Prodromus of the blessed King^ Murder,) Out steps honest H. H. briskly^
saying, My Lord, I am a Printer: An^ upon his Vigilance (not Dexterity) in tha^
piece of Villainy, he was made Printe^ to that Rebel-Army, in which Execrabl^
Employment and Title, he continu'^ Printing and Trooping several years. And

He Printed the Act, For prohibiting a^ person to be Proclaimed King of England.

And another Act, For Abolishing t^ Kingly Office, etc.

This was the man that Printed the H^ and Cry after King Charles the I.
althoug^ it was Old White's Copy; but his Ze^ for the Cause was so great, that
he counted it no sin to cheat his Brother Trayto^

This year was a year of Remark i^ earnest to him, for now he altered h^ Title,
and became Printer to the Commonwealth of England, and Printed the I^structions
for the Sale of the Lands belonging to the King, Queen, Prince and Bishop^
Deans and Chapters, etc.

He was at Worcester Fight against the ^ate King, and the next day after the
Fight was seen in General Fleedwood's Tent by Mr. B. a Book-binder now living
in St. Bar^holomew's -Close near West-Smithfield.

He Printed after Worcester Fight a Proclamation for the apprehending (as he
was pleased to call them) Charles Stewart, James Stewart, or any of the
pretended Sons or Daughters of the blessed Martyr King Charles the I. wherein
was a Thousand pounds reward offered.

In this year (the Flesh prevailing over the Spirit) he lived in Adultery with
the Wife of Thomas Hams, a Tailors Wife in Blaok Friars; for which he was Su'd,
Fined 260 l. and cast into the Fleet Prison, where he lay a considerable time;
and then and there it was, that he writ this Book the Prodigal Returned, being
his Recantation for that crime, by which he procured his Re-admittance into the
Anabaptist Congregation; and of this conversion of our Saint, Mr. William
Kiffin and Mr. Daniel King (both living) are Witnesses, as having each of them
written an Epistle before it, printed for Giles Calvert, Anno Dom. 1651. By
this Apostasy, and his hearty Penance for that Crime, he became Printer to the
Anabaptist Congregation; as appears by the many Schismatical Books, where it is
said Printed by H. H. Printer to the Anabaptist Congregation, in which he
continued several years.

He Printed The government of the Commonwealth, Cromwell the Protector^ (as
they called him) and in sundry year^ as the Pamphlets show. He Printed,

The Ordinance of High Treason against the Posterity of King Charles the I.

The Ordinance for disposing the Estate^ under Sequestration.

At that time he was Printer to Olive^ the Usurper, he became a zealous
Preacher amongst the Anabaptists, where h^ thump'd the Tub so furiously, that
he wa^ much Noted by the Heads of that Tribe^ as Patience, Kiffin, Ives, King,
etc. Tha^ he caused the Congregation to Deposite a^ very considerable sum of
money, which was no sooner paid into his hands; but he and his brother Ives
shared the money, and left them to shift for a Teacher, for honest H. H. had
now other Fish to fry.

He Printed the Act, For Establishing the High Court of Justice; and another
for prohibiting any Correspondency with Charles Stuart.

He Printed the Act, For renouncing the pretended Title of Charles Stuart King
of England.

He Printed the Act, For Discovery and Convicting Popish Recusants.

He Printed the Armies Plea against the Restoration of the King.

An Act, For the Security of the Usurper Cromwell.

The Humble Petition and Advice to Cromwell.

An Act, For the Sale of Lands and Estates in Ireland.

He Printed Barebone's Petition against the Royal Family. He was Printer to
Richard the Usurper, Oliver's Son; and at that time Printing pocket Bibles, he
corrupted the Commandments, and made it, Thou shall commit Adultery; remembering
probably how delightfully he had lived With honest Thomas Ham's the Taylor's
Wife.

Richard Cromwell being dismounted, and ^he Rump Parliament got to the Helm, he
was then Printer to Them; and in the same year the Rump being routed by
Lambert, ^e became Printer to the Army again; then Printer to the Committee of
Safety. And ^n the same year the Rump getting in again, ^e became Printer to
Them again: The ^an you may see has a Soul of no common Temper; He ever made it
his business ^o be of the rising side, let what Card ^ould turn up Trump, he
would still ^ollow the Suit, his heart and hand were ^lways so well furnished.

He was now arrived to have the ma^agement of the Press, and coming to ^ -- s
Cot -- ls he found a Pamphlet in ^indication of King Charles the II. (of
blessed memory;) which much enraged him against the said Printer, insomuch,
that he would needs both carry away the man's Printing-Letter, and take him also
into Custody, saying, What Print in Right of the King, sure we have had King
enough already, carry him before Sir John Backstead (such another Villain as
himself.)

The King being happily restored, he got 1660.
to be Printer to His late Majesty; but fearing the Act of Indemnity was too
weak for all his Treasons, Villainies, Tergiversations and Treacheries, he
procured a particular Pardon, and then he became a kind of a Church of
England-man, or a modest Presbyterian, where he continued (when profit and
interest offered) a Zealot till the year 1678.

When Oates's Plot was brought upon the Stage, and flourished, then he became
very Zealous in finding out Papists and Popish Books: In order to which, he
went into the Kings-Printing-House in Blackfriars; saying, Gentlemen, Is there
an^ Papists here? If there be, you must turn out* for the Kings-Printing-House
shall be(...) shelter for such Vermin: Nay, Or any the are Popishly affected,
they must also turn out* Which soon took effect, for poor Simo^ Chamberlain
(being so) was soon turned out* A little after this exploit, he instructed on^
of his Sons (a Glasier by Trade) to betra^ Turbeveil's Catechisms, the Manuel
of Devotions, and other good Catholic Books, then in the hands of Mr. James
Thompson in Eagle-Court in the Strand; which afterward He and his Pupil Robin
Hog, procured to be burnt at the Royal Exchange, where he Triumphed at that
Exploit, as much as Sir William Waller did, when he burnt the Crucifixes in
Palace-yard, Westminster.

He Printed many of the Monstrous, Horrid, Lying Narratives and Informations
that then invaded the World; and also the Treasonable Votes, etc. And amongst
the rest, he Printed that pernicious and damnable Narrative for which
Dangerfield was Disciplined; and himself and others Sued by an Honorable Peer
of the Realm, who obtained a large Verdict against him; which Verdict, he
hoping to avod, (the good man) became (as he says) a Zealous Catholic; we do
not hear our Zealous Convert has neither acknowledged his Crime to that
Honorable Person, nor shown any Sign of Submission: Nay, he had the Confidence
to say, He never wronged his Lordship, or the Right Honorable Lady who has
also has a Verdict against him for Scandalum Magnatum, etc.

It is further to be observed, that in May 1684. when the Stationers had their
new Charter from the King Charles II. of Glo^ious Memory; this new Proselite
most zealously took the Sa^ament in the Church of England, to qualify himself
for Master ^f the said Company;) but being so well known amongst them, ^is
design was frustrated; as sometime he did before to Capa^itate himself to be
Warden thereof; which place (with the ^ssistance of some, etc.) he did compass.

This is the brief character of our spick and span new Convert, which shows him
to have been in Religion a very Proteus or Wea^er-Cock; and to have run through
more Opinions than ever ^he Wandering Jew is said to have done Countries.

A Convert nevertheless we may allow him to be, and to be^ieve him to be
changed also from what he was, as he had often ^een, and done before: But
though he be thus become a Saint; ^he Kn -- e is as Visible and Obvious as
ever, and Honest H. H. is the same Envious, Plodding, Treacherous, Sycophant in
his Looks, Words and Actions.

Query, If ever H. H. since his pretended Conversion has asked the Pardon of
any one person whom he has Libelled or Defamed? Or so much as acknowledged the
wrong? (we speak not of satisfaction for the same.) And also, whether he can be
deemed any other than an Hypocrite or Dissembler, until he has done this? God
cannot be mocked, but the World and his Father-Confessor may.

To show that according to the Title H. H. is the same as heretofore, and that
he the said H. H. was ever for the Mercenary interest part, Religion he still
making use of upon all changes, only to serve that end; for he having Printed
by Order the Papers found in the late Kings Closet, and a Bookseller having
likewise got encouragement to Print the same, which being accordingly done; H.
H. (still the same) sends one on purpose to Trepan not only the said Bookseller
but Printer, and used all underhand means to ruin them: This, I hope, cannot be
thought by any of the same Religion he now professes himself to be of, done
through a true zeal to that Persuasion.

And to the end that none that take the pains to read this Book, may think
these are falsities put upon the said H. H. through envy to his Greatness; the
Publisher will prove to (...). H's. face the truth of each particular, if he
has the confidence to deny any of them.

FINIS.
A LETTER OF ADVICE To A Young Lady, BEING Motives and Directions To Establish
Her In the Protestant Religion.

WRITTEN By a Person of Honor, AND Made Public for the Use of that Sex.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, 1688.

Price Three Pence.

Licensed,

May the 7th. 1688.
A Letter of Advice, etc.
MADAM,
I Know the law of Custom has made it not only an usual favor, but an expected
duty, to complement at least, if not flatter, such Women as Men write to,
especially the Great Ladies, who think none write well, that do not praise them
much, and those write best, who extol them most: high Praises being like good
Poetry, Music in words, the sound of which may be agreeable, but truly to
deserve them, requires such a Gygantick size of merit, as is very
unproportionable to the slender-wasted Virtues of most Ladies, who are
over-eager to receive Praises, and overcareless in meriting any: and the grand
reason is, because they know they usually have them without it; and that
Custom must give it, though Reason cannot. So obliging is the common courtesy
of England to Ladies, that it allows them to pretend to all praises as their
due, though few deserve any as their right. In a word, our English Ladies must
have their Characters writ, just as the Dutch Madams will have their Pictures
drawn, that is, very handsome, though they themselves be never so ugly.

But, Madam, for your part, I know your perfections so abundantly, and my own
heart so truly, as I must beg the Law of Custom pardon here; it being beyond
my power to flatter or complement, since I can neither overpraise your high
merit, or outspeak the real love, and true esteem, I have both for you and
them; so that knowing all manner of praises to be justly due to your merits, I
find I cannot here make you a present of any, without doing you an injury, by
intitling you to those praises by gift, which all know are your own by right.

For truly, Madam, the whole progress of your actions have still been so highly
virtuous, and religiously strict, and ever believed and proclaimed such, that
though your Beauty might make bad Men wish you ill, yet your Virtues hinder the
worst from daring to think you so: for if they did, their own hearts must at
the same time condemn their own thoughts, and declare your innocence; like
Pilate, who with the same breath he condemned our Savior, said, he found no
fault in him.

But, Madam, tho your virtuous life is so transparantly excellent, yet for all
that, you ought to look on your unsoil'd Reputation as no small blessing of
preservation in these scandalous times, where so few handsome Ladies escape
censure, and so many deserve it: for now the extravagancies of Romance-Amours
are not only daily read, but almost hourly practiced; and Women act more than
Romances can write; whilst the sober Rules of Virtue, and pious Duties of
Religion, are seldom thought on, and most ralely practiced; our Youth being
generally grown such fond friends of Mr. Hobbes his Books, as they are become
mere strangers to our Savior's Gospel; they living as if they were all bodies,
and had no souls, or had them but to lose, turning Religion into Raillery, and
Gospel into Romances: for thus in short they mangle Scripture, that part which
is chiefly Historical, that is their mere Gospel-part; and that which is the
Gospel-part, is their mere Historical-part; and because they cannot bring the
Gospel to prove their Atheistical reasons, pretend to prove by Reason, that
there is no Gospel: and if some of them now and then look over a Chapter, they
only pass through it, as a Spy does an Enemies Country, with a mischievous
design; and if they can but find in Scripture a seeming Contradiction, that
they presently bring on the Stage, as they do Fools in Plays, to railly with,
and make sport at: so great a Jest our Young Sparks now make of their
Salvation, as to be pleased in the mere displeasing God; without considering,
it is not only Atheistical madness, but Devilish folly, to make that their
Jest, which they may be damned for in earnest.

Thus our Youth throw away their Souls; and for their Time, they care not how
they spend it, (always provided it be not religiously) and therefore they wast
it most in the company of vain Women; and are so eager and zealous in their
pursuit, and so constant in their service, as if they fancied God was mistaken,
and intended creating man for the woman, rather than the woman for the man. But
though all know God made the Woman for the Man, yet what Critic can tell us
whether our New Mode has made the Gallant for the Mistress, or the Mistress for
the Gallant? But of this we are all sure, They are so plentifully made for one
another, that the Eastern Country-Laws allow not with more freedom plurality of
Wives, than our new English Customs admit plurality of Mistresses. Nay, I may
yet venture to say more, That the Liberty of our men exceeds theirs: for they
are permitted no more Wives than they can well keep, but ours allow themselves
as many Mistresses as they can any way get.

For indeed, the Names of Tom and Bess are hardly more familiar here, than
those of Gallant and Mistress; and are so far from being esteemed Names of
discredit, that many of our Mode-Ladies look on their Gallants as Beauty-marks,
rather than stains of Reputation. And for all they cannot but know, that the
infection of Gallants is as bad an Enemy to Credit, as the Smallpox to Beauty,
a common ruiner of it: And though Women's Gallants are in plain English no
better than the public Executioners of their reputations; and indeed no woman
will allow them, but such as are willingly condemned to suffer (and women that
slight reputation are seldom fond of Chastity) Yet these abusers of love, and
murderers of fame, by their fair words and base arts, have so insinuated
themselves into their favor, as the women now forsooth, call their Gallants
their Friends; and if common report may be credited* they are indeed their
bosom-ones; (and such women as value little what others say, seldom care much
what they themselves do:) Custom having brought many of our women to that pass,
as they now glory in the number of their Gallants, esteeming them rather so
many Vouchers of their Beauty, than so many Robbers of their Honor; the so
usual practice of this scandal, having taken away women's sense, that like
blackness amongst the Aethiopians, its Commonness has removed its deformity:
And there is now such a forward Love-spring in the Nurseries of our Young
Ladies, as the very little-ones learn to spell Amor with their Fescue, and
will pretend to entertain their Young Gallants, in the dark walks of Love, and
in the Labyrinth of its Intrigues, before they well know what the thing Love
is, or the name of Gallant means; and would have Servants come to them, before
they come to the Teens, (the ripeness of their minds outrunning that of their
bodies) and fancy men so mad as to believe, it is expectation makes a Blessing
dear. But that dull Presbyterian way of Love, is now quite out of Fashion, and
the loves of our Young Gallants are grown as fickle, and mere skin-deep, as
their Mistresses Fancies and Beauties; and Love-wounds that are but skin-deep,
can never hurt the heart; and therefore though every day we hear of Hundreds of
Gallants that are dying for Love in their Mistresses company, yet we cannot
read of one these many Ages that dyed for love in the Weekly-Bills of
Mortality; the obliging carriage of the Ladies of the times having made our
Young Men so healthfully wise, so forwardly bold, or at least so impatiently
hasty, as they expect now adays to take Young Women, as great Armies do weak
Towns, only by Summons, or Assaults; as not esteeming them worthy the time and
trouble of a Love-siege, though their Mistresses were as yielding as Rome it
self, which Writers say, was never besieged without being taken: that is, in
short, they hold handsome Women worth enjoying, but not wooing. And that makes
our Young Men so eager and inconstant in their Amors, as really it is a very
hard measuring-cast to tell whether your Young Gallants use now more art, or
speed, in the getting or forgetting of their Mistresses.

But the best of it is, that the inconstancy of both Sexes are now so equally
matched, that I cannot write more of their Gallants inconstancies, than their
Mistresses make good of their own: For they deal with their Gallants, as their
Fashions; that which comes latest, is still liked best, and used most. In a
word, the constancy and inconstancy of Young Men and Women, are just like water
and ice, where one still makes the other; and their loves (Ice-like) never last
long; and as soon as it is dissolved, turns immediately to the same it was
before, without any alteration or prejudice: Nor can water be more apt and
ready by the coming of Frost to turn to Ice, than our Young Men and Women's
hearts are apt and inclined to return to love, at the approach of fresh-fancied
Beauty. And truly the inconstancy of our Young Men cannot be so great, nor
their inclinations so ill, but the tongues of many of our Young Women are grown
as bad: For now if a Young Maid be but cried up for handsome, and resolves to
continue virtuous, and therefore will not turn vain, and deserve censure, as
much as the rest, they will be sure to speak her as bad as the worst; and if
they cannot with justice wound her Virtue, they will attempt by ill arts to
murder her Reputation, (Envy being the parent of wicked invention) it being now
a Mode-principle amongst most of our handsome Women, that no Woman that enjoys a
large proportion of Beauty, but must, a^ an unavoidable appurtenance, carry
with it a load of scandalous censures (a false Character of some, though too
true a one of most) which occasions their not caring how unjustly they increase
another burden, in hope to lessen their own load; and by overstretching the
miscarriages of others greater than they should be, hope to shrink theirs less
than really they are; vainly fancying, that spattering with dirt and reproach
other Women's reputations, were a kind of wiping clean their own; which suits
not at all with the mild and moderate rules of Virtue, which only allows Women
to correct each others faults, by their good Examples, but not to increase them
by their bad censures. For, scandalous censures, like Mushooms, grow without
any root; so tender and mutable a thing is a handsome Woman's good Name: there is
no taking its true Elevation by any certain outward Rules and measures, since
it depends more on her Neighbors good or bad report, than on her virtuous or
ill actions; and more on what they say, than what she does. And really such
reports are usually so sophisticated with self-concerns, and so strongly
biased by aversion or inclination, as you may daily hear in common Discourse,
both Men and Women turn Virtue into Vice, and Vice into Virtue; and so
characterize Good Women to be bad, and bad Women to be good; speaking not as
Women deserve, but as they fancy; and therefore it often happens, that many
Women save their reputations, even by a speedy losing their chastity, whilst
other Women lose their reputation in their very defense of it; that is, in
short, more Women lose their reputation in admitting to be much courted (though
that be all) than by being ill enjoined: And the reason is plain, Because the
Courtship is public to all, but the enjoyment is only private to themselves;
and it is more rational two concerned persons should keep their own counsel,
than many unconcerned should keep it for them; so that it cannot necessarily
follow, that the roported reputation or disreputation of handsome Women must
needs be the true issue of their merits, but often the by-blow of chance; and
therefore common report can be no right rule to measure Women's reputations by:
For many reports have much of the Devils nature in them, who is a liar from the
beginning. And indeed, if we but truly consider, we shall find Women general
censure one another, not as they are really faulty, but as they appear, and are
esteemed handsome; and therefore ugly Women have the privilege of Popes, who
cannot err, but may do what they will, and take what liberty they please; and
handsome Women will be as far from censuring their actions, as Young Men from
praising their persons: So that really in effect, we find most Women's censures
are not proportionable to the ill others act, but rather suitable to the Beauty
they possess; which by their leave is a way of judging, that is both iriational
and uncharitable; since I am sure none can deny, but there are some unhandsom
Women unchaste; and some chaste Women handsome: For Virtue and Beauty are not so
declared enemies, but they sometimes meet; though I cannot deny, but that
Virtue which in former Ages was esteemed one of the greatest adornments of the
soul, is now so Eclipsed by the outward Beauty of the Body, as Virtue and Piety
(the true inward Beauty) cannot shine out: A good Soul being nothing now in
comparison of a good face; Beauty being now the Great Empress that commands the
whole World, and makes the Supremest of men become subjects to Her. And yet
this so adored Beauty, (which all Women are so ambitious of, and all Men so
court) has at best no intrinsic value in it, but just like riches, they enjoy
most, that are contented with least; since it is not much, but enough, that is
the true measure of satisfaction. But Madam, it is now more than time to beg
your pardon; for I find I am strayed both beyond the time, and beside the road
of my designed Discourse, which is not to present you a Character, or List of
the fine Ladies, and Mode-vices of the times; they will require a much wittier
Pen than I pretend to be Master of, and a larger Volume than I design to
trouble you with: but this Character which indeed merits Volumes of Praises, I
am sure I can give you, without needing wit, or abusing of time; and if I could
here cast up the sum total of all the vices that your Sex are eitheir guilty
of, or scandalized with, (which I Will assure you are more than a few) their
number might be tedious to read, but need not be disagreeable for you to hear,
since by naming all those faults they are infected with, I should but tell all
those you are free from.

But, Madam, my design is now to remove my Battery, and change my Scene of
Writing, as you have your place of Living; and to level my Discourse, not at
the vices and pleasures of London, nor the pastimes of the Court, but at your
Country-Neighbours, the Woods and Mountains of Macroome, which renders it a
place much fitter to exercise your past-time, than satisfy your delight, were
you of the humor of most Ladies; but all know you are not only an excellent
Woman, but an extraordinary wife, I mean in Goodness, (for it is rare now to
meet a wife that is not extraordinary) for you take as much satisfaction in the
cares of well managing and improving your Estate, as most other Ladies delight,
in the lavishing theirs; so that I can truly say, you have not only brought
your Lord a large sum of money for your Portion, but a continued increase of
Rent by your Industry.

And I am sure, Madam, if you were now asked as the Philosopher was, Where was
his home? you would answer now, as he did then, My home is still where my chief
business is. So that now your chief Concerns and Family, (which is still the
good Wives Treasure (being at Macroome, I must conclude your heart is there
also.

A place, where in lieu of London, crowds of good Company, and swarms of
divertisements, you must prepare to meet with, and do Penance to your self,
among the Flocks of Priests and Friars, against whose Popish insinuations, and
infectious persuasions, I here present you a small, but necessary Collection of
Arguments to carry about you, as a Preservatitive in your own Religion, and an
Antitode against theirs; and though I cannot pretend this pocket-Pistol is a
sufficient Battering-piece, to beat down their infallible Church, yet I doubt
not but it will at least be a sufficient Lifeguard to defend you and your
Chamber against their assaults.

They are most of them argumentative reasonings I picked out of Mr.
Chillingworth, as one that reasons best, and satisfies me most, of any I ever
read; and knowing you want a Collection of choice Flowers, I heartily wish that
these I have gathered out of his Garden, and here sorted and made up to present
you in a Nosegay, may serve you against the unpleasing savor of Popish
Doctrine: And I wish they may not altogether degenerate from common nature of
Flowers, which the Naturalist tells us, grow larger and better by being
transplanted; so that I hope you will not find them the worse, nor like them
the less, for being transplanted, but receive these Arguments just as you do
your Rents, without caring whether your Tenants have the Money out of their own
bags, or borrow it, so you have it to supply your occasions.

Truly, Madam, I have taken some pains, and spent much time in reading the
Discourses of Papists against our Religion; and though I have considered their
Arguments without the least Byas, or antedated prejudice; yet I can give no
better a character of them, than I do of ill Dealers, The more I have to do
with them, the worse I like them: They savor much of Self-interest, teaching
Church Government, before Gospel-Obedience; witness their holding Marriage a
greater crime in a Priest, than Fornication: The one is but forbid by their
Churches Law, which they all know is disputable, the latter by the Law of
Christ, which they cannot but know, ought to be past all dispute.

And truly, Madam, if you please to admit your reason to make but a short
progress into the Popish Religion, you shall find much to create your wonder,
but little to satisfy your reason or belief; for the Gospel of Christ is the
Gospel of Truth, and therefore ought still to be pictured naked as Truth,
without any Art of Roman Dresses, which are only obscure shadings of the true
light of Scripture, by making dark Paraphrases on the plainest Gospel-Commands,
which in all reason ought to be plain enough for the meanest capacity: For God
forbid it should be otherwise; for the meanest Christian must be saved or
damned, for keeping or not keeping them; and sure God's Justice will never send
persons to Hell, for not doing what they could not understand was his Will they
should do; that were such a cruelty, as if a man should torment his Servant for
not doing his Errant, when he knew he did not understand his Message; yet the
Papist must not take these plain Gospel-Commands as such, but as they are
distilled in the mysterious politic Lymbeck of the Popish interest: Indeed
Mystery and Obedience is so interwoven in that Religion, that Papists must take
what their Priest tells them, as Men do Wives, for better, for worse, and must
marry their Faith to their Churches infallibility, which allows that only to be
Gospel, which their Church says shall be, not what the Apostles write is so;
for the Papists must obey the Pope, though no where commanded in the Gospel;
but must not read the Gospel, though they are commanded there to do it.

Nay, when once the Papist can but touch the small Needle of any ones reason
with the great Loadstone of the Harmonious Doctrine of a necessary Obedience to
their infallible Church, then they make such follow it, to every point of the
Compass, be it good, bad, or indifferent; and so they fail all their life, in a
Trade-wind of ignorance and superstition, and must believe their Priests words
before their own senses, in the plainest objects of them; as in the Miracle of
Transubstantiation, where you must have eyes and see not, and hands and feel
not, but must believe in a moment real Bread and Wine to be turned into perfect
Flesh and Blood, though you cannot see the least change whatsoever: yet they
are bound to believe their Priest, before their eyes, smell, taste; nor dare
their Priest say, that the Consecrated Bread (which they esteem the real Body
of Christ) will be less moldy, or more uncertain of corruption after
Consecration than before; and the jest of it is, that at the same time the
Papists believe that Miracle, they also believe this Scripture, That God will
not suffer his Holy One to see corruption. And tho for these and many other
reasons, I cannot believe this Transubstantiation-Miracle; yet I cannot but
admire this Miracle that belongs to Transubstantiation, which is, how the Pope
can bring so many, that have sense and reason to believe it.

But I shall pass by their adoring this Sacrament, their praying to Saints, and
a multitude of their superstitious observances never used in the Primative
Church; and shall only desire you, Madam, to observe in general, that the
Papists follow the Gospel, just as they read Hebrew, that is backward; for God
plainly commands, that all should search the Scripture. And our Blessed Savior
ordered the Sacrament to be administered in both kinds, 1 Cor. 11. 28. And St.
Paul forbids public Prayers in an unknown Language, but that which is most for
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16. But these plain positive commands do not hinder
the Church of Rome from declaring, that unlearned men shall not read and search
the Scriptures; but if we believe St. Paul before the Pope, we may read in the
17th of the Acts, 11. how he commended the noble Bereans for searching the
Scriptures; and therefore if searching the Scriptures had not been not only
lawful, but a commendable act, certainly St. Paul would never have commended
them for so doing. So that the Popish Clergy forbids the reading the
Scriptures, under pretense that their Laity might not truly understand them.
Next, the Church of Rome allows only their Clergy (except free Princes, for
they are excepters of Persons, though God is not) to receive the Communion but
in one kind, tho our Savior commands, that all drink of the Cup; and the
Papists cannot deny, but that the Communion was taken in both kinds in all
Christian Churches for above a Thousand Years after Christ.

And lastly, for the poor vulgar sort, they shall only hear their public
Prayers in an unknown Tongue, viz. Latin, which a Tenth part of them do not
understand; and therefore how that can be most for Edification, let the Papists
tell if they can; I am sure we cannot, nor do we believe they can, without the
help of another Transubstantiation-Miracle, and making an unknown Language to
most to be changed at the same time into a common known Language to all.

And now, Madam, I shall humbly desire you to consider in general, that tho the
Papists do out-noise us (as shallow Rivers do still the deepest) with the high
and mighty Rodomontades of their Churches Infallibility; yet such high Rants,
without true proof, are but like Schoolboys paper-Kites, which soar high and
lofty, but have nothing else worth taking notice of. They will have the
confidence to tell you, that their Popish Church ^s the Roman Catholic, and
only true Christian Church ^n the whole World: But the Protestants Answer to
this their boasting, is, that all the Christian Churches in the whole World
(besides the Popish Churches, tho more in number than they) declare quite
contrary. They will ask you, where your Protestant Church was before Luther;
which was wittily answered by one; (where the Papist Church never was) in the
Bible.

The Papists do divert themselves very much at our stiling our King, Head of
the Church, as we do, for their doing so: for we esteem our King Head only in
his own Dominions, without the Popes title of infallible; and sure it is more
rational that those of a Kingdom should allow their King to be Head of the
Church in his own Kingdoms, than that a few Cardinals should make the Head of
the Church over all Kingdoms. And for all their jeasting, I am sure we can show
(in sober earnest) Scripture-presidents for Kings being Heads of Churches in
their own Dominions, which is more than the Papists can show for their Pope, or
his Churches infallibility: For sure they cannot object against it as new
Doctrine (though Doctrine that is new is their greatest Trade) that the Kings of
Judah, and the first Christian Emperors were Heads of the Jewish Churches, and
in their own Dominions: And Solomon tells us, That a Divine Sentence is in the
lips of the King, and his mouth transgresses not in Judgment: (which I am sure
Popes have not, witness Liberius) and Solomon gives the reason, because the
Heart of the King is in the Hand of the Lord. If the Papists will pretend so
much Scripture for their Pope, I shall only answer, It Is more than ever
Protestants read, or the Apostles writ.

The Papists will tell you with a great deal of confidence, though we say the
Bible is the Religion of Protestants, yet there is no Protestant Religion, or
Church, mentioned in the whole Creed, which are the Articles of the Christian
Faith: And they will tell you, that their Church is the Catholic Church; and
to believe the Catholic Church, was an Article of the Christian Faith from the
very infancy of the Church in the beginning of the Apostles time. Now let the
Papists tell us, if they bring this as an Argument against the Protestant
Religion in the Bible, or not; if not, what cause have they to name it, or what
need have we to answer it? but i^ it be one, we make this reply; That the Roman
Church i^ no more named in the Apostles Creed, than the Protestan^ Church is;
for the Apostles Creed was made before the Roman Church was a Church; and this
I am sure they cannot deny; so that since the Catholic Church wa^ then in
being, and the Roman Church not in being, i^ must necessarily follow, that the
Roman Church cannon be the Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed*
and consequently is not the Mother Church, as the Papist^ would have her to be:
Thus the Papists have so overcharged this Argument to shoot at us, as it
recoils an^ flies in their own faces.

And of kin to this, is their grand Battering-piece o^ all, which so thunders
in the ears of all Papists, and makes the Popes power so absolute, and the poor
credulous Papist so obedient, and that is the power given by our Savior to St.
Peter, in the 16th of St. Matthew, beginning the 18th Verse, Thou art Peter,
and on this Rock I will build my Church, and give thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven; and whomsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven;
and whomsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven; and these
words the Papists understand literally, that St. Peter's person is the Rock
that Christ builds his Church on; which cannot possibly be, by the verses just
following: For there when our Savior tells his Disciples of his going to
Jerusalem, where he must suffer many things, and be killed, and raised again
the Third day; Peter took him, and rebuke him, Be it far from thee, Lord, this
shall not be unto thee: But our Savior turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee
behind me, Satan, thou art an offense to me, for thou savourest not the things
that he of God, but those that be of men. By which words it is most clear and
evident, that our Savior did not mean Peter's person could be the Rock of the
Christian Church: For if Peter's person had been that Rock meant, sure our
Savior would never have removed it behind him; and it would be not only
irrational, but impious, to believe that Christ would build his Church on
Satan, for so he calls St. Peter's person; and it were as unreasonable to
believe that the Rock of Christ's Church could be an offense to him, as St.
Peter's person was; and as improbable again as all this, that Christ's Church,
the Foundation of all Christianity, should savor, not of the things that be of
God, but those that are of Men, as Peter's person did.

Therefore if you but please to read the words of our Savior carefully, you
shall find they are most plain: for Verse 13th. When Jesus came into the Coast
of Caesarea, He asked his Disciples, Whom do men say that I am? and they said,
Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or
one of the Prophets: but whom say ye that I am? and Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art Christ-the Son of the Living God: And I say also unto thee, that
thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, (not this person) I will build my Church;
that is (upon this Rock of Faith) that I am Christ the Son of the Living God, I
build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Now this
must necessarily relate to his faith, not his person; for the gates of Hell,
that is the power of evil, did prevail against Peter's person, or he had not
denied and forsworn his Lord and Master again and again; and been afterward
proved blameworthy by St. Paul to his face, and indeed as blameworthy as any
of his Disciples. So that it is most plain, that Christ's words (of making him
the Rock of the Christian Church) related not to his person, but his faith of
Christ's being the Son of the Living God.

And for the other part; whereas the Papists believe a particular favor and
power, given by our Savior to St. Peter; of the Keys of Heaven; that was given
as much to the Eleven Disciples, as to him, as you may read in the 18th of St.
Matthew, and in the 20th of St. John's Gospel, Verse. 23, 24. As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you: and when he had said this, he breathed on them,
and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whosesoever sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. So
that you see this power is general to the Disciples, and not in particular to
St. Peter, more than to any of the rest, as the Papists misbelieve.

The Papists have many such Questions, which I am sure, Madam, you have neither
the patience to read, nor I the time to write; but those that are most material
of them, you will find I have here presented you, truly answered, by pure
Scripture, clear reasons, plain arguments, and all in few words, fit for the
weakest memory, or smallest pocket, to carry about them: For true reason does
not consist in large Volumes, long Gowns, or gray Beards; for many live to One
and twenty, without attaining to years of discretion; the degrees of Age being
not still the measures of Wisdom. For the World will never be without old Fools
and young Philosophers.

And truly, Madam, for my part, I cannot so much as think of the Papists
Religion without wonder, that so many rational men of them should rather fasten
their faith of salvation on the pretended infallibility of their Church (which
is denied by most Christians) than on the Holy Scripture, which is granted by
all, to be the will and word of God, and the very Foundation of their Churches
Foundation, as containing in it all things necessary to our salvation. And we
Protestants have at least this satisfaction and advantage, that not only the
Papists, but all sorts of Christians that are in the circumference of the whole
World, meet and join with us in this center of Faith, That the Scriptures
contain all things necessary to our salvation; which being a general granted
Truth, I confess I admire how any Papist can make the least scruple, which is
the safest Heavenly Guide, the Pope, or the Gospel. If there be any rational
man so extravagant as to put them in the same balance, and to commit a rape
upon his Reason, I shall only desire him to consider this plain Question. If he
were to go a Journey in an unknown way, would he not think it more rational and
safe to follow a certain true Guide, that all the Christians in the World
declare is certainly able and ready to show him the right way, than to follow a
pretended Guide, which the greatest part of the Christians in the World assures
him will lead him out of it. And this being the real difference between the
Papist and Protestant in gross, concerning the Heavenly Guide, the Bible, and
the Pope, I think I need now say no more, because so many have already said so
much, and I am sure enough to satisfy any, except such, who will believe a
crooked Rule is better to draw a straight line by, than a right one.

And now, Madam, I shall only beg so much of your patience, as to let me tell
you, that the plot and Heads of this following discourse, I have Extracted out
of the worthy Collingworth. Before I begin the discourse it self, I know, in
writing a Play, to have Ranked the plot in the Front of it, and to make the
whole design of the Prologue to be the Key to uncipher the plot of the Play,
(though anciently in use) had been now, not only out of fashion, but beside
reason: For the design of Plays aiming chiefly to please the senses, they ought
to be compounded and mixed with hopes and fears, certainties and uncertainties,
expectations and delays of the event of the plot; which being all so interwoven
together, creates the agreeableness of the Play; for when once the whole plot
is discovered, the pleasure of the Play is ended; like Hare-Hunting, the sport
lies not in presently taking the Hare, but in following him, in all his Rings
and Doubles. And those that love Plays, and such Huntings, resemble jealous
men, who eagerly pursue what they apprehend to overtake; or as old Age, which
we all pray to attain, but fear to approach.

But now I come to soar my discourse to a much higher pitch, and a more
Elevated Subject, and to treat of the most noble part of man, the Soul; and of
true Religion the only way to Heavenly felicity: For without Holiness, no man
shall see the Lord. We must therefore now, Madam, change the Scene of sense for
a spiritual one, and climb where earthly nature can never follow us, to the
pure and high Region of Heaven; which will inform us that the earlier
discovering our plot of attaining Heaven, will but better the play; and the
more speed, the better success: For the joys of Heaven are everlasting, and
admit of no increase or diminution: not like the divertisements of Stage Plays,
or Hunting, or any earthly delights, which cannot last but for a season, and
decay in our very enjoying them, and must soon leave us, or we them: But
Heavenly thoughts, the more and longer we practice them, the better we shall
like them; Heavenly joys so far exceeding all we can here leave, as they are
all we can ever aspire to have: This we all know, but few of us practice; and
we all love God, but few love to keep his Commandments.

I shall therefore now, Madam, tell you, as the Prologue to my ensuing
discourse, that the grand Plot, and whole design of it, moves chiefly on these
two hinges. First, in confirming you, that the foundation of the Protestant
Religion is built on God's holy Word, the Scriptures; which we Protestants
esteem to be a perfect Rule of Faith, and guide to our actions, and true
Touchstone to try all matters by, that relate to the good of our Souls; as
certainly containing in it all things necessary to our salvation. The second
thing I ^hiefly design to prove, is, that neither the Pope or the Popish Church
are infallible: and these two shall make ^p the principle stories, in the
little Model of this small ^uilding. The pretended infallibility of the Church
of Rome, is the grand persuasive Argument and lure to in^ite men to it, and the
strongest commanding Garrison (...) all the Popes power; and all other
Arguments and ^erswasions, are but like the small open Villages about ^his
Garrison, which must be servants to them, that are ^asters of it; and if a
Papist can be but once convinced, that neither the Pope, nor the Popish Church
are in^llible, they will soon be brought to reason, and our re^aining
differences will not be very considerable: I shall therefore only lightly
discourse on them, and shall ^o further trouble you, Madam, than briefly to
answer them in my own defense, as I meet them, or as they ^ollow me; and shall
only do as the Wolf does when ^ursued, snap and bite in his own defense,
against all ^pposers, without altering his pace, or changing his ^oad: I shall
neither meddle with the Papists, but as (...) meet them in the way, or toward
making of my way ^o my two designed points, which are (as I said before) ^o
prove the Scripture to be a perfect Rule of Faith, and ^uide to our actions;
and to answer, as I go, the Papists ^ain Arguments and Objections against it.

Next, that it is against all Scripture, and Reason, that either the Pope, or
the Popish Church should be infallible; which is the main design of this
discourse: and if I can by God's assistance make but the Papists believe
reason, (when against their own Church,) I doubt not but by this little
Pigmie-discourse (as very dwarfish as it is,) not only to ^inder many tottering
Protestants from turning Papists, ^ut to bring some stubborn Papists to turn
Protestants, or ^t least not to have such an infallible good opinion of their
Church, and so damnable a bad one of ours.

And now, Madam, it is requisite that this my discourse should be ended, as soon
as your Patience; and therefore ^ll that I shall add, either to the excusing my
self, or justifying Mr. Chillingworth, is, that thus far of this discourse
being my own writing, I confess, deserves only my Apology, and scarce your
perusal; but the following discourse being extracted out of Mr. Chillingworth,
deserves your reading, but needs not any Apology.

And because I find the word Protestant is so badly and over-largely
interpreted; I shall first acquaint you, that w^ are not to understand by the
word Protestant, the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Geneva, or only the
Articles o^ the Church of England, but that wherein they all agre^ with perfect
Harmony, That the Bible is a perfect Rul^ of our Faith, and guide to our
Actions; and this (afte^ having made the most diligent and impartial search of
the true way to Eternal happiness) I fully believe, and tha^ we can never find
any convincing satisfaction, but on thi^ Rock of God's word, the Bible, which I
conceive to b^ the only true Religion of Protestants.

If the Pope were indeed (what he unjustly says he is and the Papists
unreasonably believe him to be,) an infallible guide, then there needed no
Bible; but if the Bible be then there needs no Pope: For if I were to go a
Journey, an^ had a guide that could not err, what need I be taught the way? and
having such a guide, what need I apply m^ self to another? So that, in a word,
let us inform ou^selves the best we can, and consider as much as we please(...)
the more consideration we take, the more confirmation we shall find, that there
is no other foundation for a considering Christian to build an assured
dependency on^ than the Scriptures: For I am fully assured that God doe^ not
(and therefore man ought not to) require of an^ more than this, to believe the
Scripture to be the word(...) God, to use our best endeavors to find the true
sens^ of it, and to live to our utmost according to it.

This I am sure in reason we ought to believe; a wiser choice than if I should
guide my self by the Roman Churches Authority, and Infallibility; when really
they have nothing of certainty, but their uncertainty; witnes^ Pope against
Pope, Councils against Councils, some of their Fathers against others; and
rather then fail, some against themselves* new Traditions enrolled, and old
ones Cashiered; in a word, one Church against another, and (if that be not
enough) the Church of one Age, against the Church of another: whereas the
Scripture being true and ^nalterable, and containing all things necessary to
our Salvation; I am secure, that by believing nothing else, I shall ^elieve no
falsehood in matter of Faith; and if I mistake the ^rue sense of Scripture, and
so fall into error; yet I am secured from any dangerous error, because whilst I
am truly endea^ouring to find the true ground of Scripture, I cannot but ^old
my error without obstinacy, and be ready to forsake ^t, when more probable and
true sense shall appear unto me: and then being assured, that all necessary
truths are plainly ^et down in Scripture, I am certain by believing the
Scripture, ^o believe all necessary truth: and he that does so, if his life be
^nswerable to his Faith, how is it possible he should fail of Salvation?

And tho the Roman Church pretend to be a perfect guide of Faith, and teacher
of all Divine Truths; yet sure that ^itle might much better, and more justly be
given to the ^cirptures, as their Teacher and Master.

The Roman Church brags how ancient their Church is; but doubtless they cannot
deny but the Scripture is more ancient, ^f they will but allow the Mother to be
older than the Child.

The Papists say their Church is a means of keeping Chri^tians at unity, so are
also the Scriptures, to those that be ^ieve them in unity of belief, in matters
necessary.

The Papists say their Church is Catholic: certainly the Scripture is more
Catholic; for all true Christians in the universal world do now, and ever did
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, so much at least, as to contain
all things necessary to salvation; whereas the Papists say, They only are the
true Church; and all other Christians (tho more than they) give them the lie
for saying so.

By following the Scriptures, I follow that whereby the Papists prove their
Churches Infallibility: For were it not for Scripture, what pretense could the
Papists have for it, or what true Notion could they receive of it? So that by
so dong, the Papists must plainly confess, That they themselves are surer of
the Truth of Scripture, than of their Churches Authority; for we must be surer
of the proof, than of the thing proved, or else it is no proof. So that
following Scripture, I follow that which must be true, if the Papists Church be
true; for their Church allows it is truth: Whereas if I follow the Roman Church,
I must follow that, which tho the Scripture be true, may be false, nay more,
must be false, if the Scripture be true, because the Scipture is against it.
Following the Papists Church, I must be a servant to my Savior, and a subject
to my King, only at the pleasure of the Pope; and renounce my Allegiance, when
the Popes will is to declare him an Heretic; nay, I must believe Virtue Vice,
and Vice Virtue, if he pleases; for he both makes and unmakes Scripture as he
thinks convenient; witness the Apocripha, which has not past for Canonical,
but of late years, in the Papist^ Church, who interpret Scripture according to
their Doctrine* but will not judge their Doctrine according to Scripture; for
none like to weigh light Money in true scales. In short, the Pope adds, and
lessen, and interprets Divine Laws as he pleases; and they must stand for Laws,
and be obeyed as such; so that in effect he rules his people by his own Laws,
and his own Laws by his own Lawyers, his Clergy, who dare not speak nor uphold
them, other than just such as the Pope would have them; and indeed Cardinal
Richelieu gave the reason why more hold the Pope above the Councils, than the
Councils above the Pope; Because the Pope gave Archbishopricks and Bishoprics,
but the Councils had none to give: And tho the Papists say, his Holiness cannot
err, yet let not the Papists forget what God says in the Scripture, if (not
only the Pope, but if) angel from Heaven shall preach any thing against the
Gospel of Christ, let him be accursed.

In following the Scripture we have God's express command, and no color of any
prohibition: but to believe the Papish Church infallible, we have no
Scripture-command at all, much less an express one.

Following the Popish Church, we must believe many things not only above
reason, but against reason, witness Transubstantiation; whereas following the
Scripture, we shall believe Many mysteries, but no impossibilities; many things
above our reason, but nothing against it. Nay, we need not believe any thing,
which reason will not convince us we ought to believe: for reason will convince
any sober Christian, that the Scripture is the Word of God; and there is no
reason can be greater than this, That God says it, therefore it must be true.

In a word, we Protestants believe that all things necessary to our salvation
are evidently contained in Scripture, and what is not there evidently
contained, cannot be necessary to be believed; and our reason is just and
clear, Because nothing can challenge our Belief, as to salvation, but what has
descended to us from our Blessed Savior Christ Jesus, by original and
universal Tradition. Now nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us,
therefore nothing but Scripture can challenge our Belief.

Now the grand difference between the Papists and us, concerning the Scripture,
is this: We hold the Scripture to be the only perfect rule whereby to judge of
controversies. The Papists say, That they acknowledge the Scuriptures to be a
perfect rule: only they deny that it excludes unwritten Tradition; which in
effect is this: they say, It Is as perfect a Rule, as a Writing can be, only
they deny it to be as perfect a Rule as a Writing may be. Either they must
revoke their acknowledgment, or retract their contradiction of it, for both
cannot possibly stand together: For if they will but stand to what they have
granted, That Scripture is as perfect a Rule of Faith as a Writing can be, they
must then grant it so complete, as it needs no addition; and so evident that it
needs no interpretation: for both these properties are requisite to a perfect
Rule. And that a writing is capable of both these properties and perfections,
is most plain: for he that denies it, must say, that something may be spoken
which cannot be written; for if such a complete evident rule of Faith may be
delivered by word of mouth, as the Papists pretend may, and is, and whatsoever
is delivered by word of mouth, may also be written; then such a complete and
evident rule of Faith, may also be written: For the Argument is most plain,
Whatsoever may be spoken may be written; a perfect rule of Faith has been
spoken, therefore a perfect rule of Faith may be written. If the Papists cannot
see this plain Conclusion, they had best desire more light to be added to the
Sun.

The Papists pretend their Church to be the infallible teacher of all Divine
Truths, and an infallible Interpreter of all obscurities in the Faith: But the
Papists will, I hope give us leave to admire, how they can pretend to Teach
them in all places, without writing them down; that is certainly beyond the
reach of their power to do, as well as our belief that it is to be done.

And for the Papists saying there must be a living authority beside the
Scripture, or else controversies cannot be ended; Protestants answer: Necessary
controversies are and may be decided; and if they be not, it is not the defect
of the rule in Scripture, but the default of men; so that if necessary
controversies be ended, it is no matter if the unnecessary be not: for doubtless
if God had required it, he would also have provided some means to effect it;
but sure it does not stand with any reason it should be the Pope, because he
cannot be a Judge, being a party: indeed in civil controversies, a Judge
without being a party may end them; but in controversies of Religion, a Judge
of necessity must be a concerned party; and I am sure the Pope to us i^ the
chief, and most concerned party, being really concerned as much as his Popedom
is worth.

Now we Protestants make the Papists this plain answer, that the means of
agreeing differences, must necessarily be, either by the appointment of God, or
men: men sure it cannot be, for then rational wise Protestants may do as well
as Papists; for let the Papists show us if they can, where God has appointed
that the Pope alone, or any confirmed by the Pope, or that Society of
Christians which adhere to him, shall be the infallible Judge of Controversies:
we desire the Papists, if they can, to let us see any of those assertions
plainly set down in Scripture, as in all reason a thing of this nature ought to
be, or at least delivered with a full consent of Fathers; nay let them so much
as show us where it is in plain terms taught by any one Father in Four hundred
years after our blessed Savior Christ: and if the Papists cannot do this, as
we believe they cannot; where I pray is their either Scripture or Reason, that
the Pope or his Councils should obtrude themselves as Judges over us
Protestants.

Next, we would desire to know from the Papists, whether they do certainly
know, or not, the sense of those Scriptures by which they are led to the
knowledge of their Church; for if they do not, how come they to know their
Church is infallible? but if they do, then sure they ought to give us leave to
have the same means and ability to know other plain places in Scripture, which
they have to know theirs: for if all Scriptures be obscure, how come they to
know the sense of those places? but if some place of it be plain, why pray may
not Protestants understand them as well as Papists?

The Papists say, That the Scriptures are in themselves true and infallible,
yet without the direction of the Church we have no certain means to know which
Translations be faithful and Canonical, or what is the true meaning of
Scriptures: and this is the common Argument and general Belief of all Papists.
To which the Protestants answer, That yet all these things must first be known,
before we can know the directions of their Church to be infallible: for the
Papists cannot pretend any other proof of it, but only some Texts of Canonical
Scripture, truly interpreted; therefore either they must be mistaken in
thinking there is no other means to know these things, but their Churches
infallible direction; or else we must be excluded from all means of knowing her
directions to be infallible: for the proof must be surer than the thing to be
proved, or it is no proof. And upon better consideration, I am confident the
Papists dare not deny, but that it is most certain, Faith has been given by
other means than the Church: for sure they will not say, that Adam received
Faith by the Church, nor Abraham, nor Job, who received Faith by Revelation;
and also the Holy Apostles, who received Faith by the Miracles and Preaching of
our Blessed Savior: So that you see, and they cannot deny, but their general
Doctrine is contradictory. And to make it yet plainer, I desire to know of the
Papists, if they should meet with a man that believed neither Scripture,
Church, nor God, but declares he is both ready and willing to believe them all,
if the Papist can show him sufficient grounds to build his Faith upon; will the
Papist tell such a man, there are no certain grounds how he may be converted to
their Church, or there are? if the Papists say there are none, they make
Religion an uncertain thing* but if they say there are, then they must
necessarily either argue woman-like, that their Church is infallible, because
it is infallible; or else show there are other certain grounds besides saying
the Church is infallible, to prove its Infallibility.

The Papists demand of the Protestants, If they believe the Apostles wrote all
the Scriptures: for if they did not, how come we to call and believe them
Apostolical, and not the Writings of those that writ them? To which we answer;
Though all the Scriptures were not written by the Apostles themselves, yet they
were all confirmed by them; and tho a Clerk writes a Statute, and the King,
Lords and Commons confirm it in Parliament; I believe they would esteem it very
improper to call it the Statute of such a Clerk, tho writ by him, but an Act of
Parliament, because it was confirmed by all their censents, and becomes their
Act, not the Clerks.

The Papists desire us to tell them in what Language the Scriptures remained
incorrupted; and we desire them to satisfy us whether it be necessary to know
it, or not necessary: if it be not, I hope we may do well without it; but if it
be necessary, we desire first that they will please to tell us what became of
their Church for One thousand five hundred Years together, all which time they
must confess, they had no certainty of Scripture; till the time that Pope
Clement the 8th. set forth their approved Edition of the vulgar Translation;
and none sure can have the confidence to deny, but that there was great variety
of Copies current in diverse parts of their Church, and read so; which Copies
might be false in some things, but more than one sort of them could not
possibly be true in all things. And Pope Sixtus Quintus his Bible differed from
Pope Clement his Bible, in a multitude of places; which makes us desire to be
satisfied of the Papists, whether before Pope Sixtus Quintus his time, their
Church had any defined Canon of Scriptures or not: for if they had not, then
it is most evident that their Church was a most excellent keeper of Scripture,
for Fifteen hundred years together, that had not all that time defined what was
Scripture, and what was not; but if the Papists say they had, then we demand,
Was that set forth by Pope Sixtus Quintus, or was it set forth by Pope Clement?
or if by a third different from them both, why do they not name him? if it were
that set forth by Pope Sixtus, then it is now condemned by Pope Clement; if that
of Clement, 'twas condemned by that of Sixtus: So that error must necessarily
be betwixt them, let them choose which side they please.

And for the Book of Maccabees, I hope they will allow it defined Canonical
before St. Gregorie's time, though he would not allow it Canonical, but only
for the Edification of the Church.

We further desire to be satisfied of the Papists, if the Books of
Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom, and the Epistle to St. James, were by the holy
Apostles approved Canonical, or not: if they were approved by the Apostles
Canonical, sure the Papists cannot deny, but they had a sufficient difinition
and authority, not to question them, and therefore erred in doing so. And if
they were not approved Canonical by the Apostles, with what impudence dare the
Roman Church now approve them as Canonical, and yet pretend that all their
Doctrine is Apostolical? And if they say these Books were not questioned, they
should do well to tell which Books they mean, which were not always known to be
Canonical, but have afterward been receiveed by the Roman Church to be such:
so that this Argument reaches those, as well as these.

And further we are to consider, that there is not the same reasons for the
Churches absolute Infallibility, as for the Apostles and Scriptures: for if the
Church falls into an error, it may be reformed by comparing it with the Rules
of the Apostles Doctrine in Scripture; but if the Apostles have erred in
delivering the Doctrine of Christianity in Scripture; then the Roman Church
cannot be infallible: For Apostles, Prophets, and Canonical Writers, and the
foundation of the Church, as St. Paul says it is built upon the foundation of
Apostles and Prophets.

And now to conclude this part of my discourse in very few words, let the
Papists answer, if they can, but these five words. All Scripture is Divinely
inspired. Let them show us so much for the Roman Church, and show us if they
can, where it is written in Scripture, that all the decrees of the Popish Church
are Divinely inspired, and all our Controversies will be at an end: but I
believe they can never do that without another Transubstantiation-Miracle of
words.

The Papists desire us to show them an exact Catalogue of our fundamentals; to
which we answer, That God may be sufficiently known to one, and not
sufficiently declared to another, and consequently, that may be fundamental and
necessary to one, which is not to another; which variety of circumstances
renders it impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of Fundamentals: for God
requires more of them to whom he gives more, and less of those to whom he gives
less; more of a commander of a Kingdom, than a poor simple Turnspit. It Is a
plain revelation of God to us Protestants, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist
should be administered in both kinds, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and that the public Hymns
and Prayers of the Church should be in such a Language as is most for
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 15, 16. yet the Church of Rome, not seeing this, by
reason of the vail, would be very angry if we told them 'twould prejudice their
supposed Infallibility.

We read in St. Matthew, that the Gospel was to be Preached to all Nations; and
this was a truth revealed before our Saviors Ascension: yet if the Church had
been asked, before the conversion of Cornelius, they would have certainly told
you, it had not been necessary to teach all Nations; for it is most apparent out
of Acts 11. they all believed so, until St. Peter was better informed by a
vision from Heaven, and the conversion of Cornelius; and then they turned quite
of a differing belief, and esteemed it necessary to teach all Nations; and yet
were still a Church. The Papists are pleased to say, the Protestants differ in
Fundamentals; which indeed appears to us very irrational: For if they say, We
Protestants differ in Fundamentals, how then can they say, We are members of
the same Church, one with another, more than they are with ours, or ours with
theirs? and why do they object our difference more with one another, than with
themselves? and if we do not differ in Fundamentals, why do they upbraid us
with Fundamental differences amongst our selves? We believe the Catholic
Church cannot perish, yet we believe she may and did err, as I proved just
before: but thus much we Protestants declare in general, That we esteem it
sufficient for any man's salvation, to believe God's Word, the Scripture, and
that it contains all things necessary to our salvation; and that we do our
utmost endeavors to find, believe, and follow the true sense of it; and being
we are sure that all that is any way necessary is there, believing all that is
there, we are sure we believe all that is necessary.

And therefore it is but reasonable to say, that any private person, who truly
believes the Scriptures, and heartily endeavors to know the Will of God, and
to do it, is as secure, nay securer from the danger of erring in Fundamentals,
than the Roman Church: for it is impossible any man so qualified should fall
into an error that can prove damnable to him; for God requires no more of any
man to his salvation, but only his true and best endeavors to be saved. And
for the Papists Sacrament of Confession, which they hold is so absolute and
nenessary, and so much upbraid us for the want of it; we answer: We know no
such absolute necessity of it; but yet we hold, we must not only confess our
sins, but forsake them, or we shall not find mercy: And we Protestants farther
believe, that they that confess their sins, shall find mercy, though they only
confess them to God, and not to Man: And more, that they who confess them both
to God and Man, and do not in time forsake them, shall not find mercy.

And so for the Papists Sacrament of Repentance for Remission of sins; tho we
Protestants know no such, yet we allow and observe the same Duty, but public
before the Church; which was the constant practice of the primitive Church; and
Rhenanus himself, though so great a Champion for the Papists, writes, That the
confession then used, was before the Church; and that Auricular confession was
not then in the World.

The Papists will tell you that our Bishops have not the true power of
Ordination: but that has been so clearly answered, and so truly proved at large
by so many already, as I shall not need here so much as to name it: only let me
in a word remember the Papists, that they cannot well deny, but that the
Donatists themselves, whom the Papists esteemed as bad as us, as being
Heretics and Schismatics; yet St. Austin, and Optatus Bishop of Rome, did
both acknowledge that they had the same Baptism, Creed, and Sacrament; and that
these Donatist Fathers, tho Schismatics and Heretics, gave true Ordination,
or else some of these were not then esteemed Sacraments; therefore let them
take which they please, there must be error of one side.

The Papists pretend they have an unanswerable Objection against Protestants,
which is, That we have discords in matters of Faith, without any means of
agreement: To which we answer, That the Scripture does not let us want solid
means of agreement in matters nessary to salvation; and for our agreement in
all controversies of Religion, either they must say we have means to agree
about them, or we have not: if they say we have, why did they before deny it?
if they say we have no means, why are they so unjust to find fault with us for
not agreeing, when they themselves say we have no means to agree?

But for a Plaster to this Saor, they are so extraordinary civil, as to tell
us, we may come to their Church; and they agree in matters of faith: But the
plain truth of it is, that they define all matters of faith to be those wherein
they agree; so that to say the Roman Church does agree in matters of faith, is
but to say, they do agree in those things they do agree in: and sure they
cannot deny, but we Protestants do the same.

But we must desire the Papists to give us leave to tell them, that they most
grossly mistake, if they say, they agree in matters of Faith: as for proof; some
of them hold it against Faith, to take the Oath of Allegiance, others it is
against Faith to refuse that Oath.

Some hold it of Faith, that the Pope is Head of the Church by Divine Law;
others the contrary: some hold it of Faith that the blessed Virgin was free
from actual sin, others the contrary; some that the Popes power over Princes in
Temporalities is de fide, others the contrary: some that it is universal
Tradition that the Virgin Mary was conceived in actual sin, others the
contrary. And how the Jesuits and Franciscans, and other Orders differ to this
day, I am sure needs no memorandum; and the best Jest of all is, the Papists
have not so much as yet agreed in their very pretended means of agreement, and
yet have the confidency to pretended an Unity more than the Protestants; for
some of them say, The Pope with a Council may determine all Controversies,
others deny it: Some hold, That a general Council, without a Pope, may do so;
others deny this: Others say, Both in conjunction are infallible Determiners,
others deny this: And some among the Papists hold, The acceptance of the
Decrees of Councils by the Universal Church, is the only way to decide
Controversies; which others deny, by denying their Church to be infallible; and
yet every part pretends to be part of the Church.

In a word, can the Papish deny, but that there has been Popes against Popes,
Councils against Councils; Nay, Councils confirmed by Popes, against Popes
confirmed by Councils: And lastly, the Church of some Ages, against the Church
of other Ages? And since every part of the Body is so out of order, methinks
they should not brag of so perfect a health as they do.

The Papists say (and do but say it) that their Doctrine is held Catholic; and
therefore they esteem it an insolent madness of us Protestants, to dispute
against the practice of the whole Church. First, That their Doctrine is
Catholic; we answer, That the greatest number of Christians in the world deny
it; so that they cannot truly say, we dispute against the practice of the whole
Church. And farther we say, Supposing we should in Complement to them grant,
that their Church is Catholic and Universal; yet we say, That is no sufficient
proof it came Originally from the Apostles; witness the Doctrine of the
Millenaries, and the necessity of the Eucharist for Infants; which was
generally taught by the Universal Church, and believed as an Apostolical
Tradition, but yet contradicted by the Universal Church afterward: This, I am
sure, the Papists dare not deny; so that we unavoidably cast the Papists upon
this Rock, That they must either conclude the Apostles were Fountains of
contradictory Doctrines, or that the Universal Doctrine of the present Church
is no sufficient proof that it came originally from the Apostles, because the
Church Universal of one time, and the Church Universal of another time did
differ.

Next, for their saying, it is insolent madness to dispute against the practice
of the whole Church; First, we are sure, we can bring more Christian witnesses
that deny they are the whole Church, than they can bring to prove it: but
supposing we were as mad as they say we are, and would have us to be, to
dispute against the whole practice of the Church; yet I hope we may desire to
know of the Papists, if they can deny but that 'twas the practice of the whole
Church in St. Austin's time, and esteemed then an Apostolical Tradition even by
St. Austin himself, that the Eucharist should be administered to Infants? And
then let them tell us, Whether it be insolent madness to dispute against the
practice of the whole Church, or is it not? If it be not, why do they accuse us
for it? But if it be insolent madness, how mad and insolent is the Papists
Church, not only to dispute against this practice of the Universal Church, of
administering the Eucharist to Infants, but utterly abolishing the practice of
it?

So that the very worst the Papists can say of us, allowing what they say to be
true, is, that we but do, what they themselves own already to have done.

And tho the Papists are pleased to say that the Holy Scriptures, and ancient
Fathers, assign separation from the visible Church as a mark of Heresy, yet
they cannot show one plain Text of Scripture to confirm it.

And for the Papists bragging of the Antiquity and Universality of their
Churches Doctrine, (tho we allow it very ancient, bating the primitive times)
we answer first as to its Antiquity, we desire to see what Antiquity they can
show for their giving the Communion but in one kind, when they know that the
administering it in both kinds, was the practice of the Church for a Thousand
years after Christ; what Antiquity for the lawfulness and expediency of the
Latin Service; for the present use of Indulgences; for the Popes power in
Temporalities over Princes; for the Picturing the Trinity; for the lawfulness
of worshipping Pictures and Images; for their Beads; for their whole worship of
the blessed Virgin; for their Oblations, in the notion of Sacrifices to her and
other Saints; for their saying Pater Nosters and Creeds to the Honor of them,
and Ave Mary's to the Virgin Mary; for the infallibility of the Bishop or
Church of Rome; for their Doctrine of the blessed Virgins Immunity from actual
sin; for the necessity of Auricular confession; for the necessity of the
Priests intention to obtain benefit by any of their Sacraments; and lastly, for
their licentious Doctrine, in holding, that tho a man lives and dies without
the practice of any Christian Virtue, and with the Habits of many damnable sins
unmortified; yet if at the last moment of his life he has any sorrow for his
sins, and join confession to it, he shall certainly be saved: This is a
Doctrine may keep many Souls out of Heaven, but I doubt will scarce carry any
one there. So that the Papists Doctrine being ancient, is nothing, as long as
it is evident that they hold many dangerous errors: As for instance, the
Millenaries, and the Communicating Infants was more ancient than their
Doctrine; and it is plain that Antiquity, unless it be absolute and primative,
is not a certain sign of true Doctrine, and the very Apostles themselves,
assure us, that in their days the mystery of Iniquity was working.

The Papists demand how comes it to pass that their Doctrine is so Universal,
(forgetting that weeds spread faster than good herbs:) And we ask them how the
errors of the Millenaries, and the Communicating Infants became so universal?
let them tell us this, and we will tell them that: for what is done in some,
may be done in others.

The Papists ask us where our Chapter was before Luther; and tell us, because 'twas
no Chapter before him, therefore it can be no true Church at all. To which we
answer, That this cause is no cause: for tho Luther had no being before Luther,
yet none can deny, but that he was when he was, tho he could not be before he
was. So there may be a true Church after Luther, tho there was none for some
Ages before him: as since Columbus his time there have been Christians in
America, tho there were none for many Ages before. For it does not follow, that
nothing but a Church can possibly get a Church, nor that the present being of a
true Church depends necessarily upon the perpetuity of a Church in all Ages.
For though I cannot deny the Churches perpetuity, yet that is not here necessary
to rur difference: but that a false Church (by Gods providence overruling it)
may preserve a means of confuting their own Heresies, and so reduce men to
Truth, and raise a true Church, (I mean the integrity of the Word of God with
Men.) Thus the Jews preserve means to make men Christians, and Papists preserve
means to make men Protestants, and the Protestants false Church (as the Romans
call it) preserves men Papists. Nor does it appear that the perpetuity of the
Church is the truth of the Papists Church: for they speak as if they were the
only Christians in the World before Luther; when the whole World knows, that
this is but talk, and that there were other Christians besides the Papists that
might have perpetuated the Church, tho there had not been then one Papist in
being. For sure there was a Catholic Church before the Roman one.

Next, the Papists say, To hold that the Visible Church is not perpetual, is a
Heresy; so that Luther's Reformation being but particular, and not universal,
nor but of late date; it can have nothing to do with the visible and perpetual
Church. Which the Protestants answer thus. To say the visible Church is not
perpetual, is properly a Heresy; but the Papists cannot deny, but that the
Apostles who preached the Gospel in the beginning, did believe the Church
universal, tho their preaching at the beginning was not so. So Luther also
might well believe the Universal Church, though his Reformation was but
particular; the Church in the Apostles time being universal de jure of right,
but not de facto in fact.

Nor did Luther and his followers (as the Papists are pleased to mis-call many
Protestants) forsake the whole Church, but the corruptions of it, in renouncing
some of their corrupt practices; and this the Protestants say they did without
Schism, because they had cause to do it; and no man can have cause to be a
Schismatic, because he is only one who leaves the Church without a cause: for
it is not only separation, but a causeless separation from the Church, that is
Schismatical: and I think 'twill not be amiss, before I go any farther, to
distinguish the difference between Heresy and Schism. Heresy is an obstinate
defense of any error against any necessary Article of the Christian Faith.
Schism is a causeless separation of one part of the Church from another. Now we
Protestants say still, That we never forsook the whole Church, or the external
Communion of it, but only that part of it which is corrupted, and is to be
feared will still continue so, viz. The Papists Church; and forsook not, but
only reformed another part, which part they themselves were. And sure the
Papists will not say, the Protestants forsook themselves, nor their own
Communion: and therefore the Papists Argument must be very weak, in urging that
the Protestants joined themselves to no other part of the Church, therefore
they must separate from the whole Church; which the Protestants say is a false
conclusion, in as much as they themselves were part of it, and still continue
so; and therefore the Protestants could no more separate from the whole, than
from themselves.

So that by the rule of Reason, if Protestants be Schismatics, because they
differ from one part of the visible Church; by the same reason the Protestants
may say that the Roman Church is in a manner made up of Schismatics: for the
Jesuits are Schismatics from the Dominicans, and the Dominicans from the
Jesuits, and the Jesuits from the Canonists; the Franciscans from the
Dominicans, and the Dominicans from the Franciscans: for all these (as the
world knows) differ in point of Doctrine, and betwixt them there is an
irreconcilable contradiction; and therefore one part must be in error. And if
the Papists will but stand to justify what they declare as truth, That every
error against a revealed Truth is a Heresy; they holding for certain as a
revealed Truth, the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, then consequently
the Dominicans that hold and declare it an error in Doctrine, must necessarily
hold a Heresy. Now it may be a fault to be in error, because it many times
proceeds from a fault; but sure Protestants forsaking error, it cannot be a
sin, unless to be in error, be a Virtue: So hardly do Papists deal with us
Protestants, as they will either damn us in making us follow their false
opinions, or else brand us as Schismatics for leaving them.

And yet the rational sort of Papists can hardly deny, but the Protestant
Religion must be a safer Religion than theirs, in worshipping Pictures, in
Invocating Saints and Angels; in denying the Laymen the Communion in both
kinds, as was commanded by our blessed Savior; in celebrating their
Church Service in an unknown Tongue, which was condemned by St. Paul; in
adoring the Sacrament: and in all these a rational Papist cannot deny, but he
is on the more dangerous side, as to the committing of sin; and the Protestant
in the more secure way, as to the avoiding it.

For in all these things, if Protestants say true, the Papists do that which is
impious; but on the other side, if the Papists were in the right, yet the
Protestants might be secure enough too: for their fault would be only this,
that they should only not do some things which the Papists themselves confess
is not altogether necessary to be done.

And truly the Protestants are so Charitably civil, as only to say of Papists,
as St. Austin did of the Donatists, That Catholics approved the Doctrine of
the Donatists, but abhorred their Heresy of Rebaptization. So Protestants
approve the Fundamental and necessary Truths which the Papists retain, by which
many good Souls among them may be saved; but abhor the many superstitions they
use in their Religion. And supposing these Errors of the Popish Church were in
themselves not damnable, to them that believe as they profess; yet for us
Protestants to profess what we do not believe, and esteem those as Divine
Truths, which we believe not to be either Divine or true; would be doubtless
damnable as to us: for it is certain, Two men may do the same thing, and it may
be sinful to one, and not to the other: as suppose a married Woman gives
herself out to be a Widow, and one knowing her Husband to be alive, marries
her, doubtless his enjoyment of her was adulterous: but a second man comes, and
after seeing her pretended Husband buried, marries her, and dies without the
least information of her first Husbands being then alive; his ignorance sure
protected him from sin, and the second Husbands knowledge of the sin he acted,
condemned him of Adultery; and tho his fault might be palliated with some
excuses, yet it can never be defended by any just Apoligy. And so tho we read
in Scripture, that it was St. Paul's Judgment, that meat offered to Idols might
lawfully be eaten; yet he says; if any should eat it with a doubtful
Conscience, he should sin, and be condemned for so doing.

And supposing we Protestants ought not to have forsook the Papists Church, for
sin, and errors, if she had not enjoined and imposed them on us; yet since she
does maintain them with such obstinacy, and imposes them with such tyranny, we
ought certainly to say with St. Peter, and St. John, It Is better to forsake men
than God; and leave the Popish Church Communion, rather than commit or profess
known errors as Divine Truths; for as the Prophet Ezekiel tells us, that to say
The Lord has said so, when the Lord has not said so, is a high presumption,
and great sin, be the matter never so small; and therefore when St. Paul spoke
concerning Virgins abstaining from marriage, he said, He had no commandment of
the Lord, but I declare my own judgment of it. Now if St. Paul had given this
as God's command, surely we might have justly contradicted him, and made a
distinction between Divine Revelation, and Humane Judgment.

So that for a Protestant to abide in the Communion of the Roman Church, is so
far from securing him from error, as that if I or any Protestant should
continue in it, I am confident I could not be saved by it: and the reason is,
because the Papists will not admit of my Communion, without professing the
entire Popish Doctrine to be true: and profess this I cannot, but I must
perpetually exulcerate my Conscience: and tho the errors of the Roman Church
were not in themselves damnable, yet for me to resist known Truths, and to
continue in the Profession of known errors and falsehoods, is certainly a
capital sin, and of great affinity with the sin which shall never be forgiven.

In short, if the errors of the Roman Church did not warrant our departure,
yet the tyrannous imposition of them would be our sufficient justification; for
they force us either to forsake the Papists Communion, or profess as
Gospel Truths what our Conscience assures us is very little akin to them: so
that the Protestants were obliged to forsake those errors of the Popish
Church, and not the Church, but the errors; and we Protestants did, and do
still continue members of the Church; having only left what appeared most plain
to us to be superstitious and impious. And we separate no more from the Popish
Church, thant she has separated from the Ancient Church: and indeed, to speak
properly, our difference is more against the Court, than Church of Rome; which
has introduced so many new ceremonies and practices in the Popish Church, as
was never heard nor practiced in the Primitive Times: as for one instance of a
Thousand, I might give you Their denying the Cup to the Laity, which was never
practiced in the Church a Thousand years after our Savior.

But because the Papists brag so much of, and depend so entirely on the
Infallibility of their Church, I shall pass by their Outworks, and search a
little into this their Grand Fort, the Infallibility of their Church: for
except they prove that, they prove nothing; but in proving that they prove all:
and if the Papists could satisfy me either by Scripture or Reason, that their
Church is infallible, I should not only be of their Church to morrow, but
repent I was not sooner: but really by all that I ever heard or read for their
making it good, I find cause only to admire their confidence, but not at all to
esteem their reasons.

The chief method they take, and degrees they use, to prove the Infallibility
of their Church, are by wholesale these, First, that St. Peter was head and
chief amongst the Apostles; and there was given to him and his Successors by
our Savior, Universal Authority over his Militent Church; That the Pope or
Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's Successor, and has his Authority of Universal
Bishop; and consequently the Roman Church being built upon this Rock is
infallible: all which I doubt not but to prove to be inconsistent with, and
contradictory both to Scripture and Reason.

As to the first point of St. Peter's being Head of the Apostles, which the
Papists all style him, and say he was called from thence Cephas, which is
derived from the Greek word Head: it is a most gross mistake; for Cephas is a
Syriack word that signifies Stone; but this is only by the by. Now we
Protestants say, tho we allow St. Peter might have primacy of Order, yet we
cannot grant he had supremacy of power over the other Apostles; for sure it
cannot stand with the least reason, that St. Peter should have authority over
all the Apostles, and yet never act the least authority over any one of them.

Nor is it reasonable to believe, that St. Peter having authority over all the
Apostles for above 25 years together, should never show the least power over
any of them all that time, nor so much as receive the lest subjection from
them: sure any one must think this as strange, and unreasonable, as if a King
of England for 25 years together should not do one act of Regality among his
Subjects, nor receive any one acknowledgment from them.

Nor sure is it less strange and unreasonable, that the Papists should so many
Ages after, know this so certainly as they pretend they do, and yet that the
Apostles themselves, after that these words were spoak in their hearing by
virtue whereof St. Peter is pretended to be made their head, should still be so
ignorant of it, as to question our Savior, which of them should be the
greatest? By which sure we may rationally conclude, they did not then know; for
if they did, their question had been needless, and superfluous, in desiring to
be taught, what they already knew.

And what yet appears more strange than all, is, that our Savior should not
have helped them out of their error, by telling them St. Peter was the man; but
rather confirmed them in the contrary, by saying, The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Authority over them, but it should not be so among them.

And again, it is as strange and unreasonable, that St. Paul should so far
forget both St. Peter, and himself, as in mentioning so often St. Peter, he
should still do it without ascribing him any title of Honor: Nor does it stand
with reason, that St. Paul speaking of the several degrees of men in the
Church, should omit giving St. Peter the highest, if it had been his due, but
place him in the same rank and equipage with the rest of the Apostles: for St.
Paul says God has appointed (not first St. Peter, then the rest of the
Apostles) but first Apostles, secondly Prophets; now certainly if Apostles were
all first, that is, all equal, how could one be in greater power than the other?

But besides all this, though we should grant against all these probabilities,
and many more, that Optatus Bishop of Rome meant that St. Peter was Head of the
Apostles; yet sure the Papists are still very far from proving, the Bishop of
Rome was to be so at all, much less by Divine right, Successor to St. Peter in
his Headship and Authority. For what incongruity is there, if we say that
Optatus might succeed St. Peter as his Heir and Successor, in that part of his
Government of that particular Church of Rome; (as sure he did even whilst St.
Peter was living) and yet that neither he, nor any man was to succeed him in
his Apostleship, nor in the Government of the Church Universal? as tho a Bishop
should leave his Son Heir to all he died possessed of; I hope you will not
conclude, therefore he must necessarily succeed him in the Bishopric he died
seized of. The Apostles were men all called, and Divinely inspired by the Holy
Ghost; which was the immediate gift of God, and therefore could not be left as
a Legary by man; for though it be in any man's power to leave his Estate, yet
it is in no man's power to leave to his Son his acquired parts at his death. It Is
further worth your observing, and special notice, that St. Peter himself and
the rest of the Apostles, by laying the Foundation of the Church, were to be
themselves the Foundation of it; and are accordingly so called in Scripture.
And therefore as in a building it is incongruous that foundations should succeed
foundations, so it may be in the Church, that Apostles should succeed Apostles,
the Church being built upon Apostles and Prophets.

Nor indeed does the grand argument of the Papists for their Pope, extend any
further in reallity then the particular See of Rome: for thus goes their main
argument: St. Peter was first Bishop of Rome, and the Apostles did not then
attribute to themselves each one his particular Chair (understand in that City
of Rome* for in other places, others had Chairs besides St. Peter) and
therefore, says the Papists, he is a Schismatic who against that one single
Chair erects another: (understand still in the same place) and this this the
Ground and the Authority the Papists say the Pope has to be Successor to St.
Peter, and to exercise Authority over the Universal Church.

But sure the Protestants urge more rationally, in arguing thus: That St. Peter
wrote Two Catholic Epistles, in which he mentions his own departure; and
writes to preserve the Christians in the Faith: but yet in neither of these Two
Epistles does he commend the Christians to the guidance and authority to his
pretended Successor the Bishop of Rome; which sure if St. Peter had intended,
he would never have forgot to have named it.

And since the Papists so reverence and adore the Popes power, let us
Protestants also admire his way and means of attaining this power: For though
the Papists say, that as soon as he is made Pope, he has his authority
immediately from Christ; yet at the very same time the Papists all know, that
he cannot be made Pope, but by authority and Election of the Cardinals; so that
I am sure by the very same reason, any man that is chosen a Magistrate in any
Town under the Pope's Territories, may claim his Authority as immediately
received from Christ, as well as the Pope. And further, that the proving his
being made Pope, does not render him infallible, I could give a hundred
instances out of the History of Popes, but that will not suit well with my
designed brevity, but let us ask the Papists, if Liberius Bishop of Rome, after
Two years Banishment, did not by the solicitation of Fortunatianus Bishop of
Aquileia, subscribe to Heresy, and consequently could not be infallible. And
though the Papists rely so much on the Authority of the Fathers, to support and
justify the Infallibility of their Church; yet upon true Examination we shall
find, they make no more for their Universal Bishop, than St. Peter's Two
Catholic Epistles do.

And for their arguing out of St. Cyprian's 55 Epistles, that sure makes rather
against, than for them; for there St. Cyprian writes to Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, but writes not so much to him, as of himself, who was Bishop of Carthage,
against whom a Faction of Schismatics had set up another Bishop. Now though
the Papists say reasonably, that it is a mark of the Universal Bishop, that
other Bishops should make their Addresses unto the Bishop of Rome; yet sure
'twere better Reasoning to conclude thus: If the Bishop of Rome had been
acknowledged Universal Bishop, and his Authority and Supremacy had been
believed and owned, sure St. Cyprian had not been satisfied with only barely
writing him his sad story, (for he did no more,) but doubtless would have made
his complaint to him, and desired and expected redress from him, as Universal
Bishop over the whole Catholic Church; but his not doing so, argued he
esteemed him Bishop only of one Church.

And further, St. Cyprian, all know, did resolutely oppose a Decree of the
Roman Bishop, and all that adhered ^o him in that one point of Rebaptizing;
which the Popish Church at that time, delivered as a necessary Tradition, and
Excommunicated the Bishops of Capadocia, Galatia, and all that were against
that Tradition, and would not so much as allow them lodging or entertainment in
Rome.

Now since the Papists affirm, that not to Rebaptize those, whom Heretics had
Baptized, to be a damnable Heresy; It Is well worth asking the Papists, when
this begun to be so? for if they say, from the beginning it was so, then they
must maintain a contradiction; for then was St. Cypria^ a Professor of damnable
Heresy; and yet the Papists estee^ him a Saint and Martyr.

And on the other side, if 'twere not so from the beginning, then did the Pope
wrongfully Excommunicate those other Churches of Cappadocia and Galatia,
without sufficien^ ground of Excommunication and separation, which by their own
Tenants is Schismatical: So let them choose which sid^ they please, the Pope was
in an error.

And tho Victor, Bishop of Rome, obtruded the Roman Tradition touching the time
of Easter upon the Asian Biships, under the pain of Excommunication and
Damnation; yet we read that Irenaeus, and all the other Western Bishops, though
they did agree with the Bishop of Rome in his Observation of Easter, yet they
did sharply reprehen^ his Excommunicating the Asian Bishops for their
disagreeing with him; which most plainly argues, that the Western Bishops
thought that not a sufficient ground of Excommunication, which the Bishop of
Rome did; and therefore it must necessarily follow, they did not esteem the
Roman Bishop infallible, nor the separation from the Church of Rome an Heresy.
And this I am sure is true and undeniable reason.

The Popish Story tells us, That Optatus Bishop of Rome upbraided the Donatists
as Schismatics, because they held no Communion with the Church of Rome, by
adding afterward that they were Schismatics, for they held no Communion with
the Seven Churches of Asia; which occasions this Question of the Papists,
Whether a separation from these seven Apostolic Churches, was a mark of
Heresy, or not? If they say it was not, how comes it that the Pope's Authority
is a stronger Argument for the Popish Church, than the Asian Authority for the
Asian Churches? And if the Papists say, a separation from those seven Asian
Churches, was a mark of Heresy, then they must confes^ their Church was for
many years Heretical, as separating many years from the Asian Churches.

And Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, and Metropolitan of Asia, despised the
Pope's Universal Supremacy and Authority, and kept contrary to the Pope,
Easter Day the Fourteenth of March.

And indeed tho the Papists do so much quote the authority of the Fathers, yet
I find they as little befriend their Churches Infallibility, as the Asian
Bishops themselves have done: for tho the Papists say St. Hierome conceived it
nenessary to conform in matters of Faith, to the Church of Rome; yet before the
Papists brag of that, let them answer us this, How came it then to pass* that
St. Hierome chose to believe the Epistle to the Hebrews Canonical upon the
authority of the Eastern Church, and to reject it from the Canon of the Roman
Churches Authority. And how comes it also that he dissented from the Roman
Church touching the Canon of the Old Testament? Let the Papists take heed of
losing their Fort, by endeavoring to maintain their outworks.

And now to conclude this point, and excuse the Papists mistake concerning
their universal Bishop, we read in Scripture of the Prophet Elias, who thought
there was none ^eft beside himself in the whole Ringdom of Israel, who had not
revolted from God; and yet God himself is pleased to assure us he was deceived.
And if a Prophet, and one of the greatest, erred in his judgment touching his
own time and Country; why may not the Papists (subject to the same passions)
err in their opinion and judgment about the Popes being Universal Bishop, when
plain reason tells them, as well as us, that there were other Bishops as much
Universal as the Pope.

I now come to examine this infallible Pope, whether he cannot make his
infallible Church more infallible than he has made himself; and free the Popish
Church from error, tho he could not the Pope from Heresy.

Now toward the disproving the pretended Infallibility of the Roman Church, I
lay this as the foundation of my Discourse; That the whole Roman Church can be
no better than a Cengregation of Men, whereof every particular, not one
excepted, and consequently the generality, is nothing but a collection of men:
and if every one be polluted, (as who dare say he is free from sin?) how can
the whole but be defiled with error? As reasonably may a man brag he is in
perfect health and strength, and yet at the same time confess he has not one
sound part about him. And truly it very much creats my wonder, but does not in
the least satisfy my reason, what the Papists can pretend by the Infallibility
of their Church: for if they will allow their Pope to be no better than St.
Peter was, their Church to b^ composed of no better men than the Holy Apostles
were;(...) shall desire no more, and I am sure they can never prov^ so much:
for they that pretend to it, declare as great a^ ignorance, as St. Peter did a
sin, in denying his Lord an^ Master: and there are many other known
circumstances* which made St. Paul prove him blameworthy to hi^ face.

And for the Apostles being in error, we have not only the examples of the
Apostles themselves, who in the time of our Saviors Passion, being
scandalized, lost their Faith in him; and I believe the Papists will not say
they could lose their faith in our blessed Savior Christ without error* and
therefore our Savior after his Resurrection upbraided them with their
Incredulity, and called Thomas incredulous for denying the Resurrection, in the
Twentieth o^ St. John.

And further, it is most apparent that the very Apostle^ themselves, even after
the sending the Holy Ghost, did through Inadvertency, or Prejudice, continue
some time in an error, contrary to a revealed Truth. And if the Papists will
not own to know this Truth, they may be fully satisfied of it in the Story of
the Acts of the Apostles, where they may plainly read, that notwithstanding our
Saviors express warrant and injunction to the Apostles, to go and preach to
all Nations; Yet notwithstanding, till St. Peter was better informed by a
Vision from Heaven, and by the Conversion of Cornelius, both St. Peter and the
rest of the Church, held it unlawful for them to go and Preach the Gospel to
any but the Jews. Now since we can prove that St. Peter did err, and that the
Church composed partly of the Holy Apostles themselves, who were blessed with,
and inspired by the Holy Ghost, could mistake, and that there is no man free
from sin; and yet that the Body of men that make up the Popish Church, should
be infallible, is, I confess, beside my faith to believe, or reason to
comprehend.

For sure if the Roman Church had been esteemed by the Apostles, infallible,
what needed the Apostles any other ^reed, than this short Creed; I believe the
Roman Church ^fallible? and that would have been more effectual to ^eep the
Believers of it from Heresy, and in the true Faith, ^an this Apostolical Creed
we now have.

And sure the Papists cannot but believe with us, that ^ose Holy Men that wrote
the New Testament, were not ^nly Good Men, but also Men that were desirous to
direct ^s in the plainest and surest way to Heaven. And the Pa^ists cannot also
but believe with us, that they were likewise ^en very sufficiently instructed
by the Spirit of God, in all ^e necessary points of the Christian Faith:
Therefore cer^inly it is most rational to believe, they could not be ig^orant of
this unum necessarium, that all Faith is no Faith, ^cept we believe the Church
of Rome was designed by God (...) be the Guide of Faith, as the Church of Rome
believes, ^d would have us believe so too.

We also further believe, and that with great reason too, ^at the Writers of
the New Testament were Wise Men, espe^ally being they were assisted by the
Spirit of Wisdom; and ^ch that must know, that an uncertain Guide was as bad as
^ne at all; and yet after all this, is it possible for a Philoso^ical or
Contemplative man, nay, for any man that has rea^n or common sense, after all
these suppositions, to believe ^at none among these holy Writers of the New
Testament ^ould remember (ad rei memoriam) to set down plainly ^is most
necessary Doctrine, not so much as once, That ^e were to believe the Roman
Church infallible?

Again, that none of the Evangelists should so much as ^ce name this Popish
necessary point of Faith, if they had ^teem'd it necessary for us to believe
it, when St. Paul says, ^e kept not back any thing that was profitable for us;
and sure ^e Papists cannot deny, but was is necessary to salvation, ^ust be
very profitable: And St. Luke also plainly tells ^hristians, his intent was to
write all things necessary. And ^re it stands also with reason, that when St.
Paul wrote to ^e Romans, he would have congratulated this their ex^aordinary
privilege, if he had believed it belonged to ^em.

And though the Romans bring it as a great Argument ^or them, that St. Paul
tells them, Their Faith is spoken all the world over; Yet pray let them
moderate those thought^ with this consideration, that St. Paul said the very
same thing to the Thessalonians: And let them further consider this, that if
the Roman Faith had been the Rule o^ Faith for all the World for ever, as the
Papists hold; sur^ St. Paul would have forborne to put the Romans in fear o^ a
possibility, (for though Raillery is much in fashion now(...) sure 'twas not
then) that they also, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles, if they did not
look to their standing might fall into Infidelity, as the Jews had done, 1
Ephesians 11.

And methinks it also stands with great reason, that the Apostles writing so
often of Heretics, and Antichrist^ should have given the Christian World this
(as Papists pretend) only sure Preservative from them, To be guided b^ the
infallible Church of Rome; and not to separate from it* upon the pain of
damnation.

Methinks also St. Peter, St. James, and St. Jude, in their Catholic Epistles,
would not have forgot giving Christian^ this Catholic Direction of following
the Roman Church; and St. John instead of saying, He that believes that
Jesus(...) the Christ, is born of God, might have said, He that adheres to the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, and lives according to it, is a good Christian,
and by this mark you shall know him. In a word, can there be any thing more
irrational, than to believe, that none of these holy Men, who were so desirous
of men's salvation, should so much as once remember to write, that we were to
obey the Roman Church, but leave it to be collected from uncertain Principles,
and by more uncertain Consequences.

So that upon the whole, I cannot without much wonder look on the Pope's
Confidence, and the Papists Credulity, in esteeming the Pope or his Councils to
be an infallible Guide: sure either they never read what they ought to believe,
or else they will not believe what they read, though it be never so known a
Truth, and worthy of belief: for if they did, they could never believe the
Infallibility of the Popish Church, For indeed, if they would read the Popish
Story, or, as I may well call it, the Civil Wars of the Popes, you shall find,
as I said before, Popes against Popes, Councils against Councils; some Fathers
against others, nay, some against themselves; new Traditions brought in, and
old ones turned out; one Church against another; nay, the Church of one Age
against the Church of another. In a word, the Papists say their Church is
infallible; and all other Christians besides themselves, tho more in number
than they, absolutely deny it; and yet we must for all that believe the Popish
Church infallible.

And to speak the plain Truth, and in a word to unravel the real cause of the
Grandeur of the Church of Rome above all other Churches, is only this: Rome was
the Imperial Town of the Empire, and its greatness was given by Men, and not
God; and when afterward Constantinople was the Imperial City, they Decreed
that the Church of Constantinople should have equal Privileges and Dignities
with that of Rome.

And now to end this Discourse, I desire you will please to consider this
Conclusion, which is, that after all that the Papists have said, be it never so
much and mighty, to show the Infallibility of their Church; I am verily
persuaded they cannot show more, if so much, out of the Scriptures, for their
Church, as the smallest Society of Christians met together in prayer, can for
themselves, that when two or three are met together in my name, I will be
amongst them, says the Lord: And now I have just done this small Discourse, and
the Sun is just upon finishing this days visit; I can very readily follow that
holy advice of not letting it go down in my anger: (which I thank God I have to
none living) and therefore am in so much Charity with the Papists, as to wish
that neither they, nor Protestants, might waist their precious time in mere
speculative controversies about words and ceremonies, which of themselves will
never carry us to Heaven; but that we may spend our time like wise Christians
in the ways and fear of God, which is the only beginning of wisdom; and not
consume it in studying and maintaining of Disputes and Factions; but if we must
still differ, let Protestants and Papists differ in Opinions but as Aristotle
and Cicero did, who, tho they were of differing Judgments touching the natures
of Souls, yet both of them agreed in the main, that all men had Souls, and
Souls of the same nature.

And as Physicians, though they dispute, whether the Brain or the Heart be the
principal part of a man, yet that all Men have Brains, and Heart, they
sufficiently agree in: So though Protestants esteem one part of the
Church-Doctrine, and Papists set a higher value on another part, yet the Soul
of the Church may be in both of them: and though the Papists account that a
necessary truth, which the Protestants account neither necessary, nor perhaps
ture; yet in truth truly necessary they both agree, viz. The Apostles Creed,
and that Faith, Hope, and Charity, are necessary to salvation. And lastly,
though Papists hold they may be justified by their Works, and Protestants hold
none can be justified barely by them, (in regard of the Imperfections of their
Works) yet on the other side, we so much agree with the Papists, as to esteem
none can be justified without them: for without Repentance, and Charity, none
can be good; they being both like Health to our Bodies, the want of which is
sufficient to disturb all other pleasures. Therefore when we read St. Paul's
Treatise of Justification by Faith without the works of the Law; let us at the
same time read what he writes to the Corinthians concerning the absolute
necessity of that Excellent Virtue of Charity, and they will reconcile one
another. And I wish, that we were all so reconciled in the unity of the Spirit,
and in the bond of peace. And tha^ you, Madam, may be the sooner reconciled to
me, for thi^ tediousness; I shall now make a Conclusion, which afte^ such an
overgrown Letter, must needs be the best Complement that can be made by,

Madam, Yours, etc.

FINIS.
Errata: Page 9. line 27. for past-time, read patience.

The Trial of Philip Standsfield, Son to Sir James Stansfield, of New-Milns,
for the Murder of his Father. And other Crimes Libelled againg him, Feb. 7.
1688. For which he had Judgment, etc. price 1 s.

An Historical Relation of several Great and Learned Romanists who did Embrace
the Protestant Religion, with their Reasons for their Change, delivered in
their own words. 6 d.

A Seasonable Collection of plain Text of Scripture, for the Use of English
Protestants. price 2 d.

ROME'S RARITIES; OR THE Pope's Cabinet UNLOCKED, And Exposed to View.

BEING A true and Faithful Account of the Blasphemy, Treason, Massacres,
Murders, Lechery, Whoredom, Buggery, Sodomy, Debauchery, Pious Frauds, etc. of
the Romish Church, from the Pope himself to the Priest, or inferior Clergy.

TO THE Triple-Crown'd Prelate OF ROME.
HOLY SIR,
I Do here, with all imaginable Deference and Humility, present you (I will not
be so unmannerly as to say, with a Pig of your own Sow, but) with a Rich
Cabinet, and good reason too, because your own: for it is unjust that you should
be the Proprietor, and another the Usufructuary. A Cabinet, wherein are
displayed all the commendable Qualifications, and inimitable Perfections of
some of your Famous Predecessors, that have had the Honor to sit in St.
Peter's Chair; and in some particulars, a weak Character or Adumbration of your
Holiness's Endowments, which no Pen can fully delineate. Nor can you any way
complain of foul play herein, since this Tract contains no Quotations but what
are collected from the most Authentic and rigid Romanists that ever espoused
the Catholic Cause and Persuasion.

The Candid Reader, by a serious perusal of this Treatise, will, I presume, not
only receive satisfaction thereby, but also make a Discovery of those rare
Virtues which embellish the minds of St. Peter's Successors, more to their
renown and Glory, than the resplendent Diamonds and Rubies that shine in, and
adorn the Triple Diadem; and therefore, I hope, that your Sanctity will leave
the Author out when you presume to Curse all Heretics (as you miscall them)
once a Year in the Bulla Coenae; or otherwise you shall hear of him again in a
more Sarcastic Style and Satyrick Humor, this being only at present
Jocoserious. If any thing herein clinch too close, and offend; let those of
your own Party beg your pardon, (whose Duty it is) that afforded the Materials,
which, compiled together and collected, make up this Epitome of your Memorable
Acts and Monumental Transactions. But withal, I must needs confess, that no
Bigoted Protestant, who moves in the highest Sphere of Ecclesiastical Dignity,
dares presume or pretend to arrive to the height of those Excellencies herein
mentioned, which are only peculiar to the Roman Miter. If the subordinate
Clergy storm at the Contents of this Book, let them thank themselves for
exposing to the Public their Cheats and Chicaneries so apparently, that an
inconsiderable Lay-Protestant could not possibly avoid taking notice of, he
being only the Amanuensis of their own Authors, and has taken the pains to
transscribe out of them such Memorials as he thought convenient to reduce to
the Method observed in this small System or Collection. I bequeath this Aurea
Legenda to your Holiness first, and then to the rest of the Inferior Clergy;
it being a Brat of their own Brain, a Babe of their own Procreation; and so bid
you all farewell, who subscribe my self

Philanax Misopapas.

THE Pope's Cabinet UNLOCKED.
APapa Principium. Why not this as good an Invocation nowadays, as a Jove
Principium, in times of Yore? for my part, I know no reason to the contrary;
since the former is styled God by some, and Vice-God by most Romanists; the
latter known by all to be no God at all, or at best, a false one. Therefore to
begin with Holiness must needs be commendable, nay, with His Holiness, (...),
that cannot prove successless. Avaunt then, fond Protestant, and do not hit him
so often in the teeth with the flurting Nickname of the Man of Sin. No, no,
he is the Man of Sanctity; there is the Mistake; nor with that frequent
unmannerly Title of the Whore of Babylon; for that is both incoherent with
Sense, and inconsistent with the Sex; but be not too bold with that Argument,
whatever you do, good Papist, for fear some blunt Protestant round you in the
Ear (and that he is like enuf to do) with the Story of Pope Joan, and tell you
to your face, when you say you are abused herein, that it is with a matter of
truth, and show you good reason for it too; i^ there be either Truth or reason
in a great many of your own Popish Writers, who allow the History to be
authentic: bu^ of that more anon. An ordinary Physician, by the Indisposition
of the Head, can soon judge of the Temper of the Body; and no doubt when the
Reader understands how this Head of the Church stands affected, he will soon
guess at the foulness of the Stomach, and give an account of the weak and crazy
Constitution of the whole Body Ecclesiastic. Do but observe the numerous and
haughty Titles that he so magisterially assumes to himself, as the Universal,
the Infallible Bishop of Rome; the Head of the Catholic Church, the Supreme
Pastor, the Holy one, the Pope, Christ's Vicegerent, God's Vicar, a Vice-god,
nay, a God upon Earth, and God knows how many more; and then tell me truly,
whether in his Pride and number of Names he may not out-vye both Turk and
Persian (and at length prove as little a Christian as either of them) who upon
the bare Report of this usurped Authority, have bestowed on him two glorious
Denominations, the one calling him Rumbeg, that is, Prince or Lord of Rome, the
other Rumschah, King of Rome.

First then to begin with the Blasphemies used by several Popes themselves,
which are so great, that if Profaneness it self, could it assume an humane
Shape, would not be guilty of; and Lucian, that Arch-Apostate, were he now
alive, would, if compared to them, be accounted moderate.

Leo the Tenth, Son to the Duke of Florence, was a chuck-farthing-Boy Cardinal,
who was thought to deserve the Red Hat at the Age of Thirteen, and(...) Pope at
Twenty, the unerring Bishop o^ Christendom in hanging Sleeves, who before he
could write Man, or of Age, wa^ Father of all the Aged; and truly h^ verified
the old Proverb, Soon ripe, soo^ rotten; for what a more putrid an^ blasphemous
Expression could be belch'^ forth by the Devil himself, than that o^ his, who
when Cardinal Bembo quote^ a place out of the New Testament, replied, Quantum
nobis profuit haec Fabul^ de Christo, What Wealth have we gain'^ by this Fable
of Christ? Was not thi^ becoming Christ's Vicegerent? And afte^ a Dispute de
Anima, 'twas as good(...) Sentence of the Good Soul, Et redit in nihilum quod
fuit ante nihil.

Julius the Third, a mere Epicure, when he was at Table with several Grandees
of Rome, had a Peacock served in at Dinner, (his beloved Dish) and gave strict
order it should be kept cold for his Supper; but it seems some of his Servants
through neglect disposed of it otherwise: now when the time of his Evening
Repast came, and he found it wanting, he fell into so great a Chafe and Rage,
for this Sin of Omission in his Servitor, that his Holiness was guilty of a Sin
of Commission; insomuch, that a more moderate Cardinal, one of his Guests, told
him, that it was ill done to be so passionate, and fly out into so great a Fury
for so small a Trifle; but he fuddenly replied, If God was so angry as to expel
Adam Paradise for an Apple, well might he, who was his Vicar, be offended for
the Disappointment of his Peacock which was of greater value than any Apple
could possibly be.

The same worthy Pope missing his Pork, which was one of his standing Dishes,
(for he was a great Lover of Pork and Peacock) asked the Reason of it; his
Steward answered, that his Physicians had given order there should be no Pork
served in because it was very injurious and destructive to his Health; whereat
he began to fly in the very face of him whose Vicar he boasts himself to be,
saying, Porta mi quello mio Piatto al dispetto de Dio, Fetch me my Pork (my
Dish of Meat) in spite of God himself. These Words savor of more than
Lucianisme.

Paul the Third, in a Procession at Rome, where the Body of Christ, as they
term it, was with great Solemnity and seeming Piety carried before him, said,
That if the Company did not make more haste he would renounce Christ; whereupon
some Persons made up to them that were in the Front, with all speed, and caused
them to mend their Pace. Nay farther,

Pope Paul being in an open Consistory of Cardinals, boldly told by one of
them, that he could not bestow Palma and Piacenza on his two Bastards, unless
he would inevitably purchase his own Damnation. To this he answered, If St.
Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles had so tender an Affection for his
Countrymen, whom he calls Brethren, as to wish and desire himself to be
separate from Christ, so that they might obtain Salvation; why may not I with
as great Love and Affection to my Sons and Nephews, study by all means possible
to aggrandize them, and make them honorable with the hazard of my own
Salvation? O the yearning Bowels and tender Compassion of this Holy Father to
the living Monuments of his Infamy! Poor cow-hearted Hugonot! Where is there a
Calvin, Beza, or Bishop among you all that dares or can show such strange and
strong efforts of a noble and undaunted Spirit, who for the Promotion and
Welfare of his Children here, dares damn his own Soul for ever hereafter? Alas!
There Is no such Spirit among you.

What think you of Gregory the Seventh? tho his proper name (which Popes
renounce at their Election) was Hildebrand, which signifies Firebrand of Hell
in the Tutonick Tongue, as the Germans affirm; and Chemnitius gives him the
same Title, calling him Titio Infernalis; when he consulted the Oracle of his
Breaden God, threw it into the Fire, before many Cardinals, who could not
withhold him, because it gave him no answer as to the event of his War with the
Emperor Henry the Benno Card. in the life of Hildebrand.
Fourth of France.

John Bishop of Port, in a Sermon in S. Peter's Church before a numerous
Auditory, being upon the profanation of the Blessed Sacrament, said, Hildebrand
and we with him have done a Fact for which we Deserve to be Burnt alive;
meaning the forementioned Action. Nay, this Hostia was so Contemned and
Slighted by him, that he most wickedly caused Pope Victor the Second to be
poisoned with the Consecrated Wine of the Holy Eucharist; and yet Cardinal
Bellarmine had the confidence to Justify this Man, as a Saint, by Twenty seven
Authors; and another had the impudence to own him as a Canonized Saint by two
more, which he throws into the Bargain to add to the former Number; These are a
pack of Saints of the Devils Canonizing undoubtedly.

What will you say of another of these Pious Arch Prelates, who was the Person
that caused the Emperor Henry the Seventh, surnamed of Luxemburg, to be
poisoned, and that with the consecrated Bread, given him by a Jacobine at
Florence in the Eucarist. And about the year 1154 his Namesake Math. Paris. P.
88.
the Arch Bishop of York was poisoned in England with the Wine in the
Sacrament. What will the Friar's Devil do, trow we, if their God be so
dangerous, says the learned Frenchman, Stevens, who composed this Huictain
upon the very Subject;

Les Payens ne vouloyent mettre au nombre des Dieux
Ceux qui an genre humain etoyent pernicieux:
Si le Dieu de Paste est un Dieu qui empoisonne,
Don't l' Empereur Henri tesmoignage nous done;
Que dicoyent les Payens de ces gentiles Docteurs,
Qui les hommes ont fait de luy Adorateurs.
Car si leur Dieu ne fait de meurtrir conscience,
Enter leur Diable et Dieu quelle est la difference.
In The number of their Gods Pagans we find
Never rank't such as were hurtful to Mankind;
If that the God of Paste can poison men,
As the Emperor Henry testifies, what then
Would Heathens of these brave Doctors have said,
Who teach Men to adore a piece of Bread?
For if their God with Murder can dispense,
'Twixt God and Devil what is the difference.
As for Boniface the Eighth, it is too notorious how he undervalued and
vilified the same Host when he was Prisoner to the Gibellines of the Emperor's
Platina.
Faction in the City of Agnania.

Julius the Second, when he was defeated by the Earl of Faix, and totally
routed near Ravenna, he out of extraordinary Zeal and Fervor (I must not call
it Madness, or Irreverence) threw away the Hostia, and made it be trampled upon
by the unsanctified Feet of the rude Multitude, which has been formerly taken
by them with so much Reverence and Adoration.

Gregory the Ninth renounced the Gospel, and embraced in lieu of it an infamous
Legend, composed Baleus li. 5. of the lives of the Popes.
by as infamous a Monk, Cyril by name. Thus you see how these Holy Pastors of
Christ's Sheep behave themselves in Person, and this is not all, but their
Canons published in Print, and allowed, are as blasphemous as their own common
Discourse, or that of their Parasites (who are so far from punishment that they
are loaded with Rewards) asserting the Bishop of Rome to be a God. I Will warrant
you this Did. 96. c. satis evidenter and Panorm. c. Quanto Abbas.
bold assertion will frighten the Poor spirited Protestant to his Litany, From
such Blasphemy good Lord deliver us.

Pope Gregory is so bold as to couple abomination with the merit of the Holy
Passion. We ordain (says the Pope) that for all such Cap. inter opera
Charitatis despons. l. 4. Decretal.
men who shall take common Strumpets out of the Stews and Marry them; that it
shall advantage them as to the remission of Sin.

Cardinal Bellarmine establishes Bell. lib. 1. de Pontif. c. 9.
the Pope over the Church Militant etiam Christo secluso; Christ being secluded
from him.

His Flatterers exclude all Patriarchs and Bishops, from the Popes Lieutenancy
to the Son of God, in these words. That he executes C. quantol. 1. Decretal.
tit. 7. de translat. Episcop.
not the Function of a mere Man here upon Earth, but of a true God. Nay
farther; That the Pope is able to change the nature V. Gl. v. Very Dei. cap.
unico. De jurejurando. gl. v. Vicarium in Clement.
of things: That his Authority is heavenly; that of nothing he can make
something, (contrary to the old Rule ex nihilo nihil fit) that his Will is
sufficient for Reason; that none may be so bold as to question him; that he can
dispense above the Law, that he can make Justice of Injustice, that he has
fullness of Power; And elsewhere, that every Creature is Can. omnes Did. 22.
cap. etc.
subject to him, that he has the Rights of Heavenly and Earthly Empire.

Nay they proceed in higher strains, and say, We declare and define, that it is
necessary to Salvation Extrav. commun. c. Vnam sanctam de Majorit. and obedien.
See all the gloss of the chapt.
for all Creatures, in all things, and in all places to be under the Bishop of
Rome. Observe what the Blasphemous Parasite says, Our Lord would have been
very indiscreet, if he had Bertrand. in gl. Extrav. com. cap. unam sanctam de
majorit. Petri.
not left a Man behind him, that had an equal power with himself. To conclude
this subject, take an abstract of this Oration pronounced in the Lateran
Council, printed by the Authority of Leo the Tenth, in the presence of the
whole Council. Although the Aspect of your Divine Majesty Orat. Ant. Puccii
Clerici. Apostol. 3. Non. Maiae 15, 15 sess. 10.
by whose resplendent glory my weak Eyes are dazzled. Again, In thee alone, the
true and Lawful Vicar of Christ and God, this Prophecy is to be fulfilled, All
the Kings of the Earth shall worship him, and all Nations serve him, Psalm 71.
Then, he says; Before, and now the Universal Body of the Church is subject to
one only Head, viz. unto Thee. Item, Knowing that to thee alone has been given
all Power from the Lord in Heaven and Earth, that thou may judge, not only
Spiritual, but also the Earthly Powers of the World. If this be not like the
Man of Sin, to exalt himself above God, let all men judge.

Another Flatterer was General of the Order of Preachers, who received a
Cardinal's Cap as the Guerdon of his Blasphemies; It shall obtain, if you will
(speaking of the Sess. 2. in orat. Cajetani.
Church) and command it, if you imitate the Power and Perfection of the
Almighty, whose Lieutenant you are here upon Earth; not only in honor of
Dignity, but affection of Will. Gird your Swords (for you have two, the
Spiritual and Temporal) one common to other Princes, the other belongs to you
only: And speaking of the Pope's Mercy; It will render you worthy of Worship,
Gracious and most like unto God. And afterward, by the Mercy of God and yours,
etc. and so runs on with such a continued Series of Blasphemies, as Black as
the Hat could be Red, which he purchased by his Adulation in this Hyperbolical
Elogy of his Imperious Master.

But I presume I have tortured you sufficiently with this horrid Discourse;
therefore I close it with the Words of Seneca;

Magne Regnator Deum, tam lentus audis scelera!
Tam lentus vides; Ec quando saeva fulmen emittes manis?
Great God of Heaven! can thou both hear and see
Such horrid Crimes as these so patiently?
When will thy incensed Justice send, I wonder,
From thy Almighty hand revenging Thunder.
The next Virtues that qualify them for the Papal Chair, are Chastity,
Continency and Abstinence from Carnal Lusts, etc. and how well they are gifted
with these will appear by the following Examples.

Pope John the Thirteenth was a Monster of Men, nay, of Popes too; who, a^ it
was articled against him in a General Council, committed Incest with two of his
Sisters, deflowred innocent Virgins, lay with Stephana his Fathers Concubine (a
lovely Generation, like Father like Son) with Raynera a Widow, and one Anna,
with her Niece likewise. He was a great Enemy to the Married Clergy; and from
him Dunstan received a Commission to be unnaturally incestuous.

Pope Sylvius left a brace of Bastards here in England, the one got on a
Scotch, and the other on an English Woman; nay, whilst he was Cardinal, he kept
his Concubine.

John the Twelvth was killed by the Devil in the Act with another man's Wife,
says Sigebert; but others report that he was taken in the Act, and by the hand
of an abused Husband, like Zimri, had the just reward of his foul and open
Adultery; for the fatal gash that he received sent him packing to the other
World in Eight days time.

Rodorique Borgia, styled Alexander the Sixth after he came to the Papacy, was
the first Pope that was so ingeniously modest as to own Guicciard. Hist. Ital.
1. p. 10.
his Bastards, and tho his Predecessors disguised them under the appellation of
Nephews and God-sons, (looking upon Fig Leaves to be some, tho but a slender
covering of Nakedness,) yet he was so shameless in his Lust, as publikly to
acknowledge his base Offspring; and particularly took cognizance of Caesar
Borgia, one that had a Soul of as swarthy a Complexion as his Father, and
procured him a red Hat; but he being soon weary of the Gospel, which might well
be ashamed of him, did as suddenly procure a Dispensation to un-Cardinal
himself; these two committed Incest with their own Sister, Lucretia by name; as
famous for Guicciardin. l. 3. p. 179.
Whoredom in the new, as her Namesake for Chastity in old Rome; of whom
Pontanus writes this Epitaph.

Conditur hoc tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Pontisicis Filia, Sponsa, Nurus.
Here lies Lucrece by Name, Thais in Life,
The Pope's Child, Spouse, and yet his own Son's Wife.
He caused his eldest Brother, the Duke of Candia, to be murdered as he rode
one Night in the City of Rome, and his Body cast into Tyber, because he thought
him a Rub in his way to Preferment. He was, like his Father, very lavish in his
Lust, insomuch that he did not forbear to tread both Hen and Chicken when the
Fit was upon him; nay, at the taking of Capua, where he assisted the French, he
had a Reserve of no less than forty of the fairest Ladies for his own use, to
satiate his inordinate Lust.

Martin the 4th kept his Predecessor's Harlot, (Nicholas 3.) and was so tender
of her, that he caused all deformed Pictures to be removed out of his Palace,
for fear she should be delivered of a monstrous ugly Child. Surely if his
Holiness was so kind to a Whore he would be very fond of a Wife.

Of this Pope's Simony, which he was compelled to for the maintaining his own
and his Nephew's Incests and lustful Extravagancies, there is extant this
Distich:

Vendit Alexander Claves, Altaria, Christum;
Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.
Pope Alexander sells Christ, Altars, Keys,
And well he might; for first he bought all these.
This Alexander the Sixth dispensed with Peter Mendoza, Bishop of Valencia, to
use his Bastard Son, the Marquess of Zannet, as his Ganymede or Sodomitical
Boy: insomuch that Charles the Eighth being at Rome, during his Pontificate, he
was so hated by, and odious to all Men, that the whole Conclave of Cardinals
(two only excepted) did entreat him to vindicate the Holy Church from the
Violence and Tyranny of the Pope, who was rather a Successor of Judas than St.
Peter, and a greater Observer of the Alcoran than the Gospel. A fine Character
of a Pope from his own Cardinals!

A German Prince sent an Ambassador to the Pope, who after he was dispatched,
taking his leave of his Holiness, he in Latin said to him, Tell our beloved
Son, etc. which put the honest German into such a Chafe, that he had almost
affronted the Pope with the Lie; withal rounding him in the Ear, that his
Master was no Son of a Priest (meaning no Bastard.) See the Chastity of these
Holy ones when their Incontinency and Lasciviousness is grown proverbial.

Joan, Queen of Naples, hanged her first Husband, and before he was cold
married the Prince of Tarentum, one of the handsomest Men in the Universe; she
kept her self in a whole Skin by the Schism that then happened between Pope Urban
and Clement, and so escaped unpunished, (tho at last she was executed) who
bestowed Avignon in France ^^ Pope Urban and his Successors, under pretense of
Sale. This is only to let you know that his Holiness has not so sickly and
squeamish a Conscience but he can dispense with a fair, large Gift from a foul,
filthy hand: which contributes much to the Justification of the pretended
Chastity of Rome, since she has been so great a Gainer by Strumpets and
Harlots, Stews and Brothels, a Tribute far worse and baser than that of
Vespasian, ex lotio: therefore well might honest Mantuan say,

I pudor in villas, tota est jam Roma Lupanar.
At wanton Rome there is no room we know
For Shame-fac'dness, to Hamlets let her go.
And Naso, once a Roman, to the shame of such Popes, could sing, Turpe Tori
reditu census augere paternos.

What a miserable thing is it that St. Peter and St. Paul should be maintained
by those who live by the Sweat of their Bodies. In the time of Paul the Third,
he had upon his Roll or Register 45000 Courtisans (nay, Naples the Voluptuous
has 20000 registered in the Office of Savelli, allowed of.) This Word Courtisan
came originally from the Court of Rome (the modestest Synonomon of a Whore)
viz. from those Religiosa's or holy Dames who conversed with his Holiness both
at Bed and Board.

Pope Gregory the Thirteenth was a Man of the same Constitution as the rest of
that sanctified Tribe, and was subject to Failings as well as Persons of an
inferior degree; witness his Bastard, James Buoncourpagno, a good Catholic no
doubt, and according to the Proverb, he was very fortunate; for his Holy Father
in a double Sense, both Natural and Spiritual, gave him Ireland, and created
him Marquess of Lemster, Earl of Wexford, etc. and sent one Thuan. Hist. l. 64.
Stukely to reduce it to his Obedience.

Pope Paul the Third, encouraged by the Example of Alexander the Sixth,
committed Incest with Constantia his own Daughter; but finding that he could
not enjoy her as formerly, being married to the Duke of Sforza, he poisoned
her; and then courted his Sister, and grew very fond; but he soon dispatched
her also the same way, because she was not so much delighted with his Embraces
as with others.

Pope Martin the Fifth dispensed with one to marry his Anton. Sum. p. 3. tit.
1. etc. one of their own Writers.
own Sister; of whom it was a common Lampoon among the People, nay the very
Sing-song of little Children in the Streets of Florence,

Il Papa Martino.
Non vale un quatrino.
Martin the Pope
Is not worth a Rope.
An Argument they stand not much in awe of him.

In Rome, the sacred Seat of his Holiness, the Courtizans are many, who are
tolerated and publicly allowed, for which they pay a smart and certain Annual
Tribute; and every common Whore is obliged to have her Name registered in the
Vicegerents Office, an Officer belonging to the Vicario, the Pope's Vicar
General; so that they enjoy an absolute liberty to be licentious throughout the
Year, except at the times called Vacanze, or Vacation-time, which happens to be
about Christmas and Easter; for then the Sbirri, or Bailiffs, may make a strict
Search in all their Houses, and if they find any there, may commit them to
Goal; but by paying a Sum of Money, they send to the Office, and so prevent
their being molested by such kind of Persons. Nay, in those infamous Houses
those Harlots boldly and impudently commit their Crimes by the Pope's
Approbation and Protection. When Alexander the Seventh sat in the Pontifical
Chair, there was some discourse of suppressing these Brothel Houses, but it was
but Talk; yet it occasioned this impious and horrid Pasquinata, Laudate Dominum
Pueri. This Rome is that famous holy City, and the City of his Holiness, but
the honest Carmelite Mantuan tells you a quite contrary Tale, when he says,

Vivere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
You that will live well must leave Rome, for there
All things are lawful but what lawful are.
Or thus.

You that will pious be, shun Rome, for now
All things but being good they do allow.
Pope Sixtus the 4th had his Strumpet Tiresia, built Stews at Rome, which
yielded him an annual Income of 2000 Ducats, and gave a Dispensation to all the
Family of the Cardinal of St. Lucie to commit a Sin not to be named among
modest Hugonots, Vessel. Groving Tract. de Indulgent. citat. a Jac. Laur.
during the three hot Months of June, July, and August. And this made Pasquin
cry out,

At Romae Puero non licet esse mihi.
A Boy to Rome must never come.
This sin the Italians say is (if in any) excusable in them, because they live
near his Holiness, who does not only give License by permission, but a
President by his own Example; this is a common Adage among them.

We cannot I think bring up the rear of these Chaste ones with any other
Person, fitter or more deserving, than Madam Gilberta, commonly called Pope
Joan, a strapping Lass indeed. She was once a Maid of Mentz in Germany, sans
doubt, and after Miss to a Monk of Fulda, with whom she ran away to Athens in
Man's Apparel, and there did cohabit with him, till he unkindly forsook her,
and went into the other World; all which time that she did reside there with
him, she personated the Man so lively, and wore the Breeches so well and
handsomely, as some Viragoes will do, that she bid defiance to all Discovery of
her so cunningly counterfeited Sex. Well, what then? Why having lost her
beloved Gallant she trips away to Rome, and had made so great a Progress in all
the Liberal Arts and Sciences, that she was thought worthy, it seems, of a
Cardinal's Cap, and at last of the Triple Crown, and for two years and a half
behaved her self very notably, and wanted no Qualification becoming the Papal
Chair, but that of her Sex. Yet see how Murder will come out at last. Going in
a solemn Procession to the Church of St. John of Lateran, between Colosses and
St. Clements, she by the way, in the public Street, was rid of her vicious
Life and an infamous Burden both together; (a pretty teeming Prolifick Papess,
this must needs be a Babe of Grace that her Holiness was delivered of, and she
the Whore of Babylon in a double Sense) and at the very place where this
unlucky Accident happened there was erected the Colonna infame, or infamous
Pillar, (as they ever after called it) in memory of this Accident, to the end
it might the better be transmitted to Posterity; and out of a zealous
Abhorrence of so black a Deed, her Successors baulk that way in their usual
Processions, and steer another course to this very day. But this is not all; to
prevent such Female Gossips for the future from putting the like Tricks upon
the Conclave of Cardinals, they prudently found out the Porphyry Chair, an
infallible Invention to avoid such gross Mistakes, to the Prejudice of
Infallibility, and the Shame and Scandal of the Roman Religion. Thus far
Platina in his Life of that Papess, who was a great Friend to Popes, wrote the
Lives of Popes down to his time, was Secretary to a Pope, and dedicated his
Book to a Pope; and indeed the Story were almost incredible had he not the
Suffrage of fifty more of their own Authors to justify his Writing upon this
Subject, tho Card. Baronius leaves her out; of whom we may truly say, as
Scaliger did, Facit Annals non scribit, He makes Chronicles, but writes them
not.

But here will arise possibly a Question, How comes it to pass that this
Porphyry Chair is now laid aside? That Is a poignant one, upon my Word: but the
Catholics may be satisfied, if they please, with the Answer of John Pontanus
in an Epigram of his, translated by Mr. Stevens into French, which runs thus:

Null ne pouvoit jouir des saints Clefs de Rome,
Sans monstrer q'uil avoit les marquis de vray homme,
D'ou vient donc a present ceste preuve est cessee
Et qu'on n'a plus besoing de la Chair persee?
Cest pource que ceux la qui ores les Clefs ont,
Parles Enfans qu'ils font monstrent bience qu'ils sont.
None had the Keys of Rome in times of yore,
But such as showed true marks of Man before.
How comes it then that this Proof's now laid by,
And that the Porphyry stool is useless? Why?
Because those now, who sit ^ith Papa^ Chair,
By the base Brats they get show wha^ they are.
But I blush to think that I have offended the chaste ears of the Protestant
Reader by harping so long upon such loose Notes, and made his Cheeks glow at
the rehearsal of such immodest actions, therefore I Will leave off this filthy
discourse, and see if I can hit upon a more cleanly Argument, not troubling you
with Mathilda, Gregory 7th's Miss, nor with Sergius the third's Morezia, nor a
Donna Olympia, fresh in the memory of most men of this Age.

As for the Popes Humility, Poverty, Patience, Clemency and Blood-guiltiness,
etc. take these few Examples for instance.

The Proud and Magisterial name of Universal Bishop, Rome was at first a mere
Stranger to; and Gregory the Great, a Learned, Good man, declared ir to be the
name of Antichrist, a name of Blasphemy, and to admit it was to shipwreck the
Faith. See here S. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 76. 83. Ep. 78.
one Pope Proclaiming another Antichrist. But bold Boniface the third, his
Successor, received the Title of Universal Bishop from Phocas, who murdered
the Emperor Mauritius and all his Family, and usurped the Dominion of
Constantinople.

The blessed Apostle St. James, called by the Ancients the Bishop of the
Apostles, Clem. Epist. 1. who was a Prince of the Blood Royal, and Cousin
German to our Savior, was President in the first Council; though he gave his
opinion last, yet he took upon him no Superiority above others, and within the
bounds of such Christian modesty did the Holy Prelates of Christendom contain
themselves, till the year 607.

The Venetians were Excommunicated by Pope Clement the fifth for attempting to
besiege Ferrara, which is Tributary to the Sea of Rome, whereupon Francis
Dandalo, afterward Grand Dogue of Venice, went to France, where the Pope then
had his Seat; submissively to beg his Pardon for that imaginary Offense* when
he arrived there he spent much time 'ere he could be admitted, but at last he
was brought into his presence with an Iron Chain or Dog's collar about his
Neck, crawling on all four the Sabellicus in fine 9 Aeneid. l. 7.
length of the great Hall, and afterward lay among the Dogs under his Table,
till his wrath was appeased; and then he obtained a Pardon, for which Act he
was ever after called Dog by his own Countrymen. Surely he very undeservedly
had the Name of Clement, who could be so inhumane and haughty to an ancient
Person, and treat him so currishly, that prostrated himself at his Feet with so
much slavish submission.

This Pope walking through the City Bogenci upon the River Loire in great
State, had for his Attendants or Servitors, the Kings of England and France,
one upon his right, the other on his left hand, and one leading his Horse by
the Bridle.

Alexander the Third, after he obtained the Popedom, had many dangerous
Conflicts with the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and was so often worsted by
him, that he was forced to fly to Venice, and there live for some time
incognito, in the habit of a Cook (a pretty greazy Disguise for a Pope; see what
necessity will do; who would have thought so proud a Bishop should stoop to so
base a Condescension) but at last he was known, and honorably embraced by the
Venetians; and this coming to the Emperors Ear, he was highly offended at them
for entertaining his Enemy, insomuch that he sent his Son with a powerful Army,
and great Navy, to take the Pope by force and violence; but the young Prince
had the ill fate in that Engagement to be taken Prisoner by the Venetians, nor
could his freedom be possibly procured, unless Frederick would come in his own
Person to Venice, and endeavor to be reconciled to the Pope; which the
Emperor, for his Son's sake, condescended to; went to Venice, and procured it
upon these unreasonable and Unchristian conditions. That he should restore the
City of Rome, and all the Royalties thereof, and undergo such further Penance
as the Pope should enjoin. This being submitted to, the Emperor came to the
Door of St. Mark's Church, the People being Spectators, where the proud Pope
commanded him very imperiously to ly prostrate on the Ground, and to ask his
Pardon and Forgiveness; and then he gently treading upon his Neck, profanely
wrested the 13 verse of the 91 Psalm, to his own purpose, saying; Thou shall
walk upon the Asp^ and Basilisk, and shall tread upon the Lion and Dragon; And
when the Emperor said unto him Non tibi sed Petro cujus Successor es, pareo;
the Pope replied, Et mihi and Petro, proudly placing himself before the blessed
Apostle, whose immediate Successor he falsely pretends to be. See the unexampled
humility of this Servus Servorum Dei.

Platina, in the Life of Gregory the Seventh, tells you, that the Emperou^
Henry the Fourth of France, commonly styled the Great, was Excommunicated by
the Pope, and that for a Trifle too. The Emperor being informed of this his
rigorous proceedings, came to Canosse (where his Holiness was then dallying
with his wanton Mathilda) and divesting himself of his Imperial Robes (fine
work indeed that the Scepter must bow to the Crosier) went barefoot and
barehead, in the depth of a hard Winter, to the City Gates, and there humbly
craved Admittance; but his Entry was denied, and he, like an obedient Son of
that See, bore it with unimaginable and uncommon Patience, remaining three
days complete in the Suburbs fasting, continually beging Absolution, which at
length by the earnest Intercession, and repeated Request of Mathilda, the Popes
Minion, or St. Peter's Daughter as they called her, the Earl of Savoy, and the
Abbot of Cluniac, was obtained. A brave Jaunt indeed for a Puissant Potentate,
at such an Unseasonable time of the Year, and very kind usage he received for
his pains, but this must be done or he is undone, and forfeits all his Regalia,
for disobliging a proud, peevish Pope. Where is there ever a Gueux of you all
that has so much courage to maintain your Protestant Privileges and Episcopal
Dignity? But one Swallow makes no Summer; all Frenchmen are not so soft
Spirited.

Well fare Philip the Fourth, surnamed Philip Le Bell, who in the year 1320 had
to do with a Monster of a Man, Boniface the eighth, when France shook off the
Supremacy of the Pope in Temporalibus*

This Prelate wrote to the King i^ these and such like arrogant Terms* We will
that thou know* thou art our Subject i^ Annals Nie: Giles.
Spirituals, as well as Temporals. T^ which the King return'^ this Princely
answer, Q^ Sciat fatuitas vestra, etc.
ta tresgrande sottise scach^ etc. Let your Sottishness and gre^ Temerity know,
that in Temporals w^ have none but God for Superior and(...) And not being
satisfied with this, h^ commanded a Lord of Languedoc, a^ Albigeois, of the
House of Nogaret, t^ Seize on the Pope, which he did, and withal gave him such
a Blow on the Ear with a Gantlet that felled him, for saying his Father was
Burnt for an Heretic, and afterward cast him into Prison, where he died of a
Phrenzie, gnawing his own hands out of Rage and Fury, and left this worthy
Elogium or Epitaph behind him. Intravit ut Vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est
ut Canis. He entered the Papacy like a Jo. Andr. and Bald. c. 1. defend. gl. ad
6. Decretal.
Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog. It Was valiantly done of the
Stout Monsieur to knock down four at a Blow, the Campanian, the Cardinal,
Boniface the Eighth and the Pope; This Pope was so shameless as to boast
(having denied three times to confer the Title of Emperor of Germany upon the
Duke of Austria) that he himself was Lord and Emperor of the whole World. Nor
did Lewis the Twelfth stand in awe of the Pope, whose Motto was, Perdam
Babylonis nomen, I will destroy the name of Babylon. But this usurped power of
the Sea of Rome is but Novel, and Modern, for instead of their deposing Kings,
they deposed Popes; nay Constantius the Son of Constantine the Great, deposed
Pope Liberius; the Emperor Otho Pope John the Twelfth, Henry the Third, Bennet
the Ninth, Sylvester the Third and Gregory the Sixth, and Sigismund deposed as
Platina in vit. Greg. 6. Abbas Vesp. anno 1406.
many more at one time. The French Kings have not only outed but created many
Popes formerly. Philip the Fair displaced Boniface the Eighth, who translated
the Sea to Avignon, where it continued 74 years, and by the King's appointment
Six Popes succeeded one another in that place. And this right of dethroning
Popes is treated of by a Chancllor of the Academy at Paris, Gerson by name, one
of the most learned Sorbonists, in his Treatise de Auferibilitate Papae. So
that you see they were far from being Lords in Spiritual and Temporal things
originally, what ever they pretend to the contrary: and the saying of Pope
Nicholas in his Eighth Epistle makes it out, that they which are both Kings and
Priests under the Gospel, are Members of the Devil. Thus one Pope contradicts
another; yet all infallible. Nay two Popes more Pelagius and Gregory, looked
upon the Title of Universal Bishop as nomen Blasphemiae.

But the gravest Sages and greatest Doctors of them all must needs confess,
that the Largest and Fattest of the Popes Possessions, are but the Largess of
Kings, and therefore they have little reason to carry themselves so Loftily and
Exalt themselves above all, which intolerable Insolence makes them guilty of
the Blackest of Crimes, Ingratitude, if they are unthankful to their first
Promoters; for Phocas an adulterous Assassine the Murderer of his Master
Mauritius the Emperor, gave them their Name, and Pepin An. Dom. 607. An. mundi
4559.
their Revenues. But their carriage, now adays is quite contrary to the
Discipline of the Apostles, and humble and Submissive Deportment of St.
Gregory, who writing to the Emperor Mauritius begins in this lowly Style, I
the unworthy Servant of Li. 2. Epist. 61. in dict. 11.
your Piety etc.

Nor was Henry the Fifth terrified by Pope Paschal the Second, who wrought upon
his own Son to rebel against his Father, (but what may not Infallibility
countenance and approve) insomuch that he surprised his Father with great
Forces, divested him of his Regalia, together with the Empire; insomuch that
the Aged Potentate died with Grief: and this Paschal was so inhumane as to deny
him Inhumation, not permitting him to have Christian Burial for five Years
after his Death. But Henry the Fifth, the new Emperor, went immediately after
this into Italy to the Pope, who expected to be gratified for his pious
assisting the Son to murder the Father, and therefore demanded the Right of
Investiture; which so incensed the Emperor, that he took him by the Shoulders,
and boldly shook his Holiness into a panick Fear; nor was that all, for he was
committed close Prisoner, never to enjoy his Freedom unless he renounced his
unlawful Claim to Investitures and Collations of Benefices. I could instance in
many more; but let these satisfy the Reader, that Princes heretofore did
under-value the Pope and his Excommunications, or else the very Citizens of
Rome would never have presumed to expel Pope Gregory the Ninth that City; for
indeed they never took any great notice of the Pope's Excommunication. But now
to our intended Discourse.

Boniface the First began first of all to assume the Dominion of the African
Churches; but he was soon curbed in his Career by the sixth African Council,
where the great Pillar of the St. Austin.
Western Church was present.

Nay, Charles the Fifth, being shrewdly menaced by Paul the Third, if he would
not surrender Placentia to him after the Death of Peter Lewis; gave his
Holiness to understand, by an Ambassador, that if he would needs be thundering
with his Excommunications, he would both thunder and lighten with his Artillery
in Answer to him.

Do but observe the Humility of this Man of God at his Election to the Papacy.
A Fortnights time is appointed for Preparations, in order to the carrying of
him with great Pomp and Magnificence, being seated in a Chair of State, is
borne on Men's Shoulders to St. Peter's Church to possess himself of the
Popedom; and if an Emperor happen to be at the Solemnity, it is the greatest
Honor he is capable of, to be one of the Bearers of that sanctified Burden or
Lump of Holiness: and a Fortnight after, or thereabout, he rides in a Cavalcata
to the Church of St. John of Lateran to the same Intent and Purpose.

Platina tells you in the Life of Clement the Fifth, that Philip King of
France, Charles, the Monsieur, his Brother, and John Duke of Britain, with many
other Persons of the highest Quality, were present at his Inauguration, who
lost their Lives, many of them being overwhelmed with the fall of a Wall, and
buried in the Ruins; King Philip being lamed, and his Holiness himself with an
unlucky lucky Blow, was dismounted from his Bucephalus, and lost a Rubie out of
his Miter that cost 6000 Ducats, (how many poor Protestants are worth less that
deserve much more) which I do not find by the Relator that it was ever heard of
afterward. Now I leave it to the nice Casuists of their Church, to decide,
whether this was not a piece of grand Sacrilege in the Finder, to imbezel such
Goods as were consecrated to sacred Uses, and convert them to his own.

Frederick the Emperor waited upon Pope Adrian the Fourth, and like an
Imperial Groom, quietly held the Stirrup whilst he came off of his Horse; and
by all good Signs and Tokens he received a proud taunting Check for his
Humility, in holding the left instead of the right Stirtop; which moved him so
much, that he said, I was never brought up to this Trade, and thou art the
first upon whom I ever attended so servilely; but for all this he was
compelled, the day following, to hold the right. O brave Countryman! thou
did like a bold Britain, a true Nicholas Break-spear (for that was his Name
before his Papification) that makes no distinction of Persons; and if an
Emperor be his Groom he will make him know his Duty; and Reason good too, if
such Potentates will submit to such Servility merely to gratify the ambitious
Humor of a proud Prelate.

When Celestine the Third was to Crown Hen. 6th, and his Empress Constance, he
did it not with his hands but feet; setting it on, and proudly spurning it off
again, with these words in his mouth, Per me Reges regnant. It is in my sole
Power to make and unmake Kings and Emperors.

The State of Rome extends three hundred miles in length, and two hundred in
breadth; and the Pope is able upon occasion to put 50000 men in the Field well
equipped, besides his Naval strength in Galleys, which is very great: Nor is he
destitute of Money, for as Sixtus Quartus usually said, So long as the Pope can
finger a Pen, he can want no Pence. Besides, the sale of Offices is very
gainful; and some reckon that a Pope has 6000 l. a day, besides casual
Incomes, which are as advantageous as numerous. The Legate a Latere, when he
goes abroad upon public Affairs, has the allowance of twenty five pound
Sterling per diem.

Gregory the fifteenth, who sat in the Chair but two years wanting a Month,
left his Family 250000 Crowns per Ann. i. e. 62500 l.

Alexander the 6th scraped up such vast Sums of Money by the sale of
Indulgences, that his Son Caesar Borgia lost one night at Dice 100000. Crowns,
saying, Germanorum tantum haec peccata sunt.

Sixtus the 5th, of a poor Family, Peretti by name, tho he was Pope but a
luster of years, erected the Palace di San Giovanno Laterano, fortified Civita
Vecchia, began to build Monte Cavallo, founded many Colleges, and did as many
sumptuous and chargeable Works as stood him in fifteen millions of Crowns, that
is, four millions of English pounds Sterling, and yet left five millions of
Crowns behind him at his decease.

Gregory the 15th, who reigned but two years wanting a Month, yet made a poor
shift to leave his Family 250000 Crowns a year. If St. Peter had been so
wealthy, he would not have followed his poor Trade, assure your self; indeed
his Successors you see have sailed in his Ship for Traffic with such fortune
and success, that they cannot say as he did, without manifest falsehood, Silver
and Gold have I none; for they have scarce any thing else.

Paul the 5th left 1000 Crowns a day to his Nephew, the Prince of Salmona,
besides what he bestowed on other Relations.

So much of the Pope's Humility and Lowliness; now for a touch at his Clemency,
Pity, and Mercy.

And here we must make bold with the Papalines, and beg their pardon, if we
prove and reprove the horrid Actions of some Silvesters, John's, Bonifaces,
Julii, Gregory's, Sexti and Alexanders, who have either kindled a fire in the
very Bowels of Christendom, or made her swim in innocent blood.

Pope Hildebrand, Bellarmine's Saint, poisoned seven or eight Popes to make way
for his obtaining the Papal Chair, and when he enjoyed it, committed all
Barbarisms imaginable, and did hang up men at pleasure, with a stat pro ratione
Voluntas; My Will is my Law.

In the Life of Honorius the third, it is reported, Anno 1223. that one --
Bishop of Cathness in Scotland, was burnt in his Kitchen by the People of his
own Diocese, because he excommunicated some of them for Non-payment of Tithes;
which Story reaching the Pope's ear, did so distract and discompose his
Holiness, that he could not be at rest till he had hanged four hundred of them,
and castrated all their Children, and all this insufferable Cruelty upon
Innocents too, to revenge the Death of one single Person.

Pope Urban the Fourth instead of Vrbanus was called Turbanus, because he was
so great a Boutefeu, that he set all Christendom in a Combustion.

Pope Urban the Sixth did, out of a revengeful Spirit, cause five Cardinals to
be cast into the River and drowned.

It was the usual and pitiful Expression of Sixtus Quintus, or Sise Cinque,
occasioned by the Death of a Noble, renowned Princess; Che gusto di tagliar
test corronate! Oh what a Pleasure is it to take off crowned Heads! Well said,
Reverend Head of the Church! We will take thy bare Word for cutting of Throats
without Security; it is honestly done to speak plainly without mental
Reservation; for to mince the matter were a piece of Cowardice not to be
brook'd in the triumphant Chieftain of the Church Militant.

Clement the Seventh was convicted of notorious Crimes; among the rest, to show
his insatiable Thirst after Blood, he sewed five Cardinals in Sacks (not the
five Cardinal Virtues I Will warrant you) and threw them into the Sea; beheaded
three more, and after burned their Bodies to Ashes, which he urn'd up in
Chests, and placed Cardinals Hats upon them, carrying them about with him where
ever he went, to give all People to understand what Relics were contained in
them. And if he were so kind to those of his own Religion, what mercy could
others expect from him that were of a contrary Persuasion?

Sergius, who stood Candidate for the Pontificate with Formosus, prevailed so
far as to obtain it; and when he afterward came to be Bishop of that See, in
revenge of his former repulse, compelled the Romans, by his threats and
menaces, to make the Ordination of Formosus null and void; and made him be
taken out of his Grave, (an Act not to be thought on without horror) after he
had layn there a considerable time, and then robbed him with the Papal Vesture,
placed him in St. Peter's Chair, commanding him to be beheaded, and to have
three of his Fingers cut off, and so disgracefully and barbarously cast him
into the River Tyber, and withal degraded all Persons that were ordained by him.

During the time of the Popes Innocent the third, Honorius, Celistine, Innocent
the fourth, and Gregory the ninth, against Frederick the second, there was a
most horrid Slaughter made by them, that lasted for thirty three Years. And
then it was that Mahomet, the Imposter, and inveterate Enemy of Christianity,
advanced himself in the East; whom the Emperor intended to repulse; but that
the good Pope in that juncture of time made War against him in Italy, which
hast'ned his return, and made him leave Greece to be harassed by the Turk; nor
would the Pope admit of a Reconciliation, till 11000 Marks of Gold procured it.
And with the same zeal Pope Innocent, and his Successors acted all along, who
kept Zemin Ottoman, Bajazet the second's Brother, in custody, for which he
received annually 40000 Ducats. Nay, when King Charles the eighth would have
made an advantage of the Prisoners in his War against this mortal Foe of
Christendom, Alexander the sixth advertised the Turk of his intended Designs
(like a good Pope) and took such care to prevent him, that Zemin was poisoned;
(an Action which a Mufti would scorn to do unto a Christian) for which goodly
and godly Work, he was rewarded with 200000 Crowns, which were paid him by
George of Antia, the Messenger of that wholesome advice. By these foregoing
Works we may guess at the Bloody temper of these Sanguinary Popes; and the best
and truest Character we can bestow on them is that shameful byword of young
Tiberius, that the Pope is Lutum sanguine maceratum, a mere Lump of Clay
kneaded together with Blood.

John the thirteenth was addicted to all manner of vices, as Perjury,
Sacrilege, and Cruelty, etc. He dismemb'red several Cardinals, because they
inclined to Otho the Great, Emperor, by Exoculating them, cutting off their
Hands, and Castrating of them. He made Deacons in his Stable, among his Horses,
like a Brute as he was; created young Boys grave Bishops, for Money, out of a
lucrative and sordidly covetous Humor; whose Gehazisme and Simony, with some
other Com-Popes of the Holy See, was the occasion of that known Distich;

An Petrus fuerat Romae sub Judice lis est,
Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat.
Whether St. Peter 'ere to Rome did go
Is questioned, that Simon was there, all know.
He put out the eyes of his Ghostly Father Benedict, and committed many other
matchless Cruelties.

Boniface the seventh was so wicked, that Baronius himself, that Grand Pillar
of the Papal Cause, says, he deserved the name of Thief and Murderer of his
Country rather than of a Pope.

Hildebrand sainted Liberius the Arrian, exercised all sorts of Cruelty, cut
off the Foot of a Widows Son, but at last, for the Impieties which he was
guilty of, (many of which are premention'd) he was deposed in a Senate at
Brixia; and as he lived wretchedly, so he died miserably in Exile, and left the
Keys to Victor the third, an Italian, thrust in by Matilda, who was soon
poisoned by his Subdeacon in the Chalice; so that you may see Christ's precious
Blood is no Antidote nor Preservative in these Cases.

But this is only Slaughter by retail, take a view of their Massacres by
wholesail.

As to the Cruelties of Merindol and Cabriere, they were so barbarous and
inhumane, that when the Advocate Aubery, and other Civilians, related them in
the High Court of Parliament at Paris, the Auditory stopped their Ears at the
hideousness, and horror of them: take this single Example for instance among
many others.

John Menier, Lord of Oppede, Chief President of the Parliament of Provence,
and the French King's Lieutenant General; who, tho he made choice of the worst
Bloodhounds of the Army, could not meet with Soldiers cruel enough to execute
his bloody Edicts, commanding them to rip up the Bowels of big-bellied Women,
and to trample their innocent Babes under foot; and this was done before his
Face to his delight, who was then Spectaror and Author of this Inhumanity. This
was a piece of cruelty beyond that of Pharaoh to the male Children of the
Hebrew Women in the old, or the other of Herod to the Innocents of Bethlehem in
the new Testament, and yet promoted and approved of by the Holy Man of Rome.

The Parisian Massacre was so detestable and unparalled a Cruelty, according
to Thuanus, that some curious Persons perusing the Annals Thuan. Hist. l. 52.
and 53.
of other Nations, could not meet with the like in all Antiquity. The manner of
this hellish and bloody Persecution, was as you find it in this ensuing
Relation. Catharina di Medici, the Daughter of Pope Clement's Brother, and
Mother to Charles the ninth, did Govern the Kingdom of France during the King's
Minority, through the supine negligence of Anthony King of Navarre, with whom
the said Queen's Mother was joined in the office of Protectorship, contrary to
the Salique Law, which denies the Inheritance, or Administration of the Realm
to the Spindle. And she persuaded her Son to this Massacre. It was very
speciously carried on, and veiled with pretenses of the greatest Amity
imaginable, and that was a Match between the Houses of Valois and Bourbon, the
King resolving to bestow his Sister Margaret in marriage to Prince Henry, Son
to Joan, Queen of Navarre, the former being a Romanist, the latter of the
Religion. But before the Nuptials were Celebrated, the Queen of Navarre (being
then at the Court of Paris, providing all things necessary for the
wedding-Solemnity) was poisoned by Renat, an Italian, the King's Apothecary,
with the venomous scent of a pair of persum'd Gloves; by whose unnatural death,
the Kingdom descended to the said Henry, precontracted to the King's Sister.
Shortly after the Marriage was solemnized with Royal Pomp and State in the
chief Church at Paris, to the great joy of his Majesty and all good Men; to
this wedding the Grandees of the Protestant party were courteously invited,
viz. Henry Prince of Conde, Gasper de Coligni Admiral of France, and Cousin to
the King, Francis de Andelot, the Admiral's Brother, Captain of the Infantry,
and other Princes and Nobles. And the Magnificence, Jollity, and Caresses of
Entertainment were so great as are not to be expressed. Nothing is seen but
Banquets, Balls, Masks, Stage Plays, and such kind of Divertisments, all
personated in the Night. And this was the reason the Admiral had a desire to
quit Paris, because he could not have access to the King, who was altogether
taken up and delighted with these nocturnal Revels. But those of the reformed
Religion hearing of his purpose to depart, with all speed delivered their
Petitions to him for redress of Grievances, begging of him not to quit the
place till he had presented them to the King, which he did on the 22th of
August 1572, being the fifth day after the Marriage. Returning home about noon,
a Harquebuzier shot the Admiral with a brace of Bullets through both the Arms,
out of the Window of a near adjoining House; but the Villain made his escape,
before they could reach the House. The King was then at Tennis with the Duke,
when one of the Admiral's Gentlemen acquainted him with the news; which he no
sooner heard, but he, with a seemingly violent Transport of Passion, threw away
his Racket, and retired to his Castle: as young as he was he made good use of
the Motto of Lewis the 11th his Predecessor, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
regnare. The King swears most desperately, severely to revenge this injury;
grants the Admiral a Guard at his request, but such a one as would be sure to
ruin rather than secure him: and Cossin, Captain of the Guards, was the Man
that commanded them; a most Inveterate and Irreconcilable Enemy to the Admiral
and his Party, and a fast friend to the Guisians. The Admiral hear's a noise
and rattling of Armor, tho altogether undisturbed, having the King's Royal word
for his security; Besides, he reflected on the Oath for Peace publicly and
frequently sworn by the King, his Brethren and Mother, the League with Queen
Elizabeth, the Articles with the Prince of Aurange to that purpose; the King's
faith engaged to the German Princes; some Towns taken in the low Countries by
the King's order; his Sisters marriage celebrated but six days before (yet her
Bridal Robes were stained and defiled with innocent Blood) the judgment of
foreign Princes, succeeding Posterity; the honor and Faith of a Prince, and
the violation of the Law of Nations; all these, one would think, might easily
oblige a Man to believe that it was incredible he could ever assent to so
outrageous and monstrous a Fact.

Well, notwithstanding all those Protestations, Promises, Oaths, and Vows, the
Queen Mother and the King had resolved upon a general Massacre throughout the
City of Paris, and this bloody Butchery was to be executed on the 24th of
August being Sunday (no matter for that, the better day the better deed) and
accordingly it was performed: for Cossin first brake in, which the Admiral
understanding, caused those few Servants that were with him to lift him out of
his Bed, for he could not rise without help, being so disabled by his Wounds,
and put on a Nightgown, desiring them to make their escape, he himself
resolving to die with an undaunted Courage and Christian-like Resolution.

These Assassines soon gained the Admiral's Chamber, broke open the doors, and
Benvese, a German Miscreant, educated in the House of the Duke of Guise, with
Cossin the Gascoign, and others, rushed in with Swords, Targets, and Coats of
Male. Benvese presenting his Sword to the Admiral, after he had first
blasphemed God, ran him in the breast, and then cowardly struck the aged
Gentleman on the Head; Attin Shot him with a Pistol, and Benvese gave him the
third Wound on the Thigh, and so he fell down Dead upon the Spot. The Duke of
Guise that staid in the Court called to him and bid him throw him out at the
window, which he accordingly did. Then he commanded the sign to be given by
ringing the Tocksein, or great Bell of the Palace, (which is never done but on
extraordinary occasions:) the mark whereby the Murderers were distinguished was
by a general consent to be a white linen Cloth tied about their Arm, and a
white Cross on their Caps. Then an Italian Soldier of Captain Lewis
Gonzagua's, Duke of Nivers, cut off the Admiral's Head, and sent it to Rome,
preserved with Spices, to the Pope and Cardinal of Lorrain; others cut off his
Hands, and some, void of all modesty, his Privities. Then the rude Rabble, for
three days together drew the dead Body, thus mangled and weltering in Gore,
through the Streets, and afterward out of the Town, to the common Gallows, and
there hanged it up by the Feet. In the interim the rest brake into the other
Chambers of the House, and slaught'red all they met with; among others, there
were two young Pages of honor, of noble Birth, Count Rochfoucaut, and young
Theligius, who was Guilty of no other crime, but being the Admiral's Son in
Law. So they ran about from morning till night, ransacking 400 Houses, sparing
neither Age, nor Sex, and threw the Bodies out of the windows, so that the
Streets were strewed with murd'red Carcasses, and ran down with Blood.

The next day the Butchery was renewed, those disperate Villains stripping the
dead Bodies of their Garments, and throwing them into the River of Sein. Nor
was their Blood-thirstiness yet quenched, for Messengers were sent Post to all
Cities, commanding them to imitate Paris, and to kill all of the Religion. Many
Women with Child, Ladies and Gentlewomen, Advocates, Physicians, and other
eminent Men of Learning and Piety; among the rest Peter Ramus, and several
Students, were assassinated, without Plea, Sentence or Condemnation. I must not
omit one passage that deserves a marginal Asterism in blood, that is of Ma'sson
de Rivers, a Pastor, and the first that laid the foundation of the Protestant
Church at Paris. Mansorel, a mortal Enemy of the Religion, as soon as the
Slaughter was began in Paris, was sent Post to Angiers to prevent the News of
Massacre by others: as soon as he arrived there, he was conducted to Masson's
House; in the very Entry he meets with his Wife and there saluted her very
ceremoniously (a right Judas kiss, for he came to betray her Master) he
demanded where her Husband was, she replied in the Garden, and being brought to
him they mutually and lovingly (as to outward appearance) embraced each other,
Mansorel told him in plain terms, like a bloody Butcher, I am come hither by
the King's command to kill you, as you may perceive by these Letters, producing
his Dague ready charged. Masson answered, I have committed no Crime; however, I
beg the favor of a little time to call upon God and recommend my self to his
merciful hands. Which short Oraison being soon concluded, he with a meek
Christian temper received his Death-Wound, being Shot through the Body; but to
return to Paris. We left the Admiral's Body hanged up; the Parisians went
thither in great Multitudes, and the Queen Mother carried the King along with
them and her other two Sons to glut their eyes with that barbarous Spectacle;
but the next night the Body was conveyed away, and interred, as it is
conjectured. Their cruelty not being yet satiated, they bring some to public
Trial, to efface the blot of dishonor that might justly reflect upon the King;
and there was a parcel of Judges called out for that very purpose, who made an
Order that a man of Hay (since the Admiral's Body could not be found) should be
made, and be dragged by the Boureau through the Streets, in Effigy, which was
accordingly done, his Arms and Ensigns of Honor broken, his Memory blasted,
his Castles and Farms razed to the ground, his Issue declared Ignoble,
Infamous, and Intestate, and all the Trees in his Woods to be cut down, to the
height of six Foot.

Thus in all Towns great Murders were committed, but none more horrid or
devilish than the Massacre at Lions, Mandolet being Governor. As soon as he
received the Letters, he, by a Trumpet and Crier, summoned those of the
Religion to appear before him, which they readily did. Then he committed them
to several Prisons, and desired the common Executioner to call some to his
assistance, and to murder them in Prison, but he refused it, saying, he
executed the Law on none but such as were publicly condemned, (a goodly
Governor indeed, more cruel than the common Hangman!) Upon this denial, he
commanded the Garrison Soldiers of the Castle to take upon them that worthy
action, and they refused it likewise, upon a punctilio of Honor, that they did
not use to fight with naked men; but the Butchers and Watermen at last
(verifying the old Saying, that they are pessimum genus hominum) were the
wretched Actors of his Bloody Design, committing unheard of Cruelties, and
sporting with them in the midst of their misery. Insomuch that the Blood which
came out of the Goal, called the Archbishop's Prison, was seen in the
daytime, to the horror of the standers by, to flow reaking hot in the
Channels of the Streets, and so into the River of Seine. Thus for the space of
thirty days complete, there was no intermission of Murder and Slaughter all
over France, so that there were about 100000 Persons slain. The Guignard, in
his Oration, said, It was a great mistake that they did not cut the Basilisk
Vein.
Bridegroom and the Prince of Conde, who were secured, and turned Papists to
escape their fury, yet could not avoid it; for the one was poisoned, and the
other stabbed by the Papists. But now to the purpose. His Holiness surely could
not but detest and abhor such barbarous Inhumanity; yet since this was done
upon the account of Religion, and he is held to be the only competent Judge of
it; let us give ear to his Opinion, which we find recorded in Thuanus, a
Papist, and an Authentic Historiographer, Hist. l. 53. The Pope's Legate at
Paris gave him an exact Relation of this Massacre, which he received with great
Joy and Satisfaction; read the Letter openly in the Consistory of Cardinals,
and fell to consultation about the matter; where it was concluded and decreed,
nemine contradicente, that they should go to St. Mark's Church, and return
solemn thanks to God for so great a blessing bestowed on the Roman Church, and
the whole Christian World: and this being performed, that a Jubilee should be
forthwith published throughout all Christendom, to give thanks to the Almighty
for destroying the Enemies of the Church, etc. The Guns were fired at the
Castle of St. Angelo, Bonfires made, and all demonstrations of Joy manifested
for this great Victory. Within a short time after, there was a Procession to
St. Lewis, made by his Holiness, under a Canopy, his Train being born up by the
Emperor's Ambassador, with many of the Clergy and Nobility: and an
Inscription was set over the Church door; whereby the Cardinal of Lorrain in
the name of the French King congratulated his Holiness and the Cardinals, etc.
for the plainly stupendous effects, and altogether incredible events of the
Counsels they gave him, of the Assistance they sent him, and of their twelve
years desires and Prayers. Not long after the Pope sent Cardinal Vrsin to
Congratulate the French King in his name; who in his journey highly extolled
the zeal of those who had a hand in the Massacre, and very prodigally
distributed the Pope's blessings among them; and at Paris he used these words;
The remembrance of the late Action, to be magnified in all Ages, as conducing
to the glory of God, and the dignity of the holy Church of Rome, etc. What
could a Dionysius, or a Phalaris have said more to purpose? 'Twas nobly spoken,
like a Man of God in Armor, one that intended to make more use of St. Paul's
Sword than St. Peter's Keys to do the work of the Lord more effectually.

Pope Sixtus the fifth, because he suspected Henry the fourth of France to be
an Heritick, moved Thu. Hist. l. 91.
the Guisians (whom he styled the Maccabees of the Church of Rome) to enter
into an holy League against their Lawful Sovereign; calling in Spain and Savoy
to their Assistance, which Succors they paid off with the Rights of the Crown:
and did all that in them lay to rob him, both of his Kingdom and Life; which
forced this King to treat them as they had the Hugonots; and for standing thus
manfully upon his own Legs, in his own defense, he is shamefully abused by one
of the Romanists, a Man of a common and shameless Brow, to bespatter a Puissant
Monarch with such base and scurrilous Language: for he does not blush to
affirm, that he was 1000 times worse than Mahomet; nay, he goes farther,
saying, that no Nation ever suffered such a Tyrant from the Creation to his
time. Kos. saeus p. 17. However, the Pope Excommunicates the King, grants an
Indulgence of nine Years, to any Subject that would fight against him, as the
wages of his Rebellion; and did prognosticate (which he might easily do
without Necromancy, an Art that many of them have been very expert in) that it
would not be long 'ere he came to a violent Death. The Subjects take up Arms
against their King, and earn the Indulgence; and a Friar with his Knife
verefies the Prediction: and the exultation and joy that was at Rome for this
Assassination, can hardly be believed, were it not warranted by the Popes
Harangue to his Cardinals, printed at Paris 1589, wherein he says, this work
of God (the King's murder) is to be compared with the Incarnation and
Resurrection of Christ for it is Stupendiousness; and prefers the Friar's
courage and fervent zeal to God, before that of Elezar and Judith, averring,
that the King died in the Sin against the Holy Ghost, tho a professed Papist.
Thus a Popish King is stabbed, and condemned to Hell for sparing the Blood of
Hugonots.

I will not trouble you with the story of the Spanish Invasion in eighty eight,
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; nor the Gunpowder Plot in the timeof King
James, tho the former was plotted, countenanced, and abetted by Pope and the
latter had it is rise from the Breves of Pope Clement the eighth; (for where
shall you hear of any monstrous Design that his Holiness has not a Hand in?)
These wicked Practices are so modern, and well known, that, I presume, the
Reader wants not a Remembrancer to put him in mind of them, but my Pen is
almost choakt up with Blood and Gore; therefore I will conclude these Tragedies
with this Epilogue, made ready to my hand, on the deplored death of the Lady
Jane Gray.

Nescio tu quibus es Lector lecturus ocellis,
Hoc scio quod siccis scribere non potui.
I know not, Reader, how you can forbear,
I Am sure I could not write without a Tear.
The next thing that falls under our consideration is, the Popes
Heavenly-mindedness, Knowledge, Learning, Sobriety, Infalibility, and some
other particulars.

As to the first, to show how heavenly they are inclined; Baronius and
Genebrard, both mortal Enemies to Protestants, and great Promoters of the
Popish Interest and Religion, cannot but confess ingeniously, without any
provocation thereunto, that from the Year 870, to the Year 1050, none sat in
the Papal Chair, but such as were Necromancers, Magicians, Adulterers,
Murderers and Impious Persons.

Hildebrand was a notorious Necromancer, raised Devils familiarly, shook sparks
of Fire out of his sleeve by Magic Art, being elected by Soldiers, contrary to
the Canons of the Church, and when he obtained the Papacy, played the Devil for
Gods sake, expelled Cardinals at his pleasure, and supported himself by his
Sorcery and Witchcraft.

John thirteenth, Monstrum Papae, a monster of a Pope, he, besides other filthy
and enormous crimes which he committed, called for the Devil to assist him at
Dice, and after drank a Health to him, and, like a Devil incarnate, would
ramble about and break Windows, fire Houses in the night, and run away by the
light of them.

Pope Sylvester the second, was a Necromancer, and gave his Soul to the Devil,
by compact made with him, provided he might obtain the Popedom. This is
strange, tho true, to part with that for money, that cannot be purchased with
money; sure he had but a very bad Bargain on it.

Alexander the sixth, was guilty of Witchcraft as well as Incest, and a
concatenation of other Crimes.

Paul the third was a Magician, as well as John the 8th, 12th, 13th, 14th,
15th, 16th, 17th, as if the name, whose Etymology implies Gracious, could be so
impure and satanical; and you will find, if you consult their own Authors,
Idolatry in a Marcelline, Arrianisme in a Liberius, Diabolical Applications
Platina in vita Marcelli.
and Inhumations in a wicked Celestine, and such barbarous Cruelties, that
Paganism it self, is comparitively merciful, and Mahometism morally virtuous.

Their Learning and Knowledge in the Arts and Sciences will appear in a Pope
Paul the second, who was brought up a Merchant's Factor, and was so great a
hater of Learning and the Learned, that he pronounced them Heretics, who durst
so much as name the word Academy, either in jest or earnest: Platina in vit.
Paul. 2.
Nay farther, my Author says, Hunc ob rem Romanos ad hortabatur, ne filios
diutius in studiis literarum paterentur; satis esse si legere and scribere
potuissent; therefore he advised the Romans not to suffer their Children to go
to School any longer, than till they had learnt to write and read.

Calixtus the third, an old decrepit foolish Spaniard, of whom Cardinal
Pontanus de magni, c. 12. of his Election, Quam fatue, fatui, fatuum creavere
Calixtum. How foolishly did the fools elect thee, foolish Calixtus, to the
Papacy?

The poor Bishop Virgilius, a German Mathematician, was cited to Rome for an
Heretic, because he asserted the Antipodes, and there (as one has it) by the
fiery zeal of Pope Zachary, was committed to the Flames, to show how infallible
the Roman Oracle is in condemning that which all do maintain; and himself
maintained the Antipodes in his life, his footsteps being opposite to those of
his meek and pious Ancestors.

Some Popes have been mere ignorant Laymen at their Election.

Boniface the ninth, a Neopolitan, was so illiterate, that he could neither
write, sing, nor say, (a fit Person to be Universal Pastor, and to instruct the
ignorant) nor understand matters discussed before him; yet a notable Huckster
for selling Livings, who exposed all to sale; no Dolt could be long unpreferr'd
if he came open-handed, and could purchase with money.

One of the Benedicts was a Boy of ten years of age, a Popeling, not manumitted
from the rigor of the ferula; John the 13th, an aged Stripling of nineteen:
Nay, some Popes, as Alphonsus de Castro intimates, were such Learned Clerks, ut
penitus Grammaticam ignorarent, that they had scarce read their Grammar. What?
beardless Striplings ascend the Chair! surely it is not come to that yet! but it
is, assure your self, whatever is the matter. Hence we may rationally infer,
that that Church must needs be well managed that has such Reverend Guides and
Learned Heads, yet if you look about you, you will find more in it than you
imagine; it is very probable these Successors of St. Peter did it to avoid the
imputation of St. Paul; Too much Learning has made thee mad.

Take a spice of their Sobriety in Pope Benedict the 12th, who was so great a
Drinker, would carouze so briskly, and turn off his Cups so merrily, that it
seems he deserved this Epitaph, which some good Fellow or other bestowed on
him: the Latin's honest, but homely.

Iste fuit vero Laicis mors vipera Clero,
Devius a vero, Cupa repleta mero.
He was to Laymen death in sooth,
To Clergy and Divines
A Viper; deviating from truth;
A mere Hogshead of Wines.
Well, I Will say this for him, and a Fig for him, he was a boon blade I Will
warrant you; this is the only sociable Pope that we have met with in the whole
crew hitherto.

Innocent the eighth, a dull ignorant Sot, who would take a Cup too much in the
midst of his Affairs of greatest weight and importance, and like a true
Philosopher drink till his head run round with the World, in vindication of the
Copernican Systeme.

Their Conversation of yea, yea, and nay, nay, they observe very perfunctorily,
for the Laity and inferior Clergy out-hector the whole World in blasphemous
and customary Oaths; nor are the Popes themselves free from this vain Vice,
that is neither sweetened with Pleasure nor seasoned With Profit.

The Barons of England, seeing that the Kingdom and Crown was become absolutely
tributary to the Pope, to their great grief and perplexity, demanded some
Privileges of King John, which he had engaged by Oath to grant; to which he
returned no answer, but referred them wholly to Pope Innocent the third, as his
Liege-Lord of whom he held his Crown. Ambassadors were sent to Rome, with
Instructions and Demands to that purpose: but his Holiness resented it so ill,
that in the close of his Speech, he Swore, with a furrowed Brow, by Saint Peter
I cannot suffer this injury to be unpunished. Boldly done Innocent! 'Twas more
than St. Peter himself durst do, had he then sat in the Chair. And another
time, upon some occasion being moved to Passion, he Swore by St. Peter and St.
Paul both, that neither of them might take exceptions; of whom one wrote this
Distich.

Pope Innocent, the worst of all the rout,
If you would spell his name right, put
In out.
Robert Grosthead, the honest Bishop of Lincoln, opposed Pope Innocent, and
laughed at his thundering Excommunications; of whom it is reported, that he came
to him after his death, and put his Holiness in mind, by a blow with his
Crosier, of this Item, Surge miser, and veni in Judicum Dei: and soon after he
died of a Plurisie.

Now for the Grand Palladium of Rome, their so much boasted of, and highly
applauded infallibity, which is infeof'd upon St. Peter's Chair, tho the Pope
be Heretic, Idolater, Incestuous, a Necromancer, Sodomite, nay, what not, if
he once claps his Apostolik Seat there, he must necessarily be free from error.

Doctor John Funecius, a Man of great Learning, in the 10th Book of his
Chronology reports, that in the year 1332 Pope John the 22th, fell into a great
Heresy, which was this; That the Souls departed this life, did not enjoy the
Beatifical Vision, that is see God, till the last day; yet this Pope must be
infallible, tho guilty of so gross an Error.

There happened a great difference between this Pope and the Franciscans; he
charging them with Heresy, and they again, to requite his kindness, disowning
him, as a damnable Heretic, and no Pope; thus his Infallibility of Judgment is
disclaimed by his own Crew, and he himself un-Pop'd by them.

There were three blazing Comets conspicuous in the Roman Horizon at one and
the same time, that was in the 11th Century, viz. Benedict the 9th, Sylvester
the third, and Gregory the sixth, and, as one says very well, It were very
strange if they should produce no alteration in the Ecclesiastical Body. Three
Popes cohabiting at Rome, and as many more residing in three several Countries;
a Grand Schism for the space of forty years; and Ambition and Corruption, being
more prevalent to advance to the Pontifical Dignity, than a good Christian
Life. It must needs be a greater Prodigy, than a Miracle-monger, by the help of
his forged Legends, can pretend to, that contrariety should meet and shake
hands, and absolute Contradictions prove a Pope infallible. These were
Anti-Popes in competition and opposition to the Papal Promotion; nay, their own
Authors are at difference, yet a^ daggers drawn about his infallibility. Se^
Gerson, Occham, Alimain, Ecchins, Hosins, Pighins and Waldensis. Nay, the
prettiest humor of all is, that they should impose upon us so much as to force
us to believe, that when two Popes contradict each other, yet they are both
infallible, or if they enjoin the perusal of different Bibles we must use
neither.

Pope Urban the 8th lived the longest and died the richest of all the Popes;
for he sat in the Chair twenty years: a rare thing (for they usually kick up
their heels very suddenly, and the reason is this, if they should live long
they would do too much mischief) tho none of them ever attained to the years of
St. Peter, who, as they say, was Bishop of Rome twenty five. This Urban was a
very active Man, and did not only pry into the present Affairs of the Church,
but with a retrospect did rip up and dive into old matters; to which end and
purpose he appointed a select Committee to examine Accounts, and take
cognizance of the Errors of his Predecessors; upon which occasion this witty
Pasquin was made at Rome; where there are the Statues of St. Peter and St. Paul
erected upon a Bridge there directly opposite one to the other, a merry wag had
clapped a pair of Spurs upon St. Peter's heels, and St. Paul is supposed to say
to him, Whither so fast in this riding posture? who answers him; I apprehend
there is great danger in my stay at Rome, by reason of this new Commission, for
I fear they will question me for denying my Master, therefore I Will post away to
some other place of Safety; and truly Brother Peter, said Paul, I intend not to
stay long after you, for I have as much reason to suspect that they will
examine me for persecuting Christians before my Conversion.

Pope Zachary, when the trade of Church-merchandizes was very dead, and he had
little or nothing to do, rather than he would be idle, wrote to Bishop Boniface
in Germany directions when to eat Bacon, and he did very well in it, whatsoever
the prating Hugonot says to the contrary; tho he had done far better, in the
Opinion of some of our modern Casuists, if he had also given him some wholesome
Instructions concerning the Manducation of Eggs, that so the Prelate might have
had a complete Dish.

Leo the tenth had an intention to create Raphael Vrbin, a mere Painter,
Cardinal; And why might not a good Painter make a good Cardinal? but sure it
was not he who drew the Pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul, and made them so
red-faced, that that he was reproved for it by some of the Conclave, because
the ignorant might be apt to judge them great Drinkers, to the scandal of
Religion; but he soon replied, that is your mistake and not mine; for I made
them so ruddy, because I knew that if they were living they would blush for
shame at the vicious lives of their pretended Successors. Now what if it were
the same Man? It was great and good Policy in the Pope, beyond the reach of a
Protestant Noddle; for hereby he might oblige all of that Profession, in hopes
of the like Promotion, that when ever any of them for the future should
undertake to draw the Pourtraicture of any Saint whatsoever, he should make
them of a more pallid and sober Complexion. I Will warrant you this leering
Hugonot laughs in his sleeve at this pretty intrigue of Church-Policy: but no
matter for that, the Papist cries out, Let him laugh that wins, and so gives
you one Proverb in exchange of another.

It is reported in our History, that King James of blessed Memory did once in
his Progress vouchsafe to bestow a visit upon Sir -- Pope, Knight, whose Lady
at that time was lately delivered of a Daughter, and the Infant was presented
to his Majesty with a Paper of Verses in her Hand which the King was much
pleased with, the Contents whereof were as follows;

See this little Mistress here,
Who never sat in Peter's Chair,
Or a Triple Crown did wear,
And yet she is a Pope;
She hardly is a seven-night old,
Nor did she ever hope
To Saint one with a Pope,
And yet she is a Pope.
No Benefices she e're sold;
Nor did dispense with Sins for Gold;
No King her Feet did ever kiss,
Or had from her worse look than this,
And yet she is a Pope.
A Female Pope you will say, a second Joan;
Nay, sure she is Pope Innocent, or none.
Now if any or all your Romanists can, out of your long Nomenclatura of Popes,
produce one that may come near this Protestant Pope for Innocence, Modesty, or
Humility, we will save you the labor of compassing Sea and Land to make
Proselytes, for we will all unanimously return, and without any more ado
re-unbosom our selves with your Holy Mother the Church of Rome.

It is thought by some, and those Judicious Persons too, that Pasqin, among the
many witty Jests he has thrown upon the Pope and Clergy, never acted any thing
with better Grace, than when he counterfeited himself so affronted that he was
ready to die for very Grief, because he had received such an Injury as had
almost broke his very Heart: and being asked by one that heard him bemoan
himself; what Injury, Friend, is this that is done to thee? Has any one called
thee Thief or Buggerer? No, no, said he. What then? And so went on naming most
of the grossest Indignities that could be put upon a Man by opprobrious
Language. No, no, pish, said he, you have not hit it yet; and so breaking out
into grievous Sobs and Sighs, Alas! alas! said he, it is worse then all you can
imagine, they have been so abusive as to call me Pope. Nay farther, he has
given you to understand what conceit he and all Men should have of the Pope, by
this following Hexastick.

Hic Carapha jacet Superis invisus and Imis
Styx animam; Tellus putre cadaver habet.
Invidit pacem Terris, Diis Vota Precesque,
Impius, and Clerum perdidit, and Populum.
Hostibus infensis supplex, infidus amicis:
Scire cupis paucis caetera? Papa fuit.
Here the hate of Heaven and Hell, Carapha lies:
In The Grave's his Body; in Styx his Soul cries:
He envied Peace with Men and Prayers to God;
To Lay and Clergymen a wicked Rod.
Suppliant to Foes; but Faithless to his Friend:
In short, he was a Pope, and there is an End.
Pope Leo the 10th, being told by his Confessor, that he need fear nothing,
because he had the Keys of Heaven at his Girdle, and those of the Church
Treasury also, consisting in the Merits of Christ, and the blessed Saints, gave
him* this true answer. Thou know that he who has once sold a thing, has no
longer right to it; therefore, since I have made sale of Heaven and all to
others, I have nothing to do with it my self; which being the common Traffic
at Rome, was the occasion of this saying.

Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus, omnia Romae,
Cum pretio. --
Rome gives to all that part with all their Gold:
For there all things are merely bought and sold.
The same Pope being reproved by some of his Cardinals, for leading so lewd a
Life, being grown worse and worse, since his Inauguration; answered them, If I
am wicked you are the cause of it, for you made me what I am; which strange
reply, put them to this question, what he meant by saying so; why, quoth he,
you have made me Pope, and it is impossible to be a Pope and a good Man; Now
this must needs be infallibly true, because Infallibility it self, maintains it
to be so.

Thus you see what it is to be a Pope, and may rest satisfied with this as a
Corollary for all; if horrid Blasphemies, Oaths, and Execrations; if filthy
Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, Sodomy and Buggery; if intolerable Pride, Ambition,
Tyranny and Oppression; if bloody Cruelty, Butcheries, Murders and Massacres;
if sordid Avarice, Simony and Sacrilege, if Hellish Sorcery, Witchcraft, and
Necromancy; if blockish Ignorance, Stupidity, Gaming, and all manner of
Debaucheries; if these or any of these are commendable and sufficient
Qualifications for the Papacy, then no Persons in the World were ever more fit
to govern the Sea of Rome, than those Popes that we have given you an Account
of; but it is now high time to take our leave, and bid them all Adieu.

Sic explicit Actus primus. Exit Pope, Enter Cardinal.

Of Cardinals, Abbots, Bishops, and Jesuits promiscuously.
ANd first of the Cardinals, being next to the Pope, and Superior to others in
Dignity; let us observe whether the Cardinals Cap shrowds as many Vices as the
Triple Crown; but here I must tell you for your Comfort before hand, that you will
find never a Barrel better Herring but like Master like Man; like Head like
Members; and those as bad as bad can be, nay, which is worst of all, it is a
stark shame, that there is no shame among them.

The Popes have been Fathers to some, but Silvester the first was Godfather to
all of them: for by him they were called Cardinals. quoth. Cardines, because they
are the Persons about whom, like Hinges, the Church Militant ought to move,
repose upon, and be supported; to intimate unto us, that those who attain to
the Dignity of the Cardinalate, ought to be so Exemplary in their Lives and
Conversations, that all Christians may be regulated by their Actions, and the
very Infidels persuaded to return into the bosom of the Roman Catholic and
Apostolic Church; Who, when he is created by the Pope's Breve, it is in these
Words; Creamus te Socium Regibus, superiorem Ducibus and Fratrem nostrum. We do
make thee equal to Kings, Superior to Dukes, and our own Brother. Innocent the
fourth gave them the red Hat, Boniface the ninth their Vestment, an^ Paul the
second the Scarlet Cap, to signify unto us how ready they are to venture their
Lives and shed their Blood for the Honor of God, and Service of their holy
Mother the Church, or which is more probable, to spill the Blood of those good
Christians who oppose their superstitious and idolatrous Worship; Now, how they
deserve either Name or Habit bestowed on them by his Holiness, whose
Infallibility is as much to be questioned in this, as in any other Matter,
these ensuing Relations will soon convince you.

And first, for their blasphemous and profane Expressions and abuses of
Scripture; for we will be more plain with them than their Universal Bishop, and
not cloak Vice with the name of Virtue.

Cardinal Bembo was so much affected with, and tied up to Cicero, that he would
use none but his Words: therefore the Senate of Venice must be styled, Patres
conscripti, Dukes and Dukedoms, Reges and Regna, the grand Turk and the Sophi,
Reges Armeniae and Thracum: Excommu^ication, Interdictio Igni and Aquae; Faith,
Persuasio; Nuns, Vestals; and the Pope Pontifex Maximus, and he was so puffed
up with this Conceit, that he altogether slighted St. Paul's Epistles, abusing
them with the Name of Epistolacciae, little idle Epistles, dissuading his
Friends from perusal of them, lest thereby they should corrupt their Eloquence.
'Twas done like a true Christian Cardinal, to prefer Cicero the Pagan, before
St Paul the learned and great Apostle of the Gentiles.

And another Popish Prelate had so great a stock of Impudence as to say, that
St. Paul penned many unnecessary things, which might have been better omitted;
and farther, that if he had seriously considered the offense that might
afterward have been given thereby, he would have been better advised, before
he had ventured upon the Publication of them.

Cardinal Baronius, in his Discourse against the Seignory Baron. in his
admonition against the Venetians, p. 47.
of Venice, blames the Venetians in these proud and profane words, The
Venetians doing the contrary are as Monsters and Prodigies of the Devil; adding
this reason to corroborat^ and strengthen his Argument, and settin^ himself
above the Angels, to prove hi^ authority over them; Know ye not tha^ we shall
judge the Angels? Abusing tha^ Scripture, and wresting it for his own ends,
whereas it speaks of all the Faithful, (not Clergymen solely) who shall sit as
Assistants to our Savior at the last day, when he shall pronounce, Go ye
cursed, etc. against the wicked Sinners.

Bellarmine is so bold as to affirm, that the Pope is Head of the Church, Etiam
Christo secluso, Bellar. l. 1. de Pon. c. q.
though contrary to the Holy Gospel, I am with you always, unto the end of the
World: and in opposition to their own Canons: which says expressly; Christ is
always the Governor and Head of his Body, viz; the Gl. v. non. consonam Clem.
Ne Romam l. 1. de Elect. tit. 3.
Church, and although the Vicar fail, yet he does never fail it. It is reported
by an Italian Writer, that a Cardinal lying upon his deathbed, desired to be
shriven; and when his Confessor came to do that Office, he told him that he
must worship one God only; who replied so I do, and that God is the Pope: for
since his Holiness is God on Earth, (and two Gods are not to be worshipped) I
had rather adore the visible than the invisible Deity: the Confessor rejoined,
the Pope is neither God nor Christ, but the Cardinal closed the discourse with
this Blasphemy, I would have thee to understand, that if Christ were alive
again, and should take a Journey to Rome, the Pope would give him a very cold
(or no) reception, unless he would humble himself so far as to kiss his
Pantofle.

It was the devout saying of a profound Doctor of the Roman Church, who did
declare openly, that if he were satisfied no Person had St. Paul's Epistles but
himself, he would commit them to the flames, and burn them, rather than they
should be publikly Read.

Next, of their Riches, Lasciviousness, and Incontinency.

Baptista Fulgosius, though a great stickler for Popery, reports o^ Peter
Riarius, one of Pope Fulgos. l. 9. c. 1.
Sixtus the fourth's Cardinals, that his Gowns, the Tieks, and Coverings of
his Bed, were all of Cloth of Gold, and his other Furniture of Silk, and that
he feasted Elianor of Arragon, as she was on her Journey to Hercules d'Este,
Duke of Ferrara, with whom she was to be married very sumptuously, I had almost
said Royally, where there was such variety, and different sorts of Luxurious
Viands, and Delicious Quelqueschoses, that the Banquet continued seven hours,
and that his Guests might not be tired with so long and tedious a Treat, he
diverted them with several Plays, which were acted whilst they sat at Table,
and every Servitor that attended, to render the Entertainment more splendid,
had a new Suit every Course that was brought in; this is according to the
Proverb, Prelates fare indeed, that is delicious Food; yet all this is short of
what he says afterward, that he was so shameless as to keep his Whore Tiresia,
publicly, and so splendidly rich in all her gorgeous Apparel, that her very
Shoes were studded with Diamonds, Pearls, and precious Stones.

The great and modest Prelate, John Bishop of Crema, who was commissionated to
oppose the Marriage of the English Clergy, did perform his errand so well as to
confute himself grossly; for that very night he was taken in Bed with a
Strumpet. What of all this? you must not take notice of what they do, but what
they say, thus the Catholics excuse it, but I Will warrant you the Hugonot will
either laugh, or shake his head at such frivolous and sinful Evasions.

At the Council of Trent, (a fit place for such an Action) a Husband lent his
Wife to a Cardinal (see what Fripperers and Brokers they are, that can pawn
their Wives Chastity for filthy lucre) and though at first she was religiously
scrupulous, pleading Conscience, yet she soon altered her Mind, and prostituted
her Body to the holy Man's Embraces. The next Morning the Cardinal's Concubine
went very confidently to her Husband, and paid him the Money promised for her
work; telling him withal, that though you take it but for a Loan, yet assure
your self it is an absolute sale, therefore you had best provide your self
another Bedfellow; for to tell you the Truth, I had rather be sold out right,
then barely lent, that I may not be put to the trouble of changing so often.

There was a Bishop who said these Words in the hearing of the Writer; In
former times Stevens Apol. for Heroditus.
Clergymen were advanced for their Learning and Knowledge in the Tongues; but
for his own particular he understood not one Syllable of Latin but his
Passe-Latin (that is the Office of a Pander or Bawd) by which means he was
promoted to the Episcopacy.

John de la Casa, Archbishop of Benevent, and the Pope's Legate in the whole
State of Venice, was the Author of an Italian Poem, where he chanted forth 1000
Encomiums of Sodomy: among other Epithets which he gives it, he calls it a
heavenly Work; which Book was printed at Venice by Trojanus Nanus, as the
Amanuenses that copied it out, do averr, Monstrum horrendum, etc. A Monster of
of Men.

A certain Friar, summoned to appear before his Diocesan, being accused for a
Lutheran, but he not only excused, but accquitted him, because he could wench,
swear, be drunk, and did not quote Scripture; which true Story gave birth to
this facetious Epigram,

Esse Lutheranum rumor te, Gaurice, clamat;
Sed tuus Antistes te tamen esse negat;
Tam Scortaris ait, quam si vel Episcopus esses,
Et potas dubiam pervigil usque Diem:
Nec memor es Christi, nisi cum jurare libebit,
Nec scis Scripturas, nec breve jota sacrae.
Nempe per haec suevit nunqam fallentia signa
Ille vigil sanas noscere Pastor Oves.
Gauricus by report's a Lutheran,
His ghostly Father says he is no such man,
Because he wenches at that wanton rate,
As if the Miter adorned his bald Pate,
He Is such a fuddle Cap too, as they say,
He tipples without ceasing Night and Day.
Nor thinks on Christ, but when he is swearing Oaths,
Nor of the Holy Writ one tittle knows.
Now by such never failing Marks as these,
Which are his good Sheep the watchful Pastor sees.
Cardinal Granvil was a debauched Man, one of low Birth, but high Advancement,
a Smith's Son; and we may well say of him, as Juvenal did of the Greek Orator
of the same extract, in his 10th Satyr, who, though an Heathen, did exceed him
as much in Morality as Rhetoric; and if his Lot had fallen within the Pale of
the Church, would undoubtedly have deserved the Cardinalate much more than he,
and proved a better Christian.

A carbone and forcipibus, gladiosque parante
Incude, and luteo Vulcano ad Rhetora missus.
The private part of this Cardinal's Life, his secret Retirements, and Closet
Conversation, was dissolute and detestably lascivious, even to Romanists
themselves; the dimensions of his Immoralities and Impieties were of a vast
extent; his Adultery, Lechery, and Wantonness banished him from Rome, Naples and
Millan: He, to promote his Lust, caused several exquisite Pieces of obscenity
to be drawn and printed, and in his private recesses he had the Pictures of the
Greatest Ladies and Beauties pourtraicted to the Life, which had been by him
violated, and prostituted to his devilish Lust; insomuch that there was a
Pasquinata that went up and down of him and some others, that Carrera's
Cowardice, the Duke of Sesa's Gout, Don John's Cod-piss and Cardinal Granvil's
Breeches had lost the Guleta.

Heliodorus, was so captivated and taken with his Aethyopian, or amorous
History of Cariclea, which was to be called in by reason of some loose passages
therein, or he to lose his Bishopric; that the mitred Gentleman made choice of
the latter, rather lose his profit, than his pleasure and wanton humor.

Octavian of St. Gelais, Bishop of Angoulisme in France, (yet the worthy
Translator of Ovid de art amandi) was so Poetically waggish, that he would lay
a Wager, he could answer any one Extempore, should speak to him in Rythme. Done
and done, Cockpit Law; the Wager is agreed upon and laid, and these three
Verses were repeated to him, whilst he was dandling his breaden God.

L'autre jour venant de l'Escole,
Ie trouvai la Dame Nicole,
Laquelle etoit de verd vestue.
Coming from School the other Day,
I met with bonny Bess by the Way.
Clothed all in green.
To which he readily, replied without interruption to his devout Missification.

Ostez moy du col cest 'estole,
Et si bien tossed je ne l'accole,
I'auray la gageure perdu.
Some one take off my Stole, I pray,
And if I kiss her not straightway,
I Will lose the Wager clean.
A pretty amorous and kissative Prelate indeed? This can be no less than
Osculum Charitatis, let what Female soever receive it.

Of their Cruelty, Massacres, Murders, Coveteousness, Ignorance.
NOr have we done with Cardinal Granvil; for tho we concluded the last, we must
begin this Chapter with him. He was more than suspected to be an Atheist, very
much addicted to Enchantments, Sorcery and Poisoning; and he made an Essay of
this his black Art on the wise and virtuous Maximilian the second, King of the
Romans; yet this walking Monument of Vices was looked upon by the Pope and King
of Spain to be a very fit Instrument in settling the holy Inquisition in the
Netherlands; a proper Agent, sufficiently qualified with Cruelty for that
bloody Employment he was to excute.

This bloody Inquisition had no Cloak to shroud it is Tyranny, but pious fraud
covered with Robes of Sanctity, erected in several Parts of Europe (but we will
only mention that of the Netherlands, wherein the Cardinal was so much
concerned) was confirmed and ratified by Pope Sixtus the fourth. This bloody
Granvil, a Sanguine Cardinal, must be the good Man appointed to settle this
horrid Inquisition, who, with the assistance of that Monster the Duke d' Alva,
puts all in a Flame and Combustion; and to enumerate the Troubles, Miseries,
Cruelties, Massacres, Murders, Barbarismes, and Devastations both of that
People and Country, is a Task beyond my Weakness, and too sanguinary for a Man
of my Constitution: only in short, these Inquisitors did imprison and execute
all Protestants with the most exquisite and ineredible Tortures; confiscate
their Goods, and the Proprietors were ruined, expelled, imprisoned, chained,
fettered, burned, hanged, beheaded, broken on Wheels, hanged alive by the
Feet; nay, these are but Infant-Cruelties, in the very Cradle, compared to the
Wrack, the Trough of Water, Pulley: Barbarisms far excceding the Bull of
Phalaris, Regulus his nailed Barrel, or the Tortures of the most bloody and
arbitrary Tyrants among Infidels; Cruelties that would melt a Rock, and so
inhuman, that it is a Crime to think on them without the Tribute of a Tear:
nothing was to be seen throughout this miserable Country but Wheels, Gibbets,
Stakes, Wracks, and wretched Objects of Pity; nothing to be heard but the cries
of poor Orphans and Widows for their Parents and Husbands, the Sons living a
deplorable life in Woods, the Daughters and Virgins ravished and brutishly
used, beyond all Modesty; insomuch that Cruelty in a Human shape could not have
been more outrageous and destructive, then these modern Pharaohs. The Duke
d'Alva, that Sponge of Belgian blood, boasted, that in six years he had
dispatched to the other World by Course of Justice, at least 18000 Belgians,
and yet the President of his Council said, that he quite spoiled the
Netherlanders with too much Clemency and Mercy; so that it might very well be
said of him, as it was once of the Roman Emperor Caligula; that he never
spared Man in his Rage. Nobility, Honor, Merit, Chastity, nor any Virtue, could
privilege the Possessors from the Wrack, Pulley, Gibbet, etc. the usual
Attendants of these distressed Souls, and constantly waited on their Hearses.
They were so rigorously used by these Lords Inquisitors, that their very
Thoughts must be suppressed and stifled for fear of Discovery; (so that the
Proverb failed here, Thoughts were not free) for fear of the same misfortune of
the Knight at Rome, who was executed for putting a Dream into Words; Nay, the
Torments of some were warnings to all; witness the timorous temper of Sevilian,
who had a fruitful Pear Tree growing in his Garden, and the Inquisitors
requested some of that Fruit; but he for fear of displeasing them, plucked up
the very Tree it self by the Roots, and freely bestowed it on them, Fruit and
Tree and all. I will conclude this Paragraph, with the saying of an English
Knight, upon another occasion; if all Cruelties were lost, they might be found
in this Inquisition; and yet this was settled, promoted, and principally
managed by the Religious Clergyman, Cardinal Granvil.

In the Reign of Otho the Emperor, Hatto Bishop of Mentz in Germany, was so
pitiful to the Poor, that in a time of great Dearth and Want, he assembled a
great Multitude of them together, put them in a Barn, and then set it on fire
and burnt them; justifying his inhuman Action, with as inhuman and unepiscopal
an Expression, That they differed nothing at all from Rats, and Vermin that
devoured the Corn, and consequently were good for nothing. But, he that sits
above all, and sees all, sent such Troops of Rats to execute his Vengeance,
that they eat him up alive; though he thought to defend himself from their
assaults, by climbing up his lofty Tower, but they pursued him thither, and
never left hunting him from Place to Place, till they had dispatched and
devoured him; and this Place is called the Rats Tower to this very day.

And yet (so obdurate are some Persons in their Cruelty) notwithstanding this
severe Judgment executed upon the former Miter'd Offender; Herebert, Archbishop
of Cologne, was so unhappy, as to be related to a Brother, Heir of the like
Cruelty to the Poor, in the like Extremity.

The Cardinal of St. Eustace, poisoned Pope Alexander the 5th, who might rather
be said to usurp the Papal Throne, then to be fairly made choice of, and
elected to it, and adopted to himself the name of John the 23th.

The cruel Prelate of Verdan, was the first that ever showed Phil. Comines.
King Lewis the 11th, the Invention of Iron Cages; and for a reward of his
Mitred Cruelty, was justly mewed up in one of them, to make the first
Experiment of the Invention, and confined like a bloody Bird of prey, to that
Cage for 14 years together.

As to their Avarice, and Covetousness; Pontanus in his Book of Liberality,
tells you, that one Cardinal Angelot, was such a close-fisted griping Miser,
that he would creep privately by night into his own Stable, and steal away the
allowance of Hay from the poor Horses; which he so constantly used, that his
resolute, and bold Horseler took heart of Grace, and banged him well-favourdly
for his pains.

It is reported, that when a covetous Prelate begged a fat Benefice of Lewis
the 12th, King of France, (notwithstanding the Pluralities he already enjoyed)
he made him this answer, Tot dabo tibi, quod Diabolus portabit omnia, I shall
give thee so long, that the Devil will carry all away at last.

As to the lewd Lives, Fraud and Coveteousness, of the Popish Clergy; there is
a standing Monument thereof in the stone walls of the Library at Fulda, which
remains still to their Reproach, viz. the Picture of a Wolf with a shaven Crown,
a Monk's Cowle, leaning on a Staff, and preaching to a company of Geese, and
this is his Doctrine; Testis est mihi Deus quam cupiam vos omnes in visceribus
meis; and another of a Cat, with a Miter on her Head, and a Crosier in her Paw,
instructing the Mice; to whom one of the most apprehensive of those diminutive
Animals, as nimble with her tongue, as her feet said; Charius est mihi ut
moriar Paganus, quam sub vestra manu fiam Christianus; but crafty Mrs. Evans
suddenly replies,

Quod fueram non sum Frater, caput aspice tonsum.
I am not what I was of late,
Brother, behold my shaven Pate. But she rejoyns,
Cor tibi restat idem, vix tibi praesto fidem.
Thy heart's the same as formerly;
Therefore I dare not credit thee.
These Pictures are above 200 years old, and do notably discover the temper of
the Prelacy, and are not a whit the worse, because Wicelius calls them
Lutheranissimas, but the better.

As to their Pride, Stupidity and blockish Ignorance; It is recorded in
History, of the Cardinal of Avignon, that when the French King saw the
Grandeur, State, and Pomp of the Popes Court, and the Haughtiness and Pride of
his Cardinals; he ask't him whether the Apostles were ever lacquey'd with such
a Train at their heels, or attended by such a numerous Retinue? To whom he
answered, No surely Sir. But you must understand, that they were Apostles, when
Kings were Shepherds, that is the reason*

Archbishop Parker, in his Antiq^ Britan. says, that a French Bishop, being
to take his Oath before the Archbishop of Canterbury, met with the word
Metropoliticae, which he could by no means Pronounce, so ignorant he was, and
therefore past it over with this bald expression in French, Soit pour dit, Let
it be so said or spoken; so be it.

He was a wise Bishop indeed, (as wise as the Fellow that put out the Candle,
that the Fleas might not see to bite and sting him with their proboscis,) who
commenced a Suit with his Canons, which proved very dilatory, but he at last
overthrew them, and took order in his life time, that his Tomb should not lie
along in the Church as others do, but stand upright, for fear that after his
death they should piss upon his Body by way of revenge. A pretty Pastor, who
took more care of his Body while living, than of the state of his Soul after
death.

Not many Years ago, a President of the high Court of Parliament, was so just
and modest as to beg the favor of a Night's Lodging with a Lady of Quality and
Honor, upon which Terms he promised her audience, the Lady having at that time
a Cause depending before him: his Name I will conceal, but withal give you
this notice of him, that it was the same Person, who not not long after being
made an Abbot, wrote a severe Book against the Lutherans (which he dedicated to
the Pope) in so harsh and uncouth a Style, that his Holiness was resolved to
make Cul-paper of it; for going one day to the Close-Stool (to show as Platina
says, that he is subject to the Necessities and Infirmities of Nature as well
as other Persons) to ease himself, brought a Disease upon himself by making
cleanly use of a Leaf of it; for it did so chafe and gall his Apostolic Seat,
that he lost a great deal of Leather, and was as sore in the Fundament as he
could have been in the Feet, had his Devotion put him upon the Trott in a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. See the dire Effects of crabbed Latin; it is ten times
worse than the Piles, Hemorrhoids or Fistula in ano; but I Will warrant you this
was such a warning to him, that his Holiness, of his own accord, and for his
own good, without the Advice of a Physician, did forbear ever after the use of
such excoriating Abstersives.

This Question was once proposed in a Council, An sint Episcopi immediate a
Christo, an mediate a Pontifice? A Reverend Bishop moved with it, made this
learned and Christian reply, Parcat mihi Dominus Christus, non sum ab ipso.

Another of their Reverend Doctors, being quite baffled and beat off of the
Stage with downright Scripture, pleaded this as an excuse, Ego non sum
Theologus, Ego sum Canonicus.

One of these Reverendissimi, was not at all ashamed to declare openly his
admiration, that such young Fellows and Boys should now a days quote the new
Testament, per diem, whereas he did solemnly and truly profess, that he was
fifty years of Age and upward before he was so wise as to understand what the
New Testament meant.

But here we will bid adieu to these Illustrissimos, and pass from the
Cardinal's red-Hat, to the Jesuits black-Cap; which I fear will prove more
mischievous.

Take but a view of some of their Pranks, and you will find them as expert and
knowing in the exquisite Methods of crafty and circumventing Wickedness, as any
of the Popes or preceding Cardinals.

As to the name of Jesuit, it breaths nothing but health and prosperity, being
derived from Jesus; but as to the nature of the Persons, nothing but death and
damnation; and for their presumption in assuming to themselves this name, they
were very much maligned, and hated at first, and that was the reason they
called themselves afterward Socios Jesu, the Companions of Jesus. Now in the
sacred Writ, if you strictly examine it throughout, you will find only one, and
that a goodly one, that was called Christ's Companion, viz. Judas: so much for
their name. They have also a Nickname, which they will carry to their Graves.
When they first negotiated for footing in Paris, they demanded what they were,
whether Seculars or Regulars; and they made answer, Tales Quales, Such and
Such; a Nickname, which they will never be able to claw off, for they are
upbraided with it to this very day.

The Glorious Patron of these Popish Janissaries, was an infirm Enthusiastic
Spanish Soldier, and Cripple; and they, in imitation of him, their first
founder, do hault lamely ever since; his name was Ignatius Loyola, who being a
Soldier in those times when Ferdinand of Arragon invaded the Kingdom of
Navarr, and opposed King John de Albret, whom the Pope had excommunicated,
because he supplied the King with Succors; At this very time was this Loyola a
Soldier at Pampelona, where he was maimed; it being then besieged by the King:
this Patron of that Holy Order resolved to erect a Society of Jesuits, which
should be able from that time forward to maintain and uphold the Usurpations of
his Holy Master, and to promote the Power of the unerring Prelate of Rome;
which they do infinitely prefer beyond the Life, Honor, and Good of Kings: to
which purpose these Fauters of the Popes Power have a peculiar Vow, and take an
Oath of blind Obedience a fourth Vow unknown to other Orders, whereby they move
Subjects against their Sovereigns, and stir them up to Rebellion against their
Lawful Princes.

Let us begin with their Blasphemies both in Expressions and Opinions; and you
shall find them very bold as to these Particulars.

These are they that infected Ravilliac, that monstrous Assassine, with these
and the like Blasphemies, That to make War against the Pope was to make War
against God; that God is the Pope and the Pope is God. O horrid! Lucianisme is
modest to such Christianisme comparatively. These are the Persons who
blasphemously substitute another God on Earth besides our Holy Father in
Heaven, whom they style most Holy Father, and separate Jesus Christ from his
Body and Spouse, the Holy Church, creating him a Vicar General or Vicegerent
in all his Kingdoms: etiam Bell. l. 1. de Christo secluso. What shall we say of
Pontif c. 9. such a pack of Saints as these. The Saracens had an ancient Law,
that whosoever should blaspheme the name of Christ, or the Virgin Mary, should
be starved to death between two Boards.

Galeacius, a Duke, hanged a Man only for murmuring against him. And the Duke
of Mantua put another to death for the like Offense; and must Blasphemy against
the Almighty go unpunished in such pretended Sanctimonious Religiosi as these
Jesuits seem to be? But we'll leave the punishment of this Crime to that Lord
whose Motto is, Revenge is mine.

Father Garnett the Jesuit, one of the Gun-powder-Plot, had this Question put
to him by the Earl of Nottingham, Whether if any one should confess to him in
the Morning that he intended to murder the King next Evening, he was bound in
Conscience to reveal it? To whom he answered in the Negative: and Binetus,
another of the Tribe, confirms this Opinion, in these words to Casaubon;
Praestare Reges omnes perire, quam si vel semel Confessionis Sigillum
violaretur; Regem enim ait humani, Juris Imperium esse, Confessionem Juris
divini. Nay farther, another Jesuit in France was so audacious as to affirm
openly; Si Dominus noster Jesus Christus in Terris versaretur morti obnoxious,
et aliquis sibi in Confessione dixisse velle se illum occidere, priusquam
Confessionem revelaret passurum se, ut Christus occidatur; that is, If our Lord
Jesus Christ were upon Earth, Mortal, and a Person should Confess to him, that
he would kill him; he would rather suffer our Savior to be murdered than
reveal his Confession.

Nor are they less practiced in horrid Murders than Blasphemies.

'Twas a young stripling of this Pious Order, that stabbed Henry the Fourth in
the Mouth with his Parricide Knife, intending his Murder, tho it only proved
the loss of a Tooth; which moved the good King to no other return, than this
pleasant Repartie. Falloit il que les Jesuistes fussent convanicus par ma
bouche. Must the Jesuits be confuted by my own Mouth? Hereupon they were
commanded to depart the Kingdom by a certain Day, and a new Stone-Gallows
erected before the Palace Gate for the Execution of the Offender; (tho the
Parliaments Decree against this wicked Act was made null at Rome,) and
afterward the Pusillanimous Prince removed it out of fear; which made one
descant wittily upon this timorous Action of the King's, in this French
Quatrain.

Sire si vous voulez du tout a l'advenir,
De l' Assassin Chastel oster le souvenir,
Ostant la Pyramide and l' Arrest qui le touch;
Qu'on vous remette donc une dent dans la bouche.
Great Sir if you will have succeeding times,
Ignorant of the Assassine Chastl's Crimes;
Waving the Arrest and Gibbet, Sovereign dread,
Let him another Tooth set in your Head.
But this was only a Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy acted by Francis Raviliac,
born at Angoulesme in France, who, after he had attempted four several times to
kill the King, tho still happily prevented, began that day with Confession, and
seeming Devotion, whereon he perpetrated that horrid Murder, (which was on
Friday the 14th of May, An. 1610.) and employed the remaining part to follow
the Kings Coach, to find out a convenient opportunity, which he met with at
last, to the great damage and irreparable loss of that Kingdom; which he
accomplished at last with a Stilletto, and two Stabs in the side, near the
Church of St. Innocents, at the end of the Street of Ferronnerie, the King
being in his Carosse, that was put to the stand by the stoppage of a Coach and
Cart; which he perceiving, being then in a shop hard by, waiting the good hour,
as he thought, came out and killed the King, and suffered for it upon a
Scaffold, in the usual place of Execution; where he died with most exquisite
and deserved Torments. All which was done by the Instigation of this wicked and
cruel Society. They persuaded this Monster, that the King intended to make War
against the Pope, and that to make War against him, was a Theomachy, or open
War with the Deity; and there was found about him a Character with a Heart of
Cotton hung about his Neck, which he showed the Jesuit D' Aubinie, who
confessed him and the Knife, whereon was engraven a Heart and a Cross; and that
which was one occasion of this barbarous Fact, was, That these Persons of the
Popes Party had published throughout the whole Kingdom, that whosoever should
serve Henry the Fourth in these Wars, tho he was their Lawful and undoubted
King, could not avoid damnation.

The Gunpowder Plot was another Jesuitical Contrivance. The Provincial, Father
Garnet, was privy to it in its very infancy, so were others of that Society, as
Baldwin, Hammond, Tesmund and Gerard, who were all particularly named by the
Conspirators in their Confessions. A Fact of that dreadful Consequence, had it
taken effect, and so heinous in it self, that Garnet the Jesuit said himself
before Doctor Overal and others, That he would give all the world, were it at
his disposal, to clear his Conscience or Name from that hateful Treason. Yet
when it did miscarry, many of that Society had a Religious Veneration for these
Irreligions Wretches who were deeply engaged in it. What a Coil was there about
the feigned Miracle of Garnet's Structure! and his Picture, as well as
Gerard's, was to be seen at la Fleche, and other Places among the Martyrs of
that Society. In the Town of Dole toward Lorrain, the Jesuits have a great
House given them, called L'arc, and Henry the Fourth gave them la Fleche, upon
the River Loire, two stately Covents, among many other Houses for change, which
they have, (see the gratitude of these Villains, to be the Death of their
princely Patron) tho this latter may be called a Quiver, containing 8000
poisoned Shafts of all sizes; hereupon their Ferrier played upon them this
merry Distich;

Arcum Dola dedit, dedit his la Flecha Sagittam;
Sed quis funem illis quem meruere dabit?
La Fleche the Arrow, Dole gave them the Bow,
But who will on them the deserved Rope bestow?
Nay, his Holiness himself, Pope Clement the 8th, who first promoted this
Treason by his Breves, did sufficiently testify his good Will toward them, by
making the Jesuit Tesmund Penetentiary at St. Peter's in Rome, after the
discovery of this Horrid Plot.

And their Divinity is of as deep a Scarlet Dye as their sanguinary and bloody
Actions; for they give free liberty and permission to any Person to kill
another, from whom he fears any Prejudice or Damage, either in Reputation or
Estate, though he is assured he will be damned; this is Molina's Opinion, who
averrs, that this Molina de Just. commutat. tr. 3. d. 13. n. 1. p. 762.
Circumstance ought not to be pleaded in Bar of the Action, to hinder him from
the Murder; and that there is no Law of Justice or Charity it self, which
obliges us to spare the eternal Life of the Soul any more than that of the
Body.

These are Tenets fit to be drawn out in blood, worse than those of Draco the
Roman Legislator. As for their Doctrine of mental Reservation, it is very
remarkable. Sanchez Sanchez. Opin. Moral. Par. 2. l. 3. c. 6. n. 13.
maintains, that a Man may swear he has not done a thing which is really done
by him, by understanding within himself, that he did it not on such or such a
Day, or before he was born, or by making Reflections on some other
Circumstances of the like nature; and so the words spoken by him shall have a
different meaning, and imply no such thing as is said. This is of general use,
and great convenience upon many emergent Occasions; and is ever justifiable
when a Man's Health, Honor, or Estate, lies at stake and may be injured; Nay,
Filintius, to confirm this, says the Intention Filintius Tract. 25. c. 11. n.
331.
regulates, and squares the the Action; and for Encouragement of those who have
wicked craft enough to furnish them with particular Reservations, he alleges,
That to avoid Lying no more is required, than to say simply, they have not done
that which in truth they have, provided they have a general Intention to stamp
the sense upon their Discourse, which a Prudent and Discreet Person would do.
And indeed these their Equivocations did insert, that Clause in the Oath of
Supremacy among us here in England, Without mental Reservation.

And this doubtless was the Reason that moved one to bestow on them that so
much merited Title, calling them Concinnatores mendaces, the Polishers of Lies,
their Tongues being whetted and sharp'ned to that purpose.

These are the Croaking Frogs, the Amphibious Insects that live both by Land
and Water, in Church and State; not a Kings Privy Council, not a Ladies
Chamber, not a Lord's Closet, not a House or Cottage, nay, not so much as a
Soul, but is daily haunted by these Specter and evil Spirits; not a Gentleman
or Lady can cross the Seas, but his, or her name is landed before hand in the
Jesuits Register. It was not without cause, that their Mecaenas and Patron,
Philip the second, King of Spain, baptized them, Clerigos Negotiadores,
Negotiating or Trafficking, Trading Clergymen; and that Marcus Antonius
Columna, General of the Navy belonging to Pius the fifth, in the famous Battle
of Lepanto, and Viceroy of Sicily, did tell Don Alonso, (a noted Jesuit, who
endeavored to be of the Council of his Conscience) very plainly and roundly,
as well as truly, Voi altri Padri di Giesu havete la mente al Cielo le mani al
Mondo, l'anima al Diavolo You Jesuitical Fathers have your thoughts seemingly
in Heaven, your hands on the Wealth and Riches of the World, and your Souls
with the Devil. And this their griping for worldly gain, and polling the rest
of the Clergy (one of the three Particulars before mentioned) was the reason
that a Reverend Divine did say, tho the great Pan of Rome had committed the
greatest part, if not all his spotted-Sheep to the Pastoral charge of
Archbishops, Bishops etc. -- Pan curat oves oviunique magistros; yet they
yield them little or no profit, because they are sheared to their hands,
especially by the Jesuits, whom Reverardentius aptly terms Vindiciae Sacrae
Satyr. M. S.
in this respect, Equites aurei Velleris, Knights of the Golden Fleece. And for
this cause a Reverend Divine says, that they want no maintenance: what by
traducing our Nation abroad, and seducing our People at home, their Bones are
full of marrow, and their Eyes swell with fatness; for a Country Parson cannot
make so much of a whole years Harvest as one Jesuit can get by an hours single
Confession.

When two Jesuits presented their Petition to Duke Cezarini, and made a
Complaint to him, that Father Oliva their General, had been wrought upon by the
insinuating Persuasions of Pope Alexander the seventh, to part with some of
their Lands, for the sum of 100000 Crowns, (so covetous they were as by their
good will to part with nothing that once came into their Clutches,) he gave
them this witty and undeniable answer, Those men who believe the Popes
Infallibility, as you do, must by no means complain against him, for if he be
Infallible he can do no wrong, nor be guilty of an irregular or injurious
Action.

A Popish Writer of our Nation, (as he himself thought) not Bishop Hall in his
Quo Vadis; as he has the story out of Robert Pointz in his Preface to the
Testimony of the real Presence.
unlearned, complaining of the Abstinence of us Heretics, despairs of
prevailing, because he found it to be long ago fore-prophecied of us, in the
second Book of Chronicles, c. 24. At illi Protestants audire noluerunt; it is
well (says he) that the Protestants were yet heard of in the old Testament, as
well as the Jesuits, whose name one of their own found out by good hap, Numbers
Secar. in Josua l. 1. c. 2. q. 19. and Gresser contra Lernaeum c. 1.
26. ver. 24. like as Erasmus found Friars in St. Paul's time inter falsos
Fratres.

Father Hayndius, a Jesuit of thirty three years standing, found this not to be
the least of fifty two Complaints which he made against his own Society, to
their General Aquaviva; that his Fellows did not blush to blemish their Order,
and stain their Honor by cogging of Miracles, and cheating the Ignorant into a
belief of them. What fardles of Lies do they impose upon the Vulgar, concerning
their Indian Wonders? Nay, Cardinal Bellarmine is not ashamed to appear as
their Voucher, and dares maintain their Frauds and Cozenages, affirming, that
his Brother Xavier had not only cured the Deaf, Lame, and Blind, but also
raised the Dead, (it seems he was so intent upon his new Divinity, that he
quite forgot his old Philosophy, A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus)
while his Fellow Acosta, who continued many years in those Parts, pulls him by
the sleeve, and is downright with him, whispering so loud in his Ear that all
the World may hear him, Prodigia nulla producimus, Acosta. l. 4. c. 12. de
salut. Indic.
neque vero est opus. Africa is at the best but barren of Novelties, if
compared to Rome; and yet the World of Protestants must be branded with
Incredulity, if they will not be gulled by their pious Frauds; but let them
remember, if they are at leisure, that simulata Sanctitas est duplex Iniquitas;
Counterfeit Sanctity is double Iniquity, and one sin is made two, when once
defended; Nay, it is more than feared, that they will not want Diabolical
Delusions, and Hellish Incantations, rather than lose a Proselite; which are so
gross, and frequently put in practice among them, that it has puzzled the best
Casuists to make a difference between their Magic and that which is
Diabolical. Hence it is that some of our weak People have been frightened out of
the World upon their Deathbeds, and scared into the Religion of Roman
Catholics. Take this notable instance, among many other, from a famous Divine
in France, second to none for Learning and Fidelity, who related it with his
own mouth, and his own certain Knowledge and Experience. A Gentleman of the
Religion, whose Wife was one of the Popish Fry, sends for his own Pastor to
discourse with him, being upon his last bed of Sickness, and ready to depart;
she likewise appoints a Jesuit to be there, who appears accordingly, and both
meet at the Bed'sside; both plead for their own different Religion, and
persuade the Man to come over to their Party, but after two hours smart
Disputation at the Bar, before these Judges, the Gentleman was very well
satisfied with the Religion that he had hitherto embraced, and his Consort
also, by the prevalence of the Protestants Arguments, began to incline to his
Judgment. The Jesuit finding himself foiled, went away discontented, but
returns a few hours after, when the storm was blown over, and the Coast clear,
desiring a private Conference with the Gentlewoman, which was granted; and her
Garden was the Scene appointed for the ensuing Tragedy, where they took a turn
or two together, and the Jesuit very earnestly expostulated with her, and used
all the persuasive and inclining Arguments imaginable, to keep her from that
supposed and falsely termed Defection from the Truth, viz. the change of
Religion; and in the close of all his Discourse, did very much importune her to
do him that signal Favor, as to accept of a little Box, (like Pandor'as, as it
fell out) which he then and there presented to her, and to wear it constantly
about her for his sake; which she received as innocently as courteously, little
dreaming of the ensuing mischief that after befell her; for she no sooner had
followed his direction, but she fell into so great and absolute a Detestation
of her Husband, that she could never endure the sight of him afterward; and
within two days died in this miserable condition: an Act fitter for the sharp
Sword of revenging Justice, than the Pen of an Historian.

They are a People disesteemed and ill thought of in most Places wherever
they get footing, for their Impieties, and and wicked Practices. They have been
banished France, Hungary, Germany, Venice, nay, the Grand Turk, upon the
relation of their Vileness by Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador, exiled them out of
Pera, near Constantinople. They are hated by the common People in Spain, tho
the Subjects of the most Catholic King, as appears by this Libel.

Los mandamientes de los Teatinos,
Mas humanos son que Divinos.
The Precepts of the Jesuits Teatine,
Are much more Humane than Divine.
And after the enumeration of their Decalogue or ten Commandments, as to grow
Rich, feed well, etc. it concludes thus;

Estos diez mandamientes se encierrian en das,
Todo para mi, y nada para vos.
These ten are comprised in two,
All for me, and nothing for you.
I did not promise you, as I remember, to give you an Essay of Jesuitical
Piquancy, but yet if you please, take this as an Argument of their pregnant
Wit, related by the deceased Author of the Holy State; who speaking of Queen
Elizabeth, styles her deservedly, the Paragon of spotless Chastity, whatever
some Popish Priests (who count all Virginity hid under a Nun's Veil,) have
feigned to the contrary. He proceeds farther, and says, One Jesuit made this
false Anagram on her, Edmund Campian by name, Elizabeth, Jezabel, false both in
matter and manner; for allow it the abatement of the H (as all Anagrams must
Sue in Chancery for moderate favor) which proved tho no Letter, a guttural
aspiration to the Composer, yet was it both unequal and ominous that T, a solid
Letter, should be omitted; the Presage of the Gallows, whereon the
Anagrammatist was afterward justly executed. When Flies grow once so blind as
to play with the Candle, they either sindge their wings, or burn themselves,
and when ill-boading Ravens dare be so haughty and proud, as to fly at the
Eagle, the King of Birds, may they all have the same fate as the Brother of
this Jesuitical breed before mentioned.

Now let us anatomize and diffect the Members of this Catholic, and Universal
Head of the Church, and see how they stand affected, whether they are fit for
Physic or Amputation.

Of their Priests, Friars, Nuns, and Laymen.
WE will still continue our Method, and begin with the Blasphemies, Oaths, and
Execrations, of the inferior Clergy, the Monks and Friars, those Cannibals of
the Crucifix.

Italy abounds in Blasphemies more than any other Country, and therein the
Clergy are far better Proficients than the Laity, or else, He swears like an
Abbot, would not be Proverbial. Nor do I think as it is, that is to be matched
that was belched out by a Priest at Rome, Al dispetto di quel Can che pendeva
nella croce. I forbear the English of it, because it is so horrid an Expression;
and what should move him to this think you? Nothing, as he confessed, but that
his Strumpet had played him a slippery Trick; as if there were no way to be
even with his Whore, but to revile his God.

A ghostly Father Preaching at Tours in France, said, These Hugonots are so
impudently wicked, as to renounce the Pope, and his Authority; but I Will be bold
to tell you, that if Christ and the Pope were both here upon Earth, and the one
should command me to do a Thing, and the other forbid me, I would sooner obey
the Pope than Christ.

An Italian Preacher broacht this blasphemous Doctrine in the Pulpit before a
great Auditory; that the Virgin Mary would have crucified our Savior, rather
than he should go without Crucifixion; strengthening his blasphemous Discourse
with this strange Allegation, that it did proceed from the longing desire that
his blessed Mother had to hasten the Salvation of Mankind.

There is another story related by the same Priest, much of the same nature;
That the Apostles drew up Articles of Impeachment against Christ, and presented
them to his Mother, complaining that he was not as good as his word in sending
the Holy Ghost upon them, and that there was a Dissension between the Father
and the Holy Ghost, who feared to descend from Heaven, and come into the World,
lest he should have the same course Entertainment as our Savior had from the
murdering Jews.

Another Priest, by relating the Agony that our Savior endured at his painful
and shameful Death on the Cross, drew Rivulets of Tears from the Eyes of his
compassionate Auditory, but he dried up all their Sorrow with this point of
Consolation, Weep not my Beloved, for perhaps it is not true.

But the Devil himself with all his Hellish Assistance could never invent such
Blasphemies as are found in the Book of Conformities, printed at Milain by
Gotard Pontice, Anno 1510. As that Christ changed Water into Wine but once, St.
Francis thrice, Christ felt the Pain of his Wounds but a small time, St.
Francis two whole Years complete. As for Miracles, Christ did nothing
comparatively to St. Francis: for he cured a 1000 Blind, and as many Lame, both
Beasts and Men; cast out 1000 Daemoniacks, and raised above 1000 from the Dead.
Genesis chap. 2. Let us make Man etc. That is St. Francis: so that there is not so
much as one Text in the Holy Writ, from the first of Genesis to the last of the
Revelation, which they have not wrested to magnify the Order of St. Francis;
but I am tired with these Blasphemous Rodomontadoes, therefore I refer you to
the Book it self, if you desire farther Satisfaction as to Particulars.

Nilco Postel preaching at Paris, told them, in the very Face of the
University, that an old Beldame (whom he called his Mother Joan) should save
all Women, as Christ did all Men; and as horrid as these Opinions were, he
found many Catholics that embraced them, all which he published in Print. This
same Person was heard by several at the Rialto in Venice to affirm, that if a
Man would have a perfect Religion, these three Ingredients must necessarily go
to its Composition, Christianism, Judaism, and Mahometism; and that upon
serious consideration there would appear to be many excellent Doctrines in the
Turkish Alcoran. If Treason against an earthly King is Capital, then doubtless
a fortiori, Blasphemy against the King of Kings deserves Death much more. In
most Places of Italy these are but inconsiderable and poor Imprecations: Te
venga 'l Cancaro, and at Venice, Te vengala Ghiandussa, Te vengal mal di san
Lazaro. I omit Putana di Christo, and others of the like strain, as frequent as
horrible; and the French have taken some of them upon trust, as Te viene le
chancre, a Murrain on thee.

In France they have certain Curses peculiar to their Language; Ad omnes
Diabolos, ad triginta Mill Diabolos, used by Preachers in such barbarous
Latin, taken from the French, who say, Je te donnea trente ou quarante mill
chartees de Diables. Thirty or forty thousand Cart-loads of Devils take thee.
And Menot the Preacher, fol. 129. falsely fathers this Curse on St. Paul, who
hearing of one that had committed Fornication, said presently, I give him over
to the Devils in Hell. He says farther, fol. 47. of one of the two Harlots,
that she would swear by her Faith. They have several ways of bequeathing
themselves to the Devil (as if one were not enuf, or indeed too much) Body,
Soul, and Guts; that no part may escape his Clutches, they make sure of all.

Nor are the Laity so far exempted from these Vices, but that they have a spice
of them; witness one of the Kings of Spain, who having had diverse ill
successes, swore he would be revenged on the Deity, and therefore commanded
that none of his Subjects should adore God, believe in him, or mention his name
for a certain time by him limited and appointed, without incurring a great
penalty, and his high displeasure.

A certain Gamester losing at Cards, did curse and swear most desperately for
his loss, and commanded his Servant to assist him in Curses, Oaths, and
Execrations, till his fortune should alter and he have better luck.

A Secular person, as he was playing at Cards in the French Ambassadors House
at Venice, belcht forth this Oath; Venga'l cancaro al Lupo. Why? What hurt in
all this? Aye but his Villainy was manifested afterward, because he spoke it by
the Figure called Aposcopesis or Reticentia; instead of Venga'l cancaro al
Lupo, che non mangiava Christo quando era Agnello, calling Christ Agnello, in
allusion to that of St. John; Ecce Agnus Dei qui tollit, etc. As also the
Blasphemy of the Italian, who frequently said, A Bots on the Ass that carried
Christ to Jerusalem.

The Italian Lord who had his Passport to the other World by a Pistol-shot,
being desired to commend his Soul to God, begged of them to recommend him to the
King, and withal to acquaint him, that he had lost a very good Servant, saying;
that he had often made it his business to believe in God, but could not; and
withal was so Blasphemous as to add farther, that God dealt very unjustly with
Man in condemning him for a piece of an Apple; and that all he had learned by
the New Testament was, that Joseph was a very idle Fellow, for not being
jealous of his Wife; he being well stricken in Years, and she so youthful.

Nor must I omit that hellish Court-Curse, which is as common as Flies in
Armenia, I would I might F -- with such a Lady, or Gentlewoman upon pain of
Damnation.

Of the Lechery, Whoredom, and Sodomy of the Clergy and Laiety.
ITaly above all places abounds in these Vices, insomuch that it is a common
saying;

Jamais ni cheval ni homme
N'amenda, d'albera Rome.
Nor Horse or Man e're returned home
The better by the sight of Rome.
And Mr. Ascham, in his Preface to his Schoolmaster, did return thanks to God
that he was but nine days in Italy, during which time he saw in one City of
Venice more liberty to sin, than in London he ever heard of in as many Years.

John Haywood, our old Epigrammatist, told Queen Mary very boldly, that her
Clergy was very saucy, and if they had not Wives, they would have their Lemans.

Richard the First being Daniel 's Hist. Rich. 1. in fine.
rounded in the Ear that he had three wicked Daughters, Pride, Covetousness and
Lechery, answered very briskly, Well be it so, if I have, I cannot better match
them than with the Templers, Fathers and Friars. If a Priest be at any time
found wantonly kissing a Woman, the usual excuse is, it was but to imprint a
Blessing upon her Lips.

It was once seriously debated, which was the best way to furnish Henry the
Second with Money. His Jester, seeing his Master at a great Loss, proposed this
rational way, viz. that he should command all the Monks Beds to be sold, and
the Money to be brought in to him. To which the King replied, where must the
Monks then lie? O, said the Jester, with the Nuns; Alas! said the King, thou
art mistaken; there are not near so many Nuns as Monks. And please your
Majesty, said he, every Nun can lodge half a dozen Monks at the least, for her
own share.

It Is a known Story of the two Franciscans who (because they The Queen of
Navarr 's Relations.
are a Crew of beggarly Fellows, never carry any money about them) passed over a
Ferry, and not being able to pay their Passage, would have ravished the Ferry
Woman in part of Satisfaction, till they were enabled to Pay her her fare; a
cunning new way to pay old Debts.

Old Bromiar tells you, that a Ghost appeared to a Popish Priest, and said,
there came daily so many Priests to Hell, as he thought verily there had been
no more upon Earth.

Poggius the Florentine reports, that Ausimerius, an Eremite of Padua, who
lived in the reign of Francis the 7th, Duke of that City, had the reputation of
a Pious and godly Man, till he was detected for corrupting and defiling many
Women of Noble Extract, especially under the specious and Religious color of
sacred Confession; hereupon he was brought to Trial before the Duke, who
ordered his Secretary to take a Catalogue of the names of the married Women
that he had gallanted; and after a tedious enumeration of many Persons of
quality that frequented the Duke's Palace, the Secretary still pressed him to a
farther Confession, whereat the poor Soul fetching a deep, but counterfeit
Sigh, said, Why then Sir, sincc you are so urgent, pray set down your own Wife
in the number, which sudden and unexpected Answer, did so surprise the
Secretary with Astonishment, that the Pen fell out of his hand, and the Duke at
the rehearsal of the Story was almost resolved into Laughter: These tricks are
so frequent among them, that it is commonly said as a Proverb; An Augustine
Friar in the Stews.

In a Village near Coignac, This is in the Queen of Navarr 's Relations.
called Cherves, a reputed Maid, Sister to the Curate of the Parish, who,
because she was accounted a holy Virgin, spread a Rumor abroad among the
credulous People, that she was a second Virgin Mary, and was impregnated by the
holy Ghost: (O execrable Blasphemy!) But Charles Earl of Angoulesme, and Father
to King Francis the First, hearing of it, did imagine there was some packing
and gross villainy in the Business, and took order for a more strict examination
of this Wench, who was about 13 years of Age: The Court where she was summond
to appear to make her defense, did adjure her, as well as her Brother, to
reveal the Truth, upon her Salvation, and being sworn, she used this form of
Affidavit; I take the Body of our Lord here present, upon my Salvation, before
you my Masters, and you my Brother, that never Man had any Carnal knowledge of
me more than you; and so received the Eucharist. Having taken this Oath, as you
have heard, they related the particulars of her Process to the Earl, who
hearing it, thought on what they never dreamt of, that she had great reason to
use that form of words, That never man touched her more than her Brother, and
took it for granted, that he had raised her Belly; whereupon he commanded them
to return and imprison the Curate, who upon his Commitment confessed the Fact;
his Sister in few days lost her Tympany, and was delivered of a Child, and both
of them were condemned to be Burnt, which Sentence was accordingly executed;
and 'twas favorable enough too, considering the horrid Blasphemy and Perjury
of the Criminals.

A certain Curate, not far from Vienna in Daulphine, being taken in the Act
with a notorious Strumpet (who had often prostituted her self to his dissolute
Embraces) behind the High Altar; and that on good Friday too, an aggravating
Circumstance; the worthy Bishop of that Diocese, was to inflict a Punishment on
him for this heinous Crime, and it was a merry one indeed, viz. to sing Mass
for a certain time; but the compassionate Legate of Avignon, thought the Priest
was too severely dealt with, and discharged him from that rigid Sentence, which
encouraged the holy Man to play his tricks more frequently with the same
Harlot, and in the same Place, than formerly; thus to advance their sensual
Delight, these Clergymen make Religion and Holiness, a Bawd to their own
lascivious Wickedness. Methinks they should be more wary to observe the old
Rule; Si non cast tamen caute; and not affront the Meridian Sun with their
Noon days Impieties; and this was the cause of that sporting reason that one
gave why ghostly Fathers are called Beaux Peers, because, said he, they get
Children at the High Altar.

Thomas of Abington, a lascivious Friar, could not be satisfied with the Use of
three Concubines, but he must be incestuous, (as if single Fornication were a
small matter) for he had two Children by his own Sister; nay, some Friars and
Monks have maintained twenty Whores at one time: a fine Crew indeed, able to
fill a pretty Seraglio.

Berenger, an Italian Marquess, entertained a Chaplain in his House, as Persons
of his Quality usually do, to perform the Duties of the Family, as to their
Devotion, for which he had a competency becoming one of his Coat, and to
gratify his Lord, lay with his Lady; and tho he was but a mere Dandiprat, as
deformed in Body, as in mind, yet she notwithstanding the Nobility of her Race,
run the risco of so ignoble an Action; but he had his merited Compensation at
last, which spoiled his sport for the Future, for being discovered by the
barking of an unlucky House Dog, he was taken, stripped stark naked, and had his
impetuous Nerve amputated for the Offense. This happened in the time of Pope
Steven the Eighth, about the year 941.

A Butcher of Strasbourg in Germany, by a strange accident lost his Wife, and
not hearing the least syllable of her in a long time concluded she was Dead,
and so she was to him in truth, tho not to the Franciscans, who kept her at Bed
and Board; an Order so much extolled for their Sanctimony and Piety; but he
found that there was a Franiscan Novice, who came daily to the Shambles
accompanied with a ghostly Father, which the Butcher thought did so resemble
his Wife, that he would often say, were he not persuaded that his Wife was
dead, he should swear it were she. In fine, she proved to be what he thought
her, his Wife indeed, which being discovered, and made known to the Civil
Magistrate, not only the Franciscans, but the other Monks and all the wicked
rabble of lascivious Priests were deservedly expelled the City.

A Franciscan lodging in The Queen of Navarr 's Relation
a Gentleman's House of Perigort, who was his Confessor, and very intimate with
him, being privy to all his Secrets, by that Religious Cheat of auricular
Confession, whereby he came to understand the Gentleman had a design to bed his
Wife that Night, who had layn in but three weeks before; which the Confessor
persuaded him to, only for his own wanton ends: for when Night approached, the
Friar anticipated him, went to Bed to his Wife, and enjoyed her, who departed
immediately after he had satisfied his Lust, as mute as a Fish, not so much as
opening his lips, and went out of the Door, which the Porter took notice of;
Presently after in comes her Husband at the time appointed, who thinking it was
he that accompanied her before, could not forbear discovering it; whereupon he
suspected the Friar had played him that slippery trick, and finding him out of
his Chamber, and the Porter confirming his departure, he was satsfied 'twas he,
went back to his Wife and acquainted her with the circumstances of the Story:
and so left her, to pursue the Francisean; but his Wife being alone, and
extremely perplexed, to rid her self of that trouble that was upon Spirit,
hanged her self; but whilst she was struggling with the pangs of Death, killed a
little Infant that was by her with a Blow of her Foot, which cried out so
vehemently before Death, that a Woman who lay in the Chamber was awakened with
the noise: and seeing these miserable Spectacles, went and acquainted her
Mistrisse's Brother therewith, who asked her what Villain committed that
butcherly Fact? she not being able to satisfy him with the Author of it, only
said, she knew of no body that was there but her Master. He seeks for him, but
finds him not, which did very much confirm him in the opinion, that he was
guilty of the Murder. He follows him, over takes him, assaults him with a
whole Volley of villainous Names, draws upon him so suddenly, that his Brother
in Law had no time to ask him his Reason; so they fought desperately, and so
long, that at last being tired out, they desisted by consent, and then making
inquiry into the cause of this furious and unexpected Rencontre, he understood
the Franciscan occasioned all this Mischief; his Brother that pursued him,
craved his Pardon for fighting and wounding him, and mounting him on his Horse,
conducted him to his own Apartment, where he died the next Morning, freely
forgiving his Brother in Law, and acknowledging to his Relations, that he was
the sole cause of his own Death; but his Brother, to satisfy the Law, sued out
his Pardon, which was granted him by King Francis the First. See the pregnant
mischiefs, and complicated Crimes that did accompany the Furtiva Gaudia, the
stolen sweets, or adulterous action of a Religious Franciscan. If this be
their Religion and Piety, what must their Irreligion and Impiety be, and what
dangerous effects must attend it?

It is storied of a Priest, that a Catholic coming to holy Shrift, shook his
head at the thought of his Crimes which he was to Confess, but the Priest
finding him somewhat disturbed, persuaded him to a free Declaration of his Sins
in order to his Absolution; at last he told him, with much ado, that he had
deflowered a Virgin. Pish, said the Priest, If that be all; Innocentum docuisti,
Thou have instructed an innocent Person. Oh! but Sir, said he, I have committed
a greater Crime. What Is that? Why, I have bedded my Neighbor's Wife. Well
then, said the Priest, Proximam adjuvasti; Thou have helped thy Neighbor.
Alas, Sir, said he, I have done worse than all this; I have had carnal
knowledge of a Nun. At which the Confessor's zeal was so great, that he could
not forbear cursing instead of absolving him, Abi apud inferos furcifer, hoc
est pro nobis. Go and be damned, you Hang-dog, how durst you take the Trade out
of our hands, that is our proper work, and no Lay-man's business.

That unnatural sin, which was burn^ by fire and brimstone from Heaven, the
ashes whereof were drowned in the dead Sea: has made a shift to revive among
Romanists, and cries as loud for Vengeance as ever; and of all Places Italy
abounds most with frequent Examples of Incest and Sodomy. It is a common
Proverb there among them;

Siena di quatro cose se vanta,
Di Torre and di Campane,
Di Bardasse and di Putane.
For these four things Siena far excells
All Places; Towers, Whores, Sodomy and Bells.
In Venice, says Mr Howel, all Amorous things are done by Proxy; while the
Husband is abroad in the Galleys, there be others that shoot the Gulf at home.

At Rome, that Holy City, Pictures are Printed to provoke Lust, and to teach
men obscenity by ocular demonstration; a thing which the very Heathens detested
in Philaenis and Elephantis; and Propertius the elegiack Poet inveighs against
such filthy Draughts.

Non istis olim variabant Tecta figuris,
Cum paries nullo crimine pictus erat.
Such Pictures n'ere adorned in former times
Houses, when Walls were painted with no crimes.
Pietro Aloisio, Son to Pope Paul the third, was a Prince of Sodomy, he dealt
with a great number of all Persons, of what Sex or degree soever, and at last
courted a young man, Casmus Cherius, then Bishop of Fano; and because he found
he was not to be brought to his ends, but by violence, he caused his Servant to
hold him, whilst he used him as his Ingle.

This sort of bestiality, Sodomy and Buggery, is frequent among the Italians,
both Clergy and Laiety; for it is well known to any smattering Sciolist in
History, what beastly work the Italian Soldiers made with the Goats, when they
beleaguered Lions, during the Civil Wars; now which were the greatest Brutes of
the two, I leave it to all sober Men to judge. And this puts me in mind of a
facetious, but filthy story, of a hot Neopolitan, in whose Country Absolutions
are as cheap as Whores. There was a Calabrian who had buggered a Goat, he
confessed the fact to his ghostly Father, and bought an Absolution for it: a
Friend of his hearing of it, said to him, Prithee what might it cost thee, for
it was a heinous Crime? he answered, but four Pistolets, upon my word: and
added, that for the other odd one I think verily I might have had a
Dispensation to marry the Brute. This verifies the old saying;

Dulcis odor lucri ex re qualebet --
The scent of Gain is sweet
From Sins tho never so great.
It is recorded in Pontanus, that Sigismund Malatesta, Lord of Romagniola, got
a Child by his own Daughter, nay, that he designed to make a Pathick of his own
Son Robert; but that he, in detestation of his Fathers wickedness, drew his
Sword in his own defense, and so escaped the fury of his unnatural Lust: But
this is barbarous, and beyond a Parallel, which he acted on a virtuous German
Lady, traveling to Rome through his Territories who seeing that his Courtship
and Caresses could no ways move her to condescend to his lustful desires, he
first cut her throat, and then like a barbarous Lecher, made use of her dead
body. The same Pontanus alleges, That there is to be found among Beasts
themselves a certain natural honesty, to reprove and convince men of such gross
crimes: speaking of a Bitch that would not suffer her own Whelp to lime her,
but would fly at those that endeavored to procure it; and of a Mare that would
not let her own Colt cover her; but having at last leapt her, disguised in
another colored Skin, and other tricks and devices used to that purpose; when
she perceived the Cheat, forsook her Mate, and died for grief soon after. The
very Brutes may inform men of their Bestiality, and shame them out of such
immoral and criminal Principles and Practices.

As for the Gluttony and Drunkenness of the Clergy, among many Instances take
these few; It is grown Proverbial, Bishops fare, Prelates fare, Theological
Wine, for the best, and Chapter bread for the finest. He fares like a
Churchman, he swears like an Abbot, as fat as a Friar, as frolic as a Friar,
and the like; and the truest of all, as fat as a Hog; For as one says wittily,
Friars in puris naturalibus differ very little from Swine. nay, their good St.
Anthony was but a Swine-heard ab initio, and their reverend Patron. And they
are known to be such belly Gods, that it is a Proverbial saying, A Carmelite in
the Kitchen.

The boon Companions among the Clergy are so prodigiously profane, that they
must wrest the Scripture for Expressions to countenance their Intemperance.
They will jest with the two edged sword of God's Word. Nothing will please them
but to wash Fuller 's Holy State.
their hands in the Font, and so drink healths in the Church Chalice, every
Glass that they take off must be hallowed by this Prayer, Cor mundum crea in me
Deus, and Spiritum rectum innova in visceribus meis; and when they would
signify that the Wine is generous and good, Hic est tenete eum; and when it is
all out, the Monks express themselves in this Allegory, Data nobis de oleo
vestro, quia Lampades nostrae extinguuntur. The Abbot of Chartees being asked
how he came to bear drink so well, and quaff so deeply? answered out of the
Psalmist, Patris nostri annunciaverunt nobis; And good Fellows use to Droll
with these words, Si quis Episcopatum desiderat bonum, opus desiderat. Nay,
they spare not their own Mass, for when a Malefactor is executed, they say,
sursum corda; when a Man takes the Cup to drink, quia pius est. And some
proceed farther, who are so bold as to belch forth these or the like sayings,
Let God keep Heaven to himself, and let us alone to enjoy our sensual pleasures
upon Earth, like the French Clergyman that would not part with his Benefice in
Paris for his share in Paradise.

In the Civil Wars of France, the Romanists, to vex and disturb the poor
Protestants, who began their Prayers with Nostre aid soit au nom de Dieu. Our
help stands in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth; being an
Expression out of the Psalmist; they, I say, would begin their Game at Dice
with the same Invocation, as if a Jest were not worth a Pin, if not seasoned
with the Salt of the Sanctuary. Nay, there is not a Priest among them, but can
give you three pregnat Arguments for their drinking the best unsophisticated
Wine.

First, because it prevents and disperseth those Crudities of the Stomach,
which might otherwise by a Rebellious Insurrection fly up into the head, and so
make them snivel and drivel when they are at their solemn and Religious
Services.

Secondly, Because Devotion in the opinion of these Religious Galenists, is
more operative and fervent in a hot, then a cold Stomach.

Thirdly, because they are to chant and sing Mass: Now it is the opinion of all
Musicians, that a Man cannot sing worth a Button, till he has cleared his
throat with a plentiful dose of good Liquor. But it may be the Bigot-Protestant
will throw this rub in their way, that they are in danger of being Drunk; why,
alas poor Ignaro! what if they be intoxicated, that signifies nothing, because
they do it with a good Intention, for if it be allowable, and no ways hurtful
to say, Hoc est Nasum meum instead of Corpus meum, so it be done cum intention
consecrandi, or to cast a Child into a Well, though it be drowned, cum
intention Baptizandi, as some Glosses maintain; what then if a Priest take off
his cups so freely, as to be fuddled, it is not amiss, so long as it is done cum
intention missificandi; and he is not obliged, maugre all the Laws of
good-Fellowship, to Pay his Groat the next Morning, or to confess and Pay but
his Twopence: for the Priests are exempted from such pitiful Lay-penalties.

Of the Cruelties, Murders and Massacres committed by the Priests, Friars, and
Laity of the Catholic Religion.
THere was a French Priest at Orleans, who maintained a Whore, but grew jealous
of her for false play with others, which the Religious man looked upon as so
heinous an affront to a Person of his Coat and Order, that nothing could
sufficiently expiate the Offense but death. The Priest invites her to the
Tavern with accustomed kindness and familiarity, where being entered, he takes
her aside, as if he intended to play the wanton with her, throws her upon a
Bed, and cuts her throat with a Razor, which he carried in his sleeve to that
purpose, for which double crime he was only condemned to Imprisonment during
life; a rigorous Punishment for those two priestly Virtues of Whoredom and
Murder.

A Jacobine Friar of the holy House of Spain, John de Roan by name, was a cruel
Persecutor of the poor unarmed and unresisting Christians in Merindol and
Cabriere; nay, his cruelty extended so far, that he put his wicked fancy upon
the rack for new torments to torture these poor Protestants, and among the
rest, this was none of the least; he used to fill Boots with boiling Oil or
Grease, and to force them on the legs of those that were to undergo his
Examination, to the end, that the violence and insufferable extremity of the
pain might so distract them, that they should not be able to give any other
than disjoynted and impertinent answers to all Questions proposed.

Bernard, a Jacobine Friar, being one of the Faction of the Guelphs, poisoned
Henry the 7th, with the flesh of our Savior in the holy Eucharist, of which we
have given you a hint in another place before.

Nor are the Romish Laity altogether guiltless of these kind of Cruelties, tho
the two neat Examples, relish more of witty severity than of palpable Cruelty.

The Curate of Onzain, near Amboise in France, he had an extraordinary kindness
for his much beloved Hostess; but she, like a crafty Queen, to prevent the
jealousy of her Husband, set him upon an Imposture which put a Period to his
Venerial sport for ever, namely, to pretend that he had a real design to be
gelded, and that she would provide an able Artist, and very expert at the Trade
of Castration to do it, Monsieur Pierre des Serpens. The Priest, who thought no
pretense grievous, that might conduce to his lascivious ends; desires to speak
with his kindred, who accordingly came to know his Pleasure; they no sooner
appeared, but he acquainted them with his firm and settled resolution of making
himself an Eunuch, in order to the happy State of a future Being, and to
prevent all illicite Insurrections hereafter; and thereupon in the presence of
them all, made and published his solemn last Will and Testament; and withal,
the better to confirm the matter, did freely forgive Mr. Peter, if he should
dye under his hands, tho he had privately contracted with him before to give
him five French Crowns as a Reward, that he should only make a show of doing
that which was thought he really intended; so the Patient was fast bound, and
handled as one that was to be cut indeed. But the Host receiving Intelligence
of the slippery Trick, he designed to Put upon him, paid him in his own Coin,
and gave him as good as he brought, for he covenanted with him for twice as
much, to do the business effectually, and he would bear him harmless; so my
nimble Shaver, for lucre of the Reward went dexterously to work and castrated
him indeed, telling him withal, when he had effected it to purpose, that he did
not use to make a Fool of himself, nor a mock of his Occupation. Thus the poor
Priest, contrary to his expectation, was dismembered by this unlucky Fellow, and
I think it was a sufficient Caution to avoid jesting with edged Tools for the
future.

A Savoyard* Monsieur d' Avanchi, one that had no great kindness for Priests
and Nuns, and therefore took great delight in disobliging of them, knowing the
Wickedness of their Inclinations, and the Vitiousness of their Actions, made
two Franciscans first very merry, and at last very mad; for having invited them
to his Castle and treated them very nobly, to complete their good
Entertainment, profer'd them the use of his Miss, which, like a couple of
dissembling Varlets, they at first refused very nicely; but he desired them to
embrace his kind proffer, and assured them of their Welcome, and told them,
that this was but a modest Repulse, for he knew they were Flesh and Blood as
well as other men, and stood in need of such Refrigerations. In conclusion, he
locked them up in a Chamber together; and they were not such Fools as to lose
so fair an Opportunity, but to work they went; and when he upon his Return
found they had not been idle, O wicked Hypocrites, said he, Is this the way to
overcome Temptations? I Will teach you better things. Immediately he caused them
to be stripped stark naked, and there he and his Man belabour'd them as long as
they could stand over them; and after they were severely lashed, sent them away
with never a Rag to cover their shame, to teach them never to encounter
Temptations at all, or to fight more courageously against them. Thus did this
Ajax Flagellifer lash them severely, to prevent the whipping of themselves,
which they sometimes do, but I believe more favorably.

Pontanus. Nicholas Fortibrachius, an Italian Captain, went always attended
with a Mute laden with Halters; and when the Fit came on him, he would make a
Sign to the dumb Man, who upon this Signal soon dispatched the next Person that
came in his way upon the next Tree that was at hand.

A Virtuous Lady, whose Husband was imprisoned by the Provost la Vouste, made
her Addresses to him on behalf of her Husband, the Criminal: and after she had
earnestly supplicated him, he told her in plain terms, there could be nothing
done under the rate of a Nights Lodging with her, and then he would grant her
Request. The distressed Lady being in this great Strait and anxious Condition,
was at a very strange loss: but after a serious Debate with her self, resolved
to purchase her Husbands Life with the loss of her Honor; but withal, first
acquainted him with her Intention, to which he soon condescended; and so his
Lordship had his Desire: but like a sordid Wretch, after he had defiled the
Gentlewoman, the very next Morning hanged up her Husband, and then said, I
promised you you should have your Husband, and I scorn to be worse than my
Word; here take him dead.

In the Reign of Maximilian the Emperor, there was a famous Covent of
Franciscans in Flanders, within his Dominions, near which there dwelt a
Gentleman, who was a great Favourer of that Order, among whom there was a lusty
proper Brother of the Society, who was the Gentleman's Confessor, and gave him
full Power over his whole Family; Now having this Liberty, he came in and out
when he pleased, insomuch that at last he was inflamed with his Wife's Beauty;
and one day above all the rest, he visited her, and inquired where her Husband
was: she told him he was gone abroad to survey some Lands that belonged to him,
and would be absent two or three days. The Franciscan walks about very
disconsolately; which the Gentlewoman perceiving, sent her Maid to him to know
if he wanted any thing; she came to him in the Court and asked him if he had
occasion for any thing that the House could afford? and he said, yes: and
leading her into a bye Corner, took a Dagger out of his Sleeve and thrust it
into her Throat. In the interim, one of the Gentleman's Tenants came into the
Court to bring his Landlord's Rent; who spying the Franciscan, he embraced him
very courteously: but the wicked Friar, to requite his Kindness, stabbed him,
and then locked up the Castle Gate. The Gentlewoman wondering that her Maid
stayed so long, sent another to know the reason of it, and he served her as he
did the former. Then he went to the Gentlewoman, there being none but they two
in the House, and told her plainly, he had been in love with her a long time,
and was resolved now to fulfill his desire, entreating her to come down, which
she did, and there saw her Maids and Tenant dead; telling her that he intended
to have his pleasure on her, more than once, and therefore would not ravish
her; but pulled off his Habit, under which he had a shorter, which he proffered
her, and said, if she would not accept of it, he would deal by her as he had
done by the rest: She protracted the time as long as she could, in hopes of
some assistance; and when she had undressed her head, her hair being loose
about her Ears, he cut it off, and made her strip to her Smock, and so clothed
her with his short Habit, and put on his long Robe again, so they both
departed; but it fortuned, that her Husband had dispatched his business, and
was upon his return the same way that they went: The Friar spying him, said to
her, look yonder is your Husband, go before, and if you give him the least sign
I will cut your throat; the Gentleman approaching, asked the Friar whence he
came, he said from his own House, where I left my Mistress your Wife in health,
expecting you, and so he past on, but his Man called to her, thinking it had
been Friar John, the Franciscan's old Companion; But she durst not give him a
word, only a wink with a weeping Eye; the Fellow rides after his Master, and
told him that Novice did resemble his Mistress: Go, said he, thou talkest like
a Fool; but the Servant was so dissatisfied, that he went back, his Master
staying to know the issue; he calls out aloud, Friar John; whereat the
Franciscan fearing a Discovery, turned back upon him, and with a long
quarter-staff knocked him off his Horse, and when he was down, fell upon him
and cut his throat, the Master seeing his Man fall, made up to them, which the
Friar perceiving, beat him down, and fell upon him, but the Gentleman being
very strong, grasped him in his Arms that he could do him no hurt, and the
Dagger in the Scuffle fell out of his hand, which his Wife took up, and gave
her Husband, she holding him down by the Cowle, whilst her Husband stabbed him
in several places, insomuch that he confessed the Villainy, and begged his
Pardon; The Gentleman being unwilling to kill him, sent his Wife home for some
of his Servants, who came thither immediately, so they took up the Franciscan,
carried him to the Gentleman's, and from thence to the Emperors Deputy in
Flanders, to whom he confessed the whole matter, and upon his Examination it
was found, that abundance of beautiful Gentlewomen had been so served. In
short, the Women so detained were all fetched out of the Monastery, and the
Friars and their Covent were burned together.

Of the Necromancy, Sorcery, and Conjurations of Priests and Friars.
FRiar Lewis, about 100 years ago, made an absolute Paction with the Devil, who
appeared to him at Marseilles in the shape of a Goat, aad promised him (I
wonder the Friar had no more Wit than to believe him, since he was a Liar from
the beginning) the uninterrupted enjoyment of any Woman whatsoever, tho never
so great a Beauty; or of any other Pleasures for the term of 41 years complete,
but the Devil was too cunning an Arithmetician for him, placing the unite
before the tens, which amounted but to 14 years, (and this very Contract is to
be seen to this day, with the Devil's Claw to it,) when the time was expired,
the Friar was detected of Witchcraft and burnt; all the Children he had
christened during that double Apprentiship of twice seven years, being
rebaptized; and the Women he had abused were confined to a Nunnery by
themselves.

There was a cetain Priest of Savoy, who was Curate of the Village Feling, near
Bonne, to whom his Parishioners resorted in great flocks, to beg of him that he
would allay a violent Tempest that then raged among them; for he had often made
his brags he could do it, and that they need not fear either Thunder,
Lightning, or any Tempest, so long as he continued among them. Well, to work my
Conjurer goes, and mumbles over a great many Conjurations, which he had by
roat, being only a Medley of horrible, terrible, hard words, as dreadful to the
People as the Tempest it self, (he being sheltered all this while under a thick
well-spread Tree, and held by four or five for fear of being blown away) but
finding himself at a loss in his Art, to mend the matter, pulled out his
breaden God, and saluted it in this irreverend manner, according to the harsh
Dialect of his Country; Cour di, se te ne ple for que le Diablou, etc. By God's
heart, if thou be not stronger than the Devil, I Will throw thee into the dirt.
And this did the business effectually. Avaunt therefore all Agrippa's, and
Merlins; let not Spanheim boast any more of her grand Wizard-Abbot, since Savoy
has clearly outdone her with a little Conjuring Curate.

In Savoy Anno 1358, several Priests were burnt for Incantations, and Sorcery,
and one of them a notorious Gentleman in the Black-Art, was executed at Roll,
a Town four miles distant from Lausana, who had been a Wizard or Sorcerer, as
appeared by his own Confession, for four and twenty Years, and yet all this
time sung Mass, and performed the office of a Priest, as religiously as the
best Mass-monger of them all; and that he might not suffer uncomfortably, and
dye alone, his Whore was burnt with him for company; and 'twas but just, that
she who had been a long time Copartner with him in Pleasure, should at last be
partaker with him in Pain; and it seems she employed her Talent so well, that
she grew Mistress of the Trade too, and was so expert in it, that she was found
Guilty, and condemned as a Sorceress. Thus these two Hellish, but loving Mates
to the very last embraced one another in the hot Flames, a just reward or
guerdon of their fiery Lust, and Hellish practices of this nature for many
years together, formerly by them put in Execution, for which they were both in
the end (as you have heard) executed.

Of the gross Ignorance of the Priests and Friars, their false Impositions upon
the Laity.
THere is a known story of Monsieur Prat, the Chancellor of Paris, a
Reverendissimo, and grave Clergyman in the time of Francis the First, who had
a Present sent him by Henry the Eighth, King of England, with a Letter wherein
there was this Expression, Mitto tibi 12 Molossos, I send you twelve Mastives;
but the profoundly learned Chancellor, mistook the meaning for a dozen of
Mules, and being over confident of this Exposition, he went to the King,
accompanied with an eminent Nobleman at Court, to entreat his Master to bestow
on him that Present, which the King of England had sent him; but King Francis
having heard nothing of it, commanded them to produce the Letter, that he might
peruse it; and the rather, because that Mules in England are as rarely seen as
Coaches in Venice: But when his Majesty found out the gross mistake, the
Chancellor was the sole object of their excessive Laughter; who, like a
State-Tinker, to mend the matter, did excuse himself with this kind of evasion,
That he misunderstood Molossos for Muletos, like an Ass as he was, which latter
misinterpretation rendered his Lordship far more Ridiculous than the former.

We read of an aged Priest, who R. Pacaeus de fructu Doctrinae.
lived in the Reign of our Henry the 8th, who was so sordidly ignorant and
stupid, that he always read in his Portesse Mumpsimus Domine, for Sumpsimus
Domine, and being told of his error by a Friend that heard it, who was a
Wel-wisher of him, and would needs have made him change his note, yet the
Cuckoo would not, for this very reason, because he had used Mumpsimus these 30
Years, (the more Block-head He) and therefore he would not leave his old
Mumpsimus, for their new fangled Sumpsimus; No not he, it was fitter for a
young Novice of his Order, to follow the new Modes of refined modern Speech,
and not for a Man of his Years and Gravity. Nay, the Priests in general, when
they had very shrewdly cracked Priscian's Crown, and were taken in the fact,
would only use that common Defense out of St. Gregory, tho never intended for
their purpose, Non debent verba coelestis Oraculi subesse verbis Donati; The
words of the Sacred Writ, ought not to be subject to the Rules of the
Grammarian Donatus. But this was very hard usage from them to break the poor
old-Man's head, and neither beg his Pardon, nor give him a Plaster.

Nay farther, these learned Men, whose Duty it is to instruct the Ignorant, and
undeceive the seduced, are so far from informing their Sheep, that they, the
very Pastors, want Instruction themselves, for if in their Lectures, which are
but few, and seldom performed, they chance unhappily to stumble at a Greek
Phrase, they tumble over it with a non legitur, Graecum est; or else pass it
over with a Transeat, Graecum est. Away with it, it is Greek. We have nothing to
do with it, it does not at all belong to us. And to show the acuteness of their
Wit in their Derivations, and Skill in the Etimological Art, they derive
Presbyter, from Praebens iter, as the Conductor or Pilot of Souls; but their
Allusion is far more true, when they say, quasi prae aliis bibens ter, and it is
very This Etimological Art is practiced by Hugo Carrensis, and several of their
Praedicants.
favorable too, for they generally are so rude as to drink all, and leave none
for the Company; Nay, the Devil himself cannot escape their biting Wit, for
they derive Diabolus from dia, duo, and bolus, morcellus, quasi faciens duo
bolos de corpore et anima, as making two morcels or choice bits of a Man, one
of his Soul, and another of his Body; and herein they give the Devil his due,
and make him a devouring Abaddon or Apollion.

A certain Sir John, who deserved Stevens Apology.
to be recorded as much as canonized for his Sanctity, when he came to the
story of the Woman in the Gospel who lost a Groat, and swept her House in hopes
to find it; He himself soon lost it in the rubbish; for he read, Evertit domum,
instead of, everrit domum; and whereas in the Acts it is said, demisimus per
sportam, they write it, per portam; and in honor of this Translation, this
Quatrain was made by a French Poet;

Par ici passa devant hier
Un tresnotable Charpentier,
Qui besogna de tell sort,
Que d'un Panier fit une port.
Here passed by the other day
A notable Carpenter this way,
He was no bungler at his Trade,
Who of a Basket a Door made.
A French Curate, being angry with his Parishioners, because the Pavement of
the Church was so much out of Repair, to prove it a Duty incumbent upon them to
see that rectified, pleaded the 17th of Jerem. in his own Justification, and
for their Confutation; out of these words, Paveant illi and non paveam ego; let
them pave the Church if they will, I have nothing to do with it, it is their
business and not mine, so let them look after it, for my part I Will be no ways
concerned, even as they Brew, so let them Bake, and there is an end of the Story.

An ignorant Priest in Paris, finding in his Almanac, Sol in Cancer, in red
Letters, mistook it for some Saint, and took a great deal of pains to find out
a Mass suitable to that Holy day; turning his Mass book over and over, and
finding it to no purpose, was in so mad a Mood, that he closed his Mattins with
this strange and barbarous Conclusion, Sol in Cancro, Sol in Cancrus, nec est
Virgo, nec martyrus, venite adoremus. Now I Will be bold to say, there is never a
Satchel-boy that has had Protestant Education, but would scorn to throw out
such false and incongruous Latin.

We will conclude this witty discourse with a facetious, though old rhythming
Epitaph, made upon a Father in times of Yore;

Et mourut quatre cents and neuf,
Tout plein de virtue comme un oeuf.
He died in the year four hund'red and nine complete,
As full of Grace as an Egg's full of Meat.
Of the Abbess, Nuns, and Religious Women.
NUN is a word derived from the Egyptian Nonna, of the same signification, and
truly their Confinement would be no less than an Egyptian Bondage, but that
their Pharaoh is somewhat indulgent to that Sex, and both their Taskmasters and
Task very easy and delightful. They have several other denominations, as
Religiosas, Devota's, Votresses, etc. and all originally derived from fine
words, Religion, Devotion, Vows of Virginity, and Chastity, and the like; but
whether these are broken or kept, judge you by the sequel.

They have adopted one name to themselves, that discovers their Life and
Conversation against their wills, and that is, Recluses, which in its native
and genuine Signification, speaks no more than to be set open, or left at their
own liberty and disposal; tho the Learned Patrons of that barbarous Age,
wherein it was first started, mistook the meaning for those that are closely
shut up, and enclosed within the round of a Religious Cloister.

Joan Queen of Sweden, was the first Authress of those Epicoene Monasteries, as
one fitly call's them, wherein Men and Women did cohabit and live together
(very religiously and chastely no doubt of it) under one Roof; And here, forty
to one else, the dull Hugonot will ask, why Nuns should be lodged near the
Friars? Silly soul, God-wot, there is a question with all my heart; when every
ingenious Romanist will soon choke him with this answer, The reason is this,
because the Barn ought to be near the Threshers.

Now if you scruple the truth of this Saying; Boccace will furnish you with a
Precedent to confirm it, and one that is very pertinent, and to the purpose.
For he tells you of an Abbess in Lombardie, that rose in great haste from a
jolly Minorite, who upon pretense of shriving her, took an occasion to lie with
her, and bedded her all that night, saw one of her Nuns at the same sport with
her Paramour; but the Reverend Governess making more haste then good speed,
instead of her Veil clapped on the Friars Breeches, the points of them hanging
down on each side, as ill luck would have it, and came to her chamber big with
reproof, resolving to nettle her for her Lasciviousness, (see how old Vice
corrects youthful Sin) when she her self was piping hot with the same wanton
Conflict; but the poor Nun, being about to receive her Benedicite, by chance
spied her Head geer, that priestly ornament, and said, Madam, I beseech you
first tie your Coife, before you proceed any farther, and then I am content to
receive patiently your sharpest Reprehension; but the Abbess finding her gross
mistake, soon changed her mind, and went sneaking away, without bidding her
farewell, which showed very little breeding; but had her education been never
so good, this unlucky Accident was enough to spoil it, that is the very truth of
it. Surely my Paper would be of a more ruddy complexion than naturally it is,
for bearing the Contents of this Story, but that I find the Italian Proverb is
like the Pope, infallible; which says, that Paper cannot blush. This Story puts
me in mind of Scoggin's wonder, who taking a Friar in bed with a Whore, cried
out, a Miracle! a Miracle! Here is to be seen a Friar with four Legs.

The Author of the Anatomy The Anatomy of the English Nunnery at Lisbon, writ
by a young Brother of that Covent.
of the English Nunnery at Lisbon who was once a Brother of that Society, tells
us, as a Witness of their Chastity, that he could go directly to a Place in the
Wall of their Covent, where he might pull out the bones of Legs and Arms of the
poor innocent Bastards, that have been both got and murdered by that Common
Society.

-- Saxa ipsa trabesque Loquntur. This verifies the old Proverb; There Is
cunning in dawbing. Nay, it is certain, that these Tricks have been used some
Centuries of Years, or else Pope Gregory could never have found so many Bones
of drowned Infants as he did: and that they were very numerous is no wonder,
being found in so spacious a Place; for his Pond must needs be very large
indeed, whose See is universal. Inter Coenandum hilares, was the old rule; and
you will find it observed among the Nuns of Lisbon, where this Story was related
in their Covent, by one of that Society, to foster her ghosty Father, as
pleasant Table-talk, by one that had been formerly a Chambermaid forsooth, in
the very house where the Comedy was really acted.

Father Strange, a young Jesuit, who had been brought up in England, fell very
sick, the Air it seems of Rome and Valedolid in Spain being unhealthful, and
disagreeing with his Constitution; which made him beg leave of the Rector to
return into England, and 'twas obtained, in Order to the recovery of his
health, and partly also for the converting, or rather perverting of Heretics:
where he no sooner arrived, but he took up this Nun's Ladies Chamber for his
Quarters, and in a small time threw off his Distemper and grew very lusty;
insomuch that he had a great mind to be dabbling with that young Gentlewoman,
his Sister Anne's Mistress; for that was her name, that made this relation. Mrs.
Anne it seems was then sitting at her Needle Work, with her back to her Lady,
and the brisk recovered Jesuit, who were by the fire side; and she looking by
chance in a great looking Glass that hung before her, spied the late sick
Jesuit at work, and withal saw what pains he took to shrieve her Mistress; but
he found before he had ended his shrift, he was discovered, and suspecting the
truth, that she had seen all, he took her aside, and told her, that he was a
man, and Flesh and Blood as well as others, was subject to such failings, tho
he had vowed Chastity; using all the Persuasions imaginable to win her to
Secresy; and the better to effect it, promised her, that if she at any time
stood in need of a Confessor to absolve her for any of her sweet Sins (as he
called them) he would perform that Office, and her Penance should not be
grievous or burdensome. This was undoubtedly enough to keep a she Saint from
tatling. Do but ghess by this at the sober Conversation of a professed Nun; of
the Jesuit's Chastity in the Action, her modesty in the Relation, who did not
blush to tell this tale for her own and her Ghostly Fathers Recreation; who,
like an old Fornicator, would report it with delight in his jovial humor, as
he did to me (said the Author) and one Father Vivian, a Friar of the same House.

Nay, it is very frequent among them, for the Father Confessor to go alone into
the Nuns Cloister, or Side, and continue there a whole day together, and Dine
at their Table with them, and be every other day in their sight, tho it be
expressly against their Rules; and in the Cell, which is only for them at
Confession, they have a Grate, which is usually taken down with a slight,
through which the Holy Nuns pass to his Bed by night; a cleanly conveyance for
such lustful Persons: nor indeed can it well be expected to be otherwise, since
they have such Provocations to this Sin, as Pride, Ease, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of all Things, and those the best that can be had for Money; for many
times those costly Viands which the Viceroy's Purveyor will not meddle with,
because they they are so dear, the Caterer of such Houses will buy, tho never
so unreasonable, which Provisions are made for the ghostly Father's Table; and
when they sit at their Meals, sing bawdy Songs, and obscene Catches to please
their Confessor, playing the most loose and wanton Tunes upon Instruments, such
as would make a chaste ear glow, and a modest Person color at the hearing. And
this is the constant practice of these Religious Persons, whose Covent is made
a mere Brothel-House, daily practicing such lascivious Actions as are scarce
known or heard of in some common Stews.

But my Pen being tired with writing such unheard of Villainies; take this for a
Corollary to all the precedent Matter. If Blasphemy, Treason, and Simony, not
only countenanced, but daily practiced and applauded as works mertorious, by a
persuasion called Religion be the way to Heaven; if Massacres, Murders, and
Assassinations be pious and good Acts, and can help the Soul to everlasting
Felicity; If King-killing, deposing of Emperors and Princes, be not only
commendable, but works of Supererogation, and consequently the means to obtain
Salvation; If Sodomy, Buggery, Incest, and all sorts of Uncleanness, are not
only allowable, but preferable in some Cases to Chastity, and Matrimony; if
these, or any of these Qualifications can bring us into the Regions of immortal
Bliss and Happiness; Then he is to blame that will live an Austere, Sober,
Religious, and Godly Life, and much to blame if he turns not a Proselyte, and
embrace the Roman Religion, which is of so great a Latitude, as to allow what
Morality, nay, Paganism it self, abhors as Unnatural and Bestial; therefore
much more should every Person, who pretends to Christianity, detest and
abominate such a Religion, whose Tenets and Practices are so Hellish and
Damnable.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and sold by James Norris, at the King's
Arms without Temple-Barr.
1. MAssinello; or a Satvr against the Association and the Guild Hall Riot,
Quarto.

2. Eromena: or the Noble Stranger. A curious Novel. Octavo.

3. Tractatus adversus Reprobationis absolutae decretum, Nova Methodo and
succentissimo Compendio adornatus and in duos Libros digestus. Octavo.

4. An Idea of Happiness, in a Letter to a Friend, enquiring wherein the
greatest Happiness attainable by man in this Life does consist. Quarto.

5. A Murnival of Knaves, or Whiggism plainly displayed, and (if not grown
shameless) Burlesqu'd out of Countenance. Quarto.

6. The Accomplished Lady, or Deserving Gentlewoman: Being a Vindication of
Innocent and Harmless Females from the aspersions of Malicious Men; wherein are
contained many Eminent Examples of the Constancy, Chastity, Prudence, Policy,
Valor, Learning, etc. wherein they have not only equaled, but excelled many
of the contrary Sex.

7. Patria Parricida: or the History of the horrid Conspiracy of Catiline
against the Commonwealth of Rome, in English. Octavo.

8. Core Redivivus: In a Sermon Preached at Christ-Church Tabernacle in London,
upon Sunday, September 9. being a Day of Public Thanksgiving for the
Deliverance of His Sacred Majesty's Person and Government from the late
Treasonable Rebellion and Fanatic Conspiracy.


