royal coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

At a Court holden the 8th day of January, 1662. at the Court House of the
Parish of St Clement Danes without Temple-Barr in the County of Middlesex, by
the Commissioners for Charitable Uses for the said County and City of
Westminster.
WHereas there is a Commission Directed to The Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of London, the Right Honorable William Lord Craven, Sir William Wild
Sir Henage Finch, Sir Thomas Adams, Sir Richard Brown, Sir John Robinson, Sir
James Bunce, Knights and Baronets, Sir Reginald Forster Baronet, Sir John
Bramston Knight of the Bathe, Sir Edward Turner, Sir Thomas Allen, Sir William
Bateman, Sir Lancelot Lake, Sir Thomas Bird, Sir Thomas Ingram, Sir George
Simon, Sir Thomas Player, Sir John Babor, Knights; The Chancellor to the said
Bishop for the time being; Cheyney Roe, Thomas Smith, John Stent, Richard
Proctor, Nathaniel Snape, Ralph Hawtrey, John Hawtrey, George Day, Christopher
Abdey, Joseph Aloff, Simon Rolestone, Thomas Lucie, Robert Harleston, George
Charnocke, Charles Pitfeild, Thomas Stringer, Richard Abel, Thomas Warner,
Edward Dedson, John Robinson, Edward Hoar, Richard Sidenham, Esquires; William
Goodman, Obadiah Haywerton, Samuel Eames, Thomas Fowell, Walter Lapp, Robert
Stanhope, Thomas Ewen, Joseph Surbutt, Thomas Martin, William Rudd, William
Sanckey, William Burrows, Richard Mills, William Cotton, and Peter Mills,
Gentlemen; Commissioners authorized by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, under
the Great Seal of England, According to the Statute of the 43. of Eliz. for the
Inquiry and Finding out of all Lands, Goods, and Stocks of money heretofore
given to Charitable Uses. And having special trust and confidence in their
fidelities; Have authorized and appointed them Commissioners and does give unto
them, or any four or more of them, full power and authority to enquire by all
lawful ways and means, according to the purport and true meaning of the said
Statute, What Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels, Money, or Stocks of Money, have at any time heretofore been
given by any King, or Queen of England, or any other well disposed person, or
persons, for relief of aged, impotent, or poor People, maintenance of sick and
maimed Soldiers, or Mariners, Schools of Learning, Free-Schools, or Scholars
in Universities, repair of Bridges, Havens, ^awswayes, Churches, Sea-banks, or
Highways, education or preferment of Orphans, relief, stock, or maintenance,
^or Houses of Correction, marriages of poor Maids, supportation of Tradesmen,
or Persons decayed, redemption of Pri^oners, or Captives, setting out of
Soldiers, etc. within the said County and City; And of all abuses, breaches of
^rust, misimployment, or misgovernment of the same Lands, etc. heretofore given
to, or for, any of the Charitable and ^odly Uses before rehearsed

It is this day declared by the said Commissioners, That it shall be taken as a
good and acceptable service of any per^^n or persons within the County and City
aforesaid, and in the several Parishes thereof, to acquaint the said
Com^issioners, of all such Sums of Money given for the relief of the Poor, and
all other the Charitable and Godly Uses, ^bove-mentioned; And if any person, or
persons, can inform the said Commissioners of any the aforesaid Abuses, let
^^em repair to the House of John Bennet Gent. at the Starr-Inn in
Newington-Butts near Southwark, or to the house of John ^ell Gent. Clerk of
Clarks-hall near the Three-Cranes in the Vintrey in Thamestreet, London, any
Friday between the ^ours of Ten and Two, who will receive all your
Presentiments, and perfect them accordingly: upon which Present^^ents, care will
be taken, that the Moneys shall be made good, with sufficient damages for the
use and benefit of the ^oor, That the Donors Will shall be in all things
performed, according to the true intent and meaning thereof.

And it is further desired, by the said Commissioners, That all Ministers in
their Churches and Chapels within ^he said County and City, for the furthering
of so good a work, read this Order the next Lord's Day after the receipt ^hereof
in their several Congregations, and that it be fixed upon the Church-Doors in
the said Parishes, That all ^ersons may take notice hereof.


