April the 10th. 1696.
I Do Appoint Samuel Heyrick, and Isaac Cleve, to Print the Trial of Sir
William Parkins, Knight, and Order that no other Person presume to Print the
same.

I. Holt.

The Arraignment, TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Sir William Parkins Knt. For the
Most Horrid and Barbarous CONSPIRACY To Assassinate His Most Sacred MAJESTY
KING WILLIAM; And for Raising of Forces, in order to a REBELLION, And
Encouraging a French INVASION Into this KINGDOM.

Who was found Guilty of HIGH TREASON, March 24. 1695/6. At the Sessions House
in the Old Bailey.

TOGETHER With a true Copy of the PAPERS delivered by Sir William Parkins, and
Sir John Friend, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at the time of their
Execution.

LONDON. Printed for Samuel Heyrick, at Gray's Inn Gate in Holbourn, and Isaac
Cleve, at Serjeants-Inn Gate in Chancery Lane. 1696.

Die Martis Vicesimo quarto Martij Anno Dom. 1695. Anno Regni Regis Willielmi
Tertij Septimo.
This Day the Trial of Sir William Parkyns came on at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, and Promoting
a French Invasion for the Restoring the late King James. Cl. of Arr. Crier,
make Proclamation.


Crier. Oyez, Oyez, Oyez, All manner of Persons that have any thing more to do
at this General Sessions of the Peace, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, holden
for the City of London, and Jail-delivery of Newgate, holden for the City of
London, and County of Middlesex, and were Adjourned over to this day; Draw
near, and give your attendance, for now they will proceed to the Pleas of the
Crown for the same City, and County; and God save the King.


Cl. of Arr. Middlesex. Crier, Make proclamation.


Crier. Oyez. You good men of the County of Middlesex, summoned to appear here
this day, to try between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoner that
shall be at the Bar; answer to your names as you shall be called, every man at
the first Call, upon pain and peril shall fall thereupon.

Then the Jury that were Returned in the Panel were all called over, and the
Appearances of those who answered to the Call, were recorded.

About Ten of the Clock the Judges (to wit) the Lord Chief Justice Holt, the
Lord Chief Justice Treby, and Mr. Justice Rokeby, came into the Court.


Cl of Arr. Set Sir William Parkyns to the Bar (which was done.)


Sir William Parkyns, Hold up thy Hand.


Parkyns, My Lord, if you please, I humbly beg the favor of one word before I
am Arraigned. My Wife coming to see me in my Distress, sent up a Trunk of
Linen for our use, and the Sheriffs of London have seized it, and do detain
it. It has Linen in it, and all her necessary things, and all things have been
torn from me, since I was Apprehended, but what is there. I have nothing to
subsist upon but what is there, for no Money can I get from any body, no body
will pay us a farthing.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham, My Lord, We were sent for to Mr. Secretary Trumball's
Office, and when we came there, there was a Trunk that had been seized as
belonging to Sir William Parkyns; and when we came thither it was opened, and
there was in it some Household Linen, and some Plate; and Mr. Secretary
Trumball was pleased after having searched the Trunk, to Seal it up, and
Deliver it to my Brother and me, to be kept; and this is all we know of it.


L. C. J. Holt. Where was this Trunk Seized?


Mr. Sh. Buckingham, We found it in the Secretaries Office, and it was
Delivered to us there, and we gave a Receipt for it to bring it down again when
called for; we did not Seize it.


L. C. J. Holt, Look ye see Sir William Parkyns, your Trunk was Seized I
suppose in order to search for Papers.


Parkyns, Yes, I believe it was; but I hope it shall be Delivered back now,
they have found nothing in it, and I have nothing else to subsist upon but what
is there.


L. C. J. Holt. Is there any Plate there? What is there in the Trunk?


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. There is some Diaper and Damask Linen, a Carpet, and some
pieces of Plate, two or three hundred Ounces of Plate, for ought I know. We had
it from the Secretaries Office; we did not seize it.


Then the Judges consulted among themselves. L. C. J. Holt. He ought to have
his Plate to sell, to support him that he may have Bread.


Parkyns. Will Your Lordship please to direct the Sheriff to deliver it back.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, some care or other shall be taken in it.


Parkyns. My Lord, I have nothing to subsist upon, unless I can make something
of what is there; I have a Wife, and four Children, and nothing to subsist upon.


L. C. Just. Holt. Let your Wife make application for it at the Secretary's, it
cannot now be done here. Why did you not make complaint of it before? If you
had, care had been taken in it.


Parkyns. I was told there was a Petition; for, my Lord, I was a close
Prisoner, and they told me there was a Petition; but my Wife never mentioned
any thing of it to me while afterward; and they talked of an Order of Council
that they had for the Sheriff's seizing it; but when I came to inquire into it,
there was no Order about it, but only to search and examine it.


L. C. Just. Holt. Well, some order shall be taken about it.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. My Lord, we have given a Receipt to the Secretary for it.


L. C. Just. Holt. But he must have wherewithal to subsist and buy him Bread
while he is in Prison.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. My Lord, I see Mr. Burleigh there, who was Sir John
Friend's Solicitor; I would humbly move your Lordship, that it may be enquired
into how he came by the Panel of the Jury Yesterday; for it seems to reflect
upon us, as if we had given the Prisoner a wrong Panel.


Mr. J. Rokeby. No, I think there can be no Reflection upon you; but I think it
would be very proper to have the matter examined.


L. C. Just. Holt. Aye, let Burleigh come in; (Which he did.) Pray, how came
you by that Panel which you gave to Sir John Friend?


Burleigh. My Lord, I had Three several Copies sent me by Sir John Freind's
Friends, to the Horn Tavern about three or four a clock, and I delivered one of
them to Sir John Friend; but he had one before I delivered mine.


L. C. Just. Holt. Who sent them to you, or brought them to you?


Burleigh. I had them brought to me by a Porter.


Mr. Baker. You know you might have had it from the proper Officer for asking.


Burleigh. I had them brought me from Sir John Friend's Friends.


L. C. J. Holt. Can you tell who had it from the Sheriff?


Burleigh. My Lord, I know not: I had Three Copies sent me in a quarter of an
hours time; whence they came, I know not; the Sheriff knows me, and every body
else.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. I do know you, and would have you be fair in your Practice.


Mr. Baker. The Enquiry is made, because a false Copy is put upon him; you
might have had a true Copy if you had applied your self right.


Burleigh. I sent to Mr. Farringdon for it.


L. C. Just. Holt. The Sheriff delivered it the Secondary, who is the proper
Officer.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Sir John Friend said, he had it from him yesterday.


Burleigh. But he had one before; how he came by it, I cannot tell; nor whence
those came that were brought to me.


Mr. J. Rokeby. If you will not take care to go to the right place, it is no
body's fault but your own, if you suffer by it.


Burleigh. I was with my Lady, and delivered a Petition for this Trunk.


L. C. Just. Holt. But it seems it was under the Conuzance of the Secretary,
and direction was given to go thither; some care or other must be taken in it,
and shall; but go on now to Arraign the Prisoner.


Cl. of Arr. Hold up thy hand, (which he did); Thou stand Indicted in
Middlesex, by the name of Sir William Parkyns, late of the Parish of St. Paul
Covent Garden, in the County of Middlesex, Knight. for that, whereas an open, and
notoriously public, and most sharp, and cruel War for a long time has been,
and yet is, by Sea, and by Land, had, carried on, and prosecuted by Lewis the
French King, against the most Serene, most Illustrious, and most Excellent
Prince, our Sovereign Lord William the Third, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. During all
which time, the said Lewis the French King, and his Subjects were, and yet are
Enemies of our said Lord the King that now is, and his Subjects, You the said
Sir William Parkyns, a Subject of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now
is, of this Kingdom of England, well knowing the Premises, not having the fear
of God in your Heart, nor weighing the Duty of your Allegiance, but being moved
and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, as a false Traitor against the
said most Serene, most Clement, and most Excellent Prince, our said Sovereign
Lord William the Third, now King of England, etc. your Supreme, True, Natural,
Rightful, Lawful, and Undoubted Sovereign Lord; the cordial Love, and true and
due Obedience, Fidelity and Allegiance, which every Subject of our said Lord
the King that now is, toward him our said Lord the King, should bear, and of
right ought to bear, withdrawing, and utterly to extinguish intending; and
contriving, and with all your strength purposing, designing, and endeavoring
the Government of this Kingdom of England, under him our said Lord the King
that now is, of Right, duly, happily, and very well Established, altogether to
Subvert, Change, and Alter; as also the same our Sovereign Lord the King to
Death and final Destruction to put and bring; and his Faithful Subjects, and
the Freemen of this Kingdom of England, into intolerable and most miserable
Slavery, to the aforesaid French King, to Subdue, and bring; the first day of
July, in the Seventh year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, at the Parish
of St. Paul Covent Garden, aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely,
maliciously, devilishly, and traitorously, did compass, imagine, contrive,
purpose, design, and intend, our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, then
your Supreme, True, Natural, Rightful, and Lawful Sovereign Lord, of and from
the Regal State, Title, Honor, Power, Crown, Command, and Government of this
Kingdom of England, to Depose, cast Down, and utterly to Deprive; and the same
our Sovereign Lord the King to Kill, Slay, and Murder; and the aforesaid Lewis
the French King, by his Armies, Soldiers, Legions, and Subjects, this Kingdom
of England to Invade, Fight with, Conquer, and Subdue, to move, stir up,
procure, and aid; and a miserable slaughter among the Faithful Subjects of our
said Lord the King throughout all this whole Kingdom of England, to make and
cause; and that you the said Sir William Parkyns, to the aforesaid Enemies of
our said Lord the King that now is, then and there, during the War aforesaid,
Traitorously were adhering and aiding; and the same most abominable, wicked and
devilish Treasons, and traitorous compassings, contrivances, intentions, and
purposes of yours aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect; and in
prosecution, performance, and execution of the traitorous adhesion aforesaid,
you the said Sir William Parkyns, as such a false Traitor, during the War
aforesaid, to wit, the same first day of June, in the year abovesaid, at the
Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and diverse other days and times, as
well before as after, there and elsewhere in the same County, falsely,
maliciously, advisedly, secretly, and traitorously, and with Force and Arms,
with one Robert Chernock (late of High Treason, in contriving, and conspiring
the Death of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, duly convicted and
attainted) and with diverse other false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, did
meet, propose, treat, consult, consent, and agree, to procure from the
aforesaid Lewis the French King, of his Subjects, Forces, and Soldiers, then
and yet Enemies of our said Lord the King that now is, great numbers of
Soldiers and Armed men, this Kingdom of England to Invade and Fight with, and
to levy, procure, and prepare great numbers of Armed men, and Troops, and
Legions against our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, to rise up and be
formed; and with those Enemies at and upon such their Invasion and Entrance
into this Kingdom of England, to join and unite; Rebellion and War against him
our said Sovereign Lord the King, within this Kingdom of England, to make,
levy, and wage; and the same our Sovereign Lord the King so as aforesaid to
Depose, and him to Kill and Murder. And further, with the said false Traitors,
the same first day of July, in the year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in
the County aforesaid, Traitorously you did consult, consent, and agree to send
the aforesaid Robert Chernock as a Messenger from you the said Sir William
Parkyns, and the same other Traitors unknown, as far as, and into the Kingdom
of France, in parts beyond the Seas, to James the Second, late King of England,
to propose to him, and desire of him to obtain of the aforesaid French King,
the Soldiers and Armed men aforesaid, for the Invasion aforesaid to be made;
and Intelligence and Notice of such their Traitorous Intentions, and Adhesions,
and all the Premises to the said late King James, and the said other Enemies
and their Adherents, to give and exhibit; and them to inform of other things,
particulars, and circumstances thereunto relating; as also Intelligence from
them of the said intended Invasion, and other things and circumstances
concerning the Premises, to receive, and them to you the said Sir William
Parkyns, and the said other Traitors in this Kingdom of England, to signify,
report, and declare, in Assistance, Animation, and Aid of the said Enemies of
our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, in the War aforesaid, and to stir
up and procure those Enemies the more readily and boldly this Kingdom of
England to Invade, the Treasons and Traytorous Contrivances, Compassings,
Imaginations, and Purposes of you the said Sir William Parkyns aforesaid, to
perfect and fulfill, and all the Premises the sooner to execute, manage and
perform, and the Invasion aforesaid to render and make the more easy, you the
said Sir William Parkyns, afterward, to wit, the 10th day of February in the
year abovsaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and diverse
other days and times, as well before as after, there and elsewhere in the same
County, Falsely, Maliciously, Advisedly, Secretly, Traitorously, and with Force
and Arms, with the aforesaid Robert Chernock, and very many other false
Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, did Meet, Propose, Treat, Consult, Consent,
and Agree, him our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, by lying in wait,
and deceit, to Assassinate, Kiill and Murder; and that execrable, abominable,
and detestable Assassination, and Killing the sooner to execute, and
perpetrate, afterward, to wit, the same day and year, there Traitorously you
did Treat, Propose, and Consult with those Traitors, of the Ways, Methods, and
Means, and the Time and Place where, when, which way, and how our said
Sovereign Lord the King, so by lying in wait, the sooner might be Killed, and
Slain, and did Consent, Agree, and Assent with the same Traitors, that Forty
Horsemen, or thereabouts, of those Traitors, and others by them, and you the
said Sir William Parkyns, to be Hired, Procured, and Paid, with Guns, Carbines,
and Pistols, with Gunpowder and Leaden-Bullets Charged, and with Swords,
Rapiers, and other Weapons Armed, should lie in wait, and be in Ambush, our
said Lord the King in his Coach being, when he should go abroad, to Attack, and
that a certain, and competent number of those Men so Armed, should set upon the
Guards of our said Lord the King then, and there attending him, and being with
him, and should Overpower and Fight with them, whilst others of the same Men
so Armed, him our said Lord the King should Kill, Slay, and Murder; and that
you the said Sir William Parkyns, then and there, did take upon you to provide
Five Horses for those Men which should so kill and murder our said Sovereign
Lord the King; And also that you the said Sir William Parkyns, your Treasons,
and all your Traiterous Intentions, Designs and Contrivances aforesaid, to
execute, perpetrate, fulfill, and bring to effect afterward, to wit, the Day
and Year last abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
Diverse Horses, and very many Arms, Guns, Carbines, Rapiers and Swords, and
other Weapons, Ammunition, and Warlike Things, and Military Instruments falsely,
maliciously, secretly, and Traitorously did obtain, buy, gather, and procure,
and to be bought, obtained, gathered, and procured did cause, and in your
Custody had and detained, with that Intention them in, and about the
detestable, abominable, and execrable Assassination, Kiliing, and Murder of our
said Lord the King, and the Invasion aforesaid, as aforesaid, to use, employ,
and bestow; and also your Treasons, and all your Traitorous Intentions,
Purposes, and Contrivances aforesaid, to execute, perpetrate, fulfill, and fully
bring to effect; you the said Sir William Parkyns afterward, to wit, the day
and year last abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
Falsely, Maliciously, Advisedly, Secretly, and Traitorously, diverse Soldiers,
and Men Armed, and ready to be Armed, after the said detestable, abominable,
and execrable Assassination, Killing, and Murder of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, so as aforesaid should be done, perpetrated, and committed, to Rise, and
Muster, and War and Rebellion within this Kingdom of England to make, and wage,
and with the Enemies of our said Lord the King, Foreigners and Strangers,
Subjects and Soldiers of the said Lewis the French King, being about to Invade
this Kingdom of England, at and upon their Invasion and Entrance into this same
Kingdom then expected to be shortly made, themselves, together with you the
said William Parkyns to Join and Unite, and into Troops and Legions to form,
you did Levy, List, and Retain, and did procure to be Levied, Listed, and
Retained, and those Soldiers and Men for the Treasons, Intentions, and Purposes
aforesaid, then, and there, and afterward in Readiness you had; Against the
Duty of Your Allegiance, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the
King that now is, His Grown and Dignity; As also against the Form of the
Statute in this Case made and provided.

How say thou, Sir William Parkyns, Art thou Guilty of this High Treason
whereof thou stand Indicted, or Not Guilty?


Parkyns. Not Guilty.


Cl. of Arr. Culpritt. How will thou be Tried?


Parkyns. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Arr. God send thee good Deliverance.


Parkyns. My Lord, If your Lordship pleases to favor me with a Word or two.


L. C. Just. Holt. Aye, What say you Sir?


Parkyns. My Lord, I have been kept in hard Prison ever since I was Committed,
no Body has been suffered to come to me till Friday last, then my Counsel came
to me; and being charged with many Facts as I see in this Indictment, it will
be necessary to have diverse Witnesses to clear my self of these Particulars;
they are dispersed up and down, and I have had no time to look after them, and
therefore I beg your Lordship to put off my Trial till another Day.


L. C. J. Holt. When had you first notice of your Trial?


Parkyns. The first Notice of my Trial was on Wednesday last, in the Afternoon.


L. C. J. Holt. That is a sufficient time of Notice, sure you might have
provided your Witnesses, and prepared for it by this Time.


Parkyns. But, my Lord, being kept so close Prisoner, I had no Opportunity for
it; for it was not possible for me to get any Body to come to me, till Friday
Noon, not so much as my Counsel, and then there was but Two Days, Saturday and
Monday, (for Sunday is no Day for any Business) and it is impossible for me to
be ready in the Manner that I ought to be. It is a perfect Distress, and
Hardship upon me, to be put so soon upon my Trial, without my Witnesses, and
what should enable me to make my Defense; therefore I humbly entreat your
Lordship to put it off till another Day.


L. C. J. Holt. What Witness do you want, Sir William?


Parkyns. I have diverse Witnesses, my Lord, that can give an Account where I
was from Time to Time, but they are many of them out of Town, and I have sent
about every way, but cannot get them together in so short a Time.


L. C. J. Holt. When had he Notice of his Trial?


Mr. Baker. On Wednesday I told him that he must expect to be tried this Day,
and withal, that if he would name me any Counsel, that he would have come to
him, he should have an Order next Morning for them.


L. C. J. Holt. You were told, it seems, on Wednesday that you might have what
Counsel you would.


Mr. Baker. And he had an Order upon Thursday Morning for his Counsel.


Parkyns. I could not have it without Application to the Court at White Hall,
and could have no body come to me till Thursday, and it was Friday before I
could get my Counsel to me.


L. C. J. Holt. You might have sent for your Witnesses on Thursday, and
employed some body about that Matter then.


Parkyns. The Solicitor that I employed was employed otherways, and I could not
employ any body else.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, you might have employed any other about that Business.


Parkyns. I had no body to send, I was kept close, and no body permitted to
come to me.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Solicitor you desired had Leave to come to you.


Mr. Baker. You know that those you sent for, you had an Order for.


Parkyns. I could not get him till Thursday to me, I had no Messengers to send
till then.


Mr. Baker. I gave the Keeper Direction, to let him have Persons come to him to
send on any Errand.


L. C. J. Holt. The Keeper had Orders, it seems, to let any Messenger come to
you, and he would have helped you to some body to send of this Errand to be
sure.


Keeper. I always did it, as soon as I know they have Notice of their Trial.


Parkyns. But the Keeper is not always in the Way, and besides, when I had
Notice given me of my Trial, it was Execution Day, and he was not at home that
Day.


L. C. J. Holt. He names no Witnesses, only he says he has diverse Witnesses,
neither is there any Oath made of any Witnesses: Pray how long is it since you
were Committed?


Parkyns. I was Committed this Day Fortnight.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Commitment charged you with High Treason, and therefore
you knew what you stood accused of, were you not committed for High Treason.


Parkyns. Yes my Lord, I believe I was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, he had a very fair Time to prepare for his Defense, for
he saw his Name in the Proclamation a good while before he was taken, and there
it is declared, what he stands charged with.


L. C. J. Holt. You might have had a Copy of your Commitment, you had a Right
to have it, and thereby you might have seen what you were accused of.


Keeper. We never do deny it, if it be demanded.


L. C. J. Holt. You cannot deny it, you know what Penalty you are under if you
do.


Parkyns. No body was permitted to come to me.


L. C. J. Holt. You might have asked for a Copy, or any body else, for you had
Notice of your Trial so long ago as Wednesday last.


Mr. Baker. I gave him Notice of his Trial on Wednesday, and then told him he
must prepare for it against this Day; he said he would endeavor to Petition
for a longer Time, I told him it would be in Vain, for he must prepare for his
Trial to Day, and could have no longer Time.


L. C. J. Holt. Sir William, truly we do not see any Reason to put off the
Trial upon these Suggestions.


Parkyns. My Lord, it is very hard; then I humbly beg I may have the Favor,
that I may have Counsel allowed me, I have no skill in Indictments.


L. C. J. Holt. We cannont allow Counsel.


Parkyns My Lord, if I have no Counsel, I do not understand these Matters, nor
what Advantage may be Proper for me to take in these Cases.


L. J. Holt. You are not ignorant, Sir William, that Counsel has been always
refused when desired in such Cases.


Parkyns. My Lord, there is a new Act of Parliament that is lately made, which
allows Counsel.


L. C. J. Holt. But that does not commence yet, Sir William.


Parkyns. My Lord, it wants but one Day.


L. C. J. Holt. That is as much as if it were a much longer time: for we are to
proceed according to what the Law is, and not what it will be.


Parkyns. But it is declarative of the Common Law, because it says it was
always just and reasonable.


L. C. J. Holt. We cannot alter the Law till Lawmakers do it.


Parkyns. Will your Lordship be pleased to let it be read?


L. C. J. Holt. Aye, if you have a Mind to it, it shall be read.


Parkyns. Yes, if your Lordship pleases.


L. C. J. Holt. Read it.


Cl. of Ar. Reads. An Act for Regulating of Trials in Cases of Treason, and
Misprision of Treason. --


All the first Paragraph of the New Act was read. L. C. J. Holt. Look ye, Sir
William Parkyns, this Law has not taken any Effect as yet; but the Law stands
as it did before the making of this Act.


Parkyns. But, My Lord, the Law says it is just and reasonable that it should be
so.


L. C. J. Holt. We go according to the Law as we find it is.


Parkyns. And, My Lord, what is just and reasonable to Morrow, sure is just and
reasonable to Day, and your Lordship may indulge me in this Case, especially
when you see how straight Notice I have had, and what a little time has been
allowed me, that I am not able to make my defense.


L C. J Holt. We cannot make a Law, we must go according to the Law, that must
be our Rule and Direction.


Parkyns. Yes, my Lord, but what is just and reasonable, sure is Law: the Law
is grounded upon Reason.


L. C. J. Holt. The Parliament has thought fit to make such a Law, which is to
commence from the 25th of this Month: It is not a Law till the time comes that
the Parliament has appointed for its being a Law.


Parkyns. But, my Lord, if my Notice had been a convenient Notice, I had been
within the time limited by the Act of Parliament; and no one can want the
Advantage of that Act from henceforward, nor suffer for such want but my self,
which is a particular Hardship upon me.


L. C. J. Holt. We cannot alter the Law, we are bound by our Oaths to proceed
according to the Law as it is at present.


Parkyns. Pray, my Lord, let the Trial be put off till another Day then.


L. C. J. Holt. You show no reason for it; you name no Witnesses that you want,
nor have we any Oath as we ought to have in such a Case.


Parkyns. I will do both if your Lordship will oblige me to it.


L. C. J. Holt. There ought to be an Oath certainly, but we think you have had
fair and convenient Notice: For you have had as much Notice as Sir John Friend
had, who was tried Yesterday.


Parkyns. As I am informed he was charged with single Facts about the Town, but
I am charged with many particular Things more than he was.


L. C. J. Holt. The Act of Parliament says nothing of Notice of Trial; that
still continues as it was before; and you have had very convenient Notice: Go
on Mr. Hardesty to swear the Jury.


Cl. of Ar. Sir William Parkyns, you the Prisoner at the Bar, Those Men that
you shall hear called and personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign
Lord the King and you upon Trial of your Life and Death; if therefore you will
challenge them or any of them, you are to speak unto them as they come to the
Book to be sworn, and before they be sworn.


Parkyns. I hope your Lordship will be of Counsel for me then.


L. C. J. Holt. So we will, we will do you all the Right we can. Look ye, you
know you may challenge 35 without Cause, and as many as you will with Cause,
but no more than 35 without Cause.


Cl. of Ar. Sir Goddard Nelthrop.


Parkyns. I accept against him.


Cl. of Ar. Leonard Hancock, Esquire;


Parkyns. I except against him, he is the King's Servant.


Cl. of Ar. William Withers, Esquire;


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Samuel Powel, Esquire;


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Northey, Esquire;


Parkyns. Well, I don't except against him.


Cl. of Ar. Hold Mr. Northey a Book (which was done.) Look upon the Prisoner.
You shall well and truly try, and true Deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King and the Prisoner at the Bar, whom you shall have in Charge
according to your Evidence, so help you God.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Trench.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Wolf.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. James Boddington.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Smith.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Edward Gould.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him. he was sworn.


Cl. of Ar. John Raymond.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Daniel Thomas.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him he was Sworn.


Cl. of Ar. Isaac H^neywood.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Underwood.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Arthur Bayley.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Nehemiah Erming.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Webber.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Cane.


Parkyns. I have no Exception to him.


Mr. At. Genesis We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Glover.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Henry Witchcott.


Parkyns. I have no Objection against him he was Sworn.


Cl. of Ar. Timothy Thornbury.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Dormer Shepprad.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Temple.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Nathaniel Gold.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him.


Mr. Gold My Lord, I am no Freeholder in this County.


Mr. Baker, Nor have you no Copyhold, Sir?


Mr. Gold. Yes Sir I have.


Mr. At. Genesis However let him be set by.


Cl. of Ar. Robert Breedon.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Tailor.


Parkyns. I challenge him, he is the King's Servant.


Cl. of Ar. Joseph Blissett.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Billier.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Francis Chapman.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. John Cleeve.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Robert Bamptom.


Parkyns. I have no exception to him. He was Sworn.


Cl. of Ar. William Atlee.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Sutton.


Parkyns. I have no Exception to him. (he was Sworn.)


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Edlin.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him. (he was Sworn.)


Cl. of Ar. Robert Sanderson.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him. (he was Sworn.)


Cl. of Ar. Ralph Marsh.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him. (he was Sworn.)


Cl. of Ar. Richard Bealing.


Parkyns. Pray Mr. Hardistey, how many have I Challenged?


Mr. Hardistey. I will tell you presently, Sir. -- You have Challenged 25.


Parkyns. But there are two that I gave reason for; Do you put them in among
them? that is, Mr. Hancock and Mr. Tailor, as the King's Servants.


Cl. of Ar. You may speak to my Lord about it; but if that be allowed, then
there are but twenty three.


Parkyns. Well Sir, Go on then.


Cl. of Ar. Richard Bealeing.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. William Partridge.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Nicholas Roberts.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Peter Lavigne.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Joseph Whiston.


Parkyns. I have no Exception to him. (he was Sworn.)


Cl. of Ar. Andrew Cook.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Samuel Hooper.


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Thomas Heames.


Parkyns. I have no Exception to him. (he was Sworn.)


L. C. J. Holt. Sir William Parkyns, you have Challenged two, and have assigned
the Cause of your Challenge, that is, Hancock and another, and the reason of
your Challenge is, because they are the King's Servants. I am to acquaint you,
that is no cause of Challenge; but however the King's Counsel do not intend to
insist upon it, if there are enough besides. They are willing to go on with the
Panel; and I speak this because I would not have it go for a President, nor
have it understood that the Cause you assign is a good Cause: but however they
will not stand with you, if there be enough to serve.


Parkyns. My Lord, I submit to it; the Jury is full I think.


Cl. of Ar. No, there are but Eleven sworn yet.


Parkyns. But how far have I gone in my Challenges?


Cl. of Ar. There are four which you may Challenge more.


Parkyns. There are two allowed me, though it be not a Precedent: Are there four
still?


Cl. of Ar. Yes, you may Challenge four more, and no more. Edward Townsend


Parkyns. I challenge him.


Cl. of Ar. Nicholas Rufford.


Parkyns. I have no Exception against him. he was Sworn.


Cl. of Ar. Cries Countez. William Northey.


Crier. One, etc. (and so the rest till the Twelfth.)


Cl. of Ar. Nicholas Rufford.


Crier. Twelve good Men and true, stand together, and hear your Evidence.


Cl. of Ar. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. Oyez. If any one can inform my Lords the King's Justices, the King's
Sergeant, the King's Attorney General, of this Inquest now to be taken, of the
High Treason whereof the Prisoner at the Bar stands indicted, let them come
forth, and they shall be heard; for now the Prisoner stands at the Bar upon his
Deliverance, and all others that are bound by Recognizance to give Evidence
against the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth, and give their Evidence,
or else they forfeit their Recognizance. And all Jurymen of Middlesex that have
appeared, and are not Sworn, may depart the Court.

The Names of the Twelve Sworn were these, Jur.
William Northey, Esquire; Edward Gold, Esquire; Daniel Thomas, Esquire; Henry Whitchot,
Esquire; Robert Bampton, Gent. Thomas Sutton, Gent. Thomas Edling, Gent. Robert
Sanderson, Gent. Ralph Marsh, Gent. John Whiston, Gent. Thomas Heams, Gent. and
Nicholas Rufford, Gent.



C. L. of Ar. Sir William Parkyns, hold up thy Hand (which he did.) You that
are sworn look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause: he stands Indicted
by the Name of Sir William Parkyns, late of the Parish of St. Paul
Covent Garden, in the County of Middlesex, Knight, that whereas ( prout in the
Indictment, mutatis mutandis,) and against the Form of the Statute in this Case
made and provided. Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and thereunto
has Pleaded not Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his
Country, which Country you are; your Charge is to inquire, whether he be Guilty
of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or not guilty; if you find that
he is Guilty, you are to inquire what Goods, and Chattels, Lands, and
Tenements, he had at the Time of the High Treason committed, or at any time
since: If you find him not Guilty, ye are to inquire whether he fled for it; if
you find that he fled for it, you are to inquire of his Goods and Chattels, as
if you had found him Guilty; if you find him not Guilty, nor that he did fly
for it, you are to say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Mr. Montague. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.


Parkyns. My Lord, your Lordship was pleased to say you would be my Counsel. I
am Ignorant in Matters of Indictments, I beg if there be any Fault in it, you
will let me know it.


L. C. J. Holt. Truly I have observed no Fault in it; I do not know of any.


Mr. Montague. Gentlemen, this Indictment does contain as heavy an Accusation,
as can be laid upon any Man, for it not only charges the Prisoner with a
Traitorous design of subverting the Government, and raising War and Rebellion
within the Kingdom; which was to be done by adhering to the King's Enemies, and
promoting a Foreign Invasion, but likewise with a Conspiracy against the Life
of the King, which was to have been taken away by a bloody Assassination.

Gentlemen, the Indictment sets forth, That Sir Will. Parkyns, the Prisoner at
the Bar, did meet several times with Chernock and other false Traitors; and
there it was consulted, and agreed how they should procure French Forces to
Land within this Kingdom, and then they were to raise Rebellion among his
Majesty's Subjects, to join with the Invadors. Mr. Chernock was sent from the
Prisoner at the Bar, and the rest, as a Messenger into France, unto the late
King James to acquaint him with this Bloody Design; and to desire him to borrow
of the French King as many Troops as he could spare to make a Descent upon this
Kingdom, and they at the same time were to facilitate the Descent, by getting
as many Men as they could to make the Assassination; and the number of Forty
was pitched upon, who were to be provided for that purpose, of which the
Prisoner at the Bar was to find Five, who were to lie in wait with the rest,
and set upon the King as he came along in his Coach upon his Return from
Hunting. Some were to assault and attack the Guards, while others were
barbarously to Assassinate and Murder the King in his Coach: and particularly
it Charges the Prisoner with undertaking to procure and provide Five Horses and
Arms that were to be Employed in this Bloody Assassination, and also with
gathering together great Quantities of Arms and Ammunition that were to be used
in the Insurrection. To this Indictment the Prisoner has pleaded Not Guilty; if
he be not Guilty, God forbid he should be Convicted; but if he be Guilty, and
we prove the Fact, the Nation expects that you will do Justice to the King and
Kingdom, and find him so.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir William Parkyns, stands Indicted of High Treason,
for Compassing the Death of his Majesty, and adhering to his Majesty's Enemies;
and the Overt Acts laid in the Indictment to prove this Treason are, That he
with others had several Meetings and Consultations about this Design, and sent
a Messenger over to France to the late King James, to procure French Forces to
Invade the Kingdom, to Depose the King, and subject the Kingdom to a French
Power: And likewise that he did enter into a Conspiracy with several Persons
for the Assassination of his Majesty's Royal Person. These are the Overt Acts
mentioned in the Indictment, to prove this Charge of Treason against the
Prisoner.

Gentlemen, the Evidence to prove these Overt Acts, and which we shall produce,
will be in this manner. It will appear that the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir
William Parkyns, has formerly had a Commission from King James to raise a
Regiment of Horse, and about May last, he with several others had a Meeting at
the Old King's-head in Leadenhall-street, where were present my Lord of
Aylesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir William Parkyns, Sir John Friend, Sir John
Fenwick; Mr. Chernock, Mr. Porter, and one Mr. Cook; and Goodman came in to
them after Dinner. And at that Meeting it was Consulted and Conserted among
them, how they should bring back the late King James, and Depose his present
Majesty; and in order to that they did Resolve to send Mr. Chernock as a
Messenger to the late King James, to desire him to obtain from the French King
10000 Men to Invade this Kingdom; 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons; and
to Encourage the late King to this, they did assure him by the same Messenger,
that they would meet him with 2000 Horse upon his Landing; and they did all
undertake and agree that they would do it: and Mr. Chernock undertook to go of
this Message.

Gentlemen, about a Week after this Meeting, Mr. Chernock not being willing to
go upon this Errand without a good Assurance that they intended to perform what
they had Resolved upon, they therefore had another Meeting of most of the same
Persons that were at the former, and particularly the Prisoner at the Bar was
one; and that was at Mrs. Mountjoyes a Tavern in St. James's-street. And at
that Meeting they did all agree, as formerly, and continued in their former
Resolution, to send Mr. Chernock to assure the late King, that they would meet
him, according as they had promised, if he would give them notice where he was
to Land, and he should not fail of their Assistance. And at these Meetings they
did take notice, that then was the most proper time for such an Invasion; for
the King was gone to Flanders, most of the Forces were drawn thither, and the
People were dissatisfied, and so it would be the fittest opportunity to
accomplish their Design; and they desired Mr. Chernock to make haste to carry
this Message, and to Entreat King James that he would be speedy and expeditious
in his coming, that they might not loose this season.

Gentlemen, after these Meetings, Mr. Chernock did within a few days go over
into France, and did deliver his Message to the late King James, who took it
very kindly, but said that the French King could not spare so many Forces that
year, having other work to Employ them about: upon which, within a Months time,
or less, he came back again, and brought an account of his Message to those
Gentlemen that sent him. This was in May or June last, and so the further
prosecution of the Design ceast at that time.

But Gentlemen, the last Winter it was revived again, and attempted, and
carried on very near to the obtaining a fatal Success. And you will hear that
the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir William Parkyns, has had too great a hand, and
been a very great Instrument in both the Parts of this wicked Conspiracy and
Treason; not only in the Invasion, which he with others sent the Messenger over
to pocure, but also in the other part, the blackest part, even the
Assassination of the King's Person.

About January last Sir George Barclay, a Lieutenant of the Guards to King
James in France, was sent over into England to engage Persons to join in the
Conspiracy and Assassination; and for his Assistance there were sent over with
him, and before and after him, some 20 Troopers of the late Kings, that were
his Guards in France. And Sir George Barclay to encourage the Persons that were
to join, and whom he had brought over with him, pretended an Authority to
justify it, that is, a Commission from the late King James, and he
Communicates this Design to Mr. Chernock, Mr. Porter, and several others, and
amongst the rest to the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir William Parkyns, having a
great Confidence in him, and did acquaint him he had such a Commission, and he
showed it him, and that Commission was to levy War against the King's Person;
which they took to be a sufficient Authority for them to Assassinate the King's
Person.

Gentlemen, in order to the accomplishing this horrid Conspiracy, there were
several Meetings, and Consultations had, at which the Prisoner at the Bar was
present, and very active. Sometimes they met at Capt. Porter's Lodgings, at
another time at the Naggs-head in Covent Garden, at another time at the Sun in
the Strand, and another time at the Globe in Hatton-Garden, in order to
accomplish this Design: And at these Meetings, you will hear, they did propose
several ways and methods for the execution of it; and several Persons,
particularly one of them that have suffered the Punishment of the Law for this,
were appointed to go and view the Ground where the King's Person might most
conveniently be assaulted. Mr. King, that was Executed for it, was one, Capt.
Porter was another, and one Knightly was the third; and these did go to see the
Ground. And the day before they went there was a Meeting, at which was present
the Prisoner at the Bar, and others, wherein 'twas concluded upon that they
should go; and they went accordingly to see the most convenient place for it.
They went to Brentford, and afterward to the other side of the Water to
Richmond, and surveyed all the Ground, and the Place they pitched upon as the
most proper for their purpose, was when his Majesty should Return from Hunting,
to do it in the Lane betwixt Brentford and Turnham-Green. And accordingly, when
they returned in the Evening, they came by appointment to the place where the
rest of the Accomplices were to meet, at the Nagg's-head Tavern in St. James's,
and gave an account of there Proceedings, and at that Meeting likewise was Sir
William Parkyns the Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Chernock, and several others, and
upon the Report of Capt. Porter, and Mr. King's Expedition, they did Resolve
the thing should be done in that place, and that it should be done in this
manner.

Sir George Barclay with about 8 or 10 in his Party, who were to be chosen out
of all the other Parties, were to assault the King's Coach, and endeavor to
kill the King, and all the rest that were in the Coach with him, whilst the
others, in two Parties, were to attack the Guards; the number in all was to be
about 40. This was fully agreed upon.

And, Gentlemen, the first time that they Resolved to put this Traitorous
Design in Execution, was the Fifteenth of February, which was a Saturday: the
usual day that the King was wont to go a Hunting in; but it happened by great
Providence that the King did not go abroad that day.

They had contrived further to make the thing sure, that there should be two
Persons, whom they called orderly Men, who should be placed at Kensington, to
give Notice when the King went abroad; and Chambers was one, and Durance that
was a Fleming was another; and Durance was likewise employed to view the Inns
about Turnham-Green and Brentford, for the lodging of their Men, who were to be
placed two or three in an Inn, that they might not be observed.

Gentlemen, the first Day appointed for the accomplishing this Design, which
was the 15th of February, being over, and they disappointed; yet they did
afterward resolve to go on and execute it. And the next Saturday, which was
the 22th of February, was pitched upon for the time of Execution; and
accordingly on Friday the 21th of February, the day before, there was a Meeting
at the Nag's-head in Covent Garden; and there was present Sir George Barclay,
Capt. Porter, and several others, and amongst the rest, the Prisoner at the Bar
was there; they had at first some Discourse among them that they were in doubt,
because of the first Disappointment, whether there had not been some Discovery;
but that Doubt was soon over; for it was said, it could not be so, for then
they should not have been there together. That seemed probable, and the
Disappointment was imputed to some Accident, and that gave them new Assurance
to go on, and they were resolved to do it in the same manner, as they had
formerly resolved, on the next Day, which was Saturday.

Gentlemen, at that Meeting Mr. Porter acquainted them that he had the
Misfortune to have some of his Horses fallen sick or lame, and he acquainted
the Prisoner with it; and Sir William Parkyns was careful to supply him with
other Horses, and told him, he could get a Note from one Lewis, who I think is
Major of the Horse to my Lord Feversham, to get three Horses, and accordingly
he did send a Note for three Horses to Mr. Lewis.

Upon the 22th of February in the Morning, which was the time for the Execution
of this bloody Conspiracy, they had met together, and resolved to go on with
it, and put it in Execution; and they had Notice from Chambers that the King
did go a Hunting that Day, and there was great Joy among them all, thinking
themselves sure; and so they ordered all things to be got ready. But
afterward, about One a Clock, there came other News, that the King did not go
abroad, but the Guards were all come back in great haste, their Horses being
all of a Foam, and the King's Coaches were sent back to the Mews; then they
began to be in a great Consternation, and they thought the thing had taken Air,
and was discovered. This, Gentlemen, is a short Account how it will appear upon
the Evidence as to the Conspiracy of Assassinating the King, and the several
Meetings and Consultations about it; at which the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir
William Parkyns, was present.

But, Gentlemen, there will be a little more Evidence, if it be necessary, to
confirm this former Evidence, and to show the part that the Prisoner at the Bar
had in this barbarous, Treasonable Conspiracy: For it will appear, that, as the
Prisoner had a Commission from the late King James to raise a Regiment of
Horse, and had sent a Messenger into France to invite the late King over, with
10000 French; so he had made great Preparation of Arms to be ready for that
Purpose. About Michaelmas last, the Prisoner at the Bar sent a parcel of Goods,
as he called them, which were put into Cases, I think they were about Eight
small Boxes, put in very large Cases, and sent down by his Order into the
Country, unto one Haywood. It seems this Haywood had married Mr. Chernock's
Sister, and Chernock writ a Letter to him, and desired that he would give Sir
William Parkyns leave to lodge some Goods there, which were of great value, and
he durst not trust them at his own House in Warwickshire, because his Servants
were not there to look after them, and accordingly upon that Letter Mr. Haywood
did give leave that the Goods should be carried thither, and they were so, and
there they were locked up privately, and kept till this Barbarous Conspiracy
was discovered; then you will find the Prisoner at the Bar sent his own Servant
down, the Tuesday after the Discovery, and gave him Orders immediately (his
Name is Ubanck, and he is the Groom, and looks after his Horses) to go down to
Warwickshire to one Evans, who carried the Goods, to desire him with all speed
to remove those Goods, and to take care to remove them privately, and to secure
them, and to hide them. And accordingly on Wednesday he came there, which was
Ash Wednesday; and acquainted Evans with what Sir William had ordered him, and
they went that very Night with a Cart to Mr. Haywood's; and though it was late,
and they were desired to stay till the next Morning, they would not; they said,
they could stay no longer, but would remove the Goods immediately; and
accordingly they were carried from thence that Night, to Sir William Parkyns
own House in Warwickshire; and there they were buried in the Garden. These
Goods that were of this great value were put into the Ground to preserve them.
But after this Discovery, Sir William Parkyns being accused, and his Name put
in the Proclamation, and a Search being ordered to be made at his House, these
Goods that lay hid at Haywood's, and upon the removal thence were thus buried
in the Ground, came to be discovered, and the Cases were broken open, and then
they did appear to be Goods of an extraordinary Nature indeed, for you will
find they were Horse Arms for Troopers; there were two and thirty Carbines,
five and twenty Cases of Pistols, and about forty odd Swords without Hilts upon
them, but the Hilts lay loose by them; so that this will make it apparent,
without Dispute, how far the Prisoner at the Bar has engaged in this
Conspiracy, and what Preparations he had made for the Execution of it.

Gentlemen, it will appear further against the Prisoner at the Bar, that he
has had a considerable Number of Horses, that have frequently been brought up
from his House in Hartfordshire to the George-Inn in Houlbourn.

But before we come to that, I would acquaint you with another particular part
of our Evidence, that is precedent in point of time. About Christmas last, the
Prisoner did acquaint one Sweet, who is an Officer of the Excise, (and I am
very sorry that we should have any such Officers, that should be thought fit to
be entrusted with Secrets of this nature) Sir William Parkyns acquainted this
Sweet, and gave him an Account that he had long had an Assurance that King
James would Land, but now he had it under his own Hand, that he would land very
speedily, and that he had made Preparations for that purpose to meet him. That
great things were expected from him; that his own Troop was ready, and it
consisted chiefly of old Soldiers; and that several Persons who had been
Officers would be Volunteers under him. He said, he intended to go into
Leicestershire, and there he was to meet several Gentlemen from the North, and
from the West, to consider, and settle a Correspondence how to meet the late
King upon his Landing; and accordingly Sir William Parkyns did go, and you will
have an account that he came to Leicester on Friday night, one Scudimore went
along with him, there he staid all Saturday, and a good part of Sunday. There
came several persons to him while he was at Leicester, particularly one Captain
Yarborough, the Son of Sir Thomas Yarborough, and a Parson, who said they came
as far as from York to meet Sir William Parkyns at Leicester; and there was
great resort thither at that time, as you will hear from the Witnesses. Sir
William Parkyns came back again from Leicester to Brickhill, that night, and
returned to his own House on Monday night; and after his return, he acquainted
this Sweet, that he had been his Journey to Leicester; that he met with several
Gentlemen there from the North, and other places, and had settled a
Correspondency, and had found them all fully Engaged, and well Inclined, all
went well, and there was no danger of any Miscarriage at all; and this was
about January last, that this Expedition was made by the Prisoner.

And now, Gentlemen, as to that particular about the Horses, which were so
frequently brought up this last Winter from his House in Hartfordshire, to the
George-Inn in Holbourn; there is one very unfortunate Circumstance that attends
this Matter; that is, that these Horses were brought to Town just the several
Nights before the King was to be assassinated; for upon Thursday the 13th of
February, he being in Town, sent Directions to his Groom to bring up three of
his Horses on Friday, which was the 14th in the Afternoon, and all these Horses
were furnished with Pistols and Furniture for Troopers; according to those
Directions his Servant brought up the three Horses, and he came and acquainted
his Master that they were brought up according to his Order; Sir William
Parkyns was then at his Lodgings, which were in the same House where Mr.
Chernock did lodge; when his Man had told him the Horses were come, he
pretended at first that he had had some Thoughts of going out of Town that
Evening, but that he had changed his Mind, and would go in the Morning; and he
would have the Horses ready against the next Morning, which was Saturday the
15th, the first Day upon which the Assassination was intended to be put in
Execution.

The next Morning when his Man came to him again, he had changed his Mind, and
he would not go out of Town in the Morning, but he would go in the Afternoon;
and it will appear that he did not go out of Town that Day, nor the next Day,
nor till Monday; and then the Design had miscarried by the King's not going
abroad a Saturday, and the Horses were carried back; and when he went out of
Town upon Monday, one Holmes went along with him, and he went with him to his
house in Hartfordshire; and there he staid until Friday after, which was the
Day before the next time that was appointed for the Execution of the
Assassination. And upon the Friday they came up again, and then there were more
Horses, 4 or 5, that were brought up that Day; and all of them with Pistolls,
and Jack Boots, and other Furniture and Accoutriments for Troopers; and these
came to the George Inn, where Sir Will. Parkins gave his man Eubank particular
Orders, to be very early the next Morning at Kensington; that was the 22d. and
he was to go, as he told him, to one Brown, that he said was Concerned in the
Kings Kitchen, and Lived 2 Doors off the Gate that turns up to the Kings house,
and he was to tell him he was Sir W. Parkins's servant, but that he came from a
man that Lodged at a Confectioners house over against Grays Inn; in which place
by the Description of the person, you will find Sir Geo. Barclay lodged.

The man went accordingly at 8 a Clock in the Morning to Kensington, and
inquired out this Brown, and met with him, and told him he was Sir W. Parkins's
servant, but came from the Gentleman that Lodged at the Confectioners in
Holbourn. Brown said he had nothing to say to him, but bid him give him his
Almanac, and he writ in it, that he would be in Town in 2 hours himself, and
wait upon him: And bid him carry that to the man that lodged at the
Confectioners, and this Brown by the Circumstances of the whole, must probably
be one of the Orderly men who lodged at Kensington, to give notice when the
King, and the Gurds went out.

Sir Will. Parkins's servant came back to the Confectioners house, and there he
met with a man that went by the name of Rogers; he will tell you he was a Scotch
man, for he spoke broad Scotch, and he will give you a particular Description of
the man, by which I believe it will appear that it was Sir Geo. Barclay. Sir
Will. Parkins's servant after he had Delivered his Message to this Rogers, came
back to his Master, and told him he had done his Errand according as he was
ordered, and Sir Will. Parkins ask't him what Rogers said, and he told him that
he bid him tell his Master, if he would come to him he would be ready at home
for him. This was upon Saturday Morning the 22d. of February.

About 11 a Clock that day Sir Will. Parkins, and this Lewis that we spoke of
before, came to the George Inn, and there Sir Will. Parkins ask't his servant
whether he had received any more then 2 Sadles, for there were 2 Sadles sent in
thither, according to an order that has been given, to furnish two other
Horses that stood their at the George Inn, and which Sir W. Parkings told his
Groom belonged to two Friends of his, and bid him besure to take care of them,
and to see them well fed, and ordered 2 Sadles to be bought for them. Lewis
said he did think they had more then two, but you will see by the Evidence that
this same Lewis had provided 30 Sadles for Sir Wi. Parkins; but there seemed to
be a Controversy between them and that time how many had really been sent in,
and Lewis affirmed there was 24, but Sir W. Perkins said, I have had but 22 of
the 30 yet, for I have but 2 brought in here, and I had 20 before. This you
will hear fully proved, and I think it is Impossible for any body to believe,
but that all this preparation of Sadles, Pistols, Boots, and other things, must
Convince any body of the Prisoners being so far Engaged in this Design, that he
can never Answer it without giving you a very good Account, what this
preparation was for.

Gentlemen, a great part of this will be proved to you by one that Acted in it,
as a servant to Sir W. Parkins, that is, as to the coming up of the Horses,
Jack Boots, Pistols, and other Arms at that time; and that when on the last
Saturday it was Disappointed, all the Horses, not only those Sir W. Parkins
brought, but the other two went away in a great Hurry, and Confusion, and
nothing was ever heard of them more; and that will be proved by the Servants in
the very Inn.

Gentlemen, I have now opened to you the nature and state of the Evidence, we
will call our Witnesses, and make it out very undeniably, and Substantially,
and therefore I will not give you any further trouble.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Call Mr. Porter (who was Sworn) Mr. Porter, pray will you give
the Court and the Jury an Account of the meeting at the Kings Head in Leaden
hall street, and who was there, and what Resolutions, and Agrements they came
to.


Capt. Porter. About the latter end of May last, or the beginning of June, there
were two meetings had, the one was at the Kings Head in Leaden hall street, the
other was at Mr. Mountjoyes near Sir John Fenwicks. At the First meeting there
was my Lord of Aylesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir J. Friend, Sir W. Parkins the
prisoner at the Bar, Sir J. Fenwick, Capt. Chernock, Mr. Cook, and my self.
Mr. Goodman came in after Dinner, and there we Consulted which was the best way
for King James's coming in, and we all Resolved to send a Messenger to him to
to Invite him over, and to desire him to Interpose with the French King for the
Getting 10000 men, to come over with him, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000
Dragoons. It was then Considered who should be sent, and all the Company agreed
Mr. Chernock was the properest person. Says Mr. Chernock, if you send me, pray
tell me what Errant I shall go upon: We did likewise then agree, that he should
assure the King, if He would come over, at such a time, we would meet Him with
a body of 2000 Horse.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Chernock undertake to go upon that Message?


Cap. P. Yes, he Did, and to propose this matter to Him, that He might propose
it to the French King for the getting of the men.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Before you go away, I Desire to ask of you one thing, Did Sir
Will. Parkins the Prisoner at the Bar agree to the Message.


Capt. P. Yes, he Did.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Had you any other meeting about this business, and when was it,
and who was there?


Capt. P. My Lord, Capt. Chernock said at first he would not go of a foolish
Message, and thereupon we all agreed to be at the head of 2000 men to meet King
James at His Landing, and every one should bring his Quota.


M. At. Genesis When was the Second meeting, and where was it; and who were
there, and what was agreed upon?


Capt. P. The second meeting was at Mrs. Mountjoys, where Capt. Chernock
desired us once more to meet, before he went away, to know whether we kept to
our First Resolution, and we did agree to what was Resolved upon at First, and
he said he would go in two or three Days time.


Mr. At. Genesis Did the Company agree to it then?


Capt. P. Yes, they Did Sir, all that meet at that time.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray name them over again, who they were.


Capt. P. Sir Will. Parkins was actually there, and my Lord of Aylesbury, and
Sir J. Friend, and Capt. Chernock, Mr. Cook, and my self, I cannot tell whether
my Lord Montgomery was there, or Mr. Goodman.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray when did you see Capt. Chernock, or speak with him after
that?


Capt. P. It was when I was in Prison about the Riot, and he told me he had
been there; but there would be nothing done in that matter at Present, for King
James said, the French King could not then spare so many men, tho he thankt us
for Our Kind offer: And he said he had been with my Lord of Aylesbury, Sir W.
Parkins, and the several other people of Quality, which he did not name, and
had carried them the particular Messages that he had in Command from the King
to carry to them.


Mr. At. Genesis Now, pray, tell us what you Know about the Design of
Assassinating the King, and what hand the Prisoner at the Bar was to have in it?


Capt. P. About some weeks before I heard of the Assassination; I came to Lodge
in the house in Norfolk street, where Capt. Chernock Lodged, and where Sir W.
Parkins Lodged when he came to Town. Most commonly we used to go in the Evening
to the Tavern, or Drink a Bottle of Wine at our own Lodgings; and one Morning I
asked Mr. Chernock, if I should see him at Night, he said he was Engaged in
private Company for that Night, and he could not go with me to the Tavern. For
says he there are some Gentlemen that are lately come from France, and there is
something to be done for the Kings service. If there be so, says I, pray let me
be concerned? says he, they are but newly come, and they will see no body else
but me at present. A little after I fell sick of a fit of the Gout, and Mr.
Chernock came to Visit me, and we fell into Discourse, and I asked him about
those Gentlemen that were come from France, what they came about; he told me it
was Sir G. Barclay that came from France, and several other Officers with him,
and that he had a Commission from the late King James to Levy War against the
Person of King William, or the Prince of Orange, as I think it was named in the
Commission.


L. C. J. H. Who told you this?


Capt. P. It was Capt. Chernock: He desired to Know how many men I could bring.
I desired a little time to Consider, but I said there would be a great many
that would Join if the King landed (whom I did not think fit to Trust with a
thing of this nature before hand.) Some few Days after, Capt. Chernock came
into my Chamber, and brought Sir G. Barclay and Major Holmes that said he was
come from France; and there we had little more but a General discourse: But a
Little after that I got well of the Gout, and we had several meetings at
several Places; at the Globe Tavern in Hatton-Garden, at the Naggs head in
Covent Garden, and at the Sun in the Strand, where Sir Will. Parkins was always
present. And there we Did consult of the best ways to Assassinat the King, as
he came from Richmond after Hunting. Sir G. Barclay said, he had received 800
l. from King James's Secretary toward the buying of Horses, and furnishing
both Horses and Men for the Expedition; and it was Considered of how many men
it would be necessary to bring. The number agreed upon was about 40, of which
Sir G. Barclay was to provide 20, I promised to bring 7 or 8, Sir Will. Parkins
Engaged to bring 5, whereof 3 should be mounted with his own Men, and the other
2 my Men were to mount upon.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know the names of those People that he was to mount.


Capt. P. I never had the names my self.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, what was Done after these Consultations?


Capt. P. I ask Capt. Chernock one time, if I might not see the Commission,
that King James had given; he said he had never seen it himself, but Sir W.
Parkyns had. I asked Sir W. Parkyns one Evening, as we were smoking a Pipe by
the Fire side, whether he had seen the Commission; he said he had, and that
because King James would not trust any of his Ministers; it was written and
Signed with the Kings own Hand.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray did he tell you what it was for?


Capt. P. He said it was for Raising, and Levying War upon the Person of the
King, but I do not know whether he called him King William, or the Prince of
Orange; but I suppose it was the Prince of Orange.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray then give us an Account of your going to view the Ground,
where it was most Convenient to do the business.


Capt. P. There were several propositions about the Place where it was to be
done, one was to be on the other side of the Water by Ambuscade in Richmond
Park, the other was to be on this side of the Water after the King was Landed.
Sir G. Barclay was for that that was upon the other side of the Water; I
thought that would take up too much time to go over thither, that it was better
to be done on this side; but because there was Difference of Opinions, It was
Resolved upon that some body should be appointed to view the Ground; and I was
appointed for one, Mr. Knightly for another, and Mr. King would needs go with
us for a Third, and we three did go. We lay all Night at Knights bridge, and
the next Day went and viewed the Grounds on both sides the River; and came back
that Evening to the Naggs head according to appointment, where was Sir W.
Parkyns the Prisoner, and Sir G. Barclay, and Mr. Chernock, and we gave an
account that we had viewed both the Places: And upon our Report it was
Resolved, that it should be done on this side the Water, In the Lane between
Brentford and Turnham Green.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you sure Sir W. Parkyns the Prisoner at the Bar was there,
at that meeting at the Naggs head?


Capt. P. Yes he was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he agree to that Resolution?


Capt. P. It was in General agreed by all that was there.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Capt. Porter then give us an Account of the Days that were
fixed for the Execution of this Design.


Capt. P. There was Saturday the 15th. and Saturday the 22d. because Saturday
was the Day the King used to go a Hunting, and Shooting.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there any men at Kensington to give you notice when the
King went abroad.


Capt. P. There were two men that had a Lodging at Kensington, the one was one
Chambers who belonged to Capt. Chernock, and the other was a Fleming, one
Durance, who came over with Sir George Barclay, and he went every Day and
thrust himself among the Guards to bring Intelligence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What was the reason the Design was not executed.


Capt. P. The first Day Durance brought notice in the Morning, that the Guards
were gone abroad; and afterward there came notice, that the King would not go
abroad that Day, for which reason we Adjourned it to the next Saturday.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the Method you was to take in the Execution?


Capt. P. The method agreed upon was this; there was one Rookwood that came
from France upon this Expedition, he was to Command one party, and Capt.
Chernock and my self, were to Command another Party to attack the Guards, and
Sir George Barclay was to have 4 men out of each party to attack the Coack,
while we Attacked the Guards.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, you say the First Day you was Disappointed by the Kings
not going, when was the next meeting.


Capt P. The next meeting was upon Friday the day before the 22d. I was sick
all the Week, and I do not know whether I lay a Bed all the Week, or no, but
upon Friday they met, and it was at the Sun Tavern in the Strand: There was
none but Sir G. Barclay, Capt. Chernock, Sir W. Parkyns and my self.


Mr. At. Genesis What Discourse was there then?


Capt. P. Sir G. Barclay came in, and said he was afraid the thing was
Discovered; I told him I fancyed not, for if it had we should not have been in
that house at that time. Then says he, let us go on and try another day. Sir W.
Parkyns was asked if his Horses were come to Town? he said they were come to
Town that Night. Said I, I have had a misfortune with my Horses, two of them
are fallen Lame, and and will not be fit for service. Says he, if I had known
that, I could have brought more Horses out of the Country: But says he, I will
send to Mr. Lewis, who was Gentleman of the Horse to my Lord Feversham, and I
believe he can help us to more Horses; he will be with me to Morrow morning,
and I Will get a Note from him for two more. In the Morning I sent to him, and he
sent me a Note for two Horses to mount my men, and he sent me word Mr, Lewis
could help me to 2 or 3 others, that they were all 3 Sadled, and one was
Accoutred with Holsters and Pistolls, but the other 2 had only Sadles. I did
not see Sir W. Parkyns, on Saturday the 22d. but I met some of my friends, who
were to go along with me upon this Enterprise, and we had first notice that the
Guards were gone abroad, and that the King would go, at which all were very
glad: But when we had notice that the King did not go, we were afraid the thing
was Discovered, and I went out of Town, and I did not see any of them
afterward till they were taken.


M. At. Genesis Pray, Capt. Porter, have you ever heard any thing from Sir W.
Parkyns of his having a Commission from King James?


Capt. P. I had heard Capt. Chernock ask Sir W. Parkyns why he did not go along
with us in this Expedition, he said he did not go, because he could not go.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he not to be one of the Number that was to Act in the
Assassination?


Capt. P. No, he said he had other Business to do, he had a Regiment to look
after.


L. C. J. H. How many Horses had you from Lewis.


Capt. P. I had never a one, only Sir W. Parkyns sent me word, if I wanted I
might have 3 for I had told him I would not send for them, till I heard whither
the King went abroad, and then I had notice that the King did not go.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you a Note for them.


Capt. P. Not for those 3 Horses, but Cranburn said he had a Note for 2 Horses.


Parkyns. Did he say he had a Note from me.


Capt. P. No, I don't say so Sir W. Cranburn told me he had a Note whither to
go for them.


L. C. J. H. Will you ask him any Questions, Sir William?


Parkyns. No, my Lord.


Juryman. My Lord, I desire he may be ask't, whither at any of those meetings
there was any Discourse of the Assassination before Sir W. Parkyns?


L. C. J. H. What say you to that Capt. Porter?


Capt. P. Yes, he was at all the meetings and Consultations.


Juryman. Pray my Lord, I desire to know whither Sir W. Parkyns Discoursed of
it himself, and what he did say about it.


Capt. P. I cannot say exactly what he did say in particular, only he agreed to
it, and was to furnish 5 Horses for it, and said it was necessary to be done,
for it would bring the King in more easily. Tho he could not Personally engage
in it himself, because he had other business, he was to look after his Regiment.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If Sir W. Parkyns will ask Capt. Porter no Questions, we will go
on to our next Witness, which is one Abraham Sweet whom Mr. Attorney mentioned.


He was brought in and Sworn. Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Sweet, Will you give the Court,
and Jury an Account what Sir Will. Parkyns said to you about King James's
Landing?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you give an Account what Discourse you had with Sir W.
Parkyns the Prisoner at the Bar, about King James's Returning, and Landing with
French Forces.


Sweet. Sir W. Parkyns did tell me, that he did expect King James's Landing,
and he said his own Troop was Composed of Old Soldiers.


M. At. Genesis How long have you known Sir W. Parkyns?


Sweet. This 3 Years.


Mr. At. Gen.. Pray tell the time when this Discourse was, about what time was
it?


Sweet. This was since Christmas, about Christmas last.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was it that you had this Discourse?


Sweet. It was about his own House.


L. C. J. Holt. What Discourse?


Sweet. We were talking about King James' coming.


L. C. J. Holt. Who told you that King James was coming?


Sweet. Sir William Parkyns.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he say?


Sweet. He said he had bought a great many Saddles, Thirty Saddles; and that
his own Troop was composed of all old Soldiers.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell you of any assurance that he had of King James's
landing?


Sweet. Yes, he said he had the Kings Word for it.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any discourse between you about any Journey that Sir
William was to take?


Sweet. Yes he did tell me, he was to go into Leicestershire, and was to meet
several Gentlemen in Leicestershire, and he did go, and after he came back
again, he said he had met his Friends, and all was well, and that the West was
as much inclined to King James's Interest as the North, and that a Lords
Brother was concerned.


Mr. At. Genesis What other discourse had you about this matter?


Sweet. Nothing else, as to particulars, that I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis What Orders had you to come up to Town in February, and when,
and from whom?


Sweet. Sir Will. Parkyns sent for me, and he sent me a Letter about the 11th.
of February, that I should come to him the next day, and I did come the next
day.


Mr. At. Genesis Whether did you come? Where did you find him?


Sweet. At his Lodgings in Norfolk-street, at the House where Mr. Charnock
lodged; and after I had spoken with Sir William Parkyns about the Letter which
he had sent me to come up, he told me that the Business that he had designed
for me, he did not think fit I should do, because of my Family.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what directions had you from him, what you were to do when
you came into the Country?


Sweet. When I went into the Country, he ordered me to go to his House, and
send up three of the strongest Horses.


Mr. At. Genesis When was this, do you say?


Sweet. It was in February.


Mr. At. Genesis What time in February?


Sweet. The Eleventh or Twelfth, which was Wednesday; and at my going away, he
told me, if I had not a Letter from him the Friday following, I should come to
Town again. I did come to Town again, and then he asked me if I had made
Provision for my Family, I told him, no; then he asked me why I came up to
Town, he told me I might go into the Country again on the morrow morning.


L. C. J. Holt. What did he tell you?


Sweet. He said I might go back again into the Country. I came upon the
Saturday morning to him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what day was that Saturday?


Sweet. I believe it was the 13th. or 14th. of February.


Mr. At. Genesis You say Wednesday was the 12th.


Sweet. Yes, I believe Wednesday was the 12th. and I came to Town the Friday
after that 12th. that was the 14th. and on the Saturday I went home again.


Mr. At. Genesis You say you came to him on the Saturday morning, what passed
between you then?


Sweet. I went the next morning to Sir Will. Parkyns's Lodgings, but he was
gone out, and had left word that I must come again about Eleven of the Clock; I
did go about that time, and he was not come in; and there I met one Mr.
Chambers and one Mr. Lee, whom I had seen there the Night before.


Mr. At. Genesis And what Discourse had you then with them?


Sweet. We had little Discourse, for I had only seen them the Night before; but
I think Chambers told me he had been at Kensington; and I desired to know what
News there; and he told me William kept as close as a Fox; and he showed me his
Wounds, and he said those Wounds wanted Revenge.


Mr. At. Genesis Where did he say he received those Wounds?


Sweet. At the Boyne.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, Mr. Sweet, did he tell you for what use his Troop was?


Sweet. He did not tell me positively; but I understood it to be to join King
James when he landed.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray, Sir, where did you dine that Saturday?


Sweet. With Sir Will. Parkyns, and Mr. Charnock, and Chambers, and one or two
more that I did not know.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions, Sir William?


Parkyns. Did I tell you, Mr. Sweet, that I had a Troop of Horse?


Sweet. I will tell you your own words, and no other: you said, Your own Troop
was composed of old Soldiers.


L. C. J. Holt. Pray, let me ask you one Question: How many Horses were you to
bid the Man to bring up to Town?


Sweet. Three, My Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis And were they not his strongest Horses?


Sweet. Yes, My Lord, they were.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he say any thing to you about Volunteers?


Sweet. Yes, he said there were some Gentlemen that were Captains and old
Officers, that would be Volunteers under him.


Parkyns. Pray, Sir, where were these words spoken?


Sweet. Either in your own House or in the Garden, I cannot tell directly which,
but some where about your House it was.


Parkyns. Where is that House?


Sweet. In Hertfordshire.


Parkyns. Then I am in your Lordships Judgment; whether words spoken in
Hertfordshire can be an Evidence of a Treason acted here in Middlesex?


L. C. J. Holt. Sir Will. Parkyns, if there be a Design to kill the King, and
there are several Overt-Acts to prove that Design, and one is in one County,
and another is in another County, the Party may be indicted in either of the
Counties, and Evidence may be given of both those Overt-Acts, tho in several
Counties. It is true, you being indicted in Middlesex, makes it necessary that
some Evidence should be given of some things done in Middlesex, as there is; as
your meeting at Mr. Mountjoyes, and at the Nags Head in Covent Garden, and the
Sun in the Strand, where were several Consults, which are Overt-Acts of the
same Treason; and if Treason be ^^mmitted in several Counties, the Party may be
indicted in any one, and the Evidence may be giv^^ ^f Facts done in all.


Parkyns. Then, Mr. Sweet, you do not say that I had raised a Troop, o^ (...)
raise a Troop?


Sweet. I told you your own words; that your Troop was made u^ (...) Soldiers.


L. C. J. Holt. But yet I must tell you further, Sir Will. Parkyns, if I
remember right, there is Evidence given of a Discourse you had in
Norfolk-street, where you lodged, and that is in Middlesex.


Parkyns. My Lord, I did not observe that he said any thing of me about
Norfolk-street.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, this is what he says. You told him you had thought of a
Business for him, but you would not engage him in it, because of his Family.


Parkyns. Pray, Mr. Sweet, Did I tell you any thing what you were to do?


Sweet. No, Sir, you did not.


Parkyns. I hope the Jury will take notice of that: I did not tell him any
thing that he was to do.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, that was no great matter. Will you ask him any more
Questions, Sir?


Parkyns. No, My Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then our next VVitness is James Eubank. (Who was Sworn.)


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know Sir Will. Parkyns?


Eubank. Yes, he is my Master.


Mr. At. Genesis What Servant were you to him?


Eubank. I was Groom to him.


Mr. At. Genesis How long have you been his Groom?


Eubank. Not a Twelvemonth yet.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, first give an account what Journey you took with him.


Eubank. I went into Leicestershire with him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, tell us what you know of that matter.


Eubank. Yes, my Lord. We went from our own House to Stony-Stratford, and
there we lay all night.


Mr. At. Genesis What time was this?


Eub. I cannot tell the day of the Month, it was in January.


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Week was it?


Eubank. It was on a Thursday.


Mr. At. Genesis And where did you go from Stony-Stratford?


Eubank. We came the next day to Leicester.


Mr. At. Genesis Who went with him?


Eubank. One Capt. Scudamore.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did you tarry at Leicester?


Eubank. When we came the next day to Leicester, we staid there till Sunday
morning.


Mr. At. Genesis What Company came to your Master when he was at Leicester?


Eubank. Sir, I am Stranger, I know none of them, I was never there before.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you remember whether there was one Yarborough there?


Eubank. There was one that said his Name was Yarborough.


Mr. At. Genesis Whence did he come?


Eubank. He said he came out of Yorkshire.


Mr. At Genesis Who came with him?


Eubank. There was a Gentleman in black Clothes, that said he was a Minister.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any others that came thither to your Master?


Eubank. It was Market Day, and I had my Horses to look after; there were a
great many People went up and down Stairs, but whether they went to him, or no,
I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you come back again?


Eubank. We staid there till Sunday morning, and then we came away.


Mr. At. Genesis To what place did you go that night?


Eubank. To a Town called Brickhill, and the night following we came home.


Mr. At. Genesis Who came back with him?


Eubank. None but Capt. Scudamore, who went with him.


Mr. At. Genesis Whether did you go the next day?


Eubank. We came to Bushy about 8 a clock a Monday night.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, after this, did you bring up any Horses to the George-Inn
to your Master, and when?


Eubank. Yes, three Horses.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, when?


Eubank. I cannot tell the day.


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Week was it?


Eubank. Upon a Friday.


Mr. At. Genesis What Month was it in?


Eubank. Indeed I cannot say that.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Valentine's day?


Eubank. Yes, it was upon that day.


Mr. At. Genesis That is the 14th. of February, a remarkable day, and was then of
a Friday, the day before the Assassination was to have been executed. Whither
did you bring them?


Eubank. To the George-Inn.


Mr. At. Genesis How were they furnished? were there Pistols upon them?


Eubank. No: the Pistols were in Town, and the Horses were sent after my Master.


Mr. At. Genesis Where were the Pistols left?


Eubank. Indeed, I don't know.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, when you came to Town, did you go to your Master, and
acquaint him with it.


Eubank. Yes, Sir, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what did he then say to you?


Eubank. He said he thought he should go home that Night.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he change his mind?


Eubank. Yes, for he did not go till Monday.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell you he should go a Saturday?


Eubank. Yes, he said he thought he should.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you come to him to know his mind, and what did he say?


Eubank. He said in the morning he would go in the afternoon, but he did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Afterward, when did he go?


Eubank. Upon Monday.


Mr. At Genesis Who went with him that Monday?


Eubank. One Holmes, a fat thick man.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, pray when did you come to Town again?


Eubank. Upon the Friday following.


Mr. At. Genesis How many Horses did you bring up then?


Eubank. On the Friday following we brought up four; my Master himself came up
with them.


Mr. At. Genesis Who came with him?


Eubank. Mr. Holmes, and I, and another Srvant.


Mr. At. Genesis How were the Horses furnished?


Eubank. Every Horse had Pistols.


Mr. At. Genesis What did you bring besides? were there any Boots?


Eubank. None but what we rid in.


Mr. At. Genesis Where did you leave those Horses?


Eubank. At the George-Inn in Holborn.


Mr. At. Genesis What directions did your Master give you that night for going
the next morning upon an Errand, and whither?


Eubank. I had no message from him, but there was a Note that I was to carry to
Kensington to one Brown, and I was ordered to go to the Gentleman that lives
within a door or two next the going into the King's Gate, I forget his name,
but this man where Brown lodged belonged to the Court, some Officer in the
Kitchen to the King; either a Confectioner, or Cook, or some thing, and this
man lay there.


Mr. At. Genesis What was your message to him?


Eubank. I was to tell him that I came to speak with one Brown, and that I came
from a Gentleman that lay at the Confectioner's in Holborn over against
Gray's Inn. I know the Gentleman by Face again if I see him.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, what did he say to you?


Eubank. He bid me set up my Horse at the Red-Lion, and he would come to me
presently; and so he did. Says he, I have no business that I need to send; but
I Will write in your Almanac, and you may carry it back and show it him, that I
will come to Town betwixt nine and ten a clock. I did go back and tell that
Gentleman at the Confectioner's.


Mr. At. Genesis What kind of Gentleman was it?


Eubank. A Lusty man, with a great Nose and a black VVigg, he speaks broad
Scotch, and he was a swarthy colored man, and he had a wide Mouth.


Mr. At. Genesis What age was he of?


Eubank. A middle aged man.


Mr. At Genesis Pray, what did he say to you?


Eubank. He asked me if I had seen the Gentleman. I told him yes. He asked me
what the Gentleman returned for answer. I told him he had writ in my Almanac,
which I had shown him, that he would be in Town between nine and ten a clock.
He as'd me then where I was going. I said to my Master. Says he, tell your
Master that I will be in my Chamber ready for him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you go to your Master, and tell him so?


Eubank. Yes, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis And what did he say to you?


Eubank. He said, he designed to go home in the Afternoon, and therefore bid me
go to the Inn, and make ready the Horses, and know what was to pay for them,
and he would come by and by thither.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he afterward come to the Inn?


Eubank. Yes, Sir, about three or four a clock in the Afternoon


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, who came with Sir William Parkyns?


Eubank. One Lewis.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know him?


Eubank. I have seen him before with my Master.


Mr. At. Genesis What is he?


Eubank. They say he is my Lord Feversham's Gentleman.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he say to you about any Saddles?


Eubank. They asked me what Saddles and how many had been sent there; and I
said but two.


Mr. At. Genesis What said Mr. Lewis?


Eubank. Mr. Lewis said there must be a mistake, because my Master said he had
but 22, for he reckoned he had more, there should be 24 in all.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he say so, or Sir William Perkins?


Eubank. It was Mr. Lewis that said there were 24, to the best of my
remembrance.


Mr. At. Genesis Where were they sent?


Eubank. Indeed I know not, I never saw any of them but those two.


Mr. At. Genesis Who delivered those two to you?


Eubank. My Master Sir William Parkyns.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were those Saddles for?


Eubank. They were for two Gentlemen's Horses that were there.


Mr. At. Genesis Whose Horses were they?


Eubank. They were not my Master's, but they stood at that place.


Mr. At. Genesis Did your Master ever speak to you about them to look after them.


Eubank. He said, if at any time I was there, I should see that the Ostler gave
them their Corn.


Mr. At. Genesis Were they your Master's Horses or not?


Eubank. Not that I know of.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did you go out of Town?


Eubank. I went out of Town with them about four a clock in the Afternoon.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you hear from your Master after that?


Eubank. Upon Monday I had a Letter from him.


Mr. At. Genesis What was that Letter for?


Eubank. It was to go to my Master's House in Warwickshire, to one Richard
Evans that was his servant, to whom he sent a Letter.


Mr. At. Genesis What were the Contents of that Letter?


Eubank. I did not see what they were, it was sealed.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you carry that Letter to Evans?


Eubank. Yes, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did you come thither?


Eubank. I came there a Tuesday at 4 a clock.


Mr. At. Genesis What did Evans and you do after you had read the Letter?


Eubank. We went to fetch some Boxes that my Master had ordered Evans to fetch
home. It was about two Miles or more from home, at a Tradesmans.


Mr. At. Genesis What was his Name, was it Haywood?


Eubank. Yes, I think it was something like that Name.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you go with Evans to fetch the Boxes from thence?


Eubank. They had a man that drove the Team to fetch them.


Mr. At. Genesis Were they carried in a Team then?


Eubank. Yes, they were.


Mr. At. Gen Were you there when the Goods were brought back?


Eubank. Yes, I was at my Master's house.


Mr. At. Genesis What did they do with them?


Eubank. They buried them in the Garden, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis What in the Boxes?


Eubank. Yes Sir.


Mr. At. Gen How many Boxes was there?


Eubank. Five or six I think. I know not what was in them.


Mr. At. Genesis You helped to bury them, did you not?


Eubank. No; but I was there, I saw them buried.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Evans tell you what they were?


Eubank. Evans told me they were choice Goods.


Mr. At Genesis Evans told you so, did he?


Eubank. Yes.


L. C. J. H. What time of the day or night were they fetched home?


Eubank. They went away about 4 a clock in the Afternoon.


L. C. J. H. How far is it from Sir William Parkyns's house to Haywoods.


Eubank. I think about 3 or 4 miles, I cant tell how far exactly.


L. C. J. H. What time did they return?


Eubank. About 10 or 11 a clock at night.


Juryman. My Lord, I understand he says they buried them immediately, was he
there, and did he help to bury them.


Eubank. No, I did not help to bury them; but I saw Earth put upon them.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Eubank, let me ask you one Question: the Person that lay
at the Confectioner's, did you observe whether he had a lame Arm or no?


Eubank. No, I did not take notice of any such thing.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Will Sir William Parkyns ask him any Questions?


L. C. J. Holt. What say you Sir William; Will you ask him any Questions?


Parkins. You say one Holmes went out of Town with me, pray give an account
what Holmes that is.


Eubank. It is Fat Mr. Holmes, if it please your Honor, he lives at the Golden
Key in Holbourn.


Parkyns. My Lord, I observe this to distinguish it that it was not, as Mr.
Attorney opened it, Major Holmes that is in the Proclamation; it was one that
used to be at my House frequently; he was at my House all the Summer.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, you did well to ask him that Question to explain it.


L. C. J. Holt. Will you ask him any more Questions?


Park. No, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then our next Witness is one Thomas Hipwell. (Who was sworn)


Mr. At. Genesis Where do you live?


Hipwell. At (...) in Warwickshire.


Mr. At. Genesis With whom do you live?


Hipw. I live of my self, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know of any Goods that were carried from Mr. Heywood's
House to Sir William Parkyns's House?


Hipwell. I came from Litchfield Fair upon Ash Wednesday, where I had been to
carry Goods for my Master.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you say you lived of your self? I asked you before who
you lived with: Who is your Master?


Hipwell. Mr. Heywood.


Mr. At. Genesis You said before you had no Master.


Hipwell. That is, when he pleases to employ me, I work for him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray tell what you carried from Haywood's House, and who came
for them.


Hipwell. There were, to the best of my remembrance, either seven or eight
Boxes.


Mr. At. Genesis Who came for them?


Hipwell. There was one of Sir William Parkyns men, one Richard Evans that was
his Servant, and one Wetstone that was Tenant to Sir William.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, how did they come, and what did they do?


Hipwell. They brought a Wagon and two Mares.


Mr. At. Genesis About what time was it?


Hipwell. It was about Nine or Ten a Clock at Night when they went away.


Mr. At. Genesis What Orders had you from your Master?


Hipwell. It was near upon seven a Clock when the Wagon came, and my Master
wished me to go to borrow a Mare of (...) at (...) I did so, and I brought the
Mare I had borrowed with me home.


Mr. At. Genesis What was that Mare borrowed for?


Hipw. I know not.


Mr. At. Genesis What use was she put to afterward? What did you see more?


Hipwell. Why, before the Team came (about a quarter of an hour before) to
fetch these Goods, my Master told me, that Sir William Parkyns's men were to
come to fetch some Bedding and other Goods, what they were he knew not, and he
ordered me when they knocked at the Gate, to let them in; and I did so.


Mr. At. Genesis Well Friend, did they carry away any Goods, and what were they?


Hipwell. They were in Boxes, at first in three Boxes; and then Sir William
Parkyns's Servant did knock off the outside Lining, which was a Deal Board, and
he drew the Nails and took out of two Boxes three Boxes apiece, and two out of
another, to the best of my remembrance I think there were eight, but I am not
sure whether there were seven or eight.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they carry them away that Night?


Hipwell. Yes, Sir William Parkyns's Man Richard and the Tenant carried them to
the Wagon, and I lighted them down with a Lanthorn, according to my Masters
Order.


Mr. At. Genesis When, what Day was this?


Hipwell. It was Ash Wednesday at Night.


Mr. At. Gen Then set up Mr. Haywood. (Who was sworn before.) Pray give my
Lord an account when Sir William Parkyns's Goods were brought to your House?
who brought them, and what Directions were given about the careful keeping of
them?


Haywood. My Lord, about Michaelmas last, Sir William Parkyns's Man came to me
with a Letter from one Mr. Charnock, and the effect of the Letter was to desire
the favor of me to lodge some Goods of Sir William Parkyns at my House; for he
was taking his Servants from his House, and he was loath to leave his Goods in
an empty House; and he desired me to let them lie at my House, which I did.


Mr. At. Genesis How were they put up?


Haywood. I think in three Chests, pretty big Chests, nailed up and racked; and
there was a Bed, and Bedding, and a piece of Tapestry or two.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray did that Letter come from Mr. Charnock?


Haywood. Yes Evans Sir William Parkyns Man brought it me.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, how are you related to that Mr. Charnock; what a Kin
is he to you?


Haywood. I married his Sister.


L. C. J. H. You took the Goods into your Custody upon that Letter from
Charnock?


Haywood. Yes, my Lord, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you give an account whether you were in Town before
this Discovery, and had any Discourse with Mr. Charnock or Sir William Parkyns
about these Goods? When did you see Mr. Charnock afterward?


Haywood. I came up to London the 16th day, and I was in London the 17th 18th
and 19th. I think those three days; and I went to see Mr. Charnock at his
Lodgings, but I was hardly with him a quarter of an hour: I told him Sir
William Parkyns had sent some Goods to my House, and I desired to know when he
would fetch them away. Says he, I cannot say when I shall see him again. Said I,
I shall have some business at the Temple, and I will meet you at the Temple
Coffee House. Says he, I will meet, and bring Sir William Parkyns with you if
you can, said I: he came about 8 or 9 a Clock on Tuesday morning; says he, Sir
William Parkyns is at my Lodgings, just a going out of Town, and would desire
to see you. So I went up, and Sir William Parkyns was ready to go out of Town:
I told him I had some Goods of his at my House, and I desired to know how he
would dispose of them; what he would do with them: He would take them away, he
said, the first opportunity, or that effect.


L. C. J. Holt. When was this, what month?


Haywood. It was in February last.


L. C. J. H. What Day?


Haywood. I think it might be about the 18th day.


L. C. J. H. It was you that desired to have them taken away, it seems, was it
not?


Haywood. I asked him when he would take them away, or what he would do with
them.


L. C. J. H. And what Answer did he make?


Haywood. He said he would take them away the first opportunity, as soon as he
could dispose of them, or that effect.


Mr. At. Genesis Now when you came home, tell us who came for those Goods, and
when.


Haywood. I think it was upon a Shrove-Tuesday that I came home, and my Wife
said Sir William Parkyns had sent for his Goods, and desired to have them away,
but that she had made answer, I was not at home, but should be at home soon,
and then he might have them away. The next day I came home from Litchfield Fair
about 5 or 6 a Clock at Night; it was Ash Wednesday at Night when I came home,
and the man came to me between 6 and 7, and told me his Master desired to have
the Goods away. I told him he might have them when he would; he said he would
have them away that Night. I told him it was an unseasonable time: But, says
he, the Wagon is a coming, and I desire you would give me leave to take them
away, which I did: Then he said he had but two Horses, and he desired me to
lend him a Horse, which I did, and he took the Goods and went away with them,
but for what he did afterward with it, I know nothing at all of it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then swear Mr. Whestone. (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, do you give an account when you went with Evans to
Haywood's House, and what happened.


VVhestone. His Man came to me.


Mr. At. Genesis Whose Man?


VVhetstone. Sir William Parkyns his Man to desire me to go Mr. Haywood's to
fetch some Goods of Sir William Parkyns, some Bedding, and some odd things,
which I did, and said he, I will go the next way to the House, and I will meet
you before you can get thither; and he did meet me half a mile off the House,
and told me I must stay and not come to the House till it was night, till it
was later.


L. C. J. Holt. Who told you so?


Whetstone, Sir William Parkyns's Man told me so; so he went forwards to the
Gate, and then came back, and called me to come in; then we went to the House,
and loaded the Wagon with Boxes and Bedding that was there,


Mr. At. Genesis How many Boxes were there?


VVhetstone. I cannot tell whether there were seven or eight.


Mr. A. Genesis Whither did you carry them?


VVhetstone. We carried them to Sir William Parkyns's House.


M. At. Genesis What was done with them?


Whetstone. There they were put into the Ground by the Wall side, where they
were found.


Mr. At. Genesis Why, was you present when they were found?


Whetstone. Yes, I saw them dugg up.


M. At. Genesis Then you can give us an account of them, what were they?


Whetstone. They were Arms.


Mr. At. Genesis How many were there? what quantity?


Whetstone. Truly I cannot tell.


Mr. Baker. Where is the Constable Thomas Watts?


Watts. Here am I. (he was sworn)


Mr. At. Genesis Are you the Constable?


Watts. Yes Sir I am the Constable, and searched Sir W. Parkyns house, and upon
searching in the Garden I found some Arms there.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what Quantity of Arms did you find there?


Watts. 4 dozen of Swords, 32 Carbines, 25 brace of Pistols.


Mr. At. Genesis What kind of Swords were they?


Watts. They were broad swords, two-edged swords.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there any Hilts to the swords?


Watts. No, but there was a box of Hilts that I suppose was prepared for them.


Mr. At. Genesis Where did you find them.


Watts. In a border under the wall by the wall-side.


Juryman. Did you see the Boxes broke open Sir?


Watts. Yes Sir I took them and broke them open my own self.


Juryman. Was Whetstone by pray Sir when they were broke open?


Watts. He was not there by at the first, when we dug them up; but I brought
them to my own house, and there I broke them open and there he saw them.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions Sir William?


Parkyns. No Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then call Turton, Freeman, Fielding. (who were all sworn)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray set up Mr. Freeman. (which was done)


Mr. At. Genesis Where do yo live?


Freeman. At the George-Inn in Holborn.


Mr. At. Genesis What are you?


Freeman. I am Hostler there.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray do you give an account what Horses were kept there of Sir
W. Parkyns, and how many?


Freeman. He was a Guest to the house all this last Summer, sometimes more
sometimes, less.


Mr. At. Genesis How was it last Winter about February last, how many Horses had
he then?


Freeman. He had sometimes 3 came in sometimes 4, the most that ever he had was
five.


Mr. At. Genesis What time was that that he had five pray?


Freeman. To my best memory it was just the Week before the Disturbance, before
the Plot broke out.


Mr. At. Genesis Before the Proclamation you mean?


Freeman. Yes before the Proclamation.


Mr. At. Genesis When was it, what day of the week was it?


Freeman. They came in on Friday night.


L. C. J. Holt. What did five come in then?


Freeeman. Yes I think so.


L. C. J. Holt. Who was with him?


Freeman. I only saw his Groom and another servant.


Mr. At. Genesis How were they accoutred?


Freeman. Four with Holsters and small Pistols: one was a Led Mare with a
Portmanteau; and in a Horsecloath wrapped up there was one or two pair of Jack
Boots, and I think a Collar in one, I cannot tell whether there was one Bridle
or two.


Mr. At. Genesis When did they go away?


Freeman. On Saturday in the Afternoon.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any Persons to come there on Saturday morning?


Freeman. There were two men that were there that rid out between two and three
hours: they rid out between Nine and Ten, and they came in again between Twelve
and One; where they had been I cannot tell, but they had rid pretty hard for
the time they were out, for the Horses came in in a sweat.


Mr. At. Genesis Before this time that you now speak of, what Horses came up can
you remember, how many Horses came up the week before?


Freeman. The week before there were some, but how many I cannot remember; they
very rarely staid above a Night.


Mr, At. Genesis What do you know of any other Horses that were left there?


Freeman. There were three Horses that were at our house a week, that were very
good Horses, but I do not know whose Horses they were, nor the names of the
Gentlemen that owned them. The Gentlemen that brought them in paid for the
Horses, only the Groom told me his Master Sir W. Parkyns had ordered him to see
the Horses fed. I never received a farthing of Sir W. Parkyns but always of the
Groom.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray did you observe any particular Horse that was brought in
there, a Roan Horse?


Freeman. Yes there was one Horse brought in.


Mr. At. Genesis From whence did that Horse come.


Freeman. As was told me from Montague house.


Mr. At. Genesis I believe you mistake the Place, recollect your self a little.


Freeman. Somerset house I mean, a Porter brought it.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you sure it was Somerset house?


Freeman. Yes it was.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know one Lewis?


Freeman. I do not know him, perhaps the Tapster does.


L. C. J. Holt. How many Horses came from Somerset house?


Freeman. Only the Roan Gelding, and a very fat Man mounted him and rid out
with Sir W. Parkyns.


Parkyns. Pray Sir what sort of Horse was that Bay Gelding that you say the fat
man rid upon?


Freeman. I say he rid upon a little Roan Gelding about 14 hands high.


Parkyns. But the Bay Gelding how high was that?


Freeman. About 14 hands high.


Parkyns. There Is your mighty Horse for Service.


Freeman. They were no great sized Horses none of them.


Parkyns. And have not you known these Horses to have been mine a great while?


Freeman. Yes I have known them to be yours a good while.


L. C. J. Holt. What was the Roan Gelding Sir W. Parkyns?


Freeman. No not the Roan but the others: they were no strange Horses, they
were frequently there all last Summer: there was no new strange Horse but the
Roan.


L. C. J. Holt. Will you ask him any more Questions?


Parkyns. No my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then set up Mr. Turton. (which was done)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray will you give an Account what you know of Horses that were
standing at the George-Inn in Holbourn.


Turton. I have known Sir W. Parkyns to have used the Inn this 4 or 5 Years,
ever since the Inn was Built; and in last February he came to Town with three
horses the first time.


Mr. At. Genesis What Day of the month was that?


Turton. I cannot say what Day of the month, but it was about the Week before
his last coming there, which was just before the discovery of the Plot.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know what day of the Week it was?


Turton. No truly I do not, for I keep no account of Horses going in or out.
The last time of his coming was with about 4 or 5 Horses to the best of my
knowledge, and that was upon the Friday before the Plot broke out; and then
upon that Friday, Sir W. Parkyns gave order to his Groom to get the Horses
ready against Saturday morning.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he go out with his Horses on Saturday morning?


Turton. He did not go out with all the Horses according as he had given order;
but two Gentlemen rid out with two of the Horses, and staid out about two or
three hours and came in again, as if they had rid pretty hard, the Horses being
in a sweat; and in the Afternoon they all went fairly out of Town, and gave out
that they expected to be in Town on Sunday or Monday following, but they did
not return; but then came down one Mr. Lewis, I know not that that is his Name,
only when I formerly belonged to my Lord of Oxford, I knew him to be Gentleman
of the Horse to my Lord Feversham, But I did not know his Name.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you not seen him there before, what time did he come?


Turton. I do not know that I ever saw him there before; he was on Saturday in
our Yard.


L. C. J. H. You are asked when Lewis came?


Turton. The first time I see him was on Saturday, in the Yard asking for Sir
W. Parkyns.


L. C. J. H. What time on Saturday was that?


Turton. It might be three of the Clock in the Afternoon, about an hour or
thereabouts before Sir William Parkyns Horses went away; and asking for Sir W.
Parkyns, and he not being there, he returned back again; and after they were
gone he came again, and I told him they were gone, but the Groom had acquainted
me, and given me an account, that he would be there again on Sunday or Monday.
On Sunday in the Afternoon about five or six, Mr. Lewis came to enquire if Sir
W. Parkyns Horses were come to Town; I told him no: and so he came again upon
Monday morning betwixt eight and nine of the Clock, and asked me if I heard
nothing of his coming to Town; I told him no I did not hear of his coming again.


Mr. At. Genesis The Horses that came up on Friday night, how were they accoutred?


Turton. Two or three of them had Holsters; I cannot say but for Pistols they
had four or five Case.


Mr. At. Genesis Had they no Carbines?


Turton, No, but only Horse-Pistols.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you not observe any other Arms, or other Furniture?


Turton, I did see a pair or two of Jack-Boots that they Rid in, but I did not
see any more.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there any that were wrapped up in a Horse-Cloth?


Turton, No, I did not see any, they were not brought into the House.


Mr. Cooper, Do you know what time the Horses were Sadled that Day?


Turton, No, I did not.


Parkyns, You observed, and said there were two or three Cases of Pistols, did
not I always Ride with Pistols.


Turton, Yes, you seldom came without two or three pair when you came with
Servants.


Parkyns, And as to the Jack-Boots you said we Rid in them?


Turton, I suppose so.


Parkyns, We alighted at Mr. John's House, and so our Boots were sent thither:
and these were small Horses all of them, pray will you tell the Court what
sized Horses they were, was there ever a great Horse among them?


Turton, Never a one, I believe that exceeded above Fourteen Hands and a half,
some under Fourteen.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you see the Roan Gelding, what size was that?


Turton, A small Padd that might be about Thirteen and a half.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you ever see him come with so many Horses before?


Turton, I have seen more at the Sword and Buckler, when I lived there; and he
used to Inn there.


Mr. At. Genesis How many have you seen at the Sword and Buckler?


Turton, I have seen four or five at a time, but this is many years ago, Seven
or Eight years ago; when he used to keep his Coach and Four Horses, and come up
with several Saddle Horses with him.


Mr. At. Genesis How long have you lived at the Georgs Inn?


Turton, About Two years.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe any other Horses that stood there?


Turton, There were two that were pretty sizeable Horses, larger than any of
Sir William's own.


Mr. At. Genesis Whose were they?


Turton, I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Did any Body own them?


Turton, I don't know who owned them, there was one that paid for their Meat,
and took them away.


Mr. At. Genesis Who is that?


Turton, Truly, Sir, I cannot tell, I do not know who he was; I never saw him
in my Life.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Has Sir William Parkyns, any more Questions to ask him?


Parkyns, No, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Then, my Lord, we shall call no more Witnesses, unless he gives
further occasion, we leave it here till we hear what he says to it.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Sir William Parkyns, Mr. Attorney General, and the King's
Counsel have done; now, is your time to make your Defense.


Parkyns, My Lord, I rely upon your Lordship for my Defense? For I am ignorant
of these proceedings; I rely wholly upon your Lordship, to give a true account
of them to the Jury: I hope your Lordship is so Just, that you will Repeat the
Evidence to the Jury as it is, and no otherwise. But I do not observe, that as
to the Assassination there is more than one Witness, and that is Captain
Porter: there is not a tittle more! and as to that, I suppose your Lordship
will declare to the Jury, that I was not concerned in it; and Captain Porter
declares, I was to have no hand in it, only I was to furnish Five Horses, and
accidentally I was at some Meetings, but he does not declare that I was to do
any thing in particular.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Yes, yes, you agreed upon the Debates to the several
Resolutions, of Assassinating the King, and said, that it was necessary and fit
to take him off.


Parkyns, Still, that is but one Witness, I deny it utterly, and the Law says
positively there shall be two Witnesses.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Not to every Overt Act, there is no Law says so.


Parkyns, As to the Assassination there is but one, no other but he; and so as
to the Regiment he did not say that I was to raise a Regiment; but that he was
told by a Gentleman that I had been desired to be in the matter, but I would
not, because I had engaged in another business, about a Regiment, but this was
all but hear say.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Yes, he said you owned you had a Regiment. Besides it is
said, you owned you had your Saddles, and your Troop consisted of Old Soldiers.


Parkyns, No, Captain Porter never said so.


Mr. At. Genesis That was Sweet.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, You told Porter, you had a Regiment to look after.


Parkyns, Captain Porter is here, I desire he would explain himself.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Yes, and you told Sweet, that your Troop consisted of Old
Soldiers, and that you had bought Thirty Saddles.


Parkyns, My Troop, aye! but still there was nothing of a Regiment; nor did
they say I had raised a Regiment, or a Troop, or was to raise a Regiment.


Sweet, You told me your Troop consisted of Old Soldiers. I did not say that
you said, you had raised or would raise, but it did consist of Old Soldiers.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, He says, that which makes it plain, that you were to have a
Troop, or had a Troop, consisting of Old Soldiers, besides Volunteers that had
been Officers: and that you had bought a great many Saddles, Thirty Saddles;
and you were to go into Leichestershire, and accordingly you did go, and upon
your return, you did give an account that all was well, and the West was as
well inclined to King James's Interest as the North.


Parkyns, That I went into Leichestershire, and met several Gentlemen, and that
they were all well inclined; I hope that is no Evidence of Treason against me:
Every body ought to be well inclined.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Aye! But they were all well disposed, or inclined to King
James's Interest.


Parkyns, He did not say so, if your Lordship pleases to call him again.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Call him again.


Sweet was set up again. Mr. Soll. Genesis What did Sir William Parkyns tell you
of his Journey into Leichestershire?


Sweet, He said that he had been there, and had met his Friends, and all was
well.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, What did he say? Did he Name King James?


Sweet, He did not Name King James to me at that time.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, What was the Discourse about, that they were all well
inclined to?


Sweet, He always named it the King's Interest, and did not name King James,
but I understood it, and always took it to be King James he meant.


Mr. Mountaigne, What did he say of the North and West.


Sweet, He said that the West was as well inclined to the King's Interest as
the North.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he say before he went?


Sweet, He told me he was to go into Leichestershire, to meet some of the
King's Friends.


Parkyns, Pray, Recollect your self, and consider what you say.


Sweet, He said some Gentlemen Rid as far to meet him, as he did to meet them.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that the time he talked about the Troop?


Sweet, No, that was before this time. I cannot remember the particular time;
it was at his own House, and Captain Sindamore was with him.


Mr. At. Genesis When was the Discourse about King James's Landing?


Sweet, He told me that he believed now that King James would Land, he said he
had his own Word for it, it was about Christmas.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he say about preparation for it?


Sweet, He said his own Troop was to consist of Old Soldiers.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Did he tell you he had a Troop?


Sweet, I speak his own Words, he said, my Troop consists of all Old Soldiers.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Was it consists, or will consist, though I think there may
be no great matter of difference in this case?


Parkyns, Yes, my Lord, but there is a great deal sure, for will consists shows
nothing yet done, and all is but Words.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Sweet, Answer to Sir William Parkyns's Question.


Sweet, I tell your Lordship, I repeat his own Words, my Troop consists or is
composed of all Old Soldiers.


Mr. Cowper, What did he say of Volunteers?


Sweet, He said, there were some Gentlemen that would go along with him as
Volunteers, that had been Old Officers.


Mr. Cowper, Pray, let me ask another Question; when he Discoursed of the
present King, by what Name did he use to speak of him?


Sweet, He called him by the Name of the Prince of Orange.


Parkyns, Pray recollect your self, Mr. Sweet, and think of what you say, since
he was declared King, did I ever call him Prince of Orange? I am upon my Life,
and pray speak nothing but the truth.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Consider, and answer the question, what did he use to call
him?


Sweet, Truly, my Lord, I am not positive as to that, I understood it so. I
never knew that he allowed him to be King of England.


Parkyns, Did you ever hear me call him Prince of Orange since he was King?


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Look ye, Sir, how long have you been acquainted with him?


Sweet, About Three years, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Well, that is long since his Majesty was declared King,
have you ever heard Sir William Parkyns call this King Prince of Orange:


Sweet, I am not positive in that, but I understood he did not allow him to be
King.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You frequently discoursed with him about the Government it
seems; pray what did he use to call him.


Sweet, I have heard him call him King William, and the little Gentleman.


Parkyns, When ever did you hear me call him the little Gentleman? Mr. Sweet,
pray, when you are upon your Oath consider well, and recollect your Self, and
don't answer rashly and suddenly, but think of what you say. I always expressed
my self, when I had occasion to speak of him, and called him King William, as
other people use to do, I never used the words, little Gentleman, nor Prince of
Orange neither.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Did you ever hear him call him otherwise than King William.


He paused a while. L. Chapter Just. Holt, Pray speak the truth, and no more.


Sweet, I have heard him call him Prince of Orange.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But you have heard him call him King William too?


Mr. Sweet, Yes,


Mr. Cowper, But pray when he spoke of the King, what King did you understand
by it?


Sweet, I used to understand King James.


Parkyns, What is that to me what he understood?


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But I would observe to you one thing, when you came from
Leichestershire, you talked how well disposed they were to the King's Interest;
he says, he understood that King to be King James, and you said the West was as
well disposed as the North; pray now, were you employed by King William to see
how the Gentlemen stood affected to him?


Parkyns, No, nor by King James neither.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Why then should you concern your self for the King's
Friends, in the West and the North?


Parkyns, I never was in the West in my Life, and therefore I cannot tell why I
should tell him any thing about the West.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir, when was it that Sir William Parkyns spoke about the
King's Landing?


Sweet, It was about Christmas, he said he believed he would Land.


Parkyns, Did I tell you positively it would be so then.


Mr. At. Genesis He tells you he said you did believe it, for you had it from his
own Mouth.


Parkyns, That shows it is not probable I should tell him so, that I should
have it from his own Mouth, carries such an improbability with it, that the
Evidence is Felo de. se, it destroys it self.


Mr. Sol. Genesis He does not say you had it from his own Mouth, but that you had
his word for it, and this being about Christmas, long after our King was
returned, it could mean no other King but King James.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Look you, Sir William Parkyns, there is another thing I
would observe, why did you send your Man to Kensington to one Brown? who is
that Brown, and what was the Man that lodged at the Confectioners in Holbourn.


Parkyns, I cannot tell who it was, I know neither Brown nor the other Man, but
I sent my Man at the request of Mr. Charnock, who lodged in the same House with
me; he desired he might go upon an Errand for him to Kensington, and I directed
him to go upon such an Errand, for he was formerly Mr. Charnock's Servant, and
I desired him to go of the Errand if he requested it. Who these Men were I know
not, neither of them, nor any of their Business.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But he was bid by the Man that lodged at the Confectioners
to tell his Master that he would stay within for him.


Parkyns, That might be Mr. Charnock, for he was his Servant once.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But he says he carried the Message to you, and you received
it. Well have you any more to say?


Parkyns, My Lord, I think there is but one positive Evidence of any one
Overt Act.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Yes, what do you think of the design of bringing in King
James, and consulting about it, and assisting in the Invasion, and preparing a
Troop, and providing Arms and Horses, are not these Overt-Acts. Do you think
your having a Troop of old Soldiers is no Overt Act?


Parkyns, There is no positive proof of any Troop, or any Arms.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, It is proved there were Arms sent by you at Michaelmas last
to Mr. Haywoods, Chernock's Brother-in-Law, and these lay there till
Ashwednesday last, after your Name was in the Proclamation, and then they were
removed in the Night, and buried at your House, and were taken up there, and
here is an Account given what Arms they were, Four dozen of Swords, Twenty five
pair of Pistols, Thirty two Carabines.


Parkyns, First it does not appear when these Arms were bought, nor for what
intent they were brought from Haywoods.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But what use had you, a private Man, for so many Arms, and
then your going into Leichestershire to meet some Gentlemen, and your giving an
account how they stood affected to the King's Interest, whether that be
understood for the Interest of King James, I must leave to the Jury, since you
give us no account that you were employed by King William.


Parkyns, My Lord, I went upon my private Occasions, and then talked of News as
other people do.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But when you returned back again, you declared all was
well, and gave an account how persons were disposed in the West and North.


Parkyns, Is there any persons named, or particulars? Can it be an Overt Act of
Treason for me to discover my acquaintance?


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But your going with that design to engage in an interest
against the King, and for the late King.


Parkyns, He does not say discovered my design. I went to meet with some
Friends of my own.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Did not he tell you he was to go into Leichestershire?


Sweet, Yes, he did so.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Did he tell you to what purpose?


Sweet, He said he was to go to meet some of the King's Friends.


Parkyns, Did I tell you who?


Sweet, No.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, But there was a Lord's Brother, what did he tell you of
that?


Sweet, He said all things were well, and the West was as well inclined as the
North.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, To what?


Sweet, To the King's Interest.


L. Chapter Just. Treby, You spoke of a Lord's Brother that was concerned?


Sweet, He said several Persons of Quality in the West were concerned, and a
Lord's Brother was among them.


Juryman, My Lord, I desire he may be asked, when he said the King would Land,
what King he meant, whether he named the Late King, or King James.


L. Chapter Just. Holt, Well, Answer that? when he Discoursed to you of the King's
Landing, did he Name the Late King James? or did he say the Late King James?


Juryman, Was he mentioned in the Discourse?


Sweet, He never used to mention King James to me, but only the King, which I
understood always of King James.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what time was it that he spoke of the King's Landing?


Sweet. It was about Christmas.


Mr. At. Genesis Therefore no other King could be meant but King James, for there
was no other King to Land at that time; and he said he had the King's word for
it; I suppose he cannot pretend he had King William's word for it.


Parkyns. I hope, to talk of the King's Landing is no Treason, it is but words;
if I tell an idle Story of what I think may come to pass, shall that be
reckoned Treason? Then for him to say, I had it from the King's own Mouth, it
is impossible to be true, and it an Overt Act, being only Words, and cannot be
reputed Treason. And then as to the other two Parts of the Charge, the
Consultations which my Lord of Ailsbury, and those other Persons, there is but
one Witness, no body but Porter, neither is there any more but he for the
Assassination, his Evidence is but a single proof, and there ought to be two
positive Witnesses by the Law to each Overt Act.


L. C. J. Holt. No, there ought to be two Witnesses to each Species of Treason,
that is all.


Parkyns. There ought to be two Witnesses to both these parts of the Treason.


L. C. J. Holt. I must tell you, Sir Willian Parkyns, If any person does Design
and Contrive that the Realm should be Invaded, or the King Deposed, and another
set upon the Throne, that Conspiring to Invade the Realm, or Depose the King
are Overt Acts of High Treason, within the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. and the same
Species of Treason as designing to Assassinate him is. It is Compassing,
Designing, Imagining his Death, and Destruction. Now the Question is, Whether
there is not another Witness, besides Capt. Porter, to prove another Over Act
of this Design.


Parkyns. I don't find there is, for all the rest is only Discourse.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, for what do you think providing Arms for that purpose is
only Discourse?


Parkyns. The Witnesses don't say, for what purpose the Arms were bought.


L. C. J. Holt. Nor do you tell us of any other purpose.


Parkyns. My Lord, it does not appear when they were bought.


L. C. J. Holt. Ay, but what occasion had you for such a quantity of Arms?


Parkyns. My Lord, I did not buy them after all. I found them, if I had had
liberty to have sent down for Witnesses. I could have proved, that these Arms
were in Boxes all Rusty in my House, when I first came to it.


L. C. J. Bolt. Ay, but why were they buried, just at the time when the Plot
was broke out, and the whole Design discovered?


Parkyns. I cannot tell, my Lord, how to help it, if they will make an ill
Interpretation.


L. C. J. Holt. What Interpretation would you have us make?


Parkyns. My Lord, It is very easy to imagine, People don't care to be found
with Arms at such a time; but however the having of Arms is no Treason. They
are as much a Commodity as any thing else.


Mr. At. Genesis And then the Horses coming to Town just at such a time, and the
Saddles.


Parkyns. I have not bought a Horse this two Years, and I traveled in no other
manner than I used to do. So the Groom tells ye, I used to come to Town with
three or four Horses always. I never kept less than six or seven Horses this
twenty Years, sometimes a great many more; and they were little Horses, Padds,
no way fit for the Service they are presumed to be for.


L. C. J. Holt. Have you any thing more to say, Sir?


Parkyns. I hope, my Lord, as to the Assassination I am clear: Perhaps the
World may imagine, I have had some Inclinations to King James's Service, and
perhaps they may not think amiss; but I never did any thing, nor had an
opportunity to do.


L. C. J. Holt. God be thanked you had no opportunity.


Parkyns. And I hope my Life shall not be taken away without proof, I hope it
will be rather thought, that every one should be taken to be Innocent, and it
should better please the King, that I should be acquitted, than to let me be
found guilty upon slight Grounds, and Imaginations, of which little or nothing
can be made.


L. C. J. Holt. No question of it, it will please the King, and every body
else; that you should be found Innocent.


Parkyns.. Then, I hope, my Lord, you will not strain the Law to take away my
Life; according to the Rule, That it is better five guilty Men should escape,
than one innocent Man suffer: For the Blood of a Man may lie upon every body,
if it be causelessly shed; and it is very severe to strain the Law to take away
any Man's Life.


L. C. J. Holt. Look ye, Sir William Parkyns, I must tell you, You may be under
a very great mistake; you may think it necessary to have two Witnesses to every
Overt Act, but that is not so; for if there be one Witness to one Overt Act,
and another Witness to another Overt Act of the same Species of Treason; that
is all that the Law requires.


Parkyns. Here are two Species of Treason, Leying War is one Specie, and
Assassination is another.


L. C. J. Holt. Your Design was Originally, the Restoring of King James, and in
order to that the Dethroning of King William.


Parkyns. That appears but by one Witness which is not according to Law, which
requires two.


L. C. J. Holt. One way of effecting your Design was by Assassination, the
other by Invasion, or by Force.


Parkyns. Still, my Lord, here is the same Witness, and that is but one:


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, there are two.


Parkyns. None but Capt. Porter.


L. C. J. Holt. What, not, as to the Restoring of King James, which tends to
the Dethroning King William.


Parkyns. In what Particulars, my Lord?


L. C. J. Holt. Your providing Arms, and going to Leichestershire, and sending
Charnock on that Errand into France. As to the Assassination, indeed there is
but one positive Witness besides other Circumstances which have their weight,
but as to the other, you said the King would come. --


Parkyns. It was my Opinion, that is all.


L. C. J. Holt. But you said you had his word for it.


Parkyns. Does not that Answer it self, my Lord? is it possible it should be
true, that I who was in England should have the word of one that is at such a
distance beyond Sea?


L. C. J. Holt. And then your buying of Saddles, for what purpose were they?


Parkyns. My Lord, does he say it was in order to it? I am sure he does not,
and I hope I shall not be presumed out of my Life.


L. C. J. Holt. When you talked of the King's Landing, and said, you had his
word for it; you likewise said, your Troop was made up of old Soldiers, besides
Volunteers that had been Officers.


Parkyns. Still there is nothing done; he does not say, there was one Man
raised.


L. C. J. Holt. And your going into Leicestershire upon such an Errand, as you
told him you went upon.


Parkyns. Well, my Lord, I must leave it to your Lordship. I hope you will
consider well of it.


L. C. J. Holt. We must do that which is right between the King and his
Subjects.


Parkyns. And, I hope, my Lord, the Conversion of Subjects is more acceptable
than the Destruction of them; and the Government is more concerned to save the
Innocent, than to stretch the Law to punish Guilty.


L. C. J. Holt. It will be more acceptable, and indeed the King and Kingdom are
very much concerned in this matter, and at this time, Sir William, and the
Government ought to take care to preserve it self. Have you any more to say,
Sir, if you have, pray speak it?


Parkyns. I have no more. I submit it to your Lordship: I think there is but
one Witness, and all the other is but Conjecture and Nonsense; and one Witness
is not sufficient, by the Law of England, for by the Statute there must be two.


L. C. J. Holt. I have told you my Opinon.


Parkyns. Besides, your Lordship has knowm me this many Years, and you know
that my Education was not to War, and Fighting, but the Gown; and your Lordship
knows how peaceably I have lived.


L. C. J. Holt. I have known you heretofore, Sir William, while you kept your
Profession and your Gown.


Parkyns. And now in my old Age, my Lord, I am grown Lame, and lost the use of
my Hands with the Gout, and scarce able almost to go on my Feet. Therefore it
cannot in reason be thought probable, that I should engage in such a business
as this; and therefore I hope you will interpret all things in a milder Sense,
in favor of Life, rather than for the destruction of it, and the ruin of a
Man's Fortune and Family.


L. C. J. Holt. I tell you, You have had my Opinion cocerning the number of
Witnesses. I suppose, my Lord and Borther will declare theirs.


L. C. J. Treby. My Lord Chief Justice, it seems, does please to have us
deliver our Opinions; I think we ought to be very tender in a Case of Blood: I
think the life of Sir William Parkyns is at stake, and we ought to be careful
that he have no wrong done him: but I think in the Cases of Treason, especially
of this nature, the life of the King, and the lives of all the innocent People
of the Kingdom are also at stake; and we must be indifferent in this case, and
by the Grace of God we will be so. The Question that Sir W. Parkyns proposes,
is, Whether there are two Witnesses upon this Evidence, to this matter of which
he is indicted, which is, the Compassing and Imagining the King's Death. One
Witness, at least, does positively prove, that you Sir William Parkyns did
agree to the Design of assassinating the King's person, and promise to provide
and contribute Horses and Arms to that purpose. Now suppose this is proved but
by one Witness, and the Evidence had gone no further, then your Objection would
have had a very good ground, that this could not be a legal Proof of Treason;
but I must tell you, that this Treason of Compassing and Imagining the King's
Death may be made evident by other Overt-Acts, besides that of Assassination:
To conspire with a foreign Prince, to invade the Realm, to provide Arms, to
join with Invaders, and to make an Insurrection against the King, these are
Overt-Acts of Imagining the King's Death. For it cannot be supposed, but that
he that would have an Invasion and an Insurrection against the King's Person,
does intend the Destruction of the King; he that would take away all his
Defense, which he might have by the Assistance of his Subjects, and leave him
exposed to his mortal Enemies, cannot but be presumed to design the King's Ruin
and Murder. Therefore, Sir William, such things being in their Nature a
Compassing and Imagining the King's Death; your providing Arms and a Troop are
Evidences and Overt-Acts of this Treason; and so will your going up and down
and meeting People in order to rise, if that were your business in
Leicestershire, etc. as it seems by the Evidence it was.


Parkyns. But that is not said, my Lord, I humbly beg your pardon for
interrupting you; it is not said, That I met them to rise, by no Evidence
whatsoever, and therefore, pray my Lord, do not enforce it beyond what the
Evidence has proved; he said, I went to meet my Friends: was there any thing
said, it was in order to a Rising?


L. C. J. Treby. I think you mistake your own words, as you spoke them to be
Witness, if I did take them, as I think I did right, for they were several
times repeated. I will do you no wrong, Sir William, I assure you. You went
into Leicestershire, and you say, It was to meet your Friends, the Witness
says, It was to meet the King's Friends: by the King, it is very plain, you
meant not King William, but King James; for you spoke before of the King's
Landing, which was at Christmas last, when every body knows King William was in
Fngland. These coupled together --


Parkyns. I beg your Pardon, my Lord; those two things are not both to be
joined together, the discourse of the King's landing was at Christmas, as he
says, the other thing, my Journey into Leicestershire was a Month afterward,
and therefore they cannot be coupled together.


L. C. J. Treby. The coupling of them, that I meant, was only to show who was
understood to be spoken of by you, when you named the King; so the Qucstion is,
Whether you did not mean the same person in January that you meant in December,
by the word King, especially since as a Discovery you had made, you said
further, that the West was as well inclined to the King's Interest as the
North, and a Lord's Brother was concerned in it. If by the King, you had meant,
King William; how impertinent and insensible had been all this Discourse, that
the West was as well inclined as the North, and that a Lord's Brother was
concerned in it; concerned in what? In being inclined to King William, to what
purpose could that be said?


Parkyns. It may as well be interpreted that way as the other.


L. C. J. Treby. I must leave that to the Jury. And I confess, if there were
not somewhat more in the case, you might the better argue upon this, as to the
Interpretation. But laying aside the consideration of your riding into
Leicestershire, etc. here is this providing of Arms, proved by 4 or 5
Witnesses, and the serving of them in that manner; and there is no account
given by you, that they were provided for the service of the Government, or
that you were employed so to do. Certainly it is not lawful to provide Arms,
especially for a whole Troop, as for ought I perceive here was, though indeed I
am not skillful enough in those businesses, to know how many make up a Troop:
but it is plain here was an Insurrection intended, when the Invasion was made;
and that is an Evidence, that these Arms were to be employed upon that account,
for no other use was to be made of them, nor is pretended. If you had found
those Arms in your House (as you say) it had been your Duty to have delivered
them up, or disposed of them to the Use and Service of the Government, which
service too, could only be when you had a Commission from the Government, and
not of your own head. And then, besides all this, you acknowledged that you had
a Troop of old Soliders.


Parkyns. It is but slidingly that, for he only tells you, that a Troop would
be composed of old Soldiers.


L. C. J. Treby. How can that be? when he says, he repeats your own words, My
Troop consists of old Soldiers; can any body say, that his Troop consists of
old Soldiers, without having a Troop.


Parkyns. Pray Mr. Sweet speak, my life is at stake, did I say to you, it did
consist, or it was to consist, recollect your self, and consider well before
you speak.


L. C. J. Holt. What was it that he did say? it did consist, or it would
consist.


Sweet. He said his Troop was composed all of old Soldiers.


Parkyns. But does it appear by any Evidence, that I had a Troop; if I had, who
were they? none of these Men do appear. Does this Troop consist of Men in the
Air* that I should list Men that are all in Nubibus, and not one of them to be
known. Suppose I should tell him a Lie or make some Brags, is this Treason,
here is no person proved to be listed or named.


L. C. J. Holt. But Arms were found in your house for a Troop.


Parkyns. But where they were bought, and when they were bought and made ready,
it does not appear; and I affirm to your Lordship, if you would give me but one
Days time, I would prove, that they were at my House at Warwickshire, when I
first came down thither, which is too years ago. And I Will fully make it out to
your Satisfaction, or I Will be crucified or any thing in the World. I can prove
it by a great many Witnesses, by my Friends, and all the Servants that belonged
to me, they were there long before this Discourse was had or thought off.


Mr. Justice Rokeby. If your Lordship expects that I should deliver my opinion,
I am ready to do it. As to this matter of Law that Sir William Parkyns has
proposed, he says, There are not two Witnesses to the same Over-Act, and
therefore no Evidence of Treason; truly, I take it, and always did, that the
Law is, there need not be two Witnesses to the same Overt Act; but if there be
two Witnesses, one whereof speaks to one Overt Act, and another to another
Overt Act of the same Species of Treason, these are two Witnesses within the
Law. Now I think, there are two Overt-Acts in the Indictment of this Treason.
The Treason is compassing the Death of the King; the Overt-Acts are first the
particular Design of the Assassination upon his person, and the other is the
bringing in of a foreign Force, and preparing Horses and Arms to meet that
foreign Force here: all this to the same Intent and Purpose, the compassing and
imagining the King's Death. Now besides that of the Assassination, there are a
great many Witnesses that prove there were Arms prepared; for there are found a
great Quantity, when they opened the Boxes, which Boxes, it is plain, he
himself sent down to Haywood's House: For though Charnock writ a Letter, yet it
was by his Direction, as he owned to Haywood, when he was here in Town. And
then his Servant fetched them away from this place, and this I take to be
another Overt Act, and proved by several Witnesses. Sir William Parkyns speaks
of his being a Gown-man, but I do not know what a Gown-man has to do with such
a quantity of Arms.


Parkyns. If you will give me leave to send for some People, I will demonstrate
it to you as clear as the Sun, that they were in the House two years ago, when
I came first thither.


Mr. Justice Rokeby. There were preparations two years ago, it appears for the
Destruction of the King and Kingdom, how ever the Men that were accused of it,
had the luck to escape and be acquitted.


Parkyns. My Lord, I hope I shall not be interpreted out of my life, I desire
the Statute may be read.


Mr. J. Rokeby. What Statute do you mean.


Parkyns. The 25 of Edw. 3. and the new Statute too, let them both be read to
the Jury, that they may consider of it.


The Statute of the 25th. of Edw. 3. was read.

Parkyns. There is nothing of 2 Witnesses there.


L. C. J. Holt. No, but there is another Satute of the 5th. Edw. 6. Cap. 11.
that may be more for your advantage, will you have that read?


Parkins. Yes, if you please, I know there is another Statute that does direct
it, and I expected to have found it in this Statute.


Cl. of Arr. This is an Act made in the 5th. and 6th. years of King Edw. 6th.

The Statute was read to these words, Unless without Trial he shall confess the
same.


Parkyns. There Is enough.


L C. J. Holt. You have heard the Statute read, would you infer any thing from
it?


Parkyns. I infer that there ought to be two Witnesses, and here is but one.


L. C. J. Holt. There are two Witnesses.


Parkyns. Not direct to the same thing.


L. C. J. Holt. I shall leave it to the Jury, whether this Evidence does not
prove an Overt Act, to demonstrate a Design against the King; if the Design be
to depose him, and that is manifested by two Overt-Acts, and undoubtedly that is
Treason within the Statute of 25. of Edw. 3.


Park. That I agree, but yet there must be two Witnesses of it.


L. C. J. Holt. Suppose dethroning the King be the main design that strikes at
his Life, and you resolve it shall be done one way or other. One way by
Assassination, the other by Insurrection; or by Invasion and joining with a
Foreign Army.


Park. My Lord, I conceive there ought to be two Witnesses for each.


L. C. J. Holt. No, no; for that very last Act that is to take effect in a few
days, declares it is sufficient if there be one to one Overt Act, and another
to another, but still it must be of the same head or species of Treason; and
deposing the King, and assassinating of him, and preparing to raise an Army
against him, or to excite an Invasion, are but one sort of Treason.


Park. It may be so, if they were Overt Acts of one sort of Treason; but rising
in Arms, and Assassination are as different things as can be in the world, and
therefore there ought to be two Witnesses to each of them.


Mr. J. Rookby. That which I delivered as my opinion was, that one Witness
proving one Overt Act, and another Witness proving another Overt Act of the
same sort of Treason are two good Witnesses, according as the Law requires. And
I am the more fully confirmed in it, by the Clause that is in this new Act of
Parliament, made for Trials in Cases of Treason, that a man shall not be
convicted of Treason, but by and upon the Oaths and Testimony of two lawful
Witnesses, either both of them to the same Overt Act, or one of them to one,
and the other of them to another Overt Act of the same Treason.


Parkyns. Of the same Treason, aye.


Mr. J. Rookby, And here it is the imagining the Death of the King, that is the
Treason.


Parkyns. Then you may say every thing else is so; but if you please to let the
whole Statute be read.


L. C. J. Holt. You shall have it read if you will; but this is all that is in
it concerning this matter. Now a design to depose the King, which manifested by
some Overt Act, is an Overt Act to prove the design of the Death of the King.


Parkyns. Then it must be manifest, and not by Interpretation; and all these
things are by Interpretation, except it be what Porter swears.


L. C. J. Holt. If by Overt Act it be proved, that you designed his Deposition,
that is an Overt Act to prove your design of his Death.


Parkyns. They are very different things, Death and Depositions. We have seen a
King deposed, and yet he is alive.


L. C. J. Treby. I am sure we have seen a King agreed to be assassinated, and
yet, God be thanked, he is alive still.


L. C. J. Holt. It is not the succeeding in the Design, but the Design it self
that is the Treason. God forbid that it should have Success to make it Treason.


L. C. J. Treby. But whenever people will agree together to bring in Foreign
Forces, or to prepare Men and Arms against the King that is in Possession, this
is reckoned an Overt Act of a Design against his Life, and has always been
reckoned so by my Lord Chief Justice Hales, my Lord Chief Justice Coke, and by
all those Men that have been reputed, the most tender in Cases of this nature:
For any Act that expresses an intent of dethroning the King, by means of an
Invasion by a Foreign Force, and an Insurrection against the King, is a proper
proof of a Design of his Destruction; and if not, then agreeing to shoot him is
not an Overt Act. Men may say also, but there need be actual Shooting to make
out the Overt Act in that case.


Parkyns. If your Lordship pleases to have the Act read, I shall submit to your
Lordships Judgment.


L. C. J. Holt. Let it be read.


Parkyns. If you please to read the Act, the Preamble of it.


Cl. of Arr. This is an Act made in the 7th Year of our Sovereign Lord the
King. Is that the Act? It is an Act for Regulating of Trials in Cases of
Treason, and misprision of Treason. Is that the Act?


Parkyns. Yes, yes.


The Act was Read.

Mr. J. Rokeby. I believe if you look into the great Case in Parliament, the
Case of my Lord Stafford, you will find it was declared for Law, that one Witness
to one Overt Act, and another Witness to another Overt Act of the same Treason,
they were two Witnesses within the Law, and this was a solemn resolution in
Parliament in the House of Lords.


Parkins. I believe it has been done; but here is a beneficial Law made, which
if my Trial had been put off a few days, I should have had the benefit of.


L. C. J. H. It would have been the same thing as to this matter, for this Act
declares the very same thing, as to the two Witnesses.


Parkins. And then my Lord, I could have had Witnesses to have taken off a
great part of this Evidence, and the Law comes to take effect within one day,
and it turns here upon this matter of Sweet who is not a good Evidence, for it
is manifest he has contradicted himself, and it is manifest he has sworn what
cannot be true.


L. C. J. H. Wherein?


Parkins. That I should say the King would Land here, for I had his word for it.


Mr. J. Rokeby. You might have his word, and not delivered by his own mouth;
there are other ways to convey a man's word besides speaking.


Parkins. But then we don't call it his word, that is hearsay.


Mr. J. Rokeby. If a man write his Note that he will do such a thing, we may
very well say we have his word for it.


L. C. J. H. It is not impossible but that you might speak with him.


Parkyns. It is impossible I should speak from hence to France.


L. C. J. H. You might have been over with him, I believe a great many others
have, and it is proved Mr. Charnock went over.


Mr. J. Rokeby. If any man should have said at the latter end of the last
month, I believe that there was an Assassination intended against the King,
because I have his word for it, merely from reading his Speech to the
Parliament, wherein he affirms that he had several proofs of it, that had been
a proper expression, tho he did not hear the King speak it?


Parkins. Yes, if he had the Speech to produce.


Mr. J, Rokeby. Then if it come by Letter or Message, or by Common fame, he
might send you word by a particular Messenger.


Parkyns. Yes, if there was any such authority as that it were true. But he has
manifestly contradicted himself, and Captain Porter swears for his own life,
and I must leave it to you whether they are to be believed.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Captain Porter's testimony has been sufficiently confirmed by
the acknowledgement of dying Persons.


L. C. J. H. Well, have you any more to say Sir Wm. Parkins?


Parkins. No my Lord, I submit it to your Lordships direction.


L. C. J. H. Then what say you to it, Mr. At. or Mr. Solicitor.


Mr. Soll. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I
am of Council for the King in this matter, and it is my turn to sum up the
Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar. He stands Indicted for compassing the
Death of the King, for designing to depose the King, for promoting a foreign
Invasion, for intending an Insurrection here at home, and for aiding and
abetting the Kings Enemies, and for doing what he could to procure the
subjection of his own Country to Foreigners and Strangers.

Gentlemen, some of these Crimes run into one another; designing the Death of
the King by Assassination, and designing to depose the King amount to one and
the same thing, with Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King.

My Lords, the Judges have given you their opinion in that point of Law, and I
think it is agreeable to all the resolutions that have been since the making of
the Statute of 25 of Ed. 3d. I think that it has been explained so in the time
of Richard the Second; but this I am sure of, that it was so resolved in the
time of Harry the Fourth when there was a design to set up Richard the Second
again, and it was adjudged to be High Treason in Compassing and Imagining the
Death of the King. For deposing the King, is destroying him in his politic
Capacity, as much as Assassination and Murdering of him is destroying him in
his natural Capacity, and the Conspirators in such Cases know what the great
end is they aim at, to subvert the Government as it is established by Law,
whereby every man enjoys his own property, and the freedom of his person, and
those that will be quiet may have their liberty and property preserved entire
to them, but some people are so very impatient of submitting to the Law, that
they cannot be content to be in servitude themselves, but they must needs do
all they can to bring it upon their fellow Subjects. And it were very well if
that those who are in love with slavery would but go to some other places where
they may have enough of it, and not bring it upon those who are so little
desirous of such a thing, as we are and I hope shall always be.

Gentlemen, to prove Sir Wm. Parkins guilty of this Treason whereof he stands
indicted, we have produced several Witnesses: and first there is Mr. Porter,
and he tells you Sir Wm. Parkins told him he had seen a Commission from King
James written with his own hand for making War against the person of King
William.


Parkins. Sir I beg your pardon for intetrupting you, but there was not one
word of that said, here is Mr. Porter pray ask him, if ever I saw a Commission
from King James.


L. C. J. H. Porter did say so, if I remember any thing Porter said, you told
him you had read the Commission, and it was written with his own hand.


Parkins. All that I heard of it was, that when I was desired to make one in
the Assassination, I refused it because I said I was busy about the matter of
my Regiment.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray call Porter again. (Capt. Porter came in)


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray Captain Porter, will you give the Court and the Jury an
account what you heard Sir Wm. Parkins say, about the Commission that came from
King James.


Cap. Porter. I asked Mr. Charnock why I might not see the Commission, and he
told me he had never seen it himself, but Sir Wm. Parkins had. I did ask Sir
Wm. Parkins whether he had seen it, and he told me he did see it and read it,
and it was to raise War against the Person of the Prince of Orange.


Mr. At. Genesis Whose hand was in it did he say?


Capt. Porter. It was all written with King James's own hand.


Parkins. This was my mistake, I thought he had said I told him I had a
Commission for a Regiment.


Mr. Mountague. Did he give any reason why it was written with King James's own
hand.


Cap. Porter. We used to say amongst our selves it was, because he would not
trust any of his Ministers with it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis I would not do Sir Wm. Parkins any wrong, but only sum up what
is material in the Evidence given against him. I remember very well Mr. Porter
said, Mr. Charnock told him Sir Wm. Parkins had seen the Commission, but I
would not offer that as Evidence against the Prisoner what another told him,
but he says besides that Sir Wm. Parkins told him himself, that he had seen it,
and that it was written with King James's own hand. He says that they had
several Meetings together, Sir William Parkyns, and a great many others; and he
names the places, the Naggs Head in Covent Garden, the Sun Tavern in the
Strand, and the Globe Tavern in Hatton Garden; he tells you particularly, that
it was agreed that King (who was executed) and Knightly, and himself should go
and view a place that should be proper for the Assassination, and to give a
Report to the Prisoner, and the rest of the Conspirators, what they thought the
most proper place; and that accordingly they did view the place, and came home
at night, and met the Company, whereof Sir Wm. Parkyns was one; and they gave
an account how the place was viewed, and which was thought most proper, and
then all the Company agreed to it. He says indeed, that Sir Wm. Parkyns was not
one that was to execute it in his own person, but one Scudamore was to be the
man employed by him, and he did say it was a thing that was very necessary to
be done, and would facilitate the Introduction of King James, and the bringing
him back again: And there is likewise this concurring Evidence of Mr. Porters
wi^ that I shall observe by and by, that Sir William Parkyns was to procure
five Ho^^ ^hree whereof he was to mount himself, and two he was to send Captain
Porter to mount, and if there were further occasion he could procure more from
Mr. Lewis, Gent. of the Horse to my Lord Feversham, and accordingly we have
produced to you 2 Witnesses, Freeman and Turton, the one a Tapster, the other
an Hostler that lived at the George Inn in Holbourn, who give you an account
that upon Friday before the first day that was designed for the Assassination,
there did come 3 Horses to Town, for Sir Wm. Parkins, but it being put off upon
the disappointment, they were sent out of Town again. Upon the Friday
afterward, the day before the discovery, then there were 4 Horses brought to
Town, and a 5th was borrowed of Mr. Lewis which was a Roan Gelding.


Parkyns. Pray, Sir, will you please to observe what sort of Horses they were;
and particularly the height of them, that it may be known how fit they were
for this business.


Mr. Soll. Genesis I will do you no wrong, Sir William, if I can help it. The Jury
have heard the Evidence; and by and by they will hear my Lords Directions: but
they do say there were 4 brought to Town, and a fifth was sent, a Roan Gelding;
first the Witness said the Horse came from Mountague House, but then presently
he recollected himself, and acknowledged the mistake; and afterward said it
was from Somerset House. So there were the 5 Horses, 3 whereof Sir William
Parkyns was to mount, and 2 Captain Porter, as he himself says; and these Facts
I instance in as making a concurring Evidence, and very near to two Witnesses
to prove this part of the Conspiracy.

Then, Gentlemen, Captain Porter goes further, and says, that he had heard (but
Sir William Parkyns did not tell him so himself) that Sir William Parkyns had a
Commission to raise a Regiment of Horse, and was preparing so to do, against
the time of the Invasion, to join with the Forces that were to come from
abroad. To confirm which we have called Mr. Sweet to give you an account, that
he had been acquainted with Sir Wm. Parkyns for 3 years, and that he had often
talked with him about the King, that is his present Majesty, whom he called the
Prince of Orange, and the little Gentleman; and about King James, whom he used
to call always the King; and he said the King was to land very speedily, and
that he had a Troop which consisted of old Soldiers, and that there were
several Volunteers that were Officers; he said he was to take a Journey into
Leicestershire, and accordingly he went; and when he returned back again he
said, the West and the North were very well inclined to the King's Interest, or
to that purpose. And to strengthen his Evidence we prove, that he did go
accordingly into Leicestershire, and we prove it by his Servant that went with
him, where he met with several persons, particularly one Yarborough and a
Parson; what they did transact the Servant cannot prove, but he is a concurring
Witness to prove, that he went into Leicestershire; and we have all the reason
in the world to believe that he went on that Errand that he spoke of before,
that is to meet the Kings Friends, as he called King James. And then there is a
further concurring Evidence of his having a Regiment, or a Troop, it is not
material whether it be one or the other; and that is the matter of the Arms, 4
dozen of Swords, 32 Carbines, 35 Cases of Pistols, that were hid in the Garden
of his House; and these Arms we have traced further, he sent them from his
House to Haywoods House, there he thought they would not lie safe, and
therefore Sir William Parkyns sends for them privately; they were to come away
at night, and be brought back to his House, and they were accordingly brought
back in the night to his House, and there they were buried; and the same person
saw them taken up afterward, which brought them to Sir William Parkyns House,
and proves they were the same Boxes that were buried, and which upon opening
proved to be these Arms that were first sent to Haywoods, and afterward
brought back to his own House.

So that this, Gentlemen, is a concurring Evidence both to what Sweet says, and
to what Porter says, and those are the two Witnesses to this part of the
Treason, that there was a provision of Arms and Men for this purpose, which he
said he had a Commission for.

Now, Gentlemen, against all this he makes but a very small Objection. As to
the matter of the two VVitnesses to every Overt Act, that has been overruled
by the Court; and as to the Arms, he says he found them at his House when he
first came to it; and then they were old rusty Arms, but of this he gives you
no manner of Evidence. But if they were there when he came to the House, How
came he at this time of Day to hide them, and secret them? Why might they not
be as public now as they were before he came, which he has had time enough to
prepare to prove since the finding of them? And he does not give you so much as
any colorable Reason why he so secreted them. And therefore it is a most just
and violent Suspicion that they were for the purposes that the Witnesses have
given you an account of; and you have reason to believe they were provided for
to arm that Number of Men, which he was to raise to assist the French when they
came to land here. So that if you believe what the Witnesses have Sworn, you
cannot say, but that he is Guilty of the Treason charged upon him; and we doubt
not you will find him so.


Mr. Cooper. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; I am
of the same side of Counsel for the King. Sir William Parkyns has given us a
good Caution, which I shall take care to observe; and that is, not to strain
either Fact, or Law, to his prejudice. But, my Lord, When such a Matter as
this, a Crime of this nature, is so far proved against the Prisoner at the Bar,
that no body can in his private Judgment reasonably acquit him; then I think it
a good piece of Service to the Public to make the Matter so plain, that it may
be put beyond all manner of Doubt, both for the ease of the Jurors, and for the
satisfaction of all others that hear this Trial.

My Lord, Sir William Parkyns has truly divided his Indictment into two Parts,
the one that accuses him of being concerned in the Assassination, and the other
that accuses him of being concerned in Inviting the French into the Kingdom,
and Engaging to meet them with an armed Force.

My Lord, As to the first part, I must do Sir William Parkyns that Right, that
there is but one positive Evidence as to the Assassination; but that Evidence
tells ye he agreed to it at several Meetings; nay, that he was one who said it
was necessary to be done, in order to the other Design he was Engaged in, the
facilitating the Landing of the French, and King James his Descent and
Restoration. There is, I say indeed, but one Witness of that Matter, but the
Evidence of that one Witness is confirmed by many concurring Circumstances; by
his sending for Horses to Town the Day before the first Saturday, when this
Exercrable Treason was to have been Executed; by sending them out of Town again
that Day upon the Disappointment; by sending for them again the Friday before
the second Saturday that the King was to have been Assassinated; by his having
more Horses than were usual with him that Day; by his taking care then of three
Horses that were none of his own, and one of them brought very suspiciously
from Somerset House; and that all these eight Horses should be immediately
hurried and carried away upon the Disappointment the second Saturday, and
nothing ever heard of them afterward. I say one of them was brought very
suspiciously; for, my Lord, you observe it came from Somerset House, and sent
by Lewis according to the Prisoner's Promise to Captain Porter, which Lewis, it
is apparent by all the Witnesses of this Matter, was privy to this Design.

My Lord, There is another Circumstance besides this, which, I think, has not
been observed, and that is, his sending for Sweet up to Town before the second
time that the King was to have been Assassinated; he came up indeed before both
the times: The first time he was told by the Prisoner, he had once designed to
have used him in a Business; but upon second Thoughts he had Compassion for his
Family. And when he came the second time, he was first asked what Condition he
had left his Family in, whether he had provided them Money. He said, No; and
thereupon new as Chid: And the Prisoner said, he might then as well have staid
at home. All these Circumstances, besides the one positive Evidence, savor
strongly of his having a great Hand in the Design of Assassinating the King.

But then, my Lord, As to the other Part; his Inviting the French, and
preparing to meet them, that is possitively proved by two Witnesses. Captain
Porter tells you, That the Prisoner was at the two Meetings in
Leaden-hall-street, and St. James's- street, where it was expressly resolved by
all that were present, and the Prisoner among the rest, to send Chernock over
to invite the French to invade this Kingdom, and to promise to meet King James
at his Landing with Two Thousand Horse. He Swears, That Sir William Parkyns did
particularly agree to what was so Resolved upon at both the Consults. And Sweet
tells you that he had prepared for the same Design; for that Sir William
Parkyns told him, the King would Land, he had his Word for it; and he himself
had a Troop of Old Soldiers. My Troop does consist (he spoke it in the present
Tense; for it being a Doubt Sir William Parkyns did himself that Right as to
examine the Witness again, and he repeated it as his Words, My Troop consists)
of Old Soldiers, or is composed of Old Soldiers. And he was to have several
Volunteers that had been Officers.

My Lord, These Two positive Witnesses are Evidence that goes to the same
Species of Treason, nay to the same Design, the raising a Rebellion, and the
Deposing the King, which is Killing him in his politic Capacity; I say, these
Two go home to the same Design.

And, my Lord, This Evidence upon this branch of the Indictment, is
corroborated too by very strong Circumstances. There is a Journey to Leicester,
which Sweet speaks of, that Sir William Parkyns told him he would undertake:
This Journey it is proved by his Servant that he did undertake; that he met
there with several Persons, and came back and made his Report to Sweet of the
Success of his Journey, and how well Disposed the King's Friends were, by which
Name he always meant King James; for when he spoke of our present King he
called him the Little Gentleman, or sometimes King William, and sometimes, as
the Witness at last said positively, the Prince of Orange: But when he spoke of
the King, without any thing else, he always meant King James; and besides, he
spoke of a King that was beyond Sea at Christmas last, which could not be King
William, who was then, and had been in England so long before.

My Lord, the Prisoner in his Defense says, That this Servant of his that went
with him into Leicestershire, had been formerly Chernock's Servant, and was
sent by Chernock with the Message to Kensington, and not by him. Yet I must
observe, that the Evidence swore positively he was sent by Sir William Parkyns
his Master, and brought the Note in the Almanac back to the Person to whom he
was directed to carry it, who lodged at the Confectioners House; and when he
had so done, that the Person that Lodged at the Confectioners did not remit him
to Chernock, but to his Master Sir William Parkyns, with a Message that he
would be at Home, and stay there ready whenever he should have occasion for
him; and this was upon the very Saturday the King was to have been Assassinated.

My Lord, Sir William Parkyns has complained, that if he could have had his
Evidence here, he could have proved the Arms had been two years in his House,
and that he found them there when he came thither first. If we should admit
that Matter; we might Confess, and avoid it; for it is apparent, that these
Arms were on this Occasion put up in a suspicious manner in Boxes, and sent to
Haywood's, (who is a Suspicious Person by reason of his Relation to Chernock,
upon whose Letter and Recommendation they were received) and concealed till the
Plot was disappointed; and then they were carried away from that place, and
buried in Sir William Parkyns's own Garden. This was just after the breaking
out of the Plot; and they were buried for the better securing them as choice
Goods. And whereas the Prisoner says they were old and rusty when he found
them, it now appears they were clean and new-furbish'd Arms, and the Hilts were
off the Swords, and packed together.

My Lord, he has Recourse to another Argument in the last Place, the most
moving, I must confess, of all; and that is the Argument of Pity: He has spoke
of his Education in the Profession of the Gown, of his Infirmities, his Age,
and his Family. Arguments of Pity I am very unfit to give an Answer to, and
should be very unwilling to extinguish any Motions of it; but this I must
observe even by way of Answer to that Argument, That the Time was when he
should have pitied himself, and not engaged in such an Abominable and
Merciless a Design; That he should have had Pity upon his Country, which he
Plotted to bring under the greatest Confusion and Desolation; That he should
have had Pity upon the best of Kings, and the best of Men; but then there was
no Pity, when they thought they had laid their Designs so that they had him in
their Power, but they resolved Barbarously to murder him, and persisted in the
Resolution of Assassinating him after they were once Disappointed: That it
seems did not discourage them, but they undertook it a Second Time, and it does
not appear that they ever had any Remorse at last for it; but the Plot broke
out, and so their whole Design was frustrated.

My Lord, This is the Sum, I think, of his Defense; I have as well as I was
able given an Answer to the Objections made to it, and I must now leave it with
you Gentlemen of the Jury: And though these Considerations that I have
mentioned may not quite remove all Compassion, yet they may serve to confirm
you in a Resolution of doing the King, and Kingdom, and your Selves Justice;
and that is all we ask of you.


L. C. J. H. Gentlemen of the Jury, Sir William Parkyns is Indicted of High
Treason, for Designing, Imagining and Compassing the Death of the present King.
There have been several Witnesses produced that have given Evidence upon this
Indictment; The first of them is Mr. Porten, who has been a Witness heretofore
against several upon the like Occasion; and he gives you this Account, That
about (...) of May, o^ the beginning of June last, there was a meeting of
diver. Persons at the (...)ngs-Head Tavern in Leaden-Hall-street in the City,
where they dined together, and there was Sir William Parkyns, Captain Porter
himself, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, and diverse others that he has
mentioned to you. At that meeting they did consult together, which way the late
King James might be Restored, and it was thought very necessary that there
should be a French Force sent over hither to join with others for his
Restoration. And they did among themselves agree, and determine what number of
Forces might be convenient for that Purpose, they did propose Ten Thousand,
Eight Thousand Foot, One Thousand Horse, and One Thousand Dragoons: And that a
Message should be sent over to King James, to persuade him to solicit the
French King, to furnish him with such a Number of Men to be sent over into
England. Mr. Chernock, that was then in the Company, and was the Person agreed
upon among them to be the Messenger to be sent upon this Errand, which
Employment he did undertake, upon their Promise, that they would raise among
themselves Two Thousand Horse for to meet the late King at his Landing.

This being at that time determined, and Mr. Chernock having accepted this
Employment, he did make preparation to go upon this Errand. In some time after,
(a Week, or a Fortnight, or thereabouts) there was another Meeting at which
were several of the same Persons, that were present at the former, and among
them Sir William Parkyns was one: And this Meeting was at one Mrs. Mountjoy's,
that keeps a Tavern in St. James's street, where they did discourse of what
they had formerly agreed upon; and did again consider whether they should
proceed to send Mr. Chernock with that Message; to which they all agreed that
Mr. Chernock should go, and he accordingly went; and Captain Porter met him
about five or six Weeks after the Meeting at Mrs. Mountjoy's, and Chernock told
him he had been in France, and that since his return he had been with the
several persons who had sent him, and had acquainted them with the Answer of
King James, which was, that at that Juncture of time the French King had such
occasion for his Forces, that he could not then spare them, or furnish him with
so many to come over here. This is the first matter that Porter gives you an
account of.

But then Captain Porter tells you further, how the Design of Assassinating the
King was set on foot about the latter end of January, or the beginning of
February last. About which time Sir George Barckley was sent over with a
Commission from the late King James; which seems to have given great
encouragement to that Party of Men; for Sir George Barckley, Captain Porter,
and Sir William Parkyns, with diverse others, had several Meetings at the Globe
Tavern in Hutton Garden, the Nags Head Tavern in Covent Garden, the Sun Tavern
in the Strand, and other places. And at these Meetings they entered into
Consideration, what was the best way to Restore the late King James to the
Throne; and it was agreed among them. King William, which they resolved to
undertake; and at these Debates and Resolutions, Sir William Parkyns, the
Prisoner at the Bar, was present. Captain Porter being asked whether Sir William
Parkyns, at these Consults, did consent to the King's Murder, he said they did
all agree to the Assassination of the King, and Sir William Parkyns said he
thought it was very necessary to be done, to facilitate the Restoration of the
late King.

Gentlemen, This Design of the Assassinating the King being thus Resolved upon;
the next thing Considered among them was, how it might be effected; there were
several ways proposed: one was by an Ambuscade; for the King having a House in
the Country by Richmond, His Majesty used to go once a Week a Hunting
thereabout, and to return at night; and therefore an Ambuscade on that side of
the Water near the House was proposed: then another Proposal was made to fall
upon the Guards on this side the Water, and at the same time that the King's
Coach was to be set upon. And these two places being proposed, there was some
difference of Opinion among them, whereupon it was agreed that some Persons
should be sent to view the Ground on both sides the Water, which Persons were
Captain Porter* King that was Executed, and one Knightley; and so some days
before the 15th. of February they did go on both sides the Water, and viewed
the Ground, and returned in the Evening to the Nags Head Tavern according to
agreement, where were met together Sir George Barckley, Mr. Chernock, and the
Prisoner at the Bar, Sir William Parkyns. And there they made their Report done
of their view of the Ground, and upon which both the Proposals were Debated,
and at last they did all agree that the Attack should be made upon the King on
this side of the Water, in a Lane that was between Brentford and Turnham Green;
and the Attack upon the Guards was likewise to be made thereabouts.

Sir William Parkyns was to furnish five Horses, whereof three of them were to
be mounted by Men of his own providing, the other two were to be mounted by Men
of Captain Porter's providing, Mr. Porter, Mr. Chernock, and one Rookwood, were
to be principally engaged in Attacking the Guards. The number of Men agreed
upon for the whole, were about forty or few more, and Sir George Barckley was
to have a Party out of them all, of about eight, and as those others went to
fall upon, and Charge the Guards, Sir George Barckley with his Party of Men,
was to Attack the King in his Coach, and by shooting into the Coach to kill the
King and all that were with him.

The Time agreed upon for putting this design in Execution was on Saturday the
15th. of February. That day it was expected the King would go a Hunting. And
Two Men were planted at Kensington to give notice, when the King went, and upon
such notice, these Men were to March out in small Parties, and to Lodge in the
Inns, and Public Houses about Brentford, and Turnham Green, upon notice of the
King's Return from the other side of the Water, and Sir George Barclay was to
be in readiness to set upon the Coach in the Lane; and the other Party to
Attack the Guards.

But this Horrid Design was very happily Discovered, which prevented the King's
going abroad on that day; and though they were disappointed for that Time, yet
the Design was not at an end: But their Resolutions continue to make the like
Attempt when they could have an other opportunity. And for that purpose there
was another Meeting, as Captain Porter tells you, upon the Friday following at
the Sun Tavern in the Strand, at which Sir William Parkyns, Sir George Barclay,
Rookwood, and Chernock, and Captain Porter, were present, and they did agree to
Attack the King and the Guards, the next day in the same place, and manner that
they had formerly agreed upon. But by good Providence the King had notice of
it, so that he did forbear to go abroad that day, whereby these Conspirators
were totally disappointed of their Barbarous and Villainous Design which they
had resolved upon, and had made such Preparations to compass.

It is true, Captain Porter does tell you, Sir William Parkyns was not to be
one that should be actually present at the Assassination; but he was to furnish
Five Horses, Three of them to be mounted by Men of his own providing, and Two
by Men that Captain Porter was to provide. And you are told positively that
Captain Porter, at this last Meeting did complain that Two of his Horses were
fallen Lame, and acquainted Sir William Parkyns with it, and he promised to
help him to Two more by the means of one Lewis that was Gentleman of the Horse
to my Lord Feversham.

Then you are told, that Sir William Parkyns sent to Sweet to come to Town the
11th. of February, and Sweet comes to Town accordingly on Wednesday the 12th.
of February, and then he had discourse with Sir William Parkyns at his
Lodgings, where Sir William told him, that because of his Family, he would not
employ him in the business he intended for him, and therefore bid him go home
again; and with all, directed him to return to Town the Friday following: and
order his Groom to bring his Horses to Town; he mentioned Three Horses which
should be the strongest he had, the Groom brought up the Three Horses, and
Sweet came to Town with him, and staid till Saturday. Sir William Parkyns said
he thought to go out of Town in the Afternoon, but did not, but stayed till
Monday, when he went out of Town.

But upon the Friday following, the Horses of Sir William Parkyns were brought
to Town again, which now were Four, and were set up at the George Inn in
Holborn; and it appears that Mr. Lewis furnished one Horse, for there were Five
Horses there upon the Account of Sir William Parkyns, of which a Roan Horse was
one which came from Somerset House. This is proved by the Hostler; and that
Lewis himself came in on Saturday in the Afternoon to inquire for Sir William
Parkyns, but he was gone and the Horses were taken away, and he once came with
Sir William Parkyns to the Inn. These are Circumstances. that do Concur with,
and Confirm Captain Porter's Evidence concerning the providing Horses for this
Design.

Then there is another Particular of Captain Porter's Evidence concerning the
Commission from King James, which is remarkable: It was told you, that he asked
Chernock whether he had seen the Commission: he said no, but Sir William
Parkyns had: and Sir William Parkyns was asked by Porter, as they were sitting
by the fireside whether he had seen the Commission, and Sir William Parkyns
answered, that he had seen it, and had read it, and it was written with King
James's own hand; and that the Substance of it was to make War upon the Person
of the Present King, who was called in the Commission as you may suppose the
Prince of Orange. So that, Gentlemen, as to the discovery of the Assassinating
the King, and of this Commission which was understood by them to be for that
purpose. This is the Sum and Substance of Porter's Evidence so attended with,
and confirmed by these Circumstances, as you have heard.

Besides the other Witness, Sweet, who was a great Acquaintance of Sir William
Parkyns, tells you, That about Christmas last, he was informed by Sir William
Parkyns, That the King would land, which he understood to be meant of King
James. He asked Sir William Parkyns how he knew it? and he said, He had his
Word for it; and that his Troop consisted of Old Soldiers, and he had Thirty
Saddles; and besides, there would be some Volunteers, which were Old Officers.
Then he said, He was to go into Leicestershire, and he did go with one
Scudamore; and this was in January, about the latter end, as I remember. They
lay that Night at Stony-Stratford, and the next Night at Leicester, and
Scudamore went with him; and afterward one Yarborough, and a Parson, came to
him out of Yorkshire: And when he came back he said, He found all there to be
very well; and the West was as well inclined to the King's Interest, as the
North; and a Lord's Brother was concerned.

Then in the next place you are told, That at Michaelmas last Mr. Chernock did
write a Letter to one Haywood, who had married his Sister, and lived near Sir
William Parkyns in Warwickshire, to desire him to receive some Goods into his
House that were to come from Sir William Parkyns's, and lay them up very
carefull^^ for they were choice Goods, which Sir William durst not leave in his
own House, because he had left it. And accordingly there were these Boxes, and
Chests sent to Haywood's, and received by him into his House, where they
continued till the latter end of February. Haywood about this time, when the
Design of the Assassination was on foot, met with Sir William Parkyns in Town,
and asked him how he would dispose of those Goods? Thereupon Sir William
Parkyns sent his Servant into the Country; and notice was given on
Ash Wednesday, the Wednesday after the first Proclamation that issued upon the
Discovery of this Conspiracy, that these Goods should be removed: And a Man, in
the Evening, went to Haywood's House with a Cart and Horses, and removed these
Chests; they were Three in number; and those being opened, there were Eight
lesser ones taken out, and carried away about Nine or Ten a Clock at Night, to
Sir William Parkyn's House in Warwickshire, where they were buried in the
Garden, and afterward were dug up, which was at the Searching Sir William's
House upon the Breaking-out of the Plot; and when they were opened, it did
appear what sort of Goods they were: They were Arms, a considerable Quantity of
them; Four Dozen of Swords without Hilts, Twenty five Pair of Pistols, and a
great number of Carbines, Thirty two as I remember, and a parcel of Hilts
packed up in a Box by themselves. This, Gentlemen, is sworn to you by the
Persons that were present at the digging them up, and opening the Boxes.

Then, Gentlemen, you are told, That though Sir William Parkyns pretends they
were Arms that he found in the House when he came thither, yet they were not
old rusty Arms, as he pretends, but they were very bright, and fit for Use and
Service.

There is one Circumstance more that seems to affect Sir William Parkyns, about
the Business of the Assassination; and that is proved by Eubank, Sir William's
own Servant. There was a Note sent upon Saturday, the 22d. of February in the
Morning, to one Brown, at Kensington, by Sir William Parkyns's Man; and this
Brown writ in the Servant's Almanac, that he would be in Town himself in a
little time, and bid him carry it to a Man that lodged at a Confectioners
over against Grey's- Inn Gate in Holbourn: Sir William Parkyn's Man accordingly
goes to this Confectioners, and speaks with the Person there that he was
directed to go to; and he says he was a Scotch Man, and talked broad like a
Scotch Man, and he bid him go and tell his Master, That he would stay within
for him till he came; and he did accordingly.

Gentlemen, This is the Sum and Substance of the Evidence that is given against
Sir William Parkyns. Now we are to consider what Sir William says for himself:
He does admit, and agree, That what Porter says is very positive and full; but
that is but the Evidence of one Witness: For, says he, by the Law no Person
ought to be convicted of High Treason, upon the Testimony of one Witness. As to
the Matter of Law he is in the right; No Man ought to be convicted of Treason
upon the Testimony of a single Witness. Now first suppose the Design to
Assassinate the King had not been proved; consider then whether there be not
Two Witnesses besides. Porter proves, That Chernock, was sent into France by
Sir William Parkyns, and others, upon that Errand; to which, if you add the
Testimony of Sweet, that swears, That Sir William Parkyns told him the King
would Land, and he had a Troop, and had bought Saddles; and what is said
concerning his going into Leicestershire, and his having a Quantity of Arms: If
all which be understood in pursuance of the Design against His present Majesty,
then there are at least Two Witnesses of several Overt-Acts of the same Treason.

For, Gentlemen, I must tell you, though there had been no Evidence of a Design
to Assassinate the King, but the Design and Purpose had been to Depose him, and
set the late King upon the Throne, or join with a Force to invade the Realm,
that is High Treason within the Statute of 25 Edw. the Third, as being
Designing the Death and Destruction of the King. There has been a full Proof
by Two Witnesses if what Sweet, and the other Witnesses besides Porter say, do
prove Sir William Parkyns, to be concerned in that Design, which shall be
Considered further of by and by.

But in the next place, suppose that the Meetings at the King's Head in
Leaden Hall Street, and at Mountjoy's had not been proved: but the Design to
Assassinate the King is proved by one Witness, and the providing Men and Arms
to fight against him is proved by one other Witness: This is a Proof of the
same Treason; for though the Overt-acts be several, yet they both tend to the
same end, the Destruction of the King, though in a different manner; and though
the Law requires two Witnesses to the same sort of Treason, yet it does not
require two Witnesses to any one Overt Act. For if one Witness prove one
Overt Act at one time, and another Witness prove another Overt Act at another
time, these are two Witnesses within the meaning of the Law: and so it has been
always practiced, and never denied to be Law that I know of.

Besides it is observable upon this point, which my Brother has mentioned, that
this new Act of Parliament, which does not yet take effect, provides, That
there shall be either two Witnesses to one Overt Act, or one Witness to one,
and another to another of the same Species of Treason; and you have had the
Opinion of all us now that are here, that these are Overt-acts of one and the
same Species of Treason.

But then Sir William Parkyns objects, That Sweet does not prove any Overt Act.
Now for that, you are to consider the Force of Sweet's Evidence, who tells you
the Discourse of Sir William Parkyns, about Christmas last, of the late King's
Landing, of his Saddles, and of his Troops consisting of Old Soldiers, and
Volunteers that were Old Officers: But says Sir William Parkyns, this is only
Words, and Words are not Treason: But then consider, that they are Words that
relate to Acts and Things. You hear he had a great Quantity of Arms, beyond
what he, as a private Man, could have Occasion for, or would use. He does not
give you any account what he was to do with those Arms, or to what purpose
should he keep them, nor why he caused them to be removed in the night after
they had lain privately in Haywood's house, and caused them to be carried back
to his own house, and buried them in the Ground, and at such a time when there
was a Plot, and after the Plot was discovered, and a Proclamation out for his
own Apprehension.

Sir William Parkyns's Discourse with Sweet, of King James's Landing, and his
Troop consisting of such Men, plainly shows what those Arms were for. For,
Gentlemen, Men's Discourses, and their Words explain their Actions; and an
indifferent Action may be explained by Words. It is lawful for a Man to buy a
Pistol; but if it can be plainly proved from his words, or his speeches that he
designed the use of it against the Person or Life of the King, that will be an
Overt Act. Now when Sir William Parkyns said, The late King would Land, and
that he had a Troop which consisted of such Soldiers; then these Arms being
found in that manner, I must leave to your Consideration whether it is not a
Proof, for what purpose he did provide them, and to what Use he intended to put
them; especially since he gives you no Account, what Use or Occasion he had for
them. He says, indeed, he found them in the house two years ago, how probable
that is, you may consider.

Then there is another thing, his going into Leicestershire with Scudamore and
his meeting there with Yarborough and other People in that private and hasty
manner. He went out on the Thursday, and come home again upon Monday Night; and
then he meets with Sweet, and tells him that all was well; and the West was as
well inclined to the King's Interest as the North: What King must he mean? he
had no Commission from King William to go into Leicestershire to discourse with
People, to see how they stood affected to his Interest. Sweet comes and tells
you, that when Sir William Parkyns spoke of the King, he understood he meant
King James. I must leave it to your Consideration, how you will interpret these
Words.

It is true Gentlemen, it is not fit there should be any strained or forced
Construction put upon a Man's Words or Actions, when he is Tried for his Life.
You ought to have a full and a satisfactory Evidence to convince you, that he
is Guilty, before you pronounce him so; but however you are to consider the
Nature of things, and the Circumstances that attend them. If you can suppose
that he went into Leicestershire, to King William's Friends, and that he was of
Opinion, the West was as well Affected to King William, as the North; then you
make a different Construction from Sweet who tells you, that always when he
spoke of the King, he understood it of King James; and at Christmas, when he
spoke of the King's Landing, it must be meant King James, for King William was
here before; and he pretends not he had any Authority to Raise a Troop for King
William.

So that Gentlemen, I must leave it to you upon the whole matter; if you are
satisfied, that Sir William Parkyns is Guilty of the Matters of which he stands
Charged, you will find him Guilty, you have heard the Evidence, and will
consider of it, if upon the whole, you are not satisfied, that he is Guilty of
the Matters Charged in this Indictment, then you are to acquit him.

Then an Officer being Sworn to keep the Jury according to the Custom, they
withdrew, to consider of their Verdict, and in less then half an Hour, returned
again into Court.
Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, Answer to your Names, William Northey.


Mr. Northey. Here, etc. and so of the rest.


Cl. of Arr. Are you all agreed on your Verdict.


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cl. of Arr. Sir William Parkyns, hold up thy Hand, (which he did.) Look upon
the Prisoner; how say ye, is he Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted or not Guilty?


Foreman, Guilty my Lord.


Cl. of Arr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements had he at the time of
the High Treason committed, or at any time since?


Foreman. None to our Knowledge.


Jailer: Look to him, he is found Guilty of High Treason.


Cl. of Arr. Then hearken to your Verdict, as the Court has Recorded it. You
say Sir William Parkins is Guilty of the High Treason, whereof he stands
Indicted, but that he had no Goods, or Chattels, Lands, or Tenements, at the
time of the High Treason Committed, or at any time since to your Knowledge, and
so you say all


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen, the Court Discharges you, and thanks you for your
Service.

While the Jury was withdrawn to consider of the Verdict, Sir John Friend was
brought from Newate to the Bar, in order to his being called to Judgment, and
after the Verdict* he Addressed himself to the Court thus,


Friend. My Lord I humbly beseech your Lordship to give leave to Read this
Paper.


[To which the Court gave no Answer.] Frind. My Lord, will your Lordship give
me leave to Read it.


L. C. J. H. Ay, if you will.


[Reads.] Friend. My Lord, I humbly move in Arrest of Judgment, that I am not
Convicted of Treason by Two Witnesses, as I ought to have been within the Stat.
of 25 Ed. 3. for Mr. Porter swears, that I with others, in May or June last,
sent to the French King to Invade England; he is the only Witness to that
matter. Mr. Blaire swears, that I showed him a Commission in Surry-street,
about 2 Years since, Signed by King James, and Countersign'd Melfort, to be a
Colonel of Horse, and that I gave him some Moneys, for the Cherishing of the
Men. My Lord, here is no Levying of War, Sworn by Mr. Blair; and Conspiring to
Levy War not being Treason, I am Convicted by one Witness, and therefore I pray
Council may be Assigned me, to plead this matter.


L. C. J. H. Sir John Friend, that which you move now, is not in Arrest of
Judgment, it is matter that does arise upon the Evidence, and what you now say,
Arraigns the Verdict, and the Proceedings upon your Trial. There were Two
Witnesses against you, that it is plain. You were not Indicted for Levying of
War, but for Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King; and we told you
the design of the Invasion, and Conspiring to Depose the present King, and
Restore the late King, was an Overtact of that High Treason The Commission was
not so much stood upon; but the Advanceing Moneys upon this Account, to Blaire
your Lieutenant Colonel; to give to the Men, that was a plain Overt Act, and so
there were certainly Two Witnesses against you.


Friend. My Lord, I hope, I can clear my self: I thank God, I am as Innocent as
the Child un-born, of the Assassination of the King. I would not have the
People think that I am such a Man.


L. C. J. H. But you remember, it was sworn you knew of it, and we have told
you, that the design of Restoring the late King by Force, and Deposing the
King, are Overt Acts of imagining his Death, if such an Intention be proved, as
it was in your Case, and the Jury have found it so.


Friend. My Lord, I humbly beseech you, because I do not understand matter of
Law, and am advised to move this in Arrest of Judgment; I desire my Council may
be heard to it.


L. C. J. H. We cannot hear Council, but upon a matter that arises upon the
Record it self, that is, the Indictment. We cannot enter into any Examination
of this matter, that you now speak off, you had a long Trial Yesterday.


Friend. My Lord, I am sorry to give your Lordship any occasion of trouble; but
I humbly beseech you, if it may be that I may be, heard by my Council, for the
satisfaction of the World; pray my Lord hear what they can say.


L. C. J. H. They cannot say any thing; no Council in the World that understand
themselves, can Argue any thing against what has been so often Settled, and
always Practiced.


Friend. My Lord, if it be to be granted, I beseech your Lordship to grant it.


L. C. J. H. It cannot be granted; besides the matter you now move upon, is
improper it was all considered upon your Trial. It was told you, we did all
agree, that a Conspiracy to Levy War to Depose the King is Treason, or to
Invade the Realm is Treason. All this was considered at your Trial, and that is
now over.


Parkyns. My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, I desire I may have the Liberty of
some Friends and Relations, and a Minister to come to me.


L. C. J. H. Yes, yes, by all means.


Parkyns. If your Lordship pleases, that they may come and be private with me,
and pray let me have a Rule of Court for it, otherwise I shall not have any
benefit of it


L. C. J. H. Yes, yes, it is very fit you should have it; there shall be an
Order of Court for it; see that the Keeper take care it be done with safety.


Friend. My Lord, I desire the same Liberty of a Minister. and my Relations and
Friends to come to me; that for what time I have to Live, I may make the best
use I can of it for my Soul, which I hope God will enable me to do.


Then the Court was Adjourned until 5 a Clock in the Afternoon, and about 6,
the Justices returned, and the Court was Resumed. Cl. of Arr. Set Sir John
Friend to the Bar, (which was done.) Sir John Friend, hold up thy Hand, (which
he did.) Thou stand Convicted of High Treason, for Traitorously Compassing
and Imagining the Death of our Sovereign Lord King William the Third. What
can thou say for thy self why the Court should not give the Judgment
according to the Law. [Then being made to Kneel, he afterward stood up.]


Friend. I have said already, what I have to say in Arrest of Judgment.


Mr. Com. Serj. Sir, you have heard the Judgment of the Court, as to what you
have said, if you have nothing else to offer, the Court must proceed to
Judgment.


Cl. of Arr. for Mid. Sir William Perkins, hold up thy Hand, (which he did.)
Thou stand Convicted of High Treason, in Compassing and Imagining the Death
of the King, and Adhering to the King's Enemies. What can thou say for thy
self, why the Court should not give thee Judgment to die, according to the Law?


He was made to Kneel, and rise up again. Parkyns. I have nothing more to offer.


Cl. of Arr. Then Crier make Proclamation.


Crier. O yes; all manner of Persons are Commanded to keep Silence, while
Judgment is in giving, upon pain of Imprisonment.


Which Proclamation was made on both sides the Court; and then Mr. Common
Sergeant, sitting with the rest of the Court upon the Bench, Pronounced the
Sentence. Mr. Com. Ser. You the Prisoners at the Bar, Sir John Friend, and Sir
William Parkyns, you have been Indicted for High Treason, in Compassing the
Death and Destruction of the King: For your Trial, you have put your selves
upon the Country, which Country has found you Guilty. The Offense is the
greatest in the Judgment of the Law, that a Man can commit; and it is Justly
and Reasonably so. For Robbery and Murder are Injuries to private Persons, but
Compassing the Death of the King, is Compassing the Destruction of the Father
of your Country, and letting in Rapine, Death, and Desolation, upon Thousands
of People. And even this, the Hainousest of Offenses, is capable of
Aggravation; for there have been always Excuses, and sometimes Justifications
for Rebellion; and as to Murder and private Revenge; there may be somewhat said
in Mitigation from the Violence of Men's Passions. But to Sit, and Conspire,
and Consult, and Debate the Destruction of a Prince; no Man yet ever had the
Confidence to make an Excuse for it; I would not add to your Affliction: I am
sensible of the severe Judgment, that is to follow, and which you have brought
upon your selves; and cannot but Pity you for the great burden of Guilt, that
you have laid your seves under. I only say this, to offer it to your serious
Consideration, in the few Moments you have to prepare for another World, and
another Judgment. All that remains for me, is to Pronounce the Judgment of the
Law in these Cases, and the Court does Award it.

That you, and each of you, go back to the place from whence you came; and from
thence be drawn on a Hurdle, to the place of Execution, where you shall be
severally Hanged up by the Neck, and Cut down Alive; your Bodies shall be Ripped
open, your Privy Members Cut off, your Bowels taken out, and burnt before your
Faces, your Heads shall be Severed from your Bodies, your Bodies respectively
to be Divided into Four Quarters, and your Heads and Quarters are to be at the
Disposal of the King, and the Lord have Mercy upon your Souls. Then the
Prisoners were carried back to Newgate.


A true Copy of the Papers delivered by Sir John Friend, and Sir William
Parkyns, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at TYBURN, the place of
Execution, April 3. 1696.
Sir JOHN FREIND's Paper.
KNowing that I must immediately give Account to God of all my Actions, and
that I ought to be especially careful of what I say in these Last Hours, I do
solemnly profess, That what I here deliver, is from my very Soul, with all the
Heartiness and Sincerity of a dying Christian.

The Cause I am brought hither to suffer for, I do firmly believe to be the
Cause of God and True Religion, and, to the best and utmost of my Knowledge and
Information, agreeable to the Laws of the Land, which I have evermore heard to
require a firm Duty and Allegiance to our Sovereign; and that as no Foreign, so
neither any Domestic Power can alienate our Allegiance. For it is altogether
new and unintelligible to me, That the King's Subjects can depose and dethrone
him on any account, or constitute any that have not an immediate Right in his
place. We ought, I think, not to do this; and surely when it is done, to assist
him in the Recovery of his Right, is justifiable, and our Duty. And however
things may seem at present, I do believe, I am sure I heartily pray, That he
shall be one day Restored to his Rightful Throne and Dominions.

As for any sudden Descent of His Majesty upon these His Dominions, in order to
the Recovery of them, I declare I had no certain Knowledge of it, nor can I
tell what grounds there was to believe it, so little Reason had I to be in a
present Preparation for it. I suppose it is not expected I should here
endeavor to clear my self of the Assassination, which was not the thing
alleged against me; however, it was mentioned, through what means I know not:
As it was insinuated to my Disadvantage, I forgive such as were therein
instrumental: And I do also from the very bottom of my Soul, freely forgive,
and beg of God to do so too, such as were any ways accessory toward the taking
away my Life, which I really look upon to be their Misfortune more than mine.

I profess my self, and I thank God I am so, a Member of the Church of England,
though, God knows, a most unworthy and unprofitable part of it; of that Church
which suffers so much at present for a strict Adherence to Loyalty, the Laws,
and Christian Principles.

For this I Suffer, and for this I Dye. Though I have a perfect Charity for
People of all Professions, and do heartily wish well, and would endeavor so to
do, to all my Fellow Subjects, of what Persuasions soever. And indeed, I have
met with a great deal of Uprightness and Sincerity among some People of very
different Opinions in Religious Matters.

And I hope and desire it may not be taken as an uncharitable Censure, or undue
Reflection, that I objected to the Legality of Popish Evidence, being advised
so to do for my better Security, upon the Foundation of a Statute Law.

Having owned my self a Member of the Church of England, I must take this
opportunity, and I do it for God's Glory, to apply my self to you that are
Royalists of that Church, and of the same Faith and Principles with my self:
And I beg of you for God's sake, and the love of your Souls, to be very
constant and serious in all Religious Offices, and holy Duties of Divine
Worship and Service; which I have too much neglected, as I own, to my great
Sorrow: Let no Excuse, no Dangers, prevent or hinder you in these most
necessary and serious Matters, and be, I beseech you, very careful and
circumspect in all your Actions, Behavior and Conversation, as I earnestly
exhorted all that came to me.

I have, I thank God, a great deal of Satisfaction in my present Sufferings,
and have found it so ever since I have been under them: And blessed be God it
does continually increase upon me. And I do now lay down my Life with all
Cheerfulness and Resignation, in sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection to
Eternal Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whose Merits alone I hope
for the Pardon of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul.

And so, O Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me,
O Lord, thou God of Truth.

And I do heartily and humbly beseech Thee, Almighty God, and my most Gracious
Father, to forgive and bless this Sinful Nation, deliver it from the Guilt of
Rebellion, Blood and Perjury, that is now on all sides more than ever, and from
all those other heinous Sins which cry aloud Preserve and bless this Church.
Comfort our distressed King; Restore him to his Right, and his Misled Subjects
to their Allegiance: Bless also his Royal Consort, our Gracious Queen Mary; his
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, that he may grow in Stature, and in Favor
with God and Man; Support and strengthen all those that suffer in any kind for
a good Cause; Give them Patience under all their Afflictions, and a happy
Deliverance out of them

Forgive all mine Enemies. Pardon my former Neglect, and Remissness in
Religious Worship, and Holy Duties, and all the Sins I have been Guilty of to
this very Moment. Consider my Contrition, Accept my Tears; and now Thou art
pleased to take me hence, take me into thy Favor, and Grant that my Soul may
be without Spot presented unto Thee, through the Merits of thy most dearly
beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
John Friend.

Sir WILLIAM PARKYNSs Paper.
IT has not been my custom to use many Words, and I shall not be long upon
this Occasion, having Business of much greater Consequence to employ my
Thoughts upon. I thank God I am now in a full Disposition to Charity, and
therefore shall make no Complaints, either of the Hardships of my Trial, or any
other Rigours put upon me. However, one Circumstance I think my self obliged to
mention; it was sworn against me by Mr. Porter, That I had owned to him, that I
had Seen and Read a Commission from the King, to Levy War upon the Person of
the Prince of Orange: Now I must declare, That the Tenor of the King's
Commission, which I saw, was general, and directed to all His Loving Subjects,
to Raise and Levy War against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, and to
Seize all Forts, Castles, etc. Which, I suppose, may be a customary Form of
giving Authority to make War; but I must confess, I am not much acquainted with
Matters of that Nature: But as for any Commission particularly levelled against
the Person of the Prince of Orange, I neither saw nor heard of any such.

It Is true, I was privy to the Design upon the Prince, but was not to act in
it, and am fully satisfied that very few, or none, knew of it, but those who
undertook to do it.

I freely acknowledge, and think it for my Honor to say, That I was entirely
in the Interest of the King, being always firmly persuaded of the Justice of
his Cause, and looked upon it as my Duty, both as a Subject, and an Englishman,
to assist him in the Recovery of his Throne, which I believed him to be
deprived of, contrary to all Right and Justice; taking the Laws and
Constitution of my Country for my Guide.

As for my Religion, I dye in the Communion of the Church of England, in which
I was Educated.

And as I freely forgive all the World, so whoever I may any ways have injured,
I heartily ask them Pardon.

Apr. 3. 1696. William Parkyns.
And on Friday the Third of April, the said Sir William Parkins and Sir John
Friend, were Executed at Tyburn, according to the Sentence.



FINIS.
The Trials of Charnock, King, and Keys, and of Sir John Friend, for High
Treason; are Published by the Order of the Lord Chief Justice Holt, and Printed
for Samuel Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-Gate, in Holbourn; and Isaac Cleave, at the
Star, next to Serjeants-Inn, in Chancery Lane.


