monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other
BY LIEUTENANT GENERAL GINCKELL, Commander in Chief Of Their Majesty's FORCES.
TAking notice of those mean and low Artifices which some Pensioners of France,
among the Irish, make use of, both to Enslave their own Countrymen, and seduce
the Soldiers of Their Majesty's Army from their Obedience: And to the end that
at once I may give an answer to their Scandalous Billets, which they daily
scatter in our Quarters, and the false Reports they so Industriously spread in
their own to delude their Followers, and make them obstinate to their Ruin: I
have thought fit to declare, that an Irish Roman Catholic Gentleman, that came
out of the Enemies Quarters, upon humble Application to their Majesty's, has
had the Honor to be fully informed of the Mercy and Indulgence designed to
such of the Irish Army, and Inhabitants of all Conditions as shall like
Dutiful Subjects, submit to Their Government: which Condescentions would no
doubt, prove satisfactory, if once communicated to those, whose Interest and
Duty it is to lay hold of them. But this has hitherto been obstructed by some,
who fight for the Money of France, not the Interest of Ireland, and the
Gentleman denied a Passport, which he has often solicited in order to make his
Message known. Out of Compassion therefore to these People, who by such ill
Arts are kept in Ignorance of the Grace that is intended them, and for whom it
will be too late to sue for Mercy, unless they speedily embrace it, I have
taken this way of making it Public, That I have Authority, and am ready to
grant reasonable Terms to those who are willing to return to their Duty, Their
Majesty's hereby giving Demonstration to the World, that it is not Their Desire
to oppress the Inhabitants of this Nation, either by Persecuting them for their
Religion, Ruining them in their Estates and Fortunes, or Enslaving them in
their Liberty, since after all the Provocations They have received, They have a
greater Regard to the Preservation of the Irish, than giving way to that just
Resentment, which their Behavior has deserved.

Given at the City of Dublin, this Fourth day of February, 1690. In the Second
Year of Their Majesty's Reign. G. Bar. de Ginckell.

Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook Assignee of Benjamin Took Printer to the King
and Queen at Their Majesty's Printing House on Ormonde-Key.


