monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other
BY Lieutenant General GINCKELL, Commander in Chief Of Their MAJESTY'S FORCES.
THeir Majesty's Forces being now to be put into Winter Quarters, and dispersed
over this Kingdom, the better to Oppose the Designs of the Enemy, and suppress
any Commotion that may happen in the Parts thereof; It is necessary that Care
be taken, both to supply them from time to time with Provisions, and that the
Inhabitants be satisfied for what they shall bring in for that U^e, and secured
from any Violence that may be offered them, so long as they behave themselves
as become Persons that intend their Majesty's Service, and the Welfare of their
Country: For these Reasons, I have thought fit to Publish the following Rules
to be observed in all places where any of Their Majesty's Forces shall be
Quartered.

I. That all people may be encouraged to keep the Markets in the Towns where
any of Their Majesty's Forces do Quarter this Winter, I do strictly Charge and
Command all Soldiers of the Army, not to take any thing from the Inhabitants of
the Country upon any pretense whatsoever; but duly pay such Rates for the
Provisions they shall stand in need of, as are appointed by the Lords-Justices
of Ireland, under Penalty of the Officers, to whose Troop or Company such
Soldier shall belong, paying treble what shall be so taken, and the Soldiers
being proceeded against according to His Majesty's Proclamation Dated at Lought
rickland, the 24th of June last. II. No Person or Persons in Their Majesty's
pay or Entertainment shall presume to press any Horses or Carts, under the
penalties expressed in Their Majesty's Order, Dated at Hilsborough the 20th of
June, unless he or they shall first have Leave in Writing from my Self, or the
General Officer commanding in Chief in the Quarters, to which the said person
shall belong. III. That the Outrages that are and have been committed by the
Straglers from the Army, may be for the future prevented, I require all
Officers to put in execution the Order made at Kilkenny, the 9th of October,
calling all Soldiers back to their respective Regiments, and forbidding them
to leave the same again without a Pass from the Officer Commanding the Regiment
in Chief, under the penalty of being proceeded against as Deserters. IV. That
all pretense may be taken away from the Inhabitants of the Country, not to
bring in their Hay and Oats into the places appointed in the respective
Quarters, for the making Magazines for the Winter, and other places where the
Horse and Dragoons are Quartered, I strictly Charge and Command all Officers
not to permit their Soldiers to go out a Forraging without Leave first had from
my Self, or the General Officer Commanding in Chief in that Quarter, in
Writing, as they will answer the contrary. V. That the Forage of the
respective Baronies, where Horse and Dragoons are Quartered, be brought in to
the place set apart for making a Store in the Quarter, to which the said Barony
does belong; And that the Troops do not cause the Forage of another Quarter to
be brought into theirs; unless where it shall happen that a Foot-Quarter is
next, and furnished with more than they have occasion to make use of for the
Horses the said Foot Regiment is allowed to keep; Yet this not to be done
without Leave from the General Officer of that Quarter. VI. That the Forage,
thus brought in, be delivered to the Officer commanding in Chief, or such
Store-Keepers as shall be appointed, who are hereby required to give an
Acquittance for so much as they shall receive, and to return an Account thereof
Monthly into the Pay-Office at Dublin, to the end that the Play Master General
may stop what the same shall amount to, out of the Pay of the several
Regiments, in order to satisfy the Owners for the same. VII And that the
Counties may know what Quantities of Forage they are to provide this Winter,
the Officer Commanding in Chief in each Barony, shall deliver the Sheriff of
the respective County, or such Person or Persons, as are or shall be appointed
to take care of the same, the numbers of Horse and Dragoons, that are Quartered
therein, for which they shall be obliged to furnish after the ^a^e of four
hundred weight of Hay, and five Bushels of Oats a Month for each Horse, and
Straw proportionably, and no more; which Quantities of Hay, Oats, and Straw,
the Counties shall be paid for out of the Treasury, according to the settled
Rates, upon producing Receipts from the Officer in Chief, or Store-Keeper of
the Barony. And if any Person in Their Majesty's Pay or Entertainment, shall
demand, or make use of any more, he shall be obliged to pay ready money for the
same, under the Penalty of having treble the value stopped out of his Pay, upon
proof made thereof before the General Officer Commanding in that Quarter. VIII.
If, after all this Care taken to prevent Disorders, and satisfy for such
Forage as the Country shall furnish, the Inhabitants of the respective
Baronies shall refuse or neglect to bring in, by the time appointed by the
General Officer Commanding in Chief in that Quarter, such Quantities of Forage
as shall be necessary for the Troops in the same, that Notice be forthwith sent
to Me, that I may give Directions for the Obliging them to comply with this
Order, as I shall find necessary in that behalf. IX. Because some Soldiers of
the Army may not at present have Money to pay their Quarters; and it being
necessary that they be supported till they recei^e the same, and the Landlords
secured for what they shall furnish, according to the Rates agreed upon by the
Lords-Justices and my Self; I do hereby direct, that when any Regiment, Troop,
or Company shall come to their Winter-Quarter; or if they are there already,
two days after they shall receive Notice of this Order, the Officer Commanding
the said Regiment, Troop, or Company, shall deliver the name of each Person to
be Quartered in his said Regiment, Troop, or Company, to the Chief Magistrate
of the Town, who shall give Billets to the said Soldiers, in which shall be
specified the name of the Soldier, and Landlord, together with the Day of his
being so Billetted; each of which said Billets is to be Signed by the said
Officer, Magistrate, and Landlord, and renewed every Month, the old ones being
hereby directed to be delivered to the Chief Magistrate, and by him returned in
before the next Month is expired, to the Play Master General of the Army, or his
Deputies: which said Billets are to be satisfied by the said Play Master
General, out of the Pay of the said Regiment, Troop or Company. X. That when
any Soldier has Leave to change his Quarters, the same Method be observed; and
also when any new Soldier is entertained: And that the Magistrate do not
presume to make a false Return, upon the Penalty of loosing all that shall be
due to him for the Quartering of any Soldiers this Winter. XI. I do also
require every Officer Commanding in Chief in any Town or Village to Sign these
Billets for Diet and Forage as aforesaid; And at his being ordered to Leave
any Quarter, to give a Bill for the whole money that shall be left unpaid by
the Troop or Company under his Command, upon pain of being Cashiered for
refusing or neglecting the same, and forfeiting his Arrears toward Discharge
of the Debt due to the said Town. XII. And that the Country may know the method
of being Redressed against any Officer or Soldier that shall Act contrary to
these or any other Orders; Any Person, oppressed as aforesaid, is first to make
his complaint to the Officer Commanding in Chief in the respective Town or
Village, who is hereby required to see he has satisfaction for what he shall
have lost; but upon his neglect or refusal the said Complainant is to make
Application to the General Officer Commanding in Chief in that Quarter, who is
required to do him Justice, and punish the Officer that has neglected or
refused, to see he has Satisfaction as aforesaid: But if both these shall not
take effectual care to do Right to the Party aggrieved, then the Offender shall
be liable to, and delivered to the Civil Power, to be punished according to the
Laws of this Kingdom.
Given at the City of Dublin, this Thirteenth day of November, 1690. Bar. de
GINCKELL, GEO: CLARKE.


Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benjamin Took, Printer to the
King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, on Ormonde-Key. 1690.


