BY LIEUTENANT GENERAL GINCKELL, Commander in Chief Of Their Majesty's FORCES.
WHereas the Right Honorable the Lords-Justices of Ireland, have by their
Proclamation of this days Date Commanded that no Person whatsoever do presume
to carry to the Camp any Beer or Ale, that has not a Certificate under the
Gauger for the Excise his hand, that the same is well Brewed, wholesome and
good, and that it has paid His Majesty's Duty of Excise, which I judge to be
highly conducing to the health of the Army, as well as serviceable in securing
that Branch of the Revenue; And forasmuch as the Commissioners and Chief
Governors of Their Majesty's Revenue have represented to Me, that it will be
necessary, for the answering the ends designed by the Lords-Justices, that
Officers of Excise be appointed by them to attend near the Camp, and that they
are apprehensive they may meet some opposition from such as shall by that Order
be disappointed of the advantage they designed to themselves: These are
therefore to will and require all Sutlers and others coming to the Camp, to
submit to produce and deliver up to the said Officers all such Certificates as
they shall have of their having paid Their Majesty's Duties, and if they have
not paid at the place of their dwelling, and the said Officer shall Judge their
drink fit for the use of the Camp, I do hereby command them to pay their Duty
to the said Officers, whom We resolve to protect, and give them all necessary
assistance in the due Execution of their Duty, of which all Officers and
Soldiers are to take notice, and to give the said Officers all due Countenance,
Encouragement and assistance in their performing that so necessary a Service to
their Majesty's and their Army.

G. Bar. de Ginckell. Geo: Clarke.


Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook Assignee of Benjamin Took Printer to the King
and Queen at their Majesty's Printing House on Ormonde-Key.


