The Case of JOHN FORSTER,
Respondent to the Petition of Appeal of Henry Forster, which seeks to Reverse
a Decree of Dismission made in Chancery the last day of May last; and to affirm
a Decree made in 1674 against the said John Forster (he being then an Infant of
Seven Years of Age) unless Cause shown when he came of Age.
Arthur Forster the Grandfather had three Sons. Nicholas his eldest, who died
without Issue. Cuthber his 2d. who had Issue John the Respondent, and three
other Children. Henry his third the Petitioner.


THIS Respondent says, That Arthur Forster, the Petioner's Father, and this
Respondent's Grandfather, having three Sons, viz. Nicholas his eldest, Cuthbert
(this Respondent's Father) his second, and the Petitioner his youngest Son; and
being seized in Fee of Freehold, Copyhold, and Customary Lands, worth 300 l.
per annum, in England, and about 116 l. per annum in Scotland; besides about 10
l. per annum in England which he devised to the said Cuthbert his second Son,
died about 20 years since. After whose death the same descended on the said
Nicholas the eldest Son, who entered and was seized in Fee, and purchased other
Lands of good value; and about 16 years since died so seized, without Issue.
Upon whose death, all the said Estate descended on this Respondent, as Nephew
and Heir of the said Nicholas (the said Cuthbert this Respondent's Father being
dead, and leaving this Respondent an Infant of three years old, and another
Son, and two Daughters.)

That the Petitioner taking advantage of this Respondent's Minority, and that
his Mother had but 10 l. per annum for the Maintenance of her self and four
Children, immediately after the death of the said Nicholas, entered into all the
said Estate as well in England as Scotland, and got all the Deeds into his
Custody: And this Respondent's Guardian having afterward, in this Respondent's
Name, and upon his Title, obtained a Verdict for the Customary and Copyhold,
and part of the Freehold; the Petitioner exhibited his Bill in Chancery
against this Respondent, then but four years old, to be quieted in his
Possession, and for an Injunction, pretending three Titles, two at Law, and one
in Equity Note. Walter Scot (Father to the Petitioner's Wife) Complainant in
the Bill; and set forth by the Bill, That the Treaty of Marriage made by
Nicholas Forster was with Walter Scot: which Walter Scot died seven years
before the pretended Marriage-Agreement; which the Petitioner (after the
Respondent's Answer put in) apprehending, got an Order to amend his Bill; and
in his amended Bill sets forth, That the Treaty of Marriage was with Sir Gideon
Scot, who they never examined as a Witness to prove the Agreement.


.

I. By the supposed Settlement in the Petition set forth, pretended to be made
by the said Arthur one day before his death. II. By an Agreement pretended to
be made by the said Nicholas on the Petitioners Marriage with Sir Gideon
Scott's Nicce in Scotland, for the settling all his Estate, after his own death
without Issue, on the Petitioner in tail Male with remainder, to the right
Heirs of Nicholas, in consideration of 10000 Scotch Marks Portion; which was a
mere suggestion to prevent a Demur. And, III. By a supposed Will made by the
said Nicholas; whereto an Answer being put in by this Respondent's Guardian on
this Respondent's behalf, the Petitioner took a Commission into Cumberland, and
there examined several of his Wife's Relations who lived in Scotland, to prove
several paroll Discourses: Whereupon the Cause proceeded to an hearing, in
1674* before the then Lord Keeper, assisted with the late Judge Wyndham, who
Decreed, That the Petitioner should enjoy to himself and his several Sons, and
their respective Issue Male, according to the said pretended Settlement, all
the Lands contained therein; and also to Him and his Heirs all other the
Freehold and Copyhold Lands which were the Lands of the said Nicholas: And
that this Respondent when he came of Age should convey the same accordingly,
unless he should then show cause to the contrary; and in the mean time awarded
an Injunction, by color whereof the Petitioner kept Possession of the said
Estate above 14 years, and received above 4000 l. for the Profits.


That in May last this Respondent coming to show cause against the said Decree,
and having, by the Assistance of Friends, procured Counsel and Instructions
proper for his just Defense, (which was not done at the former hearing, by
reason of his Infancy, and his Mothers Inability) the Court, on long debate of
the matter, and hearing the Proofs read, and what could be alleged on either
side, saw no cause to give the Petitioner any relief, but discharged the former
Decree, and dismissed the Bill with Costs, which is enrolled, as by the Orders
and Proceedings may appear.

And this Respondent does humbly insist, That the said Dismission is Just and
Regular, and the former Decree Unjust and Erroneous; and that if the matters
insisted on at the last hearing had been observed to the Court on the former
hearing, they would then have dismissed the Bill, as this Respondent is advised.

And this Respondent farther says, That he having twice recovered at Law upon
full Evidence on both sides the said customary and Copyhold Lands, and so much
of the Freehold as was purchased by the said Nicholas; which being in
ejectment, the Petitioner may have, and ought to take his proper remedy at Law,
in case he be agrieved thereby, as this Respondent is also advised.

Wherefore, and for that the first Decree was not absolute, but only, unless
this Respondent should, upon his attaining his Age, show cause to the contrary;
and upon this Respondent's showing cause, was discharged; and that upon good
grounds and just cause; he humbly hopes your Lordships will be pleased to
dismiss the Petition, and confirm the said Dismission, etc.

And that for these Reasons. I. For that the first Decree (as well as this
Petition) is beyond the Bill, which seeks only an Estate-Tayle in all the
Lands, as well what is in the pretended Settlement, as what was afterward
purchased; and yet by the Decree the Petitioner is to have the Lands not in the
Settlement in Fee. II. For that it appears by the Decree, that Nicholas, who is
supposed to agree to confirm his Father's pretended Settlement, was thereby but
Tenant for Life: So that if that was a good Settlement, 'twas not in his power
to confirm it, or to do any Act to prejudice his next Brother's Right. III. For
that by the Bill and Proofs it appears Nicholas was to be Tenant in Tail before
the Petitioner, whose Remainder might have been barred by Nicholas's suffering
a Recovery. IV. For that an Heir at Law ought not to be disinherited by
uncertain parol discourses, without writing, much less when neither the
Petitioner, nor his Witnesses, agree what the effect of such discourses was,
but contradict themselves, and each other. V. For that the pretended Portion of
10000 Scotch Marks, sell to 4000 Scoth, and that not paid, which if it had, it
amounts but to about 220 l. Sterling. whenas the Petitioner had 1000 l. given him
by his Father's Will out of his Personal Estate; who took no notice, nor in
truth ever executed any Settlement; but the pretended Deed is feigned, or else
was unduly obtained in his Sickness but one day before his Death, with which
1000. l. the Petitioner might have deserved a better Portion in England Note.

The Petitioner examines two Witnesses in Chancery to prove the pretended Deed
of Settlement, and they both swear the Deed was executed six days before
Arthur's Death; and Arthur died 25 Dec. 1669, and the Deed bears Date but the
24th day of Dec. 1669. So that the Deed bears date five days after 'twas
executed, as by the Petitioner's own Proofs; by which it plainly appear the
Deed is forged.


. VI. For that here is a pretended Marriage-agreement without any provision for
the Wife, or Children; nor is there any certain or fixed Agreement, whereon
damages could be recovered at Law. VII. For that such pretended Parol
Discourses ought not to be favored in Equity, much less, since the Act for
prevention of Frauds and Perjuries, whereby all Marriage-agreements and
Contracts for Lands not reduced into writing, are void. VIII. For that if there
be any such Settlement, or Will, the Petitioner's remedy is at Law, and not in
Equity; and those Pretenses ought not to be used in Equity to countenance the
Pretended Parol-agreement, which in truth they rather contradict than affirm.


The Reason of the Petitioner's obtaining a Decree, unless Cause, was for the
Reasons following, viz. I. For that the Respondent was but of the Age of four
years, and had no person to examine his Witnesses touching the validity of the
Deed, and reality of the pretended Agreement; nor any person capable of drawing
his Briefs, and making Observations on the Petitioner's Proofs touching the
forged Deed, and the pretended paroll Agreement. II. For that the Respondent's
Counsel on the first hearing insisted only, That any Agreement whereby Nicholas
was to have an Estate-Tayle, ought not to be executed against the Respondent
after Nicholas's death, for that he might have barred such an Estate-Tayle; and
that these Tenant-Right and Copyhold Lands could not be intayled, nor were
subject to a paroll Agreement; and in all Tenant-Right Estates, the consent of
the Lord was necessary, and the Lord had a greater Interest whereby to admit or
refuse Tenants, than in Copyhold Lands; and John was admitted as Heir to his
Father, his Uncle, and his Grandfather; and that the Respondent's Grandfather,
on the Marriage with the Respondent's Father, had, upon a better consideration,
made a paroll Agreement, whereby his Real Estate should come to the Respondent.


And the Counsel at the first hearing omitting to observe the Deed bears Date
four days after 'twas executed, nor observing the incoherence and uncertainty
of the Witnesses, and that the pretended paroll Agreement was but a discourse
or flourish on the Treaty, and no real part of the Agreement; and that the
Agreement was not such, that any Suit could be thereupon grounded at Law to
recover Damage; and that the pretended Portion of 4000 Scotch Marks was but 220
l. and that all the VVitnesses being Scotch-men, and near Relations, do depose
in Terms of Art unlikely to be known by them; and the Petitioner by his Bill
says the Agreements to be, That the Lands should be settled on Him and the
Heirs-males of his Body; and his Proof is of a Discourse that they should be
settled o^ the Petitioner in Fee.

The Case of John Forster Respondent.


