AN ABSTRACT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF W. CARTER; Being a PLEA TO SOME OBJECTIONS
Urged against HIM.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, MDCXCIV.

TO THE Merchants, Clothiers, and Drapers, etc.
Gentlemen,
I Have for Twenty four Years, used my endeavors not only to prevent the Loss
of your Trade in the Woollen Manufacture (set up in France, with English, and
Irish Wool) and the Importation of French Silks, Stuffs, and Lace, etc. But
also used my utmost to regulate the abuses in the Aulnage (notwithstanding the
objections against me) what Steps I made in both, are in part contained in the
following Discourse.

In which I have demonstrated, that my labor was not altogether Fruitless,
against the designs of France; notwithstanding all the Craft, and Bribes of
French Agents, by all the Interest they had in our Court the two last Reigns;
both by secret disguise, and open violence, and also endeavoring by a Law to
ruin our Trade under a very fair and plausible pretense: Which, give me leave
to say, that had not the War fell out as it did, we should have hardly been
able to keep that Trade we now have; although I had frequent Access to that
Government, and did by that means put a stop at several times to it, as in
part, in the close of this and another Discourse does more fully appear.

You cannot but know (at least many of you) that I Printed my sentiments in the
Year 1669. and Reprinted the same in the Year 1671. with some enlargement of
what evil consequence the Exportation of Wool to France was.

And in the following Year, (viz.) 72. Wrote an Advertisement to you therein,
an Abstract of which is included in this Paper, together with what past in the
Years, 1676, and 77.

But, Sirs, I am now growing Old, being upward of Sixty Years, having spent the
prime of my Years in your Service, with very many hardships, Watchings, and
Dangers, when you have taken your R^st, and improved your time, for your
particular and private advantage: It cannot in reason now (at this Age) be
expected that I should act in that Post much longer; and although upon that
account it is not probable I may be able to perform those Services in Travels
and Watchings, as formerly on the Seacoast, yet nothing shall be wanting on my
part (here at the Helm) which I am capable of, for the promoting of your real
Interest, and by instructing such as may for the future be employed by you.

Having given some hints about the Trade of France, of my endeavors to prevent
it, I shall crave leave to speak something about the Aulnage. When I was
attending the Council and Parliament about the Wooll-Affair, I was by some
Merchants and Drapers in London, put upon the Redressing those abuses then
complained of, and was by them desired to Print a Paper containing the same;
and by my omitting a License, was for that reason clapped up in the Gate House,
which was not a little cost to me; notwithstanding that discouragement, in
pursuance of the Deputation, I afterward received, both from Drapers and some
others dealing in the Woollen Manufacture, (Viz)

WE Whose Names are Subscribed Woollen-Drapers, of Winton and Alsford, having
been for several Years last past exposed to great trouble, with the Officers of
the Aulnage; ^^ their entering our Shops, and carrying away our Goods from us,
to the disturbance of us in our Trade, and prejudice of our Goods, thereby to
force us to a Composition with them; which we have been forced to do. some of
Ten Pounds, others Five Pounds, and Annually, some Thirty, and others Twenty
Shillings, to free us from future trouble: Do therefore Authorize our Worthy
Friend Mr. William Carter, as our Agent, and Attorney, to Appear, Petition and
present for us, unto, and before His Majesty and Council, and before the
Parliament, whenever they shall be Assembled for the removeal of the
aforesaid abuses, and preventing of such abuses for time to come; and to do all
other things Lawful in and about the same, and to all and do for us, in such
Lawful way and manner, as by Council shall be advised, as fully, and
effectually as if we were, or might in our own Persons do the same:

Witness our Hands the 14th Day of June, 1671. William Harwood, Tho. Wavell,
Godson Penton, Thomas Monday, Edward Grace, Wiliam Smith, and Tho. Standen.

Another Deputation from the dealers in the Woollen Manufacturies, of several
Counties in England, and particularly of Exon, thus Worded, (Viz.)

WE whose Names are Subscribed Manufactures of Wool, for the Counties of
Devon, and Summerset, etc. Having considered as well in what we know, as by the
Information we have received from other parts of this Kingdom; the great abuses
that have been done to us, and other Manufactures, by such as have been
employed in the Office of Aulnage, etc.

The Deputation is Verbatim as before, only the Date is the 12th of May, 71.
Signed by Thomas Crispin, and many hundred of others.

I say, in pursuance of the said Deputations, when prosecuting some of those
abuses, and being in the Court of Exchequer, in the Year 1673. though then
complained against by the Council for the then Farmers of the Counties of
Suffolk and Essex: Yet was then justified in open Court by the then Lord Chief
Barron, pursuant to a Report to the King and Council made by his Lordship Two
Years before; as may appear by a Copy thereof, in Page 6th. I am sorry, I have
the occasion to make an Apology to you upon this Head, whom I have so freely
served; and to say something first of the occasion of the Bill* by which so
much trouble was about it, and to no purpose but rather prevented another Bill
which would have past, to have put the Laws in Execution against the
Exportation of Wool, and also to have Regulated the abuses of the Aulnage.

The reason of the complaint in Parliament, was occasioned by the differing
lengths of some of Gloucester Cloths, not to say by a Clothier himself of that
County; but before the Bill was brought into the House of Commons, I had
several meetings with the Agent, and told him that if he would attend the Kings
Council, I would persuade the Farmers to consent to such a Bill, as that no
opposition could be made against it. I remember, I was then going to Maidstone
Assizes, to prosecute some Exporters of Wool, and whilst I was there, the Bill
was brought into the House of Commons, which has occasioned so much trouble,
not only to no purpose, but also prevented such a Bill which would have
answered the ends of all parties.

The Bill which was so long depending, was to Transfer the Collecting the
Subsidy of Aulnage at the Custom-House; and to subject it to all the Laws
against Frauds in the Customs, and the duties to be paid there, by the
Merchant, and by him to be discounted with the Clothier, for the same, upon a
supposition that it would save charge, and by that means pay the D. of
Richmond, and those concerned in Interest; and also be an overplus to defray
the necessary expense in preventing the Exportation of Wool; which Bill, after
the several Hearings and Examinations, instead of doing both, it did not answer
one in that manner, besides the inevitable Trouble and Controversy betwixt the
Merchant and Clothier, for that some of the Woollen Manufacture, pays Custom by
weight, and some by the piece; when at present the Aulnage pays all by the
piece.

THE PREFACE.
IT may seem strange to some that after Twenty four Years time, the extence of
my Estate, loosing a profitable Trade, and adventuring my life so often, as one
Action, instead of many, set down in the close of this Paper, that after all
this am constrained to make an Apology to those, and for whose Interest I have,
with so much candor and freedom, to my own loss, exposed my self; I must
confess, I expected better usage from some than I have as yet received; but
since most cannot be ignorant of the Truth of this Abstracted Narrative of my
Proceedings, and that in it I have espoused your Cause, and engaged in your
Quarrel, and so long fought your Battles, it will not, I hope, be thought
unreasonable, if I do now expect but what is just and equitable from reasonable
Men; but instead thereof, it has not been a little surprise to me, to see a
Paper Entitled, The Case of the Merchants, Clothiers, Drapers, etc. with
relation to the abuse of the Aulnages, wherein I am there named Wool-Carter, as
a person seemingly justifying the said abuses, and contradicting m^ former
practice, and thereby opposing a regulating those abuses, which charge, if
true, I must confess, that a Face of Brass is proper for me; but if the
contrary appear, it will return upon the Author of that Paper, as a False
Accuser, but if it had been done by the advice and consent of those persons
therein named, then I must say its hard, for me, and creates not a little
trouble to be wounded in the House of my Friends, and at such a time, when I
was with so much affection, great difficulty and hazard, pursuing their real
Interest, in that affair wherein they have named me, and more particularly
endeavoring to prevent all Trade, Commerce and Correspondency with France, in
which I have not stuck at any pains and difficulty in the Service; but for
as much as the said Paper was Published (as I was informed) not only without the
knowledge of most ^f the persons therein named, but against the advice of some
of those that did appear at Parliament, in pursuance of the design in promoting
the Bill that have been depending, and miscarried in Four Sessions of
Parliament.

As for the Charge given against me, give me leave to answer for my self, which
Charge is, viz. We are very sensible of the several Artifices used to oppose
the Bill, amongst the numbers employed therein, there is one known by the name
of Wooll-Carter, who was formerly a zealous Solicitor against the
Aulnage-Office, but now by reason of yearly payment, is become their friend,
this Man pretending himself a friend to the Shopkeepers, have in several
Sessions sent down Printed-Forms of Letters to a great many Corporations, for
them to Transcribe and Subscribe, and direct to their Parliament Men the
substance of the Letters were to pray them to oppose the Bill, and think of
some other method for the ease of the Shopkeepers. Which Charge being answered
by another hand, I shall say the less to it now, only this, that I was not only
a pretender, but a ^eal friend to the Shopkeepers, for it is matter of fact,
that I did not only prosecute the several Petitions of the Shopkeepers in most
Counties in England, the several Sessions of Parliament, from the year 1673 to
81. most upon my own cost, but when I ^ou^^ do no good in Parliament, by all
that labor and time expended, an opportuni^^ was put into my hand by m^^ns of
some friend of mine, o^ some great figure, that I purchased the freedom for the
said Shopkeepers, without any cost to them and likewise endeavored to have so
settled it by a Law, that it should not be in the power of any Aulnager to have
given them any manner of disturbance; and also, to have a Seal of content for
the Honor and Reputation of the Woollen Manufacture it self, and Credit of the
Clothier, and to prevent all manner of disputes and controversies betwixt all
persons concerned; which, I think, is more than a pretense of kindness.

But whilst I was pursuing this latter design, I was by the importunity of
several eminent Merchants and Factors in London, taken off the said Service to
prevent the Exportation of Wool, what I did in that affair is hereafter more
enlarged, which I think I need not to make any further Apology, and may say
it is a manifest Aspersion, causlesly charged upon me.

Then as to my sending Printed Forms of Letters for the Shopkeepers to
transscribe and subscribe, and send it to their Parliament Men, I own it, being
their desire, not only when I have been in the Country with them, but when in
London they have wrote to me, to send them Forms of Letters to answer their
desires.

As to the Charge against me being formerly a zealous Solicitor against the
Aulnage-Office, but now am become their friend, though I have in a sense answered
this charge before, yet I shall be now more full in it; for as I was the person
that contracted for the whole Farm, so I was by that means made more capable to
free the Shopkeepers from those abuses put upon them by the former Aulnagers,
which give me leave here to relate some of them, viz. The first complaint I
produced at a Committee in the year 1673. was four Shopkeepers' in the County
of Essex paid as a Fine and other Fees the sum of one hundred and sixty Pounds,
and forced to promise to pay them yearly several sums of Money to free them
from future trouble; and amongst many more at Winchester, Windsor, and other
places, there was one James Smith of Eaton, since dead, was at the expense of
about four-score Pounds, and being but a young man was ruined in his Trade, by
his being imprisoned, and his Goods lay a long time under Seizure, and no cause
for it, Fleven half pieces of Broad-Cloth, some being the latter ends of the
Cloths, where the Seal is not usually fixed, and the Aulnager, without further
examination, took away the others that had Seals upon them, all which was fully
proved before the said Committee; all this trouble and charge was because he
did Replevy his Cloth which the Aulnager had seized.

Let me odd one instance of my own case by the same Aulnagers, having sent a
Spanish Black-Cloth to a Draper in Portsmouth, in value about 26 l. which Cloth
was rightly Sealed and fixed at the head-end of the Cloth, but the Aulnagers
pretending no Seal, took away the Cloth, and carried it away to their Lodging,
the Draper having not the liberty to examine the same, was forced to pay them
down five Pounds, and immediately found by opening the Cloth the Seal fixed as
before, notwithstanding which the said Aulnager would not repay the five
Pounds, I was forced to allow the Shopkeeper, or else have lost his Custom,
and run the hazard of a Suit at Law for my Money.

So that my Proceedings were not against the Office of Aulnage, but against
such abuses, which being by me regulated, as before, I ought not in justice to
suffer for my Real Service.

W. C.

Give me leave to add the Testimony of another Person, who to some it may be
thought strange; seeing he himself was a Farmer of six Counties, and by my
means lost his Farm.
Gentlemen,
UPON The perusal of a Paper Entitled, The Case of the Clothiers, Weavers,
Merchants, Drapers and Mercers, about the abuses of the Aulnagers; I find Mr.
Carter is there reflected on, as a person inconsistent with himself; and the
better to describe him, he is Charactered by the Appellation of Wool Carter: I
must confess it is a strange way of requital, to him that has so visibly served
not only the Nation in general, but those in particular whose Name the Paper
bears. Now in regard I have known Mr. Carter many years; (though the occasion, to
some, would think it strange, that by his means was put out of a Farm, for six
Counties, for the subsidy of Aulnage; yet in as much as I found in his
proceedings, preferring the public before his private Interest, and though an
Enemy, yet acting fairly and above board:) I could not but do him Justice, in
vindicating his proceedings, notwithstanding my own Loss by him.

The said Mr. Carter, 1673. in pursuance of a Deputation he received both from
Drapers and others, Solicited in the House of Commons, in the Name of the
Drapers, in the Counties of He^ford, Essex, and Berks; the matter of the
Complaint he has already mentioned in this Preface, but the Parliament being
then at that time Prorogued, nothing more then was done by him.

In the Year 1675. he revived the same Petition, and solicited that, and many
other Petitions, and several hearings were had, and thereupon diverse Councels
were retained by him; and the Parliament soon after being again Prorogued,
nothing could be more done till the next Session, (viz.) 1677, and 78. And then
the whole was Re-heard, and the House of Commons came to these Votes,
thereupon. (Viz.)

1. That the Subsidy of Aulnage, ought to be paid by the makers of the Woollen
Manufacture, and not by the Retaylers, or any other persons whatsoever.

2. That the Aulnagers searching of Wagons, and Packs on the Road was an abuse.

3. That the Aulnagers making Drapers, and other Retaylers to pay Yearly
Compositions for not searching their Shops and Warehouses was an abuse.

And a Bill accordingly was ordered to be brought in, to Redress the said
abuses, but the Parliament was then again Prorogued.

Shortly after sundry persons having taken a Farm of the said Subsidies, and
Duties for London and Middlesex; and in order to take the whole Farm of
England, (as was designed to be so let) contracted with many Factors and
Warehouse Men in the City, for Annual Rents; not to search their Goods,
thereby to make the other Farmers of the several Counties unable to pay their
Rents, when the Seal of one Cloth or Stuff was made use for several other
Pieces, and to be able to give a greater Fine for the whole than any others;
they did design, as soon they had contracted for the whole, to break off those
Agreements in London, when the Year was out, and to make Seizure of what Goods
they should then find unsealed, and to do the like in all Corporations, and
other Towns in England, by the Officers of the Excise; by which oppressive
Action they might have got great Sums of Money, which design coming to the Ear
of Mr. Carter, he prevented the same; and then Contracted for the whole Farm,
paying down 9000 l. some considerable time before the Lease Commenced, and the
Farmers were at the Expense of near 5000 l. more, with Interest and other
incident Charges in Seating the same, both for the ease of the Clothiers and
Drapers, before they had made any profit, by the reason of the standing out of
several considerable Counties in the former Leases, and notwithstanding all
that great Sum paid down, and the incident Charges, yet the Farmers took not
advantage of any one Seizure, but only to Seal the Goods; which I think was
very good Service done by him, and was then looked upon so; and the rather,
that the said Shopkeepers were not only freed from the Fines and Rent formerly
paid by them, but from future damages, or any expense for the same; besides
which Mr. Carter caused the Shalloon-Makers in the Counties of Southampton, and
Berks, to be eased one quarter of what they had paid the former Farmers.

And also procured the Clothiers themselves, or such as they approved to be
Collectors, or Deputies; which I think was real Service to all parties
concerned.

And if any accidental difference falls out, he is still ready to endeavor to
accommodate the same: And therefore he deserves not to be stigmatized, as he is
in that Paper Printed, and sent into most Towns in England; who has without
charging, Faithfully and heartily prosecuted the same design he ever did.
(Viz.) Settling the duty in its right place, and to prevent all abuses that
have or may happen to the Retaylers thereby; which as it has been so, I doubt
not but it will be his constant endeavor.

J. R.

The Contents,
THat in Nov. 1667. I discovered great quantityes of Wool that had been
exported in August before, from Rumney-marsh (and seized some) and also from
Ireland, and discovered the same to the Parliament then sitting, p. 1st. I
petitioned K. Chapter 2 d. for a Party of Horse in Rumney-marsh, and some Frigates
at Sea, which was granted, and thereby great quantities of Wool were prevented
from Exportation, i. b. Sept. 1668, I made Proposals to the said K. Chapter to
prevent the Exportation of Wool, which was reffered to the Council of Trade,
and reported, p. 2 d. August, 69 I Addressed the said King, about Ireland, which
was refered to the Ld. Roberts then going, and good effects there were by
preventing great quantities of Wool from being carried beyond Sea, i. b. About
the said Mon. of August, I made a discovery of 5 Vessels that came into Callice
with Wool, and obtained the then Lord Keepers Letters, etc. p. 2 d. and 3 d.
By a Report from the Lord Chief Baron, in January 1671, is the effects of my
pursuing the former discovery, p. 6th. In the said Year of 71, I prevented a
design of Transporting Wool from Ireland, p. 19. That I prosecuted at the
Assizes in Maidston in Kent, four Persons, and convicted the same, p. 7th. An
Abstract of an Advertisement to the Merchants, and Clothiers in the Year 1672,
p. 16. 17. 18. In the Year 1678, I prevented the design of Mr. Monk, of
lessening the penalties of the Laws for the preventing the Exportation of
Wool, p. 8th. In the Year 1684, I prevented a farther design of the said Mr.
Monk, in a Commission, and petitioned the Lords of the Treasury to Empower the
several Companies of Merchants etc. To take a particular care of that Affaier,
and thereupon I did then affresh undertake to look after it, and I prevented
great quantities of Wool that Year from Exportation, p. 9th. In the Year 85, I
attended the Parliament, for the Passing of a Bill, and petitioned the late
King for 2 Sloops to Cruse upon the Seas, and did obtain them, though opposed by
the then Commissioners of the Customs; by which means there was above 20 French
Shallops taken, and condemned, with 2 or 300 Baggs of Wool, besides much cast
over-bord, p, 10th. That in May 1686, I did request, and did obtain an Order
from the then Lord Treasurer, to bring up the Wool which was condemned, to
London, and to be sold to the Clothiers, which before used to be sold after
Seazure, to those that had exported it, and then exported by them again, p.
11th. That in Dece. 1686, I discovered a design of gaining a License to Export
6000 Baggs of Wool from Ireland, and prevented the same, p. 12th. A discovery
of a Confederacy betwixt the Officers of the Customs, and the Exporters of
Wool, p. 12th. 13th. The Difficulty I was put to, and Examinations at the
Treasury, p. 14th. 15th.

THE PROCEEDINGS Of William Carter Against TRANSPORTATION OF WOOL.
WHereas diverse Merchants, Clothiers and Factors, upon consideration of the
great detriment that accrued to this Kingdom, and to the Woollen Trade thereof,
in that great quantities of Wool were transported frequently into France,
Holland, and Flanders etc. did desire and encourage me, to endeavor the
preventing the same; which being readily willing to undertake, I perceived that
though there were many severe Laws made against exporting Wool, and though the
wisdom of our Ancesters sound it so mischeivous and destructive to this
Kingdom, as to make the Offense Capital, notwithstanding either by the wilful
corruption, or gross neglect of Officers, great quantities of Wool were
clandestinely exported, by those who, for a little private gain to themselves,
dare venture their Necks, to ruin the Trade of a Nation.

Applying my self therefore cheerfully to so necessary a Work in August 1667, I
made a discovery of twelve French Shallops loaded in one Night, from
Rumney-Marsh in Kent, with considerable quantities of Wool, and sometime
afterward, I caused a quantity of Wool, to be seized as it was carrying on
the Beach, near Camber Point in the said Marsh, in order to be shipped on board
some Shallops, that lay in Rye Harbor.

I also discovered great quantities of Wool, likewise exported beyond Sea out
of Ireland; although in that Kingdom, the exportation thereof be also
prohibited, unless the same by License be exported into England.

At the next Parliament, in November 1667. I presented the exportation of
Wool, and the National Dangers thereof, to the House of Commons, which being
referred to a Committee, to consider of, they examining of the Irish
exportations, soon found the ground of that Mischief to be, that under color
of a License granted by his late Majesty, to export some hundred Packs of
Wool, several thousand Packs were colored by that License from Ireland: Upon
which the said Committee made an Address to his said Majesty, to revoke the
said License, for the apparent frauds practiced therein, which his Majesty
accordingly did.

After the adjurnment of that Parliament, upon the importunity of the said
Merchants, and finding the Wooll-exporters, by their impunity grown to such
confidence, as to Ship off their Wool openly in the day time, with armed Men
to assist them, in the doing thereof; I petitioned his said Majesty for a
party of Horse to ^cout about Rumny Marsh, and some Frigates to cruse at Sea, to
prevent those exportations, which by his said Majestys Grace and Favor I did
obtain, and by my attendance, sometimes at Sea, and sometimes at Land, with one
and sometimes two Servants, did prevent the exportation of above one Thousand
Packs of Wool that Summer from the said Marsh, and by that means was bought up
by the Clothiers and Staplers, which the Year before was most of it Exported.

In September 1668, I presented some proposals to his said Majesty in Council,
in order to prevent the said exportations, which were referred the 20th of
November following to the Council, of Trade, with this particular Order, (Viz.)
You are very strictly to enquire, and in form your selves by what ways and
practices the Wool of this Kingdom comes to be stolen, embessed, and sent
away into foreign Parts, contrary to Law; what places (etc.) are most
suspected in England or else where, and who does buy the said Wool in those
places, to the end that nothing of care or watch may be omitted, but that all
such strict and severe courses be taken, that an evil, so mischeivous and
inconvenient, may be to ally prevented.

When I carried this Order, with my Proposals, to the said Council of Trade,
they immediately chose a select Committee on purpose to peruse them, where I was
ordered to attend, which attendance lasted a good part of that Winter; the said
Committee summoned and heard diverse Merchants, Clothiers, Factors, and
Staplers, and then made their Report, which was Read before his Majesty in
Council, upon which, an Order was made the 2. of April 1669. in these words
(viz.)

Whereas in pursuance of an Order of this Board, of the 20th. of November last,
referring, to the Council of Trade the Proposals of William Carter, for
preventing the Exportation of Wool; the said Council having returned their
Report to the Board, that having discoursed with the said Willam Carter, and
such other Persons, as they thought capable of giving them any good
information, touching this matter, they find the Exportation of Wool, is of a
destructive consequence to the Trade of this Kingdom, and that the same has
grown into practice; as well by reason of the doubtfullness and provisions in
the Statute made in the 12th year of his Majesty's Reign Prohibiting the
Exportation of Wool, as by the neglect and remissness of Officers, in not
putting the Laws in execution: And therefore proposed, that the care of that
business, should be especially recommended to the President and Governors of
Christ's Hospital in London, for the several Reasons in the said Report,
pursuant to which Report, his Majesty directed a Commission to pass under the
great Seal of England for that purpose, to the said Presedent and Governors:
but before the Commission past under Seal, I did carry the said Report, and
Order upon it to the President and Governors of the said Hospital, who
immediately caused a Court to be called, and upon reading thereof, did accept
of that Authority then intended to be given them, upon which I informed the
Council of their willingness therein, and did then proceed and solicit the
business so ^ar, as to pass the Commission at my own charge, under the great
Seal, and carried it to the ^resident and Governors, in expectation they would
have taken it upon them, as they had agreed, but in some short time after they
declined the employment, and returned the Commission back to the King and
Council, and plainly refused to act therein, upon some frivolous objections,
without allowing me one penny for the money expended, which was not less th^n
40 l. besides my own Labor and Attendance.

The next Session of Parliament, being in the year 1669 Sr. Orlando Bridgman
the then Lord Keeper, brought into the House of Lords an explainitory Bill for
hindering the said Exportation, under some new penalties.

Before which time William Facon of Canterbury Wooll-Comber, and one Marsh of
Hoakam near Dover a Farmer, were brought up before the House of Commons for
Exporting 44 Packs of Combed Wool from Canterbury, where being examined, they
were ordered to be tried at the the next Assizes at Maidstone in Kent, whereupon
I was commanded by his Majesty and Council, to prosecute them according to Law,
for the said Felony; but when I came to Maidstone I could not hear of any such
person, there being no Recognisance taken for their appearing there, nor any
Witnesses attending to prove the Fact, so I lost my Jorney but afterward I
understood that he had compounded with his Accusers, and taken off the
Witnesses, so that the Order of the House of Commons, and his Majesty's care
therein, proved altogether ineffectual.

About August following in the same year 1669, understanding that the Late Earl
of Radnor was designed to go Lord Leivtenant for Ireland, I petioned his
Majesty in Council, for some care to be taken in preventing the Exportation of
Wool from Ireland, who was pleased to Order a Letter in Council, recomending
the care thereof, to the said Lord Lieutenant, on whom I waited at his
departure as far as St. A^bans, and at my parting with his Excellency there, he
promised to Act effectually therein, which his Lordship did accordingly: In so
much, that within six weeks time after he came to Ireland, there were landed at
Minehead, above one thousand Packs of Wool more in that time, than had been
there landed within the like space of time, in any year before, and the like
proportionable at Liverpool, Chester, Bristol and Barnstable, which quantity
of Wool in other years used to be Exported out of Ireland beyond the Seas,
upon pretense of being shipped for England.

In a short time after, I made a discovery of five Vessels laden with Wool
arived at Callice in France, one of which belonging to Dover, two to Folkstone,
and two to Hythe in the County of Kent, upon which the Lord Keeper was ordered
by the King in Council, to write a letter to the Mayors of Dover, Folkstone and
Hythe, which was to this effect.

Gentlemen,
THis bearer William Carter brings along with him a Copy of an Information,
concerning the Transportation of Wool; but it being a matter of so high
Concernment to his Majesty and this Kingdom, as scarce any thing more; to
prevent the Transportation of Wool, and the punishment of the Offenders: I do
earnestly recommend it to you, to examine the Persons named in the Information,
and to make all the enquiry you can, concerning these and such others, as you
shall have cause to suspect to be guilty in this kind, and to certify what you
find herein, that his Majesty in Council may give further Orders thereupon,
not doubting of your care herein,

Your Loving Friend Orlando Bridgman.
Ess. House, Aug. 30. 1669.
With this Letter I rod Post to Dover, and having there secured one Thomas
Pierce, a Master of one of the said Vessels; whilst he was examining before the
Mayor, his wife being present, and hearing the names read of the other Masters
at Folkstone, and Hythe in the Information mentioned, and her Husbands Vessel
then lying at Folkstone, she presently gets a Horse and ^rides thither, and
discovers the business there; by which means, when I came to Folkstone, (though
it was the same day) I was frustrated of my design there, the Mayor and Masters
being all got out of the way before I came, but hasting to Hythe, by chance met
with one Mark Spicer, Master of another of the said Vessels: But before I could
find the Mayor of Hythe, to examine the said Spicer, he made his escape toward
Folkstone, whether I followed him, and just as he came to the Sea side, where a
Boat lay to receive him, I seized him; but the Women of the Town being before
alaramed by Perce's Wife (it being all in one day) came out of their Houses,
and gathered up stones upon the Beach, which they flung about my ears so
violently, that having no help, I was forced to quit my Prisoner, hardly
escaping my self.

Returning back to London, and there being a Council designed to meet at
Hampton Court, I went thither and waited on the Lord Keeper Bridgman, to whom
I gave an account of my whole Journey, his Lordship ordered me to attend while
the Council sat, which I did, and was then called in and related all the said
particular passages to his Majesty, who was pleased to command me to go down
into Kent again, and ordered a party of Horse to assist me.

But before the party of Horse were ready, I received an Information of Ten
Thousand Stones of Wool, Shipped in five Vessels from Gallaway in Ireland, and
coulorably entered for Plymouth and London, etc.

I better knowing, than being able to prevent the usual Frauds practiced in
Ireland, where under pretense of getting a License from the Lord Livetenant, to
Ship Wool for England, sometimes double the quantity Licenced was Shipped, and
the Law requiring Bonds with sureties, to be given for landing the Wool
Licenced at some Port in England, some times insufficient Security was taken,
and so the Bonds were of no effect, sometimes false and counterfeit
Certificates were procured out of England, in discharge of those Bonds, that
the Wool was landed in England, when in truth it was not, sometimes those
Bonds though actualy forfited and detected, yet were easily compounded for at low
and cheap Rates, and at other times by the corruption of Officers, several
Bonds were compounded for, as soon as they were entered into, even before the
departure of the Vessel out of the Port, whereby Offenders were encouraged to
break the Laws, by knowing and paying the price of their Punishment before they
committed the Offense; which mischeifs being willing to obviate so far as I was
able, upon diligent enquiring, I had good reason to suspect, the said Ten
Thousand Stone of Wool was really designed to be Exported beyond the Sea, and
not intended either for Plymouth or London, as was pretended by the Entries.

And thereupon I applied my self to the then Farmers of his Majesty's Customs,
for an order to ride down into the Southern Ports, to examine what Wool was
lately come thither from ^reland, to prevent Frauds by counterfit Certificates,
which I obtained. Being arrived at Exeter with their Order, I understood, that
one Blake an Irish Man had been lately there, tampering with some of the Custom
Officers, to get the Form of their usual Seal, and the Names of the said
Officers; upon which I immediately wrote to my Correspondent in Ireland, who
upon my Information found out the said Blake at Galloway, and discovered that
he was concerned in all, or most of the said five Vessels, and that he had
gotten counterfit Certificates, Importing as if the said Wool had been really
landed in England, when it was not, and by that Means was designing to get up
or discharge the said Bonds, but I prevented the doing thereof by examining the
Matter, and finding that some of those Vessels unloaded their Wool at Flushen
in Zeland, some at Amsterdam, and one at St. Ma^^os in France; of the Truth of
which I procured Oaths and Attestations, some of which are now in my Custody,
whereby those falce Certificates were detected, and the discharge of those
Bonds prevented.

Afterward returning to London, and dispatching into Kent, according to His
Majesty's Command, the Party of Horse being then gone before to Canterbury,
for my Assistance in Rumney-Marsh, we had Notice of a parcel of Wool, secured
in a House called Brokman*s Barn, which securing and the Person in whose
Custody it was, a great Discovery by him (of other Exporters) was made and
prosecuted, as more fully may appear hereafter.

Note, That William Facon before nentioned, who had been before the House of
Commons, Anno Dom. 1668, was brought up to the King and Council, in Anno Dom.
1669, and before he could have his Trial, was privately Compounded with by his
Accusers the second time, though the King had expressly ordered his Trial.

In September 1669, the Late King going to meet His Sister the Princes Henereta
Maria, at Dover, (during His abode there) going out one day to Sea, and
observing a Vessel belonging to Captain John St^ell, Sergeant to the Admiralty,
to out Sail any of His own Pleasure Boats: Such was the Zeal His Majesty had
against the Exportation of Wool, and his Care to prevent it, that He was
pleased to hire Her on purpose for that Service, Commanding the Assistance of
my Advice to the Captain, in Crusing about the Coast of Kent, to prevent the
said Exportation, which was so succesful, with some other Vessels for some
time, that together with the Discovery before mentioned, both as to Ireland and
Kent, a great stop was then put to the said Exportation; which is confirmed in
a Letter, afterward wrote from Lile, the 5th. of March 1671, viz.

Sir.
I Received Yours of the 17th. and 27th. of February, under covert, etc. about
the Wool Affair; I have much ^eason to believe, unless some are made Examples,
there will be continual Abuse; the Comodity both English and Irish, Raw and
Combed, abound so much in these Countries, that for that which would yield, not
long since 8 Stivers and a half per. Pound, will yield now but 6 and a half;
yet they would be contert to give 15 rather than want it, for they cannot make
abundance of Fabrik, viz Woollen Manufacture, without English or Irish Wool.

There is a City not 5 Leagues from this, called Tourney, a Place renownd, for
the making of all sorts of Stockings of Wool; it is not above 20 Years since,
that they betook themselves, to make the Worsted Hose; A Trade, whicb in my
Minority, was considerable from London, into these Countries, and now you may
have a Parcel of English Worsted Hose 20 Years by you, etc.

It Is not above three Year^ agon, that there was ascarcity of Combed Wool, in
this Quarter of the Country, and several of those Stocking Merchants, came
hither to buy some; I told them, that such severity was used in England, that
People Were mad if they Adventure.

The next Session of Parliament 1670, the House of Commons being under the
Consideration of raising of Money for His Majesty; it was propounded, that
Wool might be Transported from Ireland, paying 2 d. or 3 d. Per. pound Custom,
and 3 reasons, was offered, the answer to which; I shall now wave tell I come
the to proceeding in Parliament in a distinct discourse.

The Parliament then adjourning in the year 1671, I settled a Correspondancy in
Irland and Flanders, in order to know, whether the quantities of Wool exported
from one was carried to the other, and directed Captain Steel, the Owner and
Master of the Vessel beforementioned, to stear his course accordingly, but
after this Corespondancy was settled I was taken ill of a Feavor in June 1671
which held me 4 months, and a little time after the said Vessel was called in,
and so the Exporters for some time had liberty to carry out their Wool without
control.

In August 1671 one Edward Nichols, being committed to Newgate dureing my
sickness for Transporting Wool, and no per on being willing to prosecute him,
was like to be discharged upon which I as soon as I was recovered did
Immediately address my self to his Majesty in Council, for the further
continuance of the said Nichols in Prison, till he should be discharged by Law,
and an Order was forthwith granted accordingly. But there arose a Questian
before the King and Council, in what Court he should be ^rve^, whether by the
Admiralty; or by common Law, (the Vessel b^ing taken with the Wool in the
River of Thames near Graves-end) and it was referred to all the Judges to meet
and consider the matter, and afterward to Report their Opinion to the King,
upon which Report, it was debated before the King in the presence of the said
Judges, and the then Judge ^f the Admiralty, whither the said Nichols should be
tried by Common Law or not, and a^^er a long consultation in the Council, it
was Ordered as follows, (viz.)

White Hall the 13th. of December 1671:
It is this day Ordered by his Majesty in Council, that the Recorder of the
City of London do, and is hereby required, by the lest ways he can, speedily
to find out in what County that part of the River of Thames lies, wherein the
said Edward Nichols was apprehended, for Transporting of Wool contrary to Lay,
and that he Report the some to the Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Kings Bench; to the end his Lordship may give order for removal of the said
Prisoner, to the Goal of the said County, where it shall appear he was taken,
in order to his Trial at the next Assizes, to be holden for that County.

But the burden and care of observing this Order, lay chiefly on me: Though the
Vessel was in truth taken with the Wool on board on the Essex shore, and for
that reason the Prisoner removed to Chelmsford Goal, and thence brought to
Trial at Chelmsford Assizes, yet upon examining the Witnesses on the Trial it
did appear, that the Prisoner was not secured when the Vessel was Seized, though
then on Board, but got away out of the Vessel, and two days after were taken
on Shore at Graves-end, upon which the Trial was Ordered to be at the then next
Maidstone Assizes, held for the County of Kent, which was the 12th. of Marcb
1671, Whereupon my prosecution, the said Nichols was tried and Convicted of
Felony, as afterward will more fully appear: About which time I did also
discover the owner of the Wool for which Nichols was Convict, and caused him
to be taken into Custody, and unto Trial also; but notwithstanding, his money
purchased such Intrest, that he did Compound and was discharged, without my
knowledge, and against my will: About which time, and before the Trial of the
said Nichols, I petitioned his late Majesty for some supply to carry on the
Affayre; which being refered to the then Lord Chief Barron, his Lordship
Reported as follows, (viz.)

May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty.
In Obedience to your Majesty's second Order of Refferance bearing, date the
20th. of December last, hereunto annexed; I have considered of the Matter
thereby to me Refered, and have discoursed with the Petitioner about his
Charges and Expense, in prosecuting the Transporters of Wool; the which he
has reduced to some certainty, and put it into writing, and has also made
Affidavit of the Truth thereof; the which is likewise hereunto annexed, whereby
it appears that during these 4 Years last past, wherein he has brought into
your Majesty's Exchequer about 800 l. more than in former Years had been
received, he has Expended near as much, but there be many more Informations
still depending, if proved may bring in a grater Sum; But without some supply
at present from your Majesty he will not be able to proceed with them; if
therefore your Majesty be pleased to give your Petitioner 300 l. it will
encourage and Enable him to prosecute the Informations depending. And if he
shall Convict the Offenders, he will be capable of your Majesty's further Grace
and Favor, all which I most humbly submit unto your Majesty's Judgment.

January 3 d. 1671. Ed. Turnor.

In which Report it does appear that I had then expended 800 l. and ordered 300
l. in part until other Prosecutions brought in more Money, in a further
pursuance of the said Offenders, I expended about 150 l. more, and the very
Fees, Attendances, and Gratuitys to recieve the 300 l. cost me 50 l. so that I
had then but 100 l. toward my 800 l. And though I had prosecuted several
Offenders (viz.) Indicted some at the Assizes and exhibited diverse Informations
in the Exchequer against others, yet notwithstanding, partly by Compositions of
the Officers, and partly by an Act of Parliament for a general pardon, I was
then frustrated of my design, and prevented recieving the Balance of my
Accounts, besides which being then complained against by some, for using a
Millitary Power, (viz) a party of Horse in that Affayre, though only for the
preservation of my own and others Lives, in execution of the known Laws; I was
forced to decline that service at that time in Kent, the effect of all which
was, that great quantities of Wool was then exported, as well from Ireland as
from Kent, which is confirmed by the following Leter, part of which I have
before incerted to prove the effect of my first attempt, the remainder follows,
(viz.)

Both English and Irish Wool, Raw and Kembed abounds much in these Countries,
and for the Kembed Wool, most of which comes from Dover and Canterbury
Transporters: Callis, Deep, St. Vallerys, Abliveile, Amens, Dunkirk, Ostend,
Bridgees, Zealand, Rotterdam, and Ghent, all over these Provinces, every place
is choked with it; so that you may easily see how insensibly th^s^ Dover and
Canterbury Transporters, draw the Kingdoms Hearts Blood from them; I could ad
much more of the great benefit our Neighbors receive by it, which proves to an
absolute Ruin; But I guess you can as easily comprehend my Meaning, as if I
had further enlarged.

In a word France rejects our Fabrics at this day, presuming that they shall
never want our Wool to make their own fantastic Fabrics, which are so
variable, as puts a great stop to the Current de^nd, that used to be of our
more solid Fabrics, for they will pretend to give the Mode to all the World;
and so by this means, in time, all the World will be disgusted with our
Fabrics, when by Consequence, they shall receive the Mode from the French;
consider of this I pray, that so there may be some speedy remedy.

Which Leter is confirmed by two other in these words, (viz.)

We have here a miserable Tarriff lalely come forth, that Taxes Serges at 25,
Cloth at 40, Cottens, etc. at 10 Florens per. 100 weight, the misery is the
great quantity of Wool that is stolen from England to France. So repeating the
substance of the former Letter only differing expressions, and more large,
concluding in the last thus, (viz.)

The French are now got into a way of making a low price sort of Cloth, called
Searg de Berry, which comes as che^p as Northern Cloth, its about 5 quarters
broad; they have so much, in wbich they have Clothed a great number of their
Soldiers, and all made of English and Irish Wool. After the Assizes were
over, I went again into Kent, and abode some time there, looking after the
Exporters, on the Sea Coasts I found 2 Vessels near Hy^he appointed, and lying
ready to carry away Wool, one of which I had been informed had ^one little
elce for a long time, of which William ^ayly before mentioned was Master, the
other Vessel was new built by another person usually employed in that design,
but nothing was attempted whilst I was in the Country: But having occasion to
come to London, I gave notice of the Design to two several Officers, by me
appointed to be vig^lent, who Seized 12 Packs of the Wool designed to be
Transported in one of the said Vessels, being brought down to the Sea side,
ready to be shipped off, and secured in the House of one Nicholas Davis, and
afterward part of it was rescued by the Inhabitants, who rose in the night
with Weapons, to the number of 20 Persons, and wounding the Officers, carried
away 8 of the said 12 Packs; but afterward the said Nicholas Davis was taken
and secured, in order to his Trial.

Thereupon the said Nicholas Davis, together with Thomas Knight and Thomas
Stoner, all three Inhabitants of Rumney-Marsh, were by me prosecuted at
Maidstone Summer Assizes 1671 for Transporting Wool, where they were also
Tried and Convicted thereof; and the same Assizes, together with the said
Edward Nichols, formerly convicted, were burnt in the Hand, as may appear upon
Record.

These are to Certify, that at the General Goal delivery holden at Maidstone,
in the County of Kent, the 12th. of March in the 24th, Year of His now
Majesty's Reign 1671 Edward Nichols Mariner was convicted of Felony for
Transporting of Wool; And that on the first Day of August in the 24tb. Year
aforesaid, Thomas Night, Nicholas Davis, and Thomas Stoner, were convicted of
Felony for the like Offense.

These are further to Certify, that Wm. Carter Gent. did on His Majesty's
behalf attend the respective Trials of the said Nichols, Night, Davis, and
Stoner, for the respective Felonies aforesaid, and did then manage the
respective Evidences against them, and thereupon cause them to be prosecuted
and convicted for the said Felonies as aforesaid; given under my Hand, the
22th. of April 1676, and in the 28th. Year of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, etc.

Tho. Lee Clark of the Assizes.

These Proceedings being carried on in the Intervale of Parliaments, at the
next Session I procured and solicited a Bill to pass, so far as to be read
twice, refered and engrossed in the House of Commons, being the Substance of
that Bill before mentioned, brought in by the Lord Keeper Bridgman, but by the
Means of one Mr. Francis Monk, it was obstructed, on purpose to usher in
another Bill of his projecting, pretendedly to obstruct, but intendedly to
encourage the Exporting Wool, as by a Draught of the said Bill it self is
ready to be made appear.

In the Year 167^, the said Mr. Monk Solicites another Bill in the House of
Commons; pretending thereby to make the Laws more practicable; but intending to
Repeal the strength of the Act in the 14th. Year of his late Majesty's Reign,
which Bill being Committed, and almost past the Committee (I being so much
discouraged for want of Money, that I had little Interest in the Clarks)
nevertheless watching his Motion, did get a worthy Member to move the
Committee, to appoint some Merchants and Factors to attend them, and to the
end, for that time adjorned, by which means I prevented his design that Day:
And in the mean time printing some Reasons against the Exportation of Wool,
for the Information of the Committee* before their next Meeting; whereupon his
Bill was rejected and laid aside.

After which time little was to be done in Parliament, for 3 or 4 Years, by
reason of other things then Transacted.

But about he Year 1682, Mr. Monk Petitioned the late King in Council, to have
a Commission Empowring diverse Persons to put the Laws in Execution against the
Exportation of Wool, some of which Persons came to my House in the Country,
upon the Pretense that some Gentlemen at White*Hall, being willing to undertake
the business, and hearing that I had spent some time in that Affair, desired
my Assistance, and to give them a Meeting, which accordingly I did, and had
several Meetings with the Gentlemen, till I was informed by some of them that
Mr. Monk was concerned: Upon which notice I told the Gentlemen, that the
Project laid by Mr. Monk would not do, and advised them to s^are their Money,
and so parted: But notwithstanding my Caution, they did proceed upon the said
Petition before mentioned, until their whole Design was laid aside, as you
will find by the following Refferences, and Reports thereon, (viz.)

By an Order of Council dated the 2^ st. March 1682. and the Reports from the
Lords Committee of Trade, etc. made to his late Majesty upon the Petition of
Francis Monk and others, praying a Commission to put in Execution the Laws
Prohibiting the Transportation of Wool, etc. Informing his said Majesty that
there were very great abuses in unlawful Exportations of that kind, which were
of pernicious consequence, and that the fitness of the Commissioners to be
employed in that Affayre, and the cautions to be used therein, were refered to
the late Lords of the Treasury to consider of, for the better putting of the
Laws in Execution.

The matter of the said Order of Council, with other Papers and Proposals, made
by the Petitioners, were referred by their Lordships, to the Commissioners of
his said Majesty's Customs; who by their Report dated the 8th. of June 1683 do
approve that some Persons be appointed for that Service, under such Authority
as should seem meet: And that the Persons to be entrusted ought to be of known
Honesty.

Also the whole Matter afforesaid was referred to Mr. Attorney General, who
made his Report concurring with the Commissioners of the Customs; and he
further adds, that Security should be given, that upon Seizures no Compositions
should be made without License.

After which, the whole matter and Reports being referred to the Company of
Merchant Adventurers of England; they Reported that all Persons, that shall
faithfully endeavor to hinder the Exportation of Wool, etc. as aforesaid
(without connivance to the Offenders, or sinister regard to themselves) ought
to be encouraged; for as much as the Exportation is become a National Mischief,
and threatens the utter Ruin of the Woollen Trade, if not timely prevented;
that several Necessitous ^ersons, having been formerly Commissionated, Studying
their own Profit, instead of hindering the said Exportation, have rather
Assisted and Promoted, than Prevented the same.

Which Reports being Read by their Lordships, and the Answer of Mr. Monk, were
sent the 10th. of March 1683 to the said Company for their further
Consideration; who in April 1684 sent for ^e to attend them about the whole
matter; who after several meetings with a Con^^it^ee of the said Merchants
Adventurers, Levant and East-Land Companys, I attended the Sea Coast with 2
Men, one on Board Captain Brown, and another on the Shore, by which great
quantitys of Wool were Seized and Condemned, and much more prevented from being
Exported that Summer, than was Seized or Condemned.

The said Monck and others Exhibiting again further Proposals for the carrying
on that Service, on the 4th. of April 1684, the same were transmitted to the
Commissioners of the Customs, who the 25th. of the same Month, Reported that
they did look upon those men not fit to be Employed in so great a Trust,
notwithstanding they produced the Certificates of several Clothiers, etc.
Purporting their desire that the said persons might be employed in that
Service, which Clothiers etc. So Certifying they found to be generally mean
Persons, not to be credited in a thing of that Nature and Consequence: and
requiring the said undertakers to produce Certificats from known Merchants,
Blackwell-Hall Factors etc. they declined to do the same.

The said Company of Merchants-Adventurers of England, made their Report on the
Papers sent the Commissioners the 10th. of March 1683 wholly against the
undertakers, for that they designed their own private profit, more than the
effectual carrying on the intended Work; and the said Company were well assured
that if the undertakers could have no gain at all, Honestly, they would of
necessity miss the main design of their undertaking.

Upon all these Transactions there was a Petition drawn up by me, and exhibited
to the said Lords of the Treasury by several Clothiers and Factors of the
Woollen Manufacture within the Countys of Worcester, Gloucester, Somerset and
Wilts; and taking notice that the undertakers were designing to obtein such a
Commission as aforesaid, upon supposition that they were thereunto encouraged
by many Thousands of the Woollen Manufacturers, the Petitioners disown any such
Power, and do therein Pray that the proposals, being matter of weight, may be
recommended to the Hamburgh, Turkey and other Companys, whom the Petitioners
were assured would propose such methods for effecting the said Prohibitions, as
may be most effectual and succesful.

Upon which Petition the said late Lords of the Treasury caused Letters to be
written to the said Companys, taking notice in the said Letters what
proceedings had been made therein, and also sending Coppys thereof; did in the
said Letters desire the said Companyes or some of their members to meet
together to peruse the said Papers, and consider of such Rules and Methods as
they should judge proper and sufficient for the effectual restraint of the
Exportation of the said Commodity; and in the said Letters desired the said
Companys to send their Resolution thereon in writing; as also whether they or
any of their Members would be willing to engage in the Care of seeing the Laws
for Prohibting the Exportation of Wool observed.

A Committee of each company met, and the Letters and Papers being Read (and
my Proposals for a Method) all concluded it necessary to find out some fund
proportional ^o the Charge when adjusted; at which time by one of the Committee
it was declared the Clothiers were ready for their part to contribute 1600 P.
Per. Annum. And it was then propounded that the same should be farther
communicated to other Merchants trading for France, Spain, Portugal, etc. for
to procure likewise their assistance, And it was also agreed by the said
Committees at their next meeting to come prepared with resolutions how much
each Company would raise.

At which meeting the necessary Charge was brought in to amount to about
4000P. Per. Annum; after which time the Factors of Blackwell-Hall, in behalf of
the Clothiers entered into a Voluntary Subscription of 2 d. Per. Cloth, 1 d.
Per. Serge, and so Pro Rato, to raise their 1600P. beforementioned, for 3 Years.

The Merchant Adventurers of England, agreeing to contribute 300 p. Per. Annum
for the like time, and other Companys, by their Deputys agreeing likewise to
contribute in proportion to their Trade in the Woollen Manufacture.

These Subscriptions being entered into, the Difficulty lay how to Collect it;
the Parliament then suddenly meeting, a Bill was drawn up by me, corrected by
Council, and approved of by the then Lord Treasurer, which Bill, had not the
Parliament been Prorouged, and I straightened for want of Money, would probably
have passed into a Law, there being nothing on my part wanting in Solicitation.

That failing I Petitioned his Majesty for two Sloops to be employed for the
preventing Exportation of Wool; and though there was some Opposition to it, yet
his Majesty was Graciously pleased to give Order to Set out the said Sloops
in that service, and the Care for their dyrection being committed to me, I did
accordingly undertake it: and whilst the Vessels were preparing at Dover I sent
over a Man to Calice to make some discovery, which he effectually did and
as soon as one of the Vessels were ready, I went to Sea in her, and sent for my
Man to come from Calice, fearing he might be discovered, and had he not
hastened at the receipt of my Letter, in all probability he might have been
Killed; for another Person was set upon in Calice as supposing him to be my
Man, and was like to have been Murdered, had not his Landlord rectified the
French-Mens mistake: Meeting my Man at Sea in the Packet-boat, we took him on
Board, and by his discovery we took several French Shallops before we came into
Dover, and though great Opposition was made in the Exchequer by many Claymes and
other vexatious motions there, to discourage me; yet I prosecuted, and
condemned three in Michalmas Term 1685, and caused more to be Seized at that
time, which afterward were prosecuted to Condemnation; and in the middle of
December I took a Jorney into the North, leaving my Man at Dover, to observe my
dyrections whilst absent. The Exporters contriving how to hinder my design, had
got a Quo minus out of the Exchequer against him for 500 l. in the name of John
Noble, a Person that he never saw or heard of before and kept it in their hands
above a Month, that they might surely fix him in Prison, because the Vessels
were discovered by him (I having sent him privately to Calice for that purpose)
and also the Information Exhibited in his name, though the Forfiture of foreign
Vessels are wholly the Kings. And before they executed their Quo minus, some of
them made Affidavit and sent it up to London, and moved the Court of Exchequer
the first day of the next Term (viz) 23th. of January 1685 for an attachment
against him, under pretense of a Contempt of an Order of Court, for not
delivering of a Vessel Seized and not Condemned; and an Attachment was awarded
against him, unless he showed Cause to the contrary in five or six days; and
that he might not be capable of showing Cause, the said Exporters, as soon as
they heard of an order of Court, Arrested him and carried him a Prisoner to
Dover-Castle, upon the 500 l. Action; but Mr. Breton the Collector of Dover,
believing it to be a sham Action, designed to Bail him, till William Eaton
(one of the contrivers) sent him a Letter to dissuade him, assuring him it
would be proved a Real Debt; so he was forced to ly in Prison.

About this time coming home I was informed of the Order of the Court of
Exchequer, and the next day, I did appear my self in the said Court, and owned
the proceedings of my Man, as done by my Order, and therefore would be liable
to the Judgment of the Court for what he had done, and sent for him up to
answer, not knowing him then to be a Prisoner in Dover-Castle: but being
informed of that, I moved the Court upon an Affidavit, and got a friend with
me, and we become Bail in Court, and removed him by Hebeas Corpus: so all that
business fell to the ground; till afterward having got him a Prisoner at
Bulloine In France, they proceeded against him on a feigned Action in the Crown
Office, and would have brought it to Trial at Maidstone Assizes, but I stopped
it at Mr. Attorny-Generals.

After which time, upon the encouragement of the Contribution before mentioned,
there were fitted out two of the best of those French Vessels which I had got
condemned; and together with the assistance of those two Sloops his Majesty
(upon my petition) had Set out, there has been above 20 Vessels seized and
condemned, and diverse parcels of Wool, besides great quantites cast over board
by the Exporters, that they and their Vessels might make their escape.

But in the midst of these Transactions the late Lord Treasurer hearing little
from the Merchants, after his Majesty had set out the two Sloops before
mentioned, his Lordship by his Letter dated the 15th. of March 1686/5, to the
Company of Merchant Adventurers of England, pressed the said Company, to consider
what his Majesty had done, in setting out two Sloops as an encouragement for
them to proceed; and of what evil Consequence Delays were in that concern. To
which the said Company, by their Letters of the 25th. of the same Month,
informed his Lordship what progress they had made in that matter; and that for
their share they had resolved to contribute 300 l. Per Annum for 3 Years; as
the Factors had for their Clothiers, by their Subscriptions of 2 d. Per. Cloth
(and for the better carring on the said Work, had ordered two Sloops that had
been taken and condemned by me, to be fitted out for that Service) though other
Merchants had not come to any Resolution in that matter, how much they would
contribute. Upon the Receipt of this Letter his Lordship directed Letters dated
the 30th, of the same month to the other Companys, to inform them what progress
the said Company of Merchants Adventurers had made, etc. Whereupon the said
Companys (or most of them) gave answer to his Lordship of their readiness to
assist proportionable to their Trade, for so good a Work; Copies of which
Letters were sent to the Merchants Adventurers, by Mr. Guy, the 10th. of April
following (viz.) 1686.

And having, as before mentioned, caused not only so many Vessels and great
quantities of Wool to be condemned at my own Charge, though in the Officers
names, and intending to bring up the Wool to London to be sold to Clothiers,
(it being generally sold before by the Officers to the Exporters) some of the
the Officers refused to agree thereto, because it would yield more money at
Dover: upon which in May 1686, I wrote to then Lord Treasurer the matter of
Fact, and his Lordship by Mr. Guy ordered the Commissioners of the Customs to
direct their Officers to permit me to take the Wool as appraised (I paying the
Charge) and bring it up to London, to be sold to the Clothiers. In pursuance
thereof, after I had condemned the Wool at my own charge, and paid the King's
moiety into the Exchequer, and remitted money to Dover, and paid the Officers
moiety, with all their charge there, I ordered it to be brought up: And having
settled things at Dover, as I thought well, and exhibited several Informations
in the Exchequer on the Forfietures of 3 s. per. Pound, and prepared to
Prosecute others on the Statute of the 14th. of Charles the second. By this
means so great a stop was put to the said Exportation by these Prosecutions,
that Wool did rise in France above 30. per. Cent. in 6 months time, (viz.)
between January 1685, and July 1686: After which I took a Jorney into the North
on the Borders of Scotland, in order to prevent the mischiefs in those parts;
but whilst there, was informed, that some of the Officers of the Customs in
consederacy with the Exporters, did endeavor to obstruct my Proceedings, which
they had been a long time contriving.

And whilst I was in the North, was informed that the Wool I had condemned for
the Officers in their own Names, and paid all the Charges, and running the risk
of bringing it up to London, as before mentioned, was by one of the Officers
sold by some under hand means, and he received part of the money for it, which
I had fully paid him for before, and so went out of Town, which occasioned a
great Controversy betwixt my Friends here, (that had supplied me with money,
and to whom the Wool should have been delivered) and some others: This coming
to the Ears of the Exporters at Canterbury and Dover in few hours, for their
encouragement (as well as it came to me in the North for my discouragement)
their Plot took effect, and so from that time, (viz.) August and September
1686, the Exporters revived their old Trade, that in a little time twenty
thousand Packs were exported: The forementioned Officer was Commander of one of
the Sloops that I had prevayled by Petition to his Majesty to fit out, and
would have been put out of his place through his folly long since, and the
Sloop laid aside; had not I through the importunity of his Friends born with
him, and kept him in; by which means the advantage he has received thereby,
cannot be less than 600l. in 2 Year and halfs time; but having for some time
left him to his own conduct, he is through his Folly and Knavery dismissed from
his employ.

At my return from the North, the first thing to be done was to get my man out
of Prison, but in little or no Capacity to hinder the said Exportation from
Kent, the 2 Vessels before mentioned that were put out, being laid up, having
neither Power to Seize Wool, nor Collect money to prosecute the Offenders.

After which time I Petitioned the then Lord Treasurer to Empower the said
Companies, Factors and Clothiers, etc. that had entered into a voluntary
Contribution, that they might be in a condition to carry on so good a Work, the
Petition being referred to the Commissioners of the Customs nothing was done;
this attempt failing I Petitioned his Majesty in Council, some time after to
the same effect, annexing a Copy of the Commission to Christ's Hospital before
mentioned, which being referred to the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's
Treasury about F^bruary 1686, their Lordships referred the whole to the
Commissioners, as before the late Lord Treasurer had done, and there it re^^ed.

Nevertheless, though I could not do what I would, yet I neglected no opportunity
I was capable of; for hearing that there was a design privately to procure a
License to Export 6000 Baggs of Wool from Ireland; which might contain 20000
Packs: the Names of the Persons being given to me, I went immediately to Mr.
Attorney Generals, Treasury, Secretary of State and Signer Offices, and entered
Caveats at each Office; and a Friend of mine wrote a ^etter to a Worthy
Merchant and Gentleman in the Country, who did immediately, with some other
Gentlemen write to a great Minister of State; who was pleased to answer as
follows, (viz.)

Gentlemen,
Yours of the fourth Instant was conveyed to me last night, while I attended
his Majesty at Council, which I immediately communicated: Both His Majesty and
we that had the honor to attend him were all surprised, that the Malicious
Falce Reports that you seem to Insinuate, had obtained credit in your
Neighborhood, of His Majesty's Intentions, to give License for the
Transportation of Irish Wool to parts beyond the Seas: It has been so far
from His Majesty's Intentions, that He has long ago given strict Orders, both
to His Admiralty, and in His several Ports to use their utmost endeavors for
the strict Prosecution of all Offenders in that kind, and has further given
directions to the Officers of the Customs, to give their utmost assistance in
the Affair: But for your satisfaction the King Commanded me to let you know His
Royal Pleasure the^ein, and that He expects You to take Care that His Royal
Intentions may be made Public.

I have also in Command that the Justices of Assizes, do take especial Care to
satisfy the Country in this particular; so Gentlemen having no more at present
to trouble you, I crave leave to Subscribe my self, etc.

London 14th. Feb. 1686.
After which time some of the Officers in further pursuance of their design, to
baffle me in my proceedings for future, upon the alteration of some persons in
Office so represented me; that I was rendered thereby wholly incapable of any
thing, and by some greatly reflected on, 't^ll I had prevailed by the means of
^^^e eminent Merchants, to have a hearing before the Lords Commissioners of His
Majesty's Treasury: At which hearing it was judged reasonable, I should be
re-imburst m^ Charge in that Service, and ordered to bring my Accounts, and
Certificates from Sr. ^ob. Howard, what money was brought into the Exchequer by
my Prosecutions; which being done, and their Lordships referring the whole
matter to the Commissioners of Customs, in May 1687, upon receipt of which,
the Commissioners were pleased to direct Letters to the Officers, (in whose
Names I had prosecuted and paid in the money, as before mentioned) to know
^hither they did own what I had done, and some o^ them, (even those very men,
that I had directed how to Seize, and undertook to runn the risk, as before
mentioned, for their Advantage) were not only so base as to deny what I had
done for them, but also guilty of Forgery; so at that time I was rendered by
some very Obnoxious, and at the same time perplexed in the Court of Exchequer
by the Exporters; and was forc^d to pay great Sums in my own defense, and
particularly for one Witness being his Bail it cost me near 50l.;
notwithstanding all which, I at last recovered my self in my Reputation, and
gave Answer to those Officers Letters, and sent it to the Commissioners as
follows. (viz.)

Whereas it has been objected that I pretend the Prosecution of Wool and
Vessels, when is has been done by the Officers, and ^etters are produced,
which would seem to make good the pretense; to instance one for all, (viz.)
Captain Knight's to the Commissioners.

May it please Your Honors,
The Wool I have taken and seized was by my own Endeavors and Industry,
Condemned by a due Course of Law, and the King's Moiety paid with my own Money:
No^ I humbly pray your Honors that if his Majesty please to grant the Bounty,
I may receive it for my Encouragement,

Your Honors most Obedient and Humble Servant Peter Knight.
Dover the 9th. of June 1637.
In answer thereunto, I shall annex the Assidavit of two of his own men, that
prove, that Captain Knigbt was not at Dover, at the time of the date of the
pretended Letter; but at Sea six Days before and four after, and by an
Affidavit of his Sonns, that the matter in the Letter is False, by which others
man be judged; besides the matter of John Knight's Affidavit, I did, in a late
parcel of Wool, Seized by the said Captain Knight, Condemn and pay the Charge,
and the King's full Moiet, as it was appraised; yet when I Sold it, I was
forced to abate 3l. per. Pack of the Appraisement, and stood to the loss,
singly, that I might not hinder the bringing up the Wool, though it yielded more
Money at Dover than here, being done before the Proclamation came forth: The
Truth of this Answer will appear in the following Affidavits, (viz.)

Robert Kedman and William Airs makes Oath, that these Deponents being
employed under Captain Peter Knight, Commander of a Sloop to prevent the
Exportation of Wool, and having been at Sea with the said Captain Knight as
Mariners, in His Majesty's Service about tenn Days, came not on Shore from Sea,
'till Sunday last: by which reason they could not Appear according to the
contents of a Su^p^n^ issued out of this Honorable Court, requiring them to be
at Westminster on Monday l^st at one of the Clock, to give their Testimony for
the King against Henry Culmer. And they could not possibly come to London
before Teusday morning l^st, and are come on purpose to give their evidence at
the said Trial, which they apprehend to be on Thursday, if they could not come
time enough on Monday, and they are able to prove, that the said Henry Culmer
has Exported diverse quantities of Wool, having taken him in the Fact of
Exporting the same.

Jur. Decimo sept. Die Aprilis 1687. Coram me, E. Atkins.
Robert Kedman. W. A. the mark of William Aires.

John Knight makes Oath that being employed as Mate under his Father Peter
Knight in the Service of the Customs, for about sixteen Years past, he has
observed that after the Seizures of Wool by the Custom House Officers, the
Owners of the Wool, or some Agent for them generally bought the Wool of the
Officers, which afterward was Commonly exported, and this he has the greater
reason to believe, for that several times, when this Deponent has been present
at the Seizing of Wool, after the same has been condemned, he has taken the
very same parcels again at Sea, as it has been Exporting the second time.

And that several Officers, after they have Seized Wool, have delivered it to
the Owners, without any Proceedings therein.

And this Deponent further says, that when his Father formerly made Seizures
of Wool, he agreed with the Superior Officers of the Customs, to give them
part of the benefit of his Seizures, besides the full Charge of the Prosecution
to Condemnation; by which the said Officers generally had an equal Profit of
the said Seizures, with the said Peter Knight; but since Mr. Carter has looked
after the Exporters, the said Carter has paid the said Peter Knight all his
Charges, in Taking, Appraising and Condemning the Vessels and Wool, and the
full Moiety thereof clear of all Charges, and besides when the Wool Condemned
was Sold for more than the Appraisement, the overpluss was paid by the said
Carter to his Father Peter Knight.

Jur. Decimo Tertia die April Anno Dom. 1687. Ed. Atkins.
John Knight.

And as to the Charge in General of my discouraging Diligent Officers.

In Answer to which, as the Affidavit of John Knight before mentioned, do in
part prove the contrary: So I do Averr and shall make good, that in the
Seizures of Wool and Vessels, that I have undertook to Prosecute, I have bore
all the Charge and run the risk, in Case the Wool and Vessels were not
Condemned, and have Prosecuted in the Officers Name, who have had the full
benefit of the Moiety thereof, though I have been at the Seizing both of Wool
and Vessels my self.

And besides the Charges in Prosecuting and condemning the said Wool and
Vessels in the Exchequer, I have actually paid amongst the said Officers near
200l. for their Charges about Dover in their Seizing, Appraising, and other
Incidents, several of which Seizures had not I undertook, the Officers would
have let fall; by all which it does appear, whether I have discouraged
Officers, and gained my self; when I have within this four Years spent 1000l.
in Travailing, and in the said Prosecutions, besides Servants Wages and my own
time, and keeping of Horses, toward all which I have received between 2 and
300l.

After which time I Petitioned the Lords Commissionets of the Treasury, laying
before their Lordships my Case and Suffering in my Service, and what Damage His
Majesty and the Kingdom sustained thereby; and had prepared for Trial of a
Transporter in Michaelmass Term, being not able to proceed and having borrowed
diverse great Sums to carry on the Affayre so far; which being referred to the
Commissioners of the Customs, they ordered their Solicitor to disburst the
Money, upon which I proceeded, and as before cast the Exporter; some time after
I attended the Commissioners upon the former reference, who were pleased to
make Report as follows.

May it Please your Lordships
In obedience to your Lordships commands upon the annexed Petition, and other
Papers of Mr. Carters, delivered to us by your Lordships in May last We have
considered the said Petition and Papers; and do humbly Report to your Lordships
that we have observed the Petitioner to have been a very Zealous prosecutor of
the Transgressions, and transgressors mentioned in the Petition, and that upon
his motion the King was pleased about two years since, at his own charge to
set out two Vessels to prevent the Transportation of Wool, which are continued
in that Service to this day, that in his proceedings he has met with great
opposition and difficulty, and upon that consideration he has upon diverse
occasion obtained favorable Reports from this Board; as a Person fit to be
countenanced and encouraged in his proceedings: yet we never intended that his
charge was to be born by the King, supposing his recompense to be out of his
share of such penalties and Forfiturs, as he should himself Prosecute and
recover, or should be otherwise contributed to him, by the Merchants and
Clothiers, who he alleged to be willing to undergo the Charge, and by the
Account hereunto annexed we find that he has run himself into very great
Expense, and we are informed that not having met with the Encouragement he
Presumed upon from the Merchants and others, he has much lessened his own
private fortune thereby. Upon the whole Matter we are humbly of opinion that he
has with great Heartiness and Zeal, Prosecuted the Offenders and Vessels, that
have been Guilty in Transporting Wool, and that he has dealt therein with all
Honesty and Integrity, and we are humbly of Opinion that the said Account
hereunto annexed, is a true Account, he having offered to make Oath of the
Truth thereof, and we do Humbly recommend the same to your Lordships Favorable
consideration, but we cannot advise the disposing of his Majesty's part of the
Forfiture, otherwise than they are already disposed by Proclamation.

Custom-House February the 18th. 1687. N. B. J. W. D. N. W. C.


In which Report you may perceive my Actions and Integrity, and that I have not
received the Money I have expended, much less any thing for my Time, Hazard and
Labor, nor for my Servants, or keeping of Horses these four Years, besides
former Disburstments, part of which was before mentioned in the late Lord Chief
Baron's Report; more you may perceive by these following Lines, what I Wrote to
the Merchants and Clothiers, and Printed it, as an Advertisement to them, in
the Year 1672. (viz.)

A Brief Advertisement to the Merchants and Cloathiers, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
I Had an Intention, the beginning of the last Summer, (before a long and
chargeable Fit of Sickness befell me for near three Months,) to inform you in
what state that Affair about Exportation of Wool, then stood; in which the
Life and Death of your Trade, and the subsistence of many Thousands of
Families, that depend on that Manufacture, consists.

Give me leave, (by some of the many instances I could give,) to demonstrate,
that, my Labor, in this affair, has not been fruitless altogether.

I have now been four years engaged in this Service: and how I have been
forced, as well upon Travils, as Watching both by Sea and on shore, I presume
is well known to many of you.

And what expense I have been at, in that time, both for servants and horses,
and in my attendance at Court, and on the Parliament, gratuities to Seamen,
and parties of horse, and for the holding, and maintaining correspondencies in
Ireland, Flanders, etc. you cannot but in some measure be able to appehend.

And that it must be the greater, in that I have not spent six days, in twelve
Months, at my own habitation, with my Friends: either to abate expenses, or to
look after any private business of my own.

What damage I have sustained, by losing my Trade in pursuance of this affair,
is well known (at least) to some: for,

When first I undertook this Affair, I intended to spend only one Month, or
there about, in attending on the Parliament for a new Act, which held me near
six Months; and at the Adjurnment of the Parliament, I returned to my calling;
it being kept on foot for me, during the time of my attendance.

But those that knew my Trade at that time, know right well what opportunities
of advantage I le^t slip.

Therefore it must be a great mistake in some, that think I took up this
Affair, as though I had nothing else to do.

For I was importuned by several Merchants and Others, soon after the
Adjurnment of the Parliament, to address my self unto his Majesty in Council,
for a Party of Horse, to be in Rumny Marsh in Kent, where the greatest part of
the Wool is shipped from England; and some Frigates, for preventing the said
mischief; which through his Majesty's favor and encouragement, I did obtain.

Upon the promise of those Merchants, to re-imburse my charge, I proceeded.

And had those Merchants and Others, performed their promise, as some few did,
I had done much more than I have, (though I have left nothing undone, that I
was capable to perform, or do, considering how little assistance I had from
others) and indeed, my endeavors in this business, have had so good success,
as to prevent many Thousand Packs of Wool from exportation, that the effect
evidenced it self (at that time obvious to many Merchants, from their
correspondents beyond Sea,) in the rise of Wool there and the fall here.

But should it now hereafter, for want of incouragment and attendane miscarry,
how much it will wound Englands trade to the heart, I need not tell you, for,
such is the gain and incouragemend, for the transporting of this commodity,
that if any employed, or entrusted in this affair, will be bribed, they need
not make complaint for want of Money, I do assure you: and if I for my
integrity must fall, (and be forced to quit these service,) after all this four
years labor and travail, It will be no encouragement to any other Peasen, to
engage a-fresh therein.

Give me leave to add, that it was no small grief to me, during my sickness,
to here of the many hundred packs of Wool that were exported, (both from
England and Ireland,) more than had been at other times, which you will easily
see in the ensuing Petition and Letter; and my trouble was so much the more for
as much as the King had given Order, a little before, that a Vessel purposely
hired, because of Her swiftness, should attend that affair, and though I had
made provision (by correspondante) for intellegence to prevent that mischief,
yet I had not Money to pay Servants, nor to encourage my corispondents, nor
that I could find any willing or able to pursue the said business, either
because of the hazard or pains, or expensiveness thereof. The effect of which
about Michalmus last, occasioned this following Petition.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty The Humble Petition of several Merchants.
Shows,
THat although many severe Laws, have been made against the Transportation of
Wool; neverthelese, many evil-disposed Persons, do frequently Ship-off great
quantities thereof to the great decay of the Cloathing-Trade of this Kingdom,
and to the undoing of many thou, sant Families, who lived comfortably
thereupon: and being through an ill custom, sold inforraign parts, as cheap as
in many many places of this Kingdom; by means whereof, the Woollen Manufacture
of this Nation, finds but small vend abroad, and daily decreaseth in price; so
that neither the Clothier, nor Merchant, have any encouragement, in making, or
transporting the same; together with such great duties imposed by the French
King, and Others; as in effect amounts to an absolute prohibition, (and that no
purpose to encourage the Manufacture of their own Country.) Which if by some
effectual means, be not speedily prevented, must in a short time, wholly destroy
the great Manufacture, and Staple trade of this your Majesty's Kingdom and
conseqvently to the decreasing of your Majesty's Revenues, of the Custom; and
that more particularly of late days, a greater quantity of Wool, has been
transported then formerly, by reason, as is doubted, of the connivance of some
Officers, and easily compounding with the transporters when discovered, which
gives great encouragement to those Persons, to continue in this mosi
destructive course

Your Petitioners most humbly pray, that your Majesty, would be pleased to
issue out your Royal Proclamation, commanding all Officers and Others, to put
the Laws in execution, that so all may take notice thereof: there being many
poor people employed in shipping off the Wool, who pretend ignorance, and know
not the Penalty of the Law: and that no compounding be made with any, but the
Laws may be severly put in execution, against all Persons that may be found
guilty.
And though I have before upon this occasion incerted the substance of a Letter
Dated, Flanders March the 5th. 1671. yet I cannot wave a repitition of this
part of it.

Sir
I received yours of the 17/27 February, under Covert from etc. about the
Wooll-affair. I have much reason to believe, unless some are made Examples,
there will be continual abuse; the Commodity, both English and Irish, Raw and
Combed, abound so much in these Countries, as at present it is worth nothing.
etc.

Now Sirs, how both these do answer, to what was said before, that unless this
Business be continually attended, by some Person, that will be faithful; there
will be an inevitable ruin of the Clothing Trade, may be easily perceived.

Give me leave further to inform you, what great Sense his Majesty himself has
also of this Affair; who has been pleased to evidence it, both by his Care and
Charge, in not only commanding His Troops, but several Frygots to attend upon
every Occasion, beside his Hireing a Vessel; he also has spent many days in
Council about it; and in declaring his resolution, strictly to execute all the
Laws against the Transportation of Wool, and to further all rational
Proposals, that can be f^rther made; and did order (upon reading the
forementioned Petion of the Merchants) his Royal Proclamation, to be issued
out about this Matter.

Now for a conclusion, Gentlemen: If this service be acceptable, and that it be
carried on, you cannot imagine, it can be done without supplies. For, you
cannot expect the King should take the charge of it wholly upon himself; of
which, the profit will mostly return to his Subjects. Nor that I should, if I
were able, bear it my self, though indeed I have done it beyond what my
condition could well permit me; and it is very plain, what has been the
consequence of my being discouraged, and taken (wholly off) but three Months
from this Affair.

Sirs, I hope you will believe, and i'ts but Rational, so to do; if I have
spent so much of my time, and strength, mostly upon my own charge, with those
hazard I have been exposed to, these four years, in this Affair, with that
little encouragement I have received: that if encouraged but with necessary
supplies, so that I might not be taken off my pursuit, that I might do much
more than I have; and the rather, because every thing is more easy than it was
at first, having discovered so many Persons, and their ways, and several in
custody, in order to their Trial, some Convicted: its Rational, at least to
suppose the way fair, to put a stop, to this most destructive course.

Gentlemen, These instances are not of small import. To the whole Affairs, and
that the agitations about them: call for no small attendance and travel; nor is
it without its own charges, accompanying dispatches.

I have also given Declarations to two Persons, for transporting above three
Hundred packs of Wool, and had prepared Trials with them; but was forced to
forbear two or three Terms for want of Assistance to prosecute them; for such
Potent Persons, are not easily run down: if they, and their Confederates know
once with whom they have to do, (if they will not be bribed) and that Money
is wanting to prosecute, they can find ways by Friends, and Money, to make
Suits delatory and chargeable; besides an other mischief, of taking off
Witnesses: Of which you will see a Demonstration afterward.

At Easter or Trinity Term 1669, one Mr. John Morten prosecutes Mark Gabree in
the Exchequer, for transporting of Wool. The said Gabree removes it into
Surry, where Mr. Morten brings it to Trial, Midsomer Assizes following, and
subpena's one Thomas Petley, who had been Gabrees Wooll-Kember: Morten obtains
a Verdict against the said Gabree; but so it was ordered, that whereas the
forfiture was three Shillings per pound, he had but twelve pence: and being but
a small parcel, he lost by it.

At Michaelmas following, the Trial aforesaid, Gabree arrests Petley, by a Writ
of the Crown Office for Perjury, out of revenge; and to undo him, being but a
poor man, and make him incapable of being Witness any more; and to deter others.

At Mid^^mmer Assizes 1670, Gabree pretends to come to Trial: but when he saw
Petley appear, and had his Witnesses for his defense, he let it fall that
Assize.

Since Michaelmas, Seventy one, Petley is again arrested as aforesaid.

But I have now presented hi^ Case to his Majesty, else he would have been
utterly ruined; and now the said Gabree is in Custody, being owner of the
Wool, taken at Gravesend, as aforesaid.

I shall conclude with a few particular Instances, that I observed in attending
the Parliament, of which I only hinted some thing in page 5tb.

To begin with a Motion made in the House of Commons 1670, when that House were
under consideration of raising Money for His Late Majesty's supply, it being
then taken for granted, that there were great quantitys of Wool clandestinely
exported from Ireland to Foreign Parts, it was then propounded, that a Tax of
2 d. or 3 d. per l. might be laid upon such Wool for three Reasons, then
given, (viz.) First, it would make it so Dear to Foraigners, that the English
could under sell them in our Manufactury. Secondly, It would raise a great
Revenue to his Majesty. Thirdly, It would be an inducement to the Officers, to
be more careful to look after the Custom, and so less would go: This seemed to
many Wise Grave Senators at first, to be very Fesible, until I gave Answer to
it. And that was thus.

Answ. 1. As to 2. d. or 3. d. per pound dearer, signifies nothing: For if they
Enter 10 Packs, there shall go off a 100 Packs Unentred. But grant it did all
pay that Custom there in Ireland, it pays no Custom when it is Imported in
Holland, Flanders, or France; and then to consider the Custom it paid here to
his Majesty upon our Woollen Manufactury, when Exported, which is above five
pound for a Pack of Worsted-stuffs, etc. and it is such Wool that is coveted;
and that as before the French King laying such an Impost upon our English
Woollen Manufacturies, of 20 or 30 per cent, this overballanceth by ten parts
the first Reason, and besides about the Manufactors working so much cheaper,
which I humbly suppose, is a sufficient Answer to the first Reason of the
Motion.

Answ. 2. As to his Majesty's Revenue by 2 d. or 3 d. per pound, is answered in
short; The Custom paid as above upon the Export of our Woollen Manufacturies,
is double that Custom; but the Custom upon the Importation of the Product
thereof, may amount to three times the worth of the Pack of Wool; from hence
may be concluded, That his Majesty's damage by the quantity that is asserted to
be Transported, cannot be less than one Million of pounds Starling; so that
this also is Answered.

Answ. 3. As to the Officers inducement, I shall answer in short, by asking
this single Question, (viz.) Which in reason can be the greatest Inducement, 3
d. per pound for Custom, or 3 s. per pound Forfiture, of which three parts is
given to the Prosecutor, who must be supposed to be more watchful to gain the
Forfieture, than the Custom for the King, if Shipped to be Transported, which is
now in Force and Recoverable? But there was more in the bottom, For within a
day or two of the said Motion, there was a Noble Lord did affirm in the
Committee for Wool, that his Lordship was offered a hundred thousand pound
Sterling, to pass an Act for Transportation of Wool; and besides, there is a
Petition of many years standing, that within this few months I had a view of,
for Combed Wool to go off upon the same pretense as before; alleging it is
course Wool, and not for the Clothier. It Is true, that it is not fit for
Cloth, but it is for Worsted-stuffs, and Stockings, which is as prejudicial, if
not more than Clothing Wool.

By which that motion fell to the ground, but some time after the petition
before mentioned, did appear bare Faced, of which I wrote in a Letter to the
Merchants and Cloathiers (viz.) in 1686 Comprehending what past in Parliament
from 75 till that time, (viz.) I began this.

Perceiving at length what I had for some time a suspicion of, that some
Persons at the then next Sessions of Parliament, did not only appear to justify
the Fact of Transportation of Wool privately, but did appear publicly and in
Print, to assert and avow the convenience that it would be to this Nation; and
therefore did desire, that an Act of Parliament might be made for a limited
Exportation, giving also some pretended Reasons for the same.

In March 1676 a Bill was put into the Hand of an Eminent Member of the then
House of Commons, to be brought into that House, with whom I had some
Discourse, and did so far diswade him to delay, till the following Letter
prevailed on the Factors, and some Clothiers then in Town, to assist me.

March the 22 d. 1676 Sirs,
Having been at Westminster this day, and spoke with diverse Members, I find the
Arguments for the Exportation of Wool, have so far prevailed with the
Parliament Men, that a Bill is already put in Sr. T. M's. Hand to bring it into
the House which may be done this very day (although I had some Discourse with him
about it and did endeavor to diswade him from it)

The Consequence of which, seeing it must tend to the utter Ruin of the
Clothing Trade, and seeing I have done the utmost that can be expected on my
part to prevent it, which is to draw up Reasons effecttually to make out the
Inconvenience of it, which I have also put into the Printer's hand.

I thought it my Duty therefore, further to acquaint you, that unless some
further speedy Course be taken for a general meeting, to consider how, and in
what manner this Mischief should be obviated. I conceived the Intrest of the
Clothier would suddenly have grown desperate, seeing no private or single Man's
appearing in this Case, who ever he be can signify any thing to oppose it.

I am much convinced, that not only the Clothing Trade, but the very Intrest
of the Nation in general is at s^ake, and in hazard to be utterly lost, if
this Point should now be wholly neglected? This I have for some years foreseen,
and have talked of, but it has not been regarded, but you will find that I
spoke not slightly, but on good grounds* and what there is just Cause to
suspect, will come to pass, if this Matter be not with Industry and Diligence
prevented.

After I had prevailed with the Clothiers to give me some encouragement; I did
then endeavor to use proper Arguments, and took a fit Season to present them,
when the House of Commons was so earnest for the prohebiting French
Commodities, laying before them, that the Wool endeavored to be limited for
Transportation was principally intended for France, which proved so effectual
for the Ends designed; which Arguments I refer you to for your further
satisfaction.

After this was laid aside, the next Sessions of Parliament comes a Gentleman
that has been all along my Competitor (viz.) Mr. Munk as in p. 8 and brings in
a Bill, and prevailed so far as to get it read and committed, upon which I drew
up the following Petition, which was signed by several Merchants and Factors,
viz.

Whereas there is a Bill depending, the Parliament whereof seems to be against
Transportation of Wool, the Scope and Consequence of it (as is humbly
conceived) will tend rather to encourage it: For whereas it is suggested in the
said Bill, that the Act made in the 14th, Year of His Majesty's Reign, making
Transporting of Wool Felony, is ineffctual for the preventing thereof, and
therefore prays the Repealing the Felony of that Act, without confirming the
rest of that Act; as if making Transportation to be Felony did encourage
Transporting; that Suggestion with all submission is conceived to be a great
mistake: For though it must be granted (whatever Laws have been or shall be
made in this case) that some Persons for their own Lucre (though it be never so
much to the Damage of the great Manufacture of this Kingdom, and
notwithstanding all the Care imaginable) will adventure to Transport Wool. Yet
for some Years after the Act of the 14 Car. 2. was in force, there was a great
stop put to the said Transportation, until wool so increased in Ireland beyond
its Consumption there and here, that great Quantities were actually Transported
from thence; but till that Glut the Act of the 14th. Year of His Majesty's
Reign (by which the Forfeture was Three Shillings for every pound of Wool
besides the Wool forfited) conjoined with the Act in the 14th. Year of His
Majesty's Reign, was found effectual to prohibit Transporting Wool, for the
Prosecutor having liberty to Prosecute upon what Act he please.

If the Act against Felony were repealed, there would be much more Wool
exported then has been done; for although few Persons that have any
considerable Estate do now appear in the very Fact of the said Exportation, but
most times poor men; therefore in reason it cannot but be supposed if t^^ Act
which makes it Felony were repealed, none elce but poor men would do it, and
then to what purpose would that Act be of making the Forfiture, Three Shillings
per pound; to be sure no one would be at the Charge to prosecute. But then of
the other hand, experience is of some use in this case: I remember that I
prosecuted several P^^sons for Exporting of Wool about the Year 1672, upon
that Act of Felony, by the p^^t^cule^ or^e of King Charles the second; and did
Convict Four of them, as in (...) the 7th (...) ^h^ch put some stopp at that
time to the said Exportation, so that both in reason and experience that Act
ought to stand.

^o all which (...) did what has been done since May 1687. finding the work so
great, both in the Ch^^ge and (...), and too much for my self to carry on
alone, being so much (...) though (...) much for the King and Kingdoms good,
not being will(...) to the Ground; a third Petition was drawn up by order of
(...) and Clothiers in Exon (who by their Mayor had Petitioned the late King
(...) Kings (...) Woollen Manufacture in his dominions) pur(...) before
mentioned page. 11 and 2, and there being a ^roclamation (...), the same was at
last agreed to, by the said Commitioners of (...) ^roclamation Clauses were
desired in the Petition to be added (...) Merchants and ^^ct^rs ^n London, to
appoint persons to Seize (...) to Collect voluntary Contributions, to (...)

(...) with (...) King, undertook to have it added to the (...) to carry the
Petition and Clauses, to the Clerk of the Coucil; (...) Kings him* that day to
the Proclamation, and whilst I was there (...) was b^ought that the
Commissioners of the Customs would not have any (...), so I lost my labor, and
the Proclamation came forth without th^se Clauses* (...) ^he l^^s I kept things
on foot, though with great difficulty; and prosecuted diverse (...) the
Exchequer, and convicted one Henry Colmer, whose Trial I mentioned in (...),
but not his name; which Colmer was to be employed by the order of Sr. Nicoles
^u^^er. in the Room of Capt. Knight, when I petition*d the late King in July
1685, for the Two Sloops then laid down by the Commissioners page 10th. After
which time I dr^w upon the^ Petition signed by several clothiers and Factors,
which being referred to the Commission* (...) the customs* and upon their Report
at last did consent what they had a long time opposed, and upon their Report to
the Council, Mr. Attorney General was ordered to draw up a Commission, which
past the Broad Seal the 28th. of June 1688, and the same day I was Inportuned
by some of ^^ Commissioners to send down Two Men and Horses into Kent and
S^ss^r, t^ take ca^e of inspecting ^n^ preventing that Mischief, being then
Shearing-time which accordingly I did do the very same day; and defrayd the
Charge my self.

That some time after was ord^ed by a Committee of the said Commissioners, to
fit out Two Sloops to be at Sea, and two or three Men more at Land to attend
that Service, and when they were fitted I went down and g^ve directions therein
from time to time, and prevented great quantities of Wool from Exportation,
and some Vessels seized, and some Wool taken in the Night time* ^s the same
was Carrying on Horse Backs to the Sea Side, and some of the Exporters
themselves secured, who dissovered near Thirty others; against the Chiefest of
which I procured a Warrant from the late Lord Chief Justice Wright, and with as
much wariness as I could (some of them before hav^ing Absconded) was secured 8
or 10 of the Chiefest of them and desired the M^^or o^ ^^^ney to Committ them,
but he admitted them to ^aile, tho I (...) hard ^o the contrary; But he was not
so well pleased that I did not come (...) which i^ (...) possible I should have
hardly got one of them upon that Warrant, and good reason for that he himself
is since discovered to be, and is now prosecuted for the same Fact. I shall
conclude with these following Affidavits, viz.

The Information of James Webb. John Edwards. and Henry Spillet.
THese Informants makes Oath, that being employed in the Executing of a
Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice against several Exporters of Wool, living
in Rumney; and was on the 11th Instant severally informed of Thirty Packs of
Wool, intended to be ^hipt and transported that Night. These Deponents, James
Webb and John Edwards, together with John Milner was arrested in several
Actions, on purpose, as these Deponents believe to prevent them of Seizeing the
said Wool; that at or near the same time one John Slaughter a Transporter of
Wool, and one that was taken upon the said Warrant, and bound over to the
Assizes; came with a Hanger into the Room, and provoked them to Fight; until by
the Mayor of Rumney was forced to be gone, the next Morning these Deponents
preparing for Lyd, news was brought there, that the said John Slaughter was
come Armed with Ten other persons near at hand, and Ten more expected to
Assault these Deponents; Mr. Carter and his Company, upon which news the said
Mr Carter sent to the Mayor, to disire him to keep the Peace, and shortly after
went to Lyd, and being informed there also sum intentions to Export Wool that
Night, whereupon these Deponents and Company, prepared to go out to the
Sea-^^^, about Eight of the Clock that Night, and going in the Street, were
assaulted b^ several persons unknown, and one of our Company Wounded, but
afterward discovered one to be the Bailiffs Son of Lyd, who came to our
Lodging and threatened that if any stirred out of the House, we should be fired
at, out of the Town; or words to that effect, he being sent by the Bailiff his
Father, as he said: But the reason as these Deponents beleiveth, was that they
might not be interupted in the exportation of Wool, as before intended; that
about one of the Clock at Night, agreat ^ody of Horse and some Foot, (supposing
after they had Shipped the Wool) came about the House where we Lodged, Fireing
several times; Shouting and Railing upon us, but upon the Importunity of Mr.
Carter; these Deponents, nor any of the Company did Fire any Gun, when we had
the oppertunity of Killing of them, and were provoked in our own desence so to
do: These Deponents further makes Oath, that when it was light, they went to
the said Baylfls House about the Riot, and defireing his Assistance in the
search after the persons Guilty of the said Riot; and asked whether there was
any Watch in the Town the Night before, as his Son pretended that there was,
but inquiring into it by several Jurats and others, and constable, found there
was no Watch that Night, nor any ordered nor had been along time before: That
about Ten of the Clock the same day these Deponents, was followed by about
Fifty Horsemen, near the Camber point, over against Rye.

James Webb. John Edwards. Henry Spillet.


This Deponant, John Edwards, further makes Oeth; that all the men except two
with the horses, got into their Sloops Boats lying ready for them, an
perceiveing that some of he horsemen riding near the two men with our horses,
the said men left their horses on the Camber-point, and got into a Boat and put
off; but the horsemen fired both at the men in the Boat, and also at the
horses; and here since that one of the horses is killed.

JAmes Atkins, Master of a Vessel called the Diligence; did see a Party of
Horse armed, following Mr. Carter and several of his assistance, the 13th.
Instant December; intending as this Deponent beleiveth to do some mischief to
them, for that some of the horsemen fired at his men in a Boat, as they was
coming off the Cumber; the Shot Grazing near the Boat.

James Atkins.

JOhn Syer Mariner, makes Oath; that being imploved in a Vessel, called the
Merchants Desec^e; to prevent the Exportation of Wool, he the said Deponent
was required, with several others to assist in the Execution of the Lord Chief
Justice Warant, against several Exporters of Wool; and having performed that
service the 12th. of this instant December, came that day to Lyd, in order to
go to Rye; on Board their Vessel then lying at Anchor there. And about Eight or
Nine of the Clock in the night time, he with the rest of his company at the
request of Mr Carter; was going toward the Seaside to Seize, or Preven the
Exportation of Wool; which was supposed to be intended to be transported that
night, and as this Deponent and Company, were going through the Street, was set
on by several persons unknown, who received several Wounds, and afterward
found one of the persons to be the Baylisss Son of Lyd, after which time
several persons came to this Deponents Lodgings, Firing several times, and
railed upon this Deponent and Company.

And this Deponent further makes Oath, that the next day being the 13th,
instant, he with the rest of the Company coming toward Rye aforesaid, was
pursued, by about fifty horsemen or thereabouts, armed and had not the Boats
belonging to several Vessels gave their attendance and took us in, we might
have been distroyed.

John Syer.

RAndal Gosley makes Oath, that on the 13th instant December; there being a
great Body of Horse come on the Camber near Rye, being supposed Irish, or
French; which put the Town of Rye into a great fear, and being on the other
side of the Harbor, the Majestrates sent some Persons in a Boat, to discover
who they were, and the Reasons being enquired into, was to do some mischief to
Mr. William Carter, and his Assistance; who had taken up sum Persons for
Transportation of Wool: These Horsemen following them so fast that Mr. Carters
Men could not get their Horses over the Ferry, but left them on the Camber
Point.

This Deponent, being afterward sent, by the said Mr. Carter; to look after
the Horses, went as far as Lyd, where one John Slaughter owned the Horses to
be in his Custody, and would keep them so for damages, pretended to be done him
by the said Mr. Carter; and further said that his name was Slaughter, and a
Slaughter he should find of him

And this Deponent further says, that some others then in the Company of the
said Slaughter, said that they would secure his Body, and some others his Soul,
for that neither was his own.

Randal Gosley.

The Volluntary Deposition, of William Ellis of Dover Mariner; taken as
follows.
THis Deponent makes Oath, that coming from (...) to Rye, in the County of
Sussex; passed by the way of Lyd, (...)* and at a place called Broomhil House,
on this side Lyd aforesaid; the Deponent met with two Men on Horseback, who
asked this Deponent whether he was going, he answered for Gilford-Ferry in order
to Rye; one of them Swore (God-^^am-you) you are one of the Rogues that was at
Lyd last night, and if they thought this Deponent was one (they would share
him) meaning as this Deponent beleives, in Sea terms, dividing of him; but he,
this Deponent using good Language, and telling them he was not the Person they
took him for, they let him pass,

But, when this Deponent came to Gilford-Ferry, there was one John Smith of
Gilford, came in with a Bottle of Wine in his hand, and coming where this
Deponent sat by the Fire side, he Swore (by God) this is one of the Rogues
b^longing to the Sloops, and said let us ^ind hin neck and heels, and share
him, the said Smith further said, there lies Warners Horse, and he knew who
shot him with a Slug, by which the horse fell down, but rose again, and some
Person knocked him down with a Clubb; and upon the same Shot. This Deponent
herd John Smith of Gilford, say, that the Blood gushed from the Horse* and he
further says, that could he light of Mr. Webb, John Warner, Henry Spillet, or
any of the Sloops-crew; they would certainly Kill them. And further this
Deponent says not. William Ellis.

Jurat Little me Tresime, dio Decembres Anno. Dom. 1688. Ditto John Spain Mayor.
These are all True Coppys of the Original upon Record, here examined by me.

Henry Darington Town Clerk; and Public Notory, of the Ancient Town of Rye,
Sussex.



Postscript.
I Would not omit one Passage, which may be very observable, That after I had
taken up, and bound over to the Assizes, the Persons mentioned, Page 21. the
Mayor and Jurots of Rumny occasionally came to my Lodging the same Evening,
with whom I had a long Debate, I reasoning with them about the evil consequence
of Transportation of Wool, and that many, if not most of the Transporters, when
they came to dye were found worse than nothing; the reasons I then alleged,
was the evil committed, was not only against the Interest of England in
general, but many Thousand poor People were ruined by it, so it was a just
occasion to blast all the Proceedings of such Persons, insomuch, that in the
close of that Discourse, Two of the Company confessed the Truth of what I had
urged; one of which Persons had been Convicted for Transportation of Wool, on
the Statate that makes the Forfeiture of three shillings per l. and had
Execution taken out against him for the same the Term before; the other Person
was the then Mayor of another neighboring Corporation: But whilst I was in
discourse with the said Mayor and Jurots, some of the Transporters, which I had
that day bound over to the Assizes, came to my Men, and their conversation was
like to end in Blood, had I not been very importunate with the Mayor to keep
the Peace, and to dismiss the Company, as in the aforesaid Affidavit of James
Webb, John Edwards and Henry Spillot, do also appear.

Give me leave to add the Abstract of an Affidavit of one of the Persons that
was in the company of Rioters before mentioned, who was the more able to give a
full Account of their Number and Design, which person being made sensible of
the evil, came off from them, and was employed by me, and of great advantage in
further Discoveries, who made his Affidavit before Sir John More, formerly Lord
Mayor of London, the substance of which follows, viz.

This Deponent makes Oath, That upon the 13th day of December 1688, He was
importuned by James Hunt and other Transporters of Wool about Rumney, to pursue
Mr. William Carter, who suddenly after met with a greater number of Men, about
one Hundred, who went after the said Mr. Carter and his Men, toward Rye, and
had they not got into some Boats, Mr. Carter would have received some hurt, for
many of the Exporters were Desperate Fellows, not caring what mischief they did,

William Ralph.
Jurat' coram Jo. More, Mayor, September. 1. 1690.
I would crave leave to add to what I only hinted in Page 21. That though I had
taken so much pains, and been at such expense and hazard, yet for want of a
timely provision by a Fund to defray the charge of prosecuting those
Informations, there was an Act of Grace and Pardon past which discharged the
said Oflenders; but what assistance I had at that time was by one Merchant, who
also did disburse several hundred Pounds in fitting our the said two Vessels,
and one other which was hired, and victualing of them, in expectation of being
reimburs'd, which person also paid the Fees in Passing the Act in the Year
1689. to prevent Exportation of Wool, (the Title only of which Act have been
long depending this last Session) and was also at some expense the Session of
Parliament 1692. for the continuance thereof, which Merchant, though so generous
and free for the Public, having also several Thousand Pounds due to him for
the Transport-Ships employed in the reducing of Ireland; and by reason that his
Trade lay formerly in Flanders, now in the French Jurisdiction, he is somewhat
straightened by all these means, and to help forward his ruin, had 78 Actions
laid upon him about one and the same time, and the names of some of the
Plaintiffs he owed not one penny to, and besides to increase the charge,
several of the Sums are not above 6 or 7 l.

I do forbear the naming of Persons, because I would not expose them, but they
who are concerned knows it best.

And as this single Merchant was prejudiced by his voluntary expending near one
Thousand Pounds for the Public, and twice as much more in the Transport-Ships,
so the Company of Merchant Adventurers, who had in the year 1685, and 1686.
assisted me, and did disburse about six hundred Pound toward the charge then
expended, which Company having been more free than all the other Companies,
against the Exportation of Wool, yet this Company was laid open in the year
1689. by the occasion of a Bill then depending to prevent Exportation of Wool,
(viz.) the favorers of the Exporter, of Wool, joining with some other
Merchants not of that Company, added that clause for the free Exportation of
the Woollen Manufacture* and by it prevented that clause for a Fund to put in
Execution the Laws against Exportation of Wool, the evil consequence of which
has been so much seen, and may be more felt hereafter, by which means all that
provision before mentioned fell to the ground, notwithstanding which, I being
unwilling a matter of so great concern to the Nation should wholly be laid
aside, did in the Year 169^, humbly propose to the King in Council, some
endeavors, ^ot only to prevent Exportation ^f Wool, but also Trade, Commerce
and Correspondence with France, and desired four Men as my Guard, and also the
Officers of the Customs in Kent to assist me. and a Fifth-Rate Frigate to
cruise on that Coast, which being referred to the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury, whose Lordship; also referred the Examination thereof to the
Commissioners of the Customs, who made Report thereof as follows, viz.

In obedience to your Lordships Commands, signified to us by Mr. Jepson, of the
13th. instant, on the Petition of William Carter and Papers thereunto a^^e^'d.
We do humbly Report to your Lordships, That we are of opinion, that if the
Pteitioner Mr. Carter shall engage in the Service his Petition relates to, the
assistance of four men on Horseback, which he can conside in, is but a
reasonable assistance to him, and being diligently employed, may very much
conduce to the proposed purposes; and we conceive that a nimble Frigate of some
Force, to cruise upon that Coast, whose Commander may be sometimes instructed
by the said Mr. Carter, would also effectually conduce to the same purpose, and
we think it but reasonable, that the said Mr. Carter, personally engaging in
the Service at aforesaid, should be also assisted by the Officers of the
Customs, which is humbly submitted to your Lordships Consideration.

Custom-House, London. 18 December. 1690. R. S. G. B. J. W. R. C.


Upon which Report the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury gave direction
accordingly.

Notwithstanding I had no manner of security for Money to defray the charge
incident in that service, yet I took out the Orders for my men and that from
the Commissioners of the Customs, and goes down into Kent, and attended that
service till I was forced to desist for want of necessary supplies; but before
I did leave the Seacoast, I wa^ by the Order of the Queen directed to attempt
another Affair in those parts, the effect of which service ended in the method
for a Descent into France, in the beginning of the Year 1692. And whilst I was
attending the Coasts of Kent and Sussex, in the Months of May and June, found
that in order to make the aforesaid Proposals more effectual, I did humbly lay
before the Queen at the Cabbinet-Council in July following some further things
necessary in that affair; but it being referred to the Grand Council, though
there were several objections against it, yet I was heard and answered these
Objections, and obtained an order upon it, and though I took it out, yet there
were some obstructions which put a stop to my just proceedings in this Affair,
to the great damage of the Kingdom.

The things I then propounded to the Council, and argued for, were as
follows, viz.

1. The securing of and sending for an old Transporter of Wool, and lately
employed in that ^ffair, who to assist others in that evil was put into the
Light-House by Rumny Marsh, by the order ^f the then Farmer of it, which Farmer
of the Light-House having been a long time, not only a ^reat Exporter of Wool,
but also an Importer of Lace and other prohibited French Goods, which ^erson
was then in Newgate for countenancing and abetting of persons in going to, and
coming ^om France.

2. For two Sloops to attend the Frigate before ordered, as Advice-Boats the
same I had formerly ^^ted out of twenty French Sloops made swift for Sailing.

3. For some more men to be added to these four I had before ordered, where I
found most ^anting.

4. For to be put in a capacity to prosecute diverse Transporters of Wool then
discovered guilty; ^^ese were the thing* I then desired.

And give me leave to add the substance of a Letter that I afterward wrote to
one of the then ^ords of the Treasury, that did most object against me at the
Council, viz.

Right Honorable,
*As to the Force now used both at Sea and on Shore, to attend this Service, it
is found not to be sufficient, because the effects manifest it; and the
Commissioners of the Customs by their several Reports have declared, that it
was beyond the power of their Officers to hinder it; besides, it was not in
their Commission, and therefore not their proper station.

*And as it was with the Commissioners of the Customs, so it was with those of
the Admiralty, ^^r they could not exceed the number of the Ships of War, but
your Lordships, as disposers of Their Majesty's Treasure, can direct either, as
may be both for Their Interest, and the Kingdoms good.

*And Sir, what I said at the Council Board will be proved, viz. that a
Land-Guard alone, will (...) answer the end propounded, without some Vessels at
Sea, nor they neither, without such as are proper for that service, and to be
under the care and directions, either of persons concerned ^n interest, or
known of more than ordinary Integrity, (for the Temptations therein are great)
(...) that have been upwards of 20 Years employed, have observed any thing, may
be credited.

*And if the French King (besides his Ships of War) does employ (as I am well
informed) near (...) hundred small ^l^ops (there being about Forty belonging to
Dunkirk and Callis) for carrying on his design, should it be thought so great a
charge for Their Majesty's to maintain two (...) Vessels in th^se parts so much
needed, over and above the Royal Navy, especially if it be con^^dered, formerly
in time of Peace, there was always Two Vessels employed by the Commissioners of
the Customs, on those Coasts on purpose to prevent Running of Goods, commonly
(...) Stealing of Customs.

*Sir, give me leave to speak freely now, as I did warmly before your Lordships
in Council, that ^is saving a Penny and loosing a Pound; not that I propounded
any private advantage to my ^elf in it, as I told your Lordships, I could be
better content in my private station, but it was for the Public I was so
importunate, and had been often complaining in this matter for upwards of
Twenty Years, as before, from the fears of those evils we now too much see and
feel of the power of France, insomuch that it may be easily computed, that the
French has gained from England in this time, almost Eighty Millions for want
of our care, the particulars I have formerly enlarged.

*To conclude Sir, I do with submission say, that what service I have done in
this Affair, I have not as yet put the Crown to any charge, for though I have
had several sums of money ordered me (merely for my expense) yet a much greater
was first brought into the receipt of the Exchequer by my Prosecutions, which
are upon Record, and being matter of fact is evident enough.

FINIS.

