The CASE of Sir Robert Dashwood, Knight and Baronet, Sir Samuel Dashwood,
Knight, John Pery, and Edward Noell, Surviving Executors of George Dashwood,
Esquire; Deceased, in Trust for Minors, the younger Children of the said Mr.
Dashwood, Appellants, from a Decree and several Orders in the Court of
Exchequer, wherein they and others are Defendants at the Suit of Sir John
Champante, Knight, Complainant.
4. Aug. 1671. The Undertaking was for Five Years from 25th. December. 1670. to
26th. Dec. 1675. 8. Nov. 1671.
THE Lord Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, Robert Huntington,
Richard Kingdom, John Bence, Joseph Dean, John Stepney, and the Testator Mr.
Dashwood, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, were concerned in
the Undertaking for Management of the Revenues of Ireland, from 25th. Dec.
1670. to 26th. Dec. 1675. and no longer; and by Commission also under the Great
Seal dated 23th. Sept. 1671. the said Undertakers, or in their resepective
absences (most of them living here in England) several Persons therein named as
their respective Representatives, or a Quorum of such five of them as are
therein particularly named, were appointed to manage the undertaking until the
said 26th. Dec. 1675. and no longer; and by Articles between the Undertakers,
the Lord Ranelagh was to have and bear four 12th. Shares, and Mr. Dashwood, and
each other of the Undertakers one 12th. Share of all Profits and Lossess by the
Undertaking. But the Representatives had no Interest in the Undertaking, and
only acted for the respective Undertakers for a Salary allowed them by each
Undertaker.

Sir John Champante was appointed Treasurer of the Undertaking, and by his
Commission (which recites the said Commission to the Undertakers) was appointed
to receive and pay all Money relating to the Undertaking, during the
Continuance of his said Commission, in such manner as he should be directed in
Writing, signed by the said Quorum of the Undertakers, or their
Representatives, and not otherwise.

Sir J^hn Champante's Accounts to the 26th. December. 1673. were stated and drawn
into two Accounts, one for 1671/2;, and the other for 1673, and afterward were
examined, allowed of, and subscribed by a Quorum of the Undertakers, or their
Representatives, and are not questioned.

8. May 1674. Dashwood's Assignment. Bill in Ireland.
Geor^e Dashwo^^ by Indenture assigned his Share in the Undertaking to Sir
James Hayes, and from that time Sir James Hayes was to stand in the place of
Mr. Dashwood as to all Profit and Loss by the Undertaking. Of this Assignment
Sir John Champante soon after had notice, and from the time of the Assignment,
Mr. Dashwood never intermedled in the Undertaking, nor further concerned
himself therein.

Sir John Champante brought his Bill in the Exchequer in Ireland against my
Lord Ranelagh and some others (and amongst others named therein the Testator
Mr. Dashwood) and thereby demanded against them the Sum of 36454 l. 8 s. 8 d.
as due to him upon two pretended stated Accounts made up and stated about
October 1677. by one Edward Roberts, by color of an Authority given to him by
the said Sir James Hayes and Mr. Stepney, without the privity or consent of any
of the other Undertakers, one of the Accounts being from 25th. December. 1673 to
25th. December. 1674. and the other Account from 25th. December. 1674. to the 24th.
day of June 1677. But finding after he had filed his Bill that the Undertakers
then concerned could falsify those Accounts in 12295 l. in one entire Sum,
Champante and Roberts alone, and without the privity of the Undertakers, about
January 1678. being above 12 Months after the pretended Accounts were stated,
altered the same, and cut out and destroyed the whole Charge-part of the
Accounts being many Leaves, and caused a new Charge-part to be written over
again, and fixed the last Leaf containing Roberts's Approbation of the Accounts
to the Leaves so new added.

To the Bill in Ireland Mr. Dashwood never appeared, and died 8th. March 1682.
8. Mar. 1682.
long before the Case there was brought to Hearing, and the Suit was never
revived there against the Appellants his Executors, nor they ever called to or
made parties to the Bill or the Accounts. But 11th. June 1684. Champante
obtained a Decree in Ireland against the Lord Ran^lagh, and some others of the
Undertakers which were then alive, for 24159 l. 8 s. 8 d. besides Costs.

Bill in England. 6. May 1675. 58756 l. 4 d.
Sir John Champante afterward exhibited his Bill in the Exche^uer in England
against my Lord Ranelagh and several others, and amongst the rest against the
Appellants, the Executors of Mr. Dashwood, and thereby demanded the 24159 l. 8
s. 8 d. decreed in Ireland, 17350 l. for Moneys he pretends he stands bound
for, and 9180 l. for Money he ^retends he advanced besides other Principal
Moneys, Gratuities, Commission-Monies, etc. not included in the said Accounts,
amounting to 34596 l 11 s. 07 d. his Demand in ^ll amounting on the 6th. of May
1675. to 58756 l. 0 s. 4 d.. and Interest for the same ever since, which was
the first time the Appellants ever heard of Sir Jo. Champate's Demands against
them.

Appellants Answer.
To this Bill the Appellants by their Answer amongst other things insisted, That
their Testator had but a 12th. Share in the Undertaking, and had assigned as
abovesaid, and that Champante soon after had notice thereof.

That the Appellants (being only Executors in Trust for Minors) being alarmed
with so great a Demand, and especially it being founded (as was pretended) upon
a stated Account, and knowing their Testator had assigned as before is set
forth, having found amongst his Writings a Counter-part of the said Assignment,
inquired into the said Accounts, and Mr. Roberts's authority, and presently
discovered that the great Sums that made up the Foot of the said pretended
Accounts were Moneys pretended to be advanced and borrowed by Sir John
Champante for the Undertakers, long after Mr. Dashwood's Assignment, and
without his order or privity, and after the end of the Undertaking, and that
Roberts had not fairly stated the said Accounts, nor had any concluding
authority to state the same.

That the Cause being at Issue, the Complainant in Trinity Vacation 1688.
Trinity Vacation 1688.
took a Commission into Ireland for Examining Witnesses, and the Appellants
joined in the Commission and sent a Person into Ireland on purpose to look
after their Witnesses, and to attend the Execution of the Commission, who got
some of their Witnesses Examined: But one Mr. John Beesley who was Employed as
a Clerk in the Undertaking under Sir John Champante, and could have proved that
Sir John Champante had notice of the Assignment from Mr. Dashwood to Sir James
Hayes, was at that time sick at Sligo, far distant from Dublin, and so could
not be Examined at that Commission; and Mr. John Hayes who also was then in
Ireland, and could have proved the Notice to Sir John Champante, was made a
Defendant to prevent his Testimony, and could not be Examined without Leave of
the Court which were the Reasons the Appellants exhibited no Interrogatories
there, for to prove Notice of the said Assignment.

23. Oct. 1688.
The Court was moved by the Appellants for a Commission to Examine their
Witnesses as of Right due unto them, but the Barons denied, it and only gave
the Defendants a Weeks time to Examine Mr. John Hayes to prove Notice to
Champante of Mr. Dashwood's Assignment, but Mr. Hayes then being in Ireland,
and not returning it that time, nor long after could not be Examined.

29. Oct. 1688.
The Person that went into Ireland to attend the Execution of the Commission
came thence before the same was ended, that he might be in Town before the
first day of Michaelmas Term 1688. to move for a new Commission, but being
becalmed at Sea was prevented, but soon after his coming made Oath, That Mr.
John Hayes, Mr. Beesley and others, were material Witnesses for the Defendants,
and set out in the Affidavit that Beesley could prove the Notice; and also what
the other Witnesses could speak to, and the Reasons why they could not be
Examined on the said first Commission; and thereupon the Court was again moved
for a new Commission to Examine the said Witnesses, the Defendants never having
had one before. But the Court refused to grant one, but ordered Mr. John Hayes
to attend at the Hearing to be Examined as the Court should think fit; and the
Court then declared that they would let in the Appellants to prove Notice if
they found it material at the Hearing of the Cause.

Trinity Vacation 1688.
The Appellants and other Defendants exhibited a Cross Bill against Champante,
and therein charged him particularly to answer if he had not Notice of of Mr.
Dashwood's Assignment to the said Sir James Hayes: To this Bill Champante,
refused to answer, but put in an Evasive Plea, upon hearing of which the Court
of Exchequer would not give their Judgment, whether he should answer or not
till they had heard the Cause upon Champante's Bill.

Easter and Trinity Terms 1689.
The Cause was heard in the Exchequer, and the Appellants the Executors proved
the Assignment in Court, and had their said Witnesses there ready to prove
Notice thereof to Champante, but the Court being altered, and all new Judges,
and therefore strangers to the former Debates, would not hear them, and
Champante endeavored to prove that Mr Dashwood acted in the Undertaking after
the said Assignment, and exhibited for that purpose several Letters and Orders
pretended to be signed by Mr. Dashwood, but the same were all counterfeited,
and not Mr. Dashwood's Handwriting.

Decree. 20th. of June 1689.
The Court bv their Order on Hearing declard, as on one side they were not fully
satisfied to adjudge the said Accounts stated by Roberts to be conclusive, so
on the other side, they would not disallow thom as stated and closed Accounts,
but being willing that in case the Defendants should have material Objections
to offer agianst any of the Particulars of the Accounts, that the same should
be examined by Auditors, referred it to the Auditors of the Impressed to examine
the two last Accounts, and also if they are in the Method of the former
Accounts, and the Auditors are to be armed with a Commossion to examine
Witnessess on both sides, if need be, concerning the said Accounts, as also for
examining Champante, who not having answered the Cross-Bill, is instead of an
Answer thereto, to be examined upon Interrogatories: And in case of any
Difficulty, the said Auditors are to certify the Matters specially, and crave
the further Direction of the Court therein. And the said Auditors are also to
state the Interest, Commission-Money, and Gratuities upon the said two last
Accounts, and take the Account of Champante's Receipts and Disbursements
relating to the Undertaking since the 24th. of June 1677. and such of the
Defendants as would be exempted from Accounting were to bring in their Cases
for the Barons to consider of and the said Jo. Hayes is thereby dismissed as to
being a Party to the Account, but is not to be examined as a Witness in the
said Cause.

Upon passing of which Order or Decree the Appellants were not permitted to
insert therein any part of their Answer or Defense, or that the said Assignment
was proved in Court.

The Appellants the Executors of Mr. Dashwood delivered in their Case for the
Barrons to consider of, and insisted that they ought not to be accountable to
Champante further than from 25th. December 1673. to 8th. of May 1674. being the
time Mr. Dashwood assigned to Sir James Hayes, or at farthest to the time
Champante had Notice thereof, and that Champante as against them ought to come
to a new Account to that time.

6th. of December 1689.
The Appellants Case coming to be heard before the Barons, who were strangers to
the first Proceedings of the Cause, and to the Promises the Court had made to
let in the Appellants to prove Notice at the hearing of the Cause, they refused
to hear Witnesses Viva voce to prove the Notice, or to refer the same to be
Tried by an Issue at Law, although the same was very Material, and so declared
by the Court, and indeed was the sole Point upon which the Appellants Cause
depended; And ordered, that the Appellants (in regard they had not proved
Notice in the Depositions before Hearing) (which they were disabled to do for
the Reasons aforesaid) should be subject to the whole Account, though one of
the Barons declared his Opinion, that the Appellants ought to be permitted to
try the Matter of Notice at Law.

Upon passing of which Order however the Appellants were not permitted to
insert in the same, that their Council prayed the Court would allow them to
examine their Witnesses, or to go to a Trial at Law to prove the Notice, and
that they ought to be discharged from the time of the Assignment and Notice
thereof.

Against which Orders and Decree the Appellants have appealed, as conceiving
the same unjust and contrary to Equity and good Conscience.

Reasons of Appeal.
Dashwood, having by Deed under his Hand and Seal the 8th. of May 1674,
assigned his share in the Undertaking to Sir James Hayes, another of the
Undertakers, the Court ought before the Hearing to have granted the Appellants
a Commision to have examined their Witnesses, (as was desired) and at the
Hearing the Court ought to have examined the Appellants Witnesses to have
proved Notice of the said Assignment (the Assignment it self being proved in
Court) or to have let in the Appellants some other way to have proved the same,
according to the former Declaration of the Court (before the Judges were
altered) that they would so do. And the Appellants ought not to have been
decreed accountable further than to that time, Mr. Dashwood never acting not
intermedling in the said Undertaking after the said Assignment. And the
subsequent Letters and Orders produced by the said Sir John Champante as signed
by Mr. Dashwood, to prove he acted afterward, were all counterfeited, and not
his Handwriting, and near 30000 l. of the said Account is for Moneys pretended
to be lent the Undertaking, long after Mr. Dashwood's Assignment; and the End
of the Undertaking, which never did redound to the Benefit or Profit of Mr.
Dashwood, and therefore not reasonable that his Estate should be chargeable
with the same, and in truth one penny thereof was not paid or brought into the
Undertaking.

Champante only to be examined upon Interrogatories instead of answering the
Cross Bill, which, if he had answered, the Appellants might in that Cause have
examined to the Notice. And they have also ordered that Mr. John Hayes, who is
one of the Appellants Witnesses to prove the Notice, and was so declared brfore
Publication, or the Hearing shall be dismissed, as not being concerned in
Interest, to account with or answer Champante's Demands, and yet to deprive the
Appellants of his Testimony, have ordered he shall not be examined as a Witness
in the Cause, notwithstanding he has disclaimed by his Answer, and was not,
nor is in any ways concerned in Intererest, being only the Representative of
Sir James Hayes.

Roberts (as to the Appellants) he having no Authority for stating thereof from
the Appellants Testator; And Roberts himself has sworn, that he understood the
Authority was intended only for him to prepare the Accounts for the Undertakers
perusal, and not that the same should be binding or conclusive to them. Nor was
the said Authority signed by a Quorum of the Undertakers, or their
Representatives, or by the Complainant Champante himself, and so he was not
bound by what Roberts should do therein.

Also the said pretended stated Accounts are made up of general Heads and
Abstracts, containing no Particulars of Times, Persons, or Sums paid or
received: Besides, in them great Sums are allowed without sufficient Vouchers,
and also vast Sums, to the value of 100000 l. and more are therein passed and
allowed, without any Vouchers at all, and Champante refused to deliver the
Vouchers he had, by a Schedule, though the Undertakers offered to take them, if
he would do so, but carelessly threw them away, to prevent any Examination or
Discovery thereof.

Also the said pretended stated Accounts were above a year after the making up
of the same, and after a Bill brought in Ireland for the Moneys pretended due
thereupon, altered by Sir John Champante and Mr. Roberts, without the Privity
of any of the Undertakers in 12295 l. in one Item, as is since discovered, and
all the Charge-part cut out and destroyed, and a new Charg-part of several
Leaves put in the room thereof.

Also the said pretended Accounts are carried on until the 24th. of June 1677.
whereas the Undertaking ended at Christmas 1675. and after that, Sir John
Champante acted only by Order from some particular Persons then concerned in
the Undertaking (but Mr. Dashwood was not any of them) so that that Account at
most as against the Appellants (because Notice was not proved of the said
Assignment) ought only to have been taken until Christmas 1675. And the same as
to the Appellants, ought to have been an open Account; It not being pretended
that their Testator ever had any Notice of the stating thereof, or concerned
himself therein, or assented to the same.


