The CASE of the Company of Glass-sellers in London, and all others selling
Glasses or Earthen Wares, in any City, Borough, Town-Corporate, or Market Town
in England and Wales, in relation to the Bill for suppressing of Hawkers,
Pedlers, etc.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of both the Honorable Houses of
Parliament.
ALL Pedlers and petty Chapmen, wandering abroad, 39 Eliz. Chapter 4.
are adjudged Rogues and Vagabonds, with a Proviso for Glass-Men, licensed to
travel in the Countries only.

Whereas in the Statute of 39. 1 Jacob. Chapter 7.
Eliz. There was a Proviso, That the said Statute should not extend to such
Glass, Men as were of good behavior, and should travel through any County
without begging, having License from three Justices of the said County where
they travel. Said Proviso repealed, and Glass-men made Rogues.
By reason of which Liberty, many notorious Rogues and Vagabonds, and evil
disposed Persons have undertaken, and do profess the Trade of Glass-Men, and by
color thereof, do travel up and down diverse Counties of this Realm, and do
commit many Pickeries, petty Felonies, and other Misdemeanors. For the avoiding
of which inconveniency, Be it Enacted, etc. That all such Persons that shall
wander up and down to sell Glasses, shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken as
Rogues and Vagabonds, and shall suffer the like pain and punishment in every
degree, as by the same 39 of Eliz. is appointed, and is further provided in
this Statute.

In the Act for the Poor, 14 Car. 2. Chapter 2. The 39 Eliz. and 1 Jacob.
reinforced; But the Reward made so small, have never been executed.

His M^jesties order in the Glass-sellers Charter.

To suppress Hawkers of Glasses, etc. within the limits of their Corporation.

In their Bylaws signed by the Judges.


It is Enacted, That whereas those good Laws have not been put in execution,
for want of encouragement to such as should apprehend Rogues; That every Person
that shall hereafter apprehend a Rogue, shall receive of any Constable, through
whose Parish he had passed unapprehended, for every Rogue two shillings, which,
if any Constable shall refuse to pay, the Justice of Peace shall proceed
against the Constable, according to the Statutes of 39 Eliz. and 1 Jacob. Which
is, for his neglect of apprehending a Rogue, twenty shillings; out of which
money, the Constable or other Person that has apprehended the Rogue, is to be
paid two shillings, and also to be satisfied for his loss of time.

Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby straightly charge and
command, That no Person or Persons whatsoever, which by the Statute made in the
first year of the Reign of our late Royal Grandfather King James, or any other
Law of this our Realm, are prohibited to carry Glasses or Earthen Wares to
sell, do at any time hereafter presume to wander up and down to sell Glasses or
Earthen Wares; or to act, or do any thing contrary to these Statutes upon the
pains and penalties therein declared, and such other punishment as can or may
be inflicted upon such Offenders, according to the Laws of this Realm: And We
will and straightly command, that the Masters and Wardens, etc. of the Company of
Glass-Sellers of London, do from time to time take care, that at all times
hereafter, The said Statutes be put in full execution upon all such Offenders,
as shall presume to wander up and down to sell Glasses or Earthen Wares in our
City of London, or within seven miles thereof. And his Majesty commands all
Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices, Constables, and other Officers, to be aiding and
assisting the said Company of Glass-Sellers therein.

It is Ordered, That every Member of the Corporation of Glass-Sellers, shall
use his utmost care and endeavor to discover all such Persons as shall wander
up and down to sell any Glasses or Earthen Wares, and as often as he shall
discover any such, immediately to give notice thereof to the next Constable or
other Officer, to the intent they may be punished according to the Statutes of
39 of Eliz. or the 1 of King James, or any other Statute of this Realm made to
punish Pedlers, and Petty Chapmen etc. And every Member of this Company
neglecting his duty herein, is to forfeit for every Offense five shillings.

Upon all which Laws and Orders, The Glass-sellers endeavors to suppress them.
and in discharge of their duty therein, the said Company of Glass-Sellers have
been at very great trouble and expense for many years, to suppress these
wandering Glass-Men; and although some have been whipped and imprisoned for their
Offenses, they still abound more than ever, they being a sturdy incorrigible
sort of People, who regard not such corporal punishment.

Provided also, Proviso in the Patent granted for licensing of Pedlers and
Petty Chapmen.
That this our said Commission, nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to empower our said Commissioners to give or grant License or Privilege
to any Person or Persons whatsoever, to travel or wander up and down to sell
any sort of Glasses, or Earthen or Gally Ware, contrary to the Statute of the
39 of Eliz. or the 1 of King James, or of any other Laws or Statutes of this
our Realm in that Case made and provided.

There is in and about London near an hundred Glass-Sellers, many of which, by
reason of the Bulkiness of their Commodities, are constrained to exercise their
Trades in houses of near 100 pound per Annum, and it is believed pay more Scot
and Lot, and bear more public Offices in one year, than all the Pedlers and
Petty Chap-men in England do in seven; who yet many of them are almost undone
already, Reasons why these persons should be suppressed.
by reason of the multitudes of these wandering Glass-Men all England over, who
now go about, not only with Baskets and Crates, but also with Horses and Asses
laden with all sorts of Glasses and Earthen Wares, which, if not timely
restrained, the said Shopkeepers will be utterly disabled to pay their Rents,
or maintain their Families, but must be constrained to leave their Shops, and
betake themselves to the like practice of sending their Wares abroad.

There is no need of such people to wander abroad to supply the Countries with
these Commodities; Glasses and Earthen Wares being sold by Shopkeepers in all
Market Towns, and almost in all Villages in England, and would be much more in
Cities, Buroughs, Towns-Corporate, if these People were suppressed. Which
Shopkeepers are forced, by reason of the Bulkiness and Brittlenss of these
Wares, to take greater Houses, and pay greater Rents than otherwise they need
to do, and pay all public Taxes, and Parish Rates and Duties.

These Hawkers of Glasses and Earthen Wares do generally carry abroad, and
cheat the Gentry and others with very imperfect and deceitful Wares, as with
Earthen Wares not fully burnt, which will crack, and the white peel off, when
wet and used, and Glasses not well nealed, but cracked and faulty, which defects
are not easily discerned, unless by Persons of judgment in those commodities,
and sell only such Ill-made Wares as Shopkeepers cannot put off.

They are grown so insolent, that they frequently offer their Wares to the
Shopkeepers Customers at their Shop-doors; nay, even in their houses, and will
call their Customers out of their Shops, and sell them Ware before their faces,
of which there can several Instances be given.

They very often corrupt Men's Servants where they come, and tempt them to steal
their Masters Provisions to truck with them for such things as they have a mind
to, or occasion for.

It will be in vain to prohibit the carrying abroad of Linen Cloth, or other
Wares, if these wandering Glass-Men are not suppressed; for Glasses being a
light Commodity, they will carry any other commodities covered in the Straw, in
which Glasses and Earthen Wares are always packt.

It is therefore most Humbly prayed, on the behalf of all the Glass-Sellers in
London, Westminster, Sou^ wark, and all other Cities, Buroughs, Towns
Corporate, and Market Towns, at least in England and Wales, that a Proviso may
be added to the Bill now depending against Pedlers, To prohibit all Hawkers of
Glasses or Earthen Wares from Traveling, or wandering, or going about in any
City, Borough, Town-Corporate, or Market Town in England or Wales with Crates,
Baskets, or otherwise, to sell, offer, or Barter any Glasses or Earthen Wares,
upon pain of suffering the same penalties inflicted by the Act upon other
Pedlers and petty Chapmen, to be recovered in like manner, and for the same
uses, that other penalties Inflicted upon other Pedlers and petty Chapmen are
to be recovered and employed.


