THE CHARACTER OF SPAIN: Or, An EPITOME OF Their Virtues and Vices.

-- Adeo sunt multa, loquacem
Ut lassare queant Fabium --
LONDON: Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. 1660.

printer's device of Nathaniel Brook, featuring an angel holding a large
feather or quill N B



Reader,
THere is lately published an Accomplished Piece, viz. Englands Worthies, in 47
select Lives of the most eminent persons, from Constantine till these late
times. A Piece worth perusal, By William VVinstanley Gent.

TO THE READER.
THis handful of my Gleanings I have here scattered among you, and if you judge
them worth the gathering, take them, and welcome: if not, leave them, and
there is no hurt done; For my own particular, I hold it less criminal to sport
away the tedious hours with the dalliance of my Pen, than to live besotted
with black Melancholy Yet as I am not of Heraclitus his humor, to whine away
my days; no more am I of Democritus his temper, to laugh out my time; but now
and then to unbend my self with moderate relaxation, is my absolute temper and
constitution. Semel in anno ridet Apollo: The God of Wisdom is merry once a
year, and why may not I? there is no reason to the contrary in my judgment,
especially since that no man I presume, will be offended at my mirth, unless he
be a Spaniard: Now how it may move his admirable choler, I am altogether
insensible, yet I am confident, if he be but furnished with so much patience as
to peruse it, he will undoubtedly like some, and that is as much as I can
either expect or desire: I have here painted them with Spanish Wool, set them
forth in their own colors, as far as lay within the compass of my power and so
small a Volume.

As for my labor herein, I much detest so sickly an impotency, as to overwean
my self with a conceit of my own Work; but if the truly judicious, who are
ever accompanied with a clear perspicacity, and a mild censure, shall
courteously receive it, I am crowned: But if any left handed Pythagoreans, (who
compel the Pen men of this Age, as they did the ancient Comoedians, to make use
of Apologies in lieu of Prologues) shall sinisterly accept what is voluntarily
and kindly offered to their survey, I only desire that they may be endowed
with that other mute qualification of the Pythagoreans, viz. Silence.

As for the mistakes that I may here be accused of, if convinced of them, I
will ingenuously confess them, and doubt not of pardon, since I have so good a
Solicitor in the eye of any that are but moderately courteous, as my own
infancy in respect of maturity of judgment. Besides, this will plead my
excuse, the purest eye cannot discern its own blemishes, unless by reflection;
the Moon has her macula's or spots; Venus had her mole, and all persons their
failings, therefore for me to have committed no faults, had been to put off man

But if any in the procacity of ignoble Envy (occasioned usually by a despair
of Imitation) continue to be farther contumelious, I shall pass it by, knowing
that a little assumed Soloecisme will serve my turn; and I with a kind of deaf
contempt will pass by the outrages of their obstreperous clamor, undisturbed.
Thus you have my resolution, and now I have no more to do, but bid you

Farewell.
THE CHARACTER OF SPAIN.
It Is Nature's Sweating-tub, a Nest of Wolves, the very Seat of Hunger and
Famine, a place where never any Lotus grew; for be confident no person that
ever traveled thither, desired to make it his place of residence; or when once
past her bounds, was ever prompted by his fancy to a second Visit; for
whosoever goes thither may be said to come out of Gods blessing into the warm
Sun, who is too too prodigal of his Beams here, which makes the Soil barren,
and but a desert, if compared to her neighbors, being like a Libbards skin,
here a spot, and there a spot inhabited, swelling with huge Mountains and high
Hills, which forced a Gentleman into this expression of her, Beati qui
sterilitatem non viderunt, sed crediderunt: Happy are they that were never so
unhappy as to see the sterility of Spain, but to believe it only. It Is an
excellent Country to travel in, for you shall scarce meet with Meat for money,
but Sauce good store, nor an Inn to entertain you; for the Master and the Mule
usually lodge together, and the latter perhaps meets with better fare then the
former.

As for the Natives, and first their Sovereign, he boasts that he has the Sun
for his Crest; but it is certain that most of his Subjects bear the Moon
crescent, for all the strict Confinement of their Wives: Pride, Haughtiness and
Ambition, accompanied with an imaginary conceit of their own peculiar Grandeza,
are the Ingredients that usually go to the composition of a Spaniard; so that
it is hard to judge whether the Country, or the minds of the Inhabitants are
most aspiring and mountainous. They are Saturnine, dull, slow, melancholic,
and altogether speculative, aiming at no other terminus ad quem, then
Contemplation, without afterward directing or settling it upon any servile,
inferior, or mechanic work or employment; so that you shall find few natural
Spaniards of any mechanic Trade, as Shoemakers, Tailors, Cobblers, Joyners,
Innkeepers, or the like; for which I call all Travelers to witness that go
into Spain, and return offended, because they find no Alehouses or Inns upon
the way as they do in other Countries, so that they are compelled to be their
own Providores, and carry Victuals in their bags, and Wine in their bottles;
for they delight infinitely in their imagined Grandeza, outward appearances and
honor, not at all regarding their private interest, so that they can but create
unto themselves the opinion and esteem of the world; and if they want good
Apparel, and biting penury nips them, they will fast two or three days for a
handsome Cloak, or a starched Ruff, and then strut it abroad in state; so
deliberately do they measure their way, as if they said a Pater Noster or an
Ave Maria between every step, and if he be so far stimulated by that Tyrant
Necessity, that he must vend his clothes to buy him food, he will first part
with his Shirt, because that with his Doublet and Ruff he covers the want of
it; then if his needs increase, off goes his Doublet, covering his body with
his Cloak; next his Sword; after that his Ruff, and last of all his Cloak, till
he has never a one left to cover his pride and knavery, and this is their
method which exigencies prompts them to. His pride, when reduced to the utmost
extent of poverty, viz. beggary, is infamous; for he will never confess that
necessity, but some casualty or misfortune compelled him to it; as, that he was
forced to cloth himself in these despicable weeds to preserve his life, and
his honor: and thus to play the Friar Mendicant, when he craves your charity,
it shall be in these or the like terms, May it please you Sir, to do some
courtesy for a distressed Cavaliero, that has deserted his native country
for such and such a mischance, and been constrained to show himself in this
misbeseeming garb; and when you are certified of the quality of the person that
craves your Alms (as long it will not be) you will think your selves happy in
relieving so noble a person as I am: and if perchance he that hears him,
demands who he is? he will reyly, The Nephew to some Earl, or Duke, or Brother
to the Admiral of Castile, and that some famous Princess being enamored with
him, he privily conveyed her out of her Fathers house in man's apparel; which
Plot being discovered by her Parents, he was constrained to absent himself from
the place of his nativity, and live thus unknown, till by the mediation of his
friends he were reduced to his pristine condition: Besides, he will boast of
fifteen or twenty thousand Crowns per annum, besides eight Baronies, and if the
person bestows some small piece of money on him, he throws it contemptibly in
the Donor's face, but afterward looks for it very calmly and peaceably on the
ground, and when he has found it, has the grace to put up a Pater Noster, or
send up some short Ejaculation for the prosperity and good success of his
Benefactor. Nor do the females come short of them in pride or arrogance, which
may be sufficiently evinced by this ensuing Relation that Barclay in his
Euphormio affords me. It Is a story of a poor miserable Spanish woman, that
coming with her family (her three sons I mean) to beg of a French Shoemaker,
he being compassionate told her, he would ease her of her charge, and take one
of her sons from her, and make him of his own profession, that so he might be
able to get a competency, whereby he might maintain himself handsomely: She with
a great deal of indignation replied, O Sir, God forbid I should cast away my
child on a stranger, of so mechanic a profession as yours is; who knows, but
in time he may come to be Viceroy of Naples, or Mexico. So horribly are they
puffed up with the timpany of pride, that they are the greatest enemies under the
sun to their own preferment: Go but into their Casa de Locos, or Bedlam, and
you shall hear one cry, I will be King; another, I am Emperor; and a third, I
am Pope: all which verifies our English Proverb, That which is bred in the
bone, will never out of the flesh. Nay, their pride is so infamous, that it is
grown common, even to a Proverb, indebted to them for being so; for they have a
vaporing saying of themselves in point of valor, Un Espannol son quatro
Diables en Francia. One Spaniard can act the part of four devils in France. And
when Mendoza was Ambassador in France, he would often break out into this
profane Ostentation; Dios es Poderoso en Cielo, y Don Felipe en Tierra: God
bears sway in Heaven, and King Philip on Earth: So daringly presumptious are
they, as to make God their fellow creature. Nay, your Thrasonical Castillians
will not stick to say, Un Espannol vale quatre Tudescos, tres Franceses, y dos
Italianos. One Spaniard is worth four Germans, three Frenchmen, and two
Italians. So self-conceited are they of their own imaginary dignity and
deserts, that they judge no Nation fit to come in competition with them. I will
borrow a Story of one of our rarely accomplished Gentlemen, concerning a
Castilian Capitain, who used to express himself in this ensuing manner: When I
descend into my self, and contemplate my most horrible terrible terribility, I
can hardly contain my self within my self: These Breeches that I wear are ftust
with Capitains Beards, and the Mustacho's of French Generals; my Pillow is
filled with Amazonian hair, my Cushion is made of a Turban taken off of the
Grand Sultan's head, my Coverlet is the skin of the Nemean Lion that Hercules
slew, my Curtains are made up of Colors and Ensigns taken in diverse Battles:
When I march into the fields, I commonly carry two Drums, as Pendents at my
ears; I am lulled asleep by the noise of Trumpets, and brass Kettles; and
Perillus his Bull strecht along, serves me for a Pillow: I was born in the
month of Mars, who was then the predominant Planet, and Ascendant: I came into
the world about break of day; Sol himself then suffered an Eclipse, Jove and
Mercury hid themselves, and Cynthia withdrew her horns for fear; that morning it
rained blood; the streams of the greatest Rivers turned red; Mongibel and
Strombola belched forth more fire then ordinarily: Near the place I was nurft
in, there was a Den of Lions, that I might be mur'd to their roaring; and one
time my mother caused a young Cub to be slain, on purpose to feed me with the
blood thereof. To conclude, I am that invincible, transcendent, great Capitain
Basilisco Espheramonte, Generalissimo of all the Militia of Europe: I am he
that uses to swallow Mountains, breathe Whirlewindes, spit Targets, and sweat
Quicksilver: I believe all the Notaries in Biscay, in three years space cannot
cast up those miraculous Achievements, which I the Scourge of Lutherans,
Converter of Pagans, and Peopler of Churchyards, have performed, etc.

Would not any one imagine that Ovids ghost were rambled hither, and by a
Pythagorean Metempsychosis transmigrated into this Person, all that opposes
this conjecture is only this, that the one writ in undigested rough prose, and
the other in soft sweet verse, this modern, has quite out-fabled the ancient
Ovid. Thraso himself where he intervives, durst not come in competition with
this Bragadocio Castilian, such a piece of prodigious self-conceitedness as
this, the world never heard of. Another strange kind of temper discrepant from
all Nations they have, and that is this, as great an argument of their
haughtiness, as any of the preceding If any one should demand an account in a
strange Country concerning any of the Natives, though never so mean, nay the
son of a Cobbler, he will reply, And is it possible, sir, that you should not
know that Cavalier? Did you never hear of him? And all this nay more, though he
be but one of their sunbak't Peasants I dare lay a wager there is not a Child
in the City or Kingdom five years old, but knows him, at least, if he be
sprung of noble Patents. You shall therefore understand, Sir, (then he begins
to be the false Herald of his forged fame) that he is Son to the Maggiorasco of
Castile, and one of the most noble families that Spain can boast of, and there
are many that confidently pronounce him second Cousin to King Philip: yet does
he go disgused in these weeds, that he may be undiscerned by the searching eye
of the vulgar: besides I must engage you to silence in this business, for if
the King should be sensible in the least of his residence here, he would take
it hainously that he did not alight at Court as soon as he arrived: But he that
will discourse of all particulars on this subject, must necessarily swell into
a volume, wherefore I will wind all up upon a small bottom. Now for the nature
of the Spaniard they are composed of fancy, and an affected gravity, under
which lurks store of arrogance, you shall have one of a dunghilbrood stand on
tip-toe, twerling his Mustachos say, Voto a tal io soy tan burno ce mo el Rey
Don Felipe, I swear by Jupiter Ammon, that I am in as good a condition as King
Philip; nor will some of them scruple the saying, that they will walk armed in
Paradise, but it is to be feared they are no birds of Paradise, and so there is
very little probability of of their nestling there. You shall see some of their
Dons pacing of it with abundance of gravity, environed with a crowd of
Servitors, or more properly, vassalls, two before him, one holds his hat upon
occasion, another his cloak, if it chance to rain, another carries a clout to
rub his Ginnet whilst he is at Mass, another a Currycomb to kemb his Mane, and
all these when they come home, will be content with a crust of bread, and a
radish apiece for their repast. They have a saying of the French (between whom
there is a very strange antipathy, and that irreconcilable too; Al primer
impetu son mas que hombres, y despues menos que mugeres. Their first onset
manifests them more then men, but their last less then women. But they to
requite their kindness, have an ill-favor'd saying of them, That the Spaniards
in point of true active valor, are but bearded women.

Now as to their habit and garb, they usually go close buttoned, nor will they
unbutton though fire fall from heaven. Their Collar is very close, as if they
intended that saying in the sacred Code, (...) All things are bare neckt to
God. He usually wears that upon his arms, which others do on their thighs, viz.
long sleeves, and short breeches: besides, he wears his stockings so close and
straight to his Leg, that you cannot take hold of them with a pair of pincers:
As for their gesture in the street, if there be a company, they march two by
two, as if they went in procession to some Saint, or Lady, and that so slowly,
that you would judge them to be newly recovered of a Quartan-Ague; and it is
beyond the power of whip or staff to quicken their pace. As for their speech,
they are so hellishly ambitious, as to say that when God forbad Adam eating of
the tree of knowledge, he spoke in Spanish, such is their imperiousness and
arrogance; but I am an enemy to tediousness, especially whilst I am under the
name of a Character; therefore to some other particulars.

And first let us make a Pass at the Jesuit, that plays the Machiavilian both
in Church and State, those grand Supporters of the Spanish Crown, which made a
Burgundian Gentleman say, Un Espagnol sans son Jesuit est comme un Perdrix
sans Orange. A Spaniard without a Jesuit at his elbow in consultation, is like
Powder'd-beef without mustard. Define them we need not, since it is done already
to our hands by Alexander Hays, one of their own Order, and it is this; Jesuita
est omnis home: They are Pluto's prime Agents, that labor tooth and nayl to
people his infernal Territories, and add Vassals to his gloomy majesty. No
persons have been greater Incendiaries, or Boutefeux, then these Ecclesiastical
Grotesco's; they usher in all Quarrels, Contentions, Debates, and Scissures,
both in Church and State. They are the Umbra of the Nobility, inseparable
associates, that follow them as a shadow does the bodies, which is the reason
of the numerous Legacies that are conferred upon them, yet they are like those
little animals Seneca speaks of, qua mordent, and non sentiuntur: For
wheresoever they get footing or entertainment, they prejudice by insensible
encroachments, though the party shall not judge himself hurt, or damaged in the
least. And as to their damnable Inquisition, if you are resolved upon a Dispute
concerning any Doctrine held by the Roman Church, they will retort with a
Syllogism of Hemp, or Fire, which is far more harsh then one in Barbara, or
Baroco, and fitter for devils then men. And though they are so much in esteem
with the Pope, yet are they maligned and flouted at by the vulgar, as appears
by the Pasquils no less various, then ingenious and tart, that are bestowed on
them in every place, which is apparent to any one that is but a mean Historian.
When they first negotiated in France for footing in Paris, they were asked,
whether they were Seculares, or Regulares? and replied, Tales, Quales, such and
such, which remain; upon record a Nickname to them even to this very day. But
what the subject bestowed on them with the tongue, they fetched out of their
Sovereign's teeth (King Henry the fourth I mean) they began to take a course
that he might be hit in the teeth with nothing, by endeavoring to beat them all
out; for a young Jesuit green in growth, but old in villainy, stabbed him in
the mouth, though it happened with the loss of one only tooth; whereupon the
King said merrily, Falloit il que les Jesuits fussent convanicus par ma
bouche? Must they needs be convinced by my mouth? Hereupon they were commanded
to depart the Kingdom by such a day, and a new Stone-Gallows erected before the
Palace gate for the execution of the Offender; but the King out of fear (so
much do they awe the Scepter) removed it; Hereupon one sung ingeniously to his
Majesty:

Sire, si vous voulez du tout a l'advenir,
De L'Assassin Chastel oster le sou venir;
Ostant la Pyramide, and l'Arrest qui le touch,
Qu'on vous remette donc une dent dans la bouche.
Taught to speak English thus:

Great Prince, if for the future you will save
Chastel th'Assassine, that notorious Knave;
And pull the Gibbet down, to purge the stain,
Let him put in your mouth the tooth again.
But they finding themselves too much abused by the imposition of that
scandalous Title on them of Tales, Quales, (as they judged it) were so profane
as to call themselves Socios Jesu ever after, the Associates of Christ (daring
villains, that rank themselves in the same degree with their Redeemer) yet in
the sacred pages we read but of one that was called Christ's Companion, and
that was Judas: this must needs be in their own judgment malum per pejus, they
have well mended the matter; for they were their own Godfathers, and did
rebaptize themselves contrary to the Canons of their own Church, for they allow
not a second Baptism, and that with a far more ignominious (as it falls out)
though truer appellation. 'Twas their sophistical equivocation that caused that
Clause to be inserted in the Oath of Supremacy in England, without mental
reservation. Nay, the Great Turk on the Asian shore, banished them out of Pera
near Constantinople, upon the relation that Queen Elizabeth's Ambassadors made
of their impiety and inhumanity. Nay the Venetians, though birds of the same
feathers, and both feathers of the Roman Eagle, drove this ridiculous and
ravenous Bird clear out of the Confines of their Dominions, so sensible were
they of the horrible outrages that are usually committed by them; for there is
no massacre how inhumane soever, but either they kindle the faggots, or afford
the fuel. One of their notorious Machiavilian designs, though frustrated, was
hatched for our destruction, viz. in Eighty Eight, when they came with their
invincible Armado (as they styled it) but we rebaptized it in our British
Seas, the Vincible Armado, for there it was overwhelmed, destroyed, and
dispersed. They made a wood of our Seas, through the number of their Ships,
every Galeon like the Trojan Horse, having armed men in the womb of it, with
all sorts of instruments for torture; among some whereof, there were found long
Knives, with this scandalous Superscription, To cut the throats of Heretics,
and yet not a damnable Complotter in all this mischief, but must be canonized
for a Saint; as if it lay within the compass of his power that sits in the
Porphiry-chair to exempt men from the punishment due to those sins, which the
Almighty has ordained for such hellish Malefactors; but it is to be hoped,
that their Plots, like the form into which they reduced their ships, viz. a
Moon crescent, may ever prove a Moon in the wane, and that the feathers of the
Roman Eagle may molt away, till it become a ridiculous bird, and become the
object and subject of laughter to all her Neighboring Nations.

But the Masterpiece of all, was the (...), or Gunpowder Plo^ (...) ^^^^mous a
nature, that it see^^ ^^er to be (as one of our gowned Gentlemen says) A piece
hammered in Hell by a Conclave of Cacodaemons, than traced by humane invention.
A sulpherous Mine prepared and fitted with that Artifice, that with one snuff
it should have blown up to the Clouds, and made but a squib of that mighty
Assembly, with many thousands of innocent souls besides: Englands Sovereign
Monarch, with his Royal Consort, and Princely Issue; Root and Rind, Stem and
Stock, Bud and Blossom, had all been blasted, and that in a moment. Oculi
intuitu, in the very twinkling of an eye, and all our stately Fabrics and
Structures had bin turned into ashes: But before I ent^^ (...) ^he Relation of
this (...) ^ntended Cruelty, (...) our self (Reader) for trag^^^ ^xpectations,
lest the suddenness and impiety of the Fact astonish your Apprehension; and
here think of nothing but Graves, Tombs and Epitaphs, Flakes of Fire, Cracks of
Thunder, Astma's, and Vesuvio's; for here is a Plot that History is at a
nonplus to parallel. O learned Jesuit! Have thou hammered upon the Forge of
thy accursed Brain (for indeed he was the Blacksmith of this diabolical
Stratagem) a Cruelty, as horrible as unheard of: not the Raviliac's in France,
their own Inquisition, the Machiavils in Italy, the Gowries in Scotland, the
Tories or Oneals in Ireland, nor any other vicious or desperate mortal yet
found out: It Is plain that in this they intended to out-devil the grand Elector
of Erebua, if 'twere possible: A cruelty that transcends all Roman story, far
beyond that of Catiline, Brutus, or Lucius Scaevola. Presumptuous villains!
that dare send souls to Heaven before the Resurrection, and make companions for
Elijah in his fiery Chariot. Here might you see these Pioneers digging to Hell
for Assistance, when Heaven had denied it them so often, but at length Sennior
Satan took compassion of their labor, and helped them with a destructive
invention: Herein it is apparent they received assistance from, and encountered
with the greatest head of the hellish Hydra (always except the Pope) fain would
they have made our Land like the way of Medea, strewed with the Limbs of her
brother Absyrtus; here the arm of a Father, there the leg of a mother; here the
limb of one relation, there the joint of another, his laquens positus est; here
the gin was laid, but like silly Woodcocks they were ensnared in it themselves.

-- Non lex est iustior ulla,
Quam necis artifices, art perire sua.
-- It Is just I Will swear,
That they should all be caught in their own snare.
O rare Saints! what? Turn your Saint Peter into Saltpeter, to destroy us, and
all we can lay claim to? Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Religionem.
Religion, Substance, Kingdom, King,
Of all our famous Laws the Spring.
And they were prompted to all their cruelty, inhumanity, and barbarism, by
their zeal to Religion:

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Sacred Lady, must thou be the Mantle to
cover their infandous villainy; the Cloak to palliate their stupendous cruelty?
Thou that usest to be clad with the armor of light, must thou be made the
Authoress of such subterranean darkness? No, no, far be it from a rational
person, or solid Christian to entertain a thought so prejudicial and injurious
to thy sacred, incontaminated innocence.

But it is the general course of these hellish Machiavilians, not to suffer Vice
to appear upon the stage in its ugly hew, and native deformity, lest it should
deter all persons from it, but they mask or cover it with the vayl of virtue.
And farther to show that the edge of their Satanical invention is not yet
blunted, and manifest their choler still against us, they keep near the Fifth
of November a Day of Execration, wherein they curse Heretics, as they term
us; in which they approach nearest of any, and resemble most of all the
rebellious Jew, that crucified our Savior; who on the twelfth of August had
their time of Execration, wherein they cursed Vespatian, and the Roman
Soldiers for demolishing their famous Temple of Jerusalem. Nor is their malice
and envy glutted or satisfied with Europian blood, but they must satiate their
fury with the Indian too: and though they pretend that their right to both
Indies, is right of Discovery, and that they were the first Detectors of it, it
is questionable, if not absolutely false; for Pliny the Carthaginian was the
first Discoverer of India, by crossing the Equinoctial twice; nor were the
West Indies unknown to Plate: Besides, a greater evidence then the
forementioned, that the Spaniards were not the first Discoverers of America, is
this, That there was a Welsh Epitaph found at their first landing there, upon
Madoc a British Prince; who, as it is supposed, made an escape to save himself
from the fury of the Saxons in England, and put himself in a Barque to the
fortune of the Sea, and so landed in America. And it is farther confirmed, that
the old British or Weclh were there, from the variety of British words
retained among them in their language even at this very day. But whether they
were the first Discoverers or no; it is observed, that those vast treasures she
transports thence thrive little, by reason of that ocean of human (though
savage) blood the Spaniard spilt there; never did any nation phlebotomize an
enemy so inhumanely as they did, in so much that it is affirmed by some, (and
that groundedly too) that the blood they spilt would over-poise all the gold
they ever fetched from thence, if it were counter-ballanced; and as that vast
Treasure was first gained by the effusion of much blood, so has it been
ominous and fatal ever since, and consumed in blood; for most of the
Combustions and Dissentions of the Occidental World have bin fed and fomented
by them; nay, which is more prejudicial to it, in point of policy, the King of
Spain by these Mines and means, furnishes the major part of his Enemies with
Arms defensive and offensive against him, the least part of the treasure
remaining among them; for most of their current Coin is Copper, so that we may
say, according to our English Proverb, Who is worse shod than the Shooemakers
wife? In so much that we may compare her (and that very fitly) to the Arcadian
Ass; who, though laden with Gold, yet browzeth upon Thistles.

As to their Cruelty in the Indian Conquest, it was so inhuman, that the
relation thereof would stagger the belief of a Christian, were there not a
general consent among all Historiographers of the hainousness thereof. Such
horrible Murders and Massacres did they commit, that I blush to stain my paper
with their relation; for it is affirmed by some (and those of no mean credit)
that in the space of forty five years, there were above ten millions of souls
destroyed in the New World, as they are pleased to call it, besides those great
numbers that died by working in the Mines, officiating like Asses, Oxes, and
Mules; some of them being laden with burdens on their back of one hundred and
sixty pound weight, carrying them three hundred miles, sometimes more, besides
those that perished in the water with fishing for Pearl, in obedience to their
insulting commands, being dieted on purpose by them for that work with course
Biscuit, and dry edible commodities, to make them fit for that work: poor
slender fare for such hard and slavish laborers: They scorned, it seems, to
murder by retail, but Caligula like, their glutton blades must be imbrued in
the bowels of a whole Nation. Nay farther, they made a sport and recreation of
their inhumanity and barbarism; for they hunted them with dogs, as if they have
been beasts of the Game, and not their fellow creatures; to confirm which,
there is a story of an old impotent Indian woman that was sent by a Spaniard,
with a Letter to the Governor of the next Town, who, when she was departed
about a flight shot off of him, he let slip his dog at her; which she
perceiving fell on her knees, and cried out, Sennor, Sennor Dog, (so much
Spanish she had) I beseech thee spare me, for I am a going with a Letter from
thy Master, to the Governor; the unanimate creature it seems moved with
compassion at her words, and suppliant posture, being better exercised in the
rules of humanity and mortality than his master, took compassion on her, only
lifting up his leg and pissing against her, and so let her depart in peace. Now
the Spaniards had rendered themselves so odious to those Indians, by reason of
their cruelty, that not one of a noble resolution among them could endure to
hear of going to any place that they frequented, although after their
dissolution, as may appear by the story of one Hathu Cacico a stout Indian, who
being to die, (for his being an Indian was crime enough to merit death, though
probably no malefactor) Stat pro ratione voluntas, was their Motto, Their will
was their Law; who being persuaded by a Franciscan Fryat, and admonished to
turn Cathosique, and embrace the Romish superstition, withal acquainting him
with the joys of heaven, and how that he should be transported thither, if he
would be converted, or to speak more properly, perverted; whereupon he demanded
of the Franciscan whether or no there were any Spaniards in heaven? who replied
yes, 'twas peopled with them: then said he, I will choose rather to go to Hell,
then to have their company: a notable example of heathen generosity, which
might intimate unto them, they could not conquer their spirits, though they
massacred their bodies. Nay Attabalipa one of their Pagan Kings being informed,
That the Pope had conferred his kingdom upon the King of Spain, was heard to
utter this as noble, as tart expression, That the Pope must be either an
egregious fool, or an unjust Tyrant, that durst have the impudence to take upon
him the bestowing of other men's Right and Possessions, so freely and liberally
to others, that had no right nor title to them.

Nor were they thus satiated with drinking the savage blood of the Indians, but
they must be sucking the blood of the European Christians too; witness the
Tyranny of the Duke d'Alva, termed (and not undeservedly) The Sponge of the
Belgian Blood; for he made it his boast, and a kind of sportive recreation to
be heard often saying, That he had dispatched to the other world above eighteen
thousand Belgians by Fire, Water, the Rack, the Sword, and the Ax. Nor is it to
be found a humor in Subjects only, but in their Monarchs likewise; witness
one of their Kings, who being disturbed at the diverse ill Successes that he had
in his Politic Proceedings, swore he would be revenged upon the Superior
Power, that has the conduct and guidance of all mortal Affairs, and therefore
commanded that none of his subjects should adore, believe in, or speak of God
for so long time, upon pain of his utter displeasure. Impious wretches! that
durst combat Omnipotency, or venture upon a single Duel with the Deity. Now as
to the Gigantick power of his Catholic Majesty, if it be equally poised in the
balance of a discerning judgment, it comes far short of that height and
splendour that is usually attributed to it; for the vast distance of his
Territories, the innumerable Debts be has contracted, (and he is infinitely
indebted to the Genoese and others) the universal antipathy that is between
them and all Nations in general, by reason of their ambition, pride, and
haughtiness, is as great an impediment and debilitating, as his Wealth is a
Fortification or Assistance. And as for Justice, the Queen of Virtues, she has
as little power there, as among any people on the surface of the earth,
especially for forreiners; for it is as facil a business to draw a soul out of
the jaws of Hell, as to recover any thing against them if they grasp it once
within their clutches: And if a stranger come to commence a Suit at Law there
against a Spaniard, the processal charges will oftentimes surmount the value of
the thing, or right you sue for.

As for zeal, and innate valor, where shall you find it among them? it is more
rare to see a Duel there, then a Horse in Venice; or to hear of a Spurrier
preferred to a Queen; though not a Cobbler or Smith among them can be seen
without a Sword, which they wear for orament, not use: yet if they have
received any abuse or affront, they will be sure to meet in the Marketplace,
and there draw, pretending to run furiously one at another, because they are
sure to be parted e're they make a pass, or can well tell how to mount their
weapon; and usually the Minister of Justice (as they call him) deprives them
both of their weapons for a time, till he has wrought a reconciliation. It Is
true, in the Conquest of the Western World, they did atchieve somewhat, but it
was against a naked, inermous enemy, who were destitute of all defensive or
offensive weapons; besides, so stupid and ignorant were the poor Americans,
that they took Horse and Man to be one Aminal, born contrary to the course of
natural production, and begot of some infernal stage; which Bugbear opinion
profligated the Indian, and not the Spanish manhood or valor: where was the
Spanish generosity and nobility of spirit, when Goleta near Tunis was
shamefully lost by them, and taken by Sinan Bassa, with five hundred Pieces of
Ordnance, which has armed Tunis and Algier ever since, and made them such
infamous Pirates? I must confess, were the word of sufficiency to combat with
the sword, or could the good conceit they have of their own magnanimity, or the
loud (though undeserved) Encomiums they will bestow upon themselves, and their
deserts make them men of war, they would subjugate the whole universe, and
excel all their Predecessors in military discipline; but words will not gain
the field, it must be action.

As for the number of their Learned, I think they have no great quantity;
Raymundus Lullius is one of their famous Authors, one that (like a native
Spaniard) was very much conceited of his ability in the study of the
Philosophers Stone, or Elixir; of whom it may be said, as of all others that
follow that whimsie:

Et bona dilapidant omnia pro lapide. How much he was esteemed of, this ensuing
Dystich will clearly demonstrate.

Qui Lulli lapidem quaerit, quem quarere nulli
Profuit; Hand Lullus, sed mihi nullus erit.
There is nothing but air in that vain foolish study, nothing of substance;
their glowing fire does but swell up their hope of gain, till the spirits quite
expire, and so their fortunes die: Nor indeed can it be expected, that they
should excel in any kind of learning, because they peruse no volumes but their
own, penned in their own language, and in their University Dissertations, their
Vernaculum or Mother tongue carries the greatest sway (which is made up of
nothing, but a few shreds of Morisco, and patched up with some old Arabic
words) for they seldom, scarce once in an age, dispute in the Roman tongue. And
before we leave their learned Rabble, let us have one hit more at their modern
Jasons, the Jesuits, those Clergymen of the Golden-fleece, that devote
themselves more to Madam Moneta, then the Lady Loretto, or the blessed Virgin
Mary; and if we consider their Tenets in Divinity, we shall find them as
erroneous and diabolical, nay, as diametrically contrary to Reason or Divinity,
as their politic, accursed, Machiavilian Plots and Practices. Our English
Chronicles makes mention of one Father Garnet a Jesuit, who being interrogated
by the Earl of Notingham, whether or no, if any one should confess unto him in
the morning, that he had a design to murder the King that very evening, he
thought himself bound in conscience to reveal it? he replied in the negative;
which infernal doctrine was confirmed by Binetus the Jesuit, in these words:
Praestare Reges omnes perire, quam si vel semel Confessionis sigillum
violaretur; Regem enim humani juris Imperium ait esse, Confessionem juris
divini: In English thus: It were far better that all the Kings in the world
should be murdered, than that the Seal of Confession should be violated in the
least; for the dignity of a King is indebted to humane authority for its being;
but Confession, to Divine Institution. Nay, there was a Jesuit in France who
had the impudence to belch this blasphemy in public, and to maintain, if there
were occasion, Si Dominus noster Jesus Christus in terris versaretur morti
obnoxious, and aliquis sibi in Confessione dixisset velle se illum occidere,
priusquam Confessionem revaleret, passurum se, ut Christus occidatur. O
profane! in English thus: If our Lord and our Savior Jesus Christ were upon
the earth, and mortal, and that any one should confess unto him that he had an
intention to murder him, he would suffer our Savior to be slain, rather then
disclose it. Right Judas'es, that had rather murder their Master than thwart
their own vain traditions, and for phanatick Chymaera's, that never were hatched
hitherto in any but such addle pates as their own; but let them have a care
lest that they find Judas his punishment, since they are so much guilty of his
heinous crime. This is a more daring, nefandous piece of wickedness, than that
fictitious one of the Gigantomachy; for they do not only aim at the dethroning
of the Deity, but would, were it within the compass of their hellish
inventions, be so impious as to murder him. Our most gracious Sovereign of
blessed memory, King James, received a seasonable Caveat from his God-mother
Queen Elizabeth, to take heed of the Spaniard; who answered her very
ingeniously, Se non aliud beneficium ab Hispano expectare, quam quod Ulyssi
Polyphemus promiserat, ut aliis devoratis, postremus deglutiretur. That he
expected no more favor from the Spaniard, than what Polyphemus promised
Ulysses, that all the rest being devoured, it should fall to his share to go
last to pot. There is no distinction among them, when animated by rage and
fury, Prince and People, King and Kingdom, all go to rack, if it lie in their
power. Now it is most certain by this Hildebrandine Jesuitical doctrine of their
auricular Confession; for they open the Cabinets of Princes, and no persons
have such sure and faithful intelligence as they from all parts in Christendom:
Besides, there are no Ecclesiastics that frequent the Court, or Noblemens
houses more than they, so that they understand all the Transactions in Church
and State in all parts of the Christian world, and thereby are enabled to put
themselves in a posture to act their damnable designs; yet, notwithstanding all
their sinister and politic practices to support the Crown of Spain, and defend
his Holiness, they remain but in a wavering and fluctuating condition; for the
late Motus trepidationis in Naples, and that in Sicily, with the total Revolt
of the Portugese, and the Catalonian Commotions, and those vast Debts that they
have contracted with the Genoese, and several other accidents that might be
mentioned, has so shaken the Spanish Monarchy, that she continues in an
anguish condition ever since, and there is very little probability of her
resetlement. Decrescit Oliva, the Olive-branches begin to wither and decay; and
it is very much feared by themselves, that she will be found dead at the root
ere long, if by a diligent lopping off of her superfluous branches, and the
careful management, and ordering of her State-Gardeners, she be not revived,
and made to bud and blossom afresh: But undoubtedly she will come to a sad
Catastrophe, if the tympany of the Spaniards pride be not assuaged and taken
down: Besides the innumerable ill successes that she has had in all her
undertakings, is a sufficient argument to dissuade her from ever believing
Fortune to be her favorite; she seemed indeed to be in the poop, and favor King
Philip, till he received a memorable Defeat at Mostagan in Barbary, under the
Conduct of Alcaudite a petty inconsiderable Morisco King; and their ill success
at Los Gelves near Tripoli, where most of the Christians in the Neopolitan
Galleys under the Conduct of Don Alvaro their Chief Commander, were souc'd in
Thetis Powdering-tub, and made meat for Sharks and Shaddocks; which was
occasioned by the imprudence of their Leaders, when as otherwise they might
have come off nobly, with the name of Conquerors. Several others I might
mention, but I will not upbraid them too much with their infelicity: only take
this by the way, that when Philip the second rigged that numerous Fleet against
our Land, with an absolute intent to ruinate us, he was repulsed by the valor
of the English, with so much disparagement to the whole Nation, that he
passionately said, He sent his men to fight with men, and not with the Winds
and the Sea: nay, one of their holy Conclave, in a Sermon was heard to say
publicly, That by this very business, and the frustrating of their design God
had manifested himself a Lutheran. It Is strange methinks, noble Sennors, that
he should fight for the Heretics against the true Catholics, as you term your
selves! Methinks you might observe the saying of your Emperor Charles the
Fifth, (who was of the Austrian family) and have taken his Advice a little more
into consideration:

Con todo el mundo guerra,
Y puz con Ingalat jerra.
In English thus:

With all the world wage war,
But never with England jar.
For if you do, you must be armed and quilted, and for all that may be basted
into the bargain: Be confident Sennor Espannol, if you come to bake in our
Oven, your Cake will be dough. There Is no kindling your Irons in our fire,
unless you mean to be scorch't with them; but methinks you might have so much
wit, as to take warning by our English Proverb, The burnt child dreads the
fire; if not, as you like the play of our Brittisn Guns, venture upon another
Invasion: we have more Drakes still to send their Fireships among you, and
send you back to your Confines tossed and weather-beaten, if any of you be so
happy as to escape: well make you know your heart lies in your heels, and
flying is your best course; you are like to have no harbor here, a retreat is
your safest refuge.

Before the Embassage of the Constable of Castile mediating for peace with us,
your prating Jesuit had infected the common people of Spain with a false
opinion, that the English were strangely metamorphos'd, some had the faces of
Hogs, some did resemble Dogs, and others Munkies, since they forsook the Roman
Church; which they poor silly souls did really believe, till the Constable at
his return did rectify his Contrymen. But conceit them so still; but if
they be Dogs, they come all of noble Sires, they are no Mungrels, but such
Mastiffs as will bark you out of your wits; and such Munkies they are, that if
they make but a face at you, that is enough to scare a whole Legion of you; and
if you are so incredulous as not to believe it, try once more, and then judge
according to your success. When the Marriage between our late blessed Sovereign
of happy memory (though of unhappy fortune) and the Infanta of Spain was in
agitation, the Nobility of England that were dieted at the King's Table, and
attended by the Spaniards, were not so meanly bred, as to be satisfied with
your poor Cates, which made them break out into many scoffing expressions
touching the barrenness of Spain, smiling also at the vanity of their
superstitious Processions. And Archee the Kings Jester being at Madrid, and
admitted one day to see his Catholic Majesty at Dinner, strutted and walked up
and down, talking and muttering, which the King of Spain perceiving, asked what
he said? which an Interpreter there present made answer, He says that King
James his Master did resemble God Almighty most of any King in the world. And
he demanding the reason, was answered, Because that God had but one son, and he
sent him to be crucified among the Jews, so the King of England had but one
son, and he sent him to be crucified among the Spaniards: a notable saying to
check them for their accustomed cruelty and barbarism, although in this he
proved but a foolish, and false Prophet, and to our joy and comfort it fell out
quite contrary.

There happened one day a very facetious, quipping passage betwixt King Philip
and a Veteran Capitain, that had served him a long time in the Belgian Wars,
who being deferred by the Council of State, was resolved to find out his
Majesty himself, who was then at the Escurial, and as fortune would have it,
hunting; where mounted on his Mule, and meeting the King single in the field,
the King began to entertain Discourse with him: first, demanding who he was?
The blunt Soldier judging him to be some private Nobleman, related the whole
story to him, recounting how that he had served Don Philip many years in the
Netherlands, and that now he was come to demand a remuneration: The King
answered, Does Don Philip owe you any thing of your lawful pay? No, said the
Capitain: then replied the King, I am clearly of opinion, that he will scarce
give you any thing since he has satisfied you in your arrears, and principally
because he is infinitely indebted, and has many designs to put forward; at
which the Capitain broke off abruptly, saying, Pues que me bese la mula en el
culo: Then let him, kiss my Mule in the tail; and so was riding away, but the
King called him back, and asked him what Petition he had made, or what course
he had taken for satisfaction? He told him that he had often attended the
Council of State, and War, with his Memorials, but was never the near, nor
could he ever procure the sight of his Majesty there, nor elsewhere. Very good,
said the King, the Council sits to morrow, and I shall be there present, for I
have an Office there; wherefore if you come I shall procure your entrance, and
then you may make your Address to Don Philip in person. The King the very next
day did preside himself in Council, and gave strict order, that if such a
person, describing him of such a name, (for that he had learned of him by their
Conference) should chance to be at the door, he should be admitted: the
Capitain coming, and having entrance, seeing the Council bare, and knowing
this to be the King with whom he had private discourse yesterday, he was not
much out of countenance: Immediately Philip ask't him, whether he remembered
the discourse that was between them in the field? Yes Sir, replies the
Capitain; then, said he, you cannot forget what you said: That if the King
would not reward you, he might kiss your Mule in the breech: Sir, replied he,
Seno lo dicho, dichio, mi Mula esta debaxo a la puerta: What I said, I said,
and Mule stands below at the back gate: The King was not at all disturbed but
gave him his hand to kiss, and caused him to be nobly rewarded. He had now
quite forgot his usual expression to those that came to request any thing of
him, Si a todos los que me piden daria, presto pediria yo: If I should give to
every one that puts up a Petition to me, I might soon come to beg my self. Well
done Capitain, hug thy blunt Genius, it was that procured thy reward, not his
bounty; who, though a Monarch, had soon sent thee packing with a curb, had
thou not gone contrary to the common course of men who with so much
submissiveness did use to petition his Majesty; well said downright: hereafter
cry, hang Complements, and swear, Complementum is but complete mentiri.

But now since we are upon so slovingly a subject, let us expatiate upon a story
that is somewhat akin to this, which happened at a solemn Convention of his
Holiness, his Catholic Majesty, and his most Christian of France, with
thousands of the Nobility of both Nations; who being all bare, and the Pope
ready to mount, to ride in Procession, one of these Monarchs holding the
Stirrup on foot, and the other his Saddle, both uncovered, and kissing his
Pantofle. The King of France his Jester spying it, and taking it into
consideration, straight endeavors to make through the Crowd, crying out aloud,
Make room, make room; at which the multitude being astonished, asked him what
was the matter? what forced him to these loud exclamations? O! replied he, I Will
be gone to Paris. Why? your reason? O! says he, if the Pope make so great a
Monarch as my Master kiss his Toe, he will make me kiss his Breech by and by,
therefore I Will be gone. He it should seem was not minded to salute his
Apostolic rump; nor did he much fancy the kissing of his Toe, but if he had
been compelled to it, he would have gone near to have shown his Holiness as
snappish a trick as the Ambassadors dog did, that almost bit it off: But we will
have no more of these whimsies, lest some Critic or other should say, that
this Treatise is fit for nothing but to make cul-paper, that is, ad
abstergendum podicem. Methinks I hear 'em cry, fie, fie, therefore I must give
over. And now let us pitch upon some more cleanly subject, if we can hit on any,
sure we shall find out one at length, and yet it must be of that King Philip
before mentioned, who had erected a Pyramid in the Marketplace at Santo Domingo
(where our famous Swimmer Drake was, who took and plundered it) whereon was
found this Motto:

-- Non sufficit Orbis: One world was too narrow to confine the spacious soul
of Don Philip.

Aestuat infeliae angusto limite mundi: His capacious and most ample Majesty
did sweat again for want of room in this narrow World; yet notwithstanding his
proud boasting (but that you know is like a Spaniard) he was overcome by an
Army of poor inconsiderable creatures, silly worms; for Herod-like, he perished
morbo perdiculari, by the Lousy disease, which made a modern Poet sing:

-- Rex ille Philippus
Tot populis, Terrisque potens, lateque Tyrannus,
Occidit a foedo rosus grege Vermi culorum,
Carnificiesque suos miserando corpore pavit
Vivens, atque videns, and propria funera planxit.
Nor was it any other then a manifestation of Divine vengeance from an angry
Deity; which some imputed to his base Lasciviousness and Lechery; some gave out
it was a Judgment for making away his Son Don Carlos; others affirmed it to be
a Judgment inflicted upon him, for the Duke d'Alva's Tyranny over the
Belgians; others, that it was for depriving Portugal of her lawful Heir. But
most men did generally concur in this opinion, That it was a punishment sent
from Heaven, for that Ocean of American blood that was spilt by him, to possess
themselves with their Mines of Gold and Silver. Oh that sordid Lucre should
prompt a man to the effusion of so much blood! when it might have been procured
with far more honor and renown to the Conquerors, if otherwise ordered, and
they themselves have been free from such a barbarous imputation: but what would
you have? or what can you expect otherwise? for according to our English
Proverb, They must needs go that the Devil drives; and he doubtless has been
the Hellish Machiavil that has endoctrinated them in most of their politic
Designs; but no doubt he that set them forward, will, give them their due
reward. It Is impossible so much vill any as has been acted by that Nation,
should be for ever unpunished; to think so, were to accuse the Supreme Governor
of all things, of the highest injustice; but far be it from any man to harbor
such a thought. Time will produce much, and then our eyes may see what we are
now assured of will happen, unless by an unfeigned repentance, and a deluge of
penetential tears, they wash their hands from that deluge of humane blood they
have poured out; but it must not be their penance in a coat of hair, or their
barefoot pilgrimages, and affected absteniousness, and such other
Superstitious Ceremonies that are used among them; although they be of a
contrary opinion. But now a little more of their nature and disposition, and we
have done.

The austerity of the Spaniards temper, and the severity and affected arrogance
of their manners, renders them odious to all other Nations, when as an humble,
and yet handsome deportment, would make them far more acceptable. They are so
addicted to laziness and sloth, that their idleness is grown common, even to a
Proverb. Now every Schoolboy that is subject to the lash, can tell them, Otium
pestis Reipublicae: Idleness is the moth or canker of the Commonwealth; and if
this Caterpiller continue long upon the boughs of the Olive, it will leave it
as inconsiderable and mean in the judgment of all the world, as they now would
fain induce them to believe it mighty and magnificent. They are the very
Harpies of the earth, or like that roaring Lion, pace the circumference of the
Globe, seeking whom they may devour; for wheresoever they can once get
admission, they cast about by all possible means to ruinate and destroy the
inhabitants, using all artifices, and picking quarrels to that end and purpose;
So that that Maronian Dystich may very well agree with their practices, which
says:

Armati Terram exercent, semperque recentes,
Convectare juvat praedas, and vivere rapto.
They are naturally prone to suspect all they have any acquaintance with, how
slender soever it be; an argument of a depraved disposition, and corrupt
nature; and as proud as Lucifer the apostate Angel: but we know the usual
fortune that attends such haughty minds:

-- tolluntur in altum,
Ut lapsu graviore ruant. --
They are exalted and lifted up on high, that their fall may be the greater.
They are also infinitely addicted to self-love; then which there is no greater
enemy to true friendship which is the bond that ties human society together,
and makes man to be what he was born for, (...), a Sociable Creature. They are
arrogant to their inferiors, and humble to their Superiors, which argues them
to be made up of an ignoble allay, and sprung of a dunghill brood, verifying the
old saying:

Asperius nihil est humisi, quum surg^t in altum. The Catalaunians are
naturally passionate, impatient of labor, and addicted to Theft beyond measure.
The Arragonians are factious, mutinous, and subject to rebellion. Those of
Andaluzia are of a cruel temper, drunkards; a vice that the Egyptians did so
much abhor, that when they found any of their servants overcome with this
Excess, they brought them forth, showing them to their children, that they
might learn in their young years to avoid the Crime in their old age. Now
should you see any of them in this swinish condition, you would take him to be
an enated sop, that is newly sprung out of a pot of Ale in a frosty morning;
which makes them have such red-coated faces, and such fiery noses, that you
might try a young Eagle by their bloody beak; you might soon understand by their
complexion what broth they love: it is well that they cannot compass a mess of
our Ceres water gruel, for if they could, we should scarce hear of the natural
death of one of them once in an Age; for they would all quickly swim to their
graves in a drunken fit: besides, they are so avaricious, that they learn
Geometry only to measure the circumference of their household bread, that they
may know to a hairs breadth how much of it is consumed in their absence; and
should you chance to be invited to a Collation or Dinner among them you must
feed sparingly, or else it may be find the English Proverb verified, To have
roast meat given you, and be beaten with the spit: Not a leg of a Capon that
you cut but you ham-string the poor man that invites you, and he had as live
see you drink his own blood, as sup up the gravy. And yet this proud imperious
fellow will (out of ostentation, if he chance to have a fowl to dinner) strew
the feathers at the door, to show all Passengers that they have had noble fare:
but this you must note proceeds from the want of victuals among them. It Is the
general disposition of them all, to believe what they fancy, more than what
they either do, or indeed can really act, and especially of the Portugese; nor
will he deny it, Portugalli dictitant se niti eo potius, quod se esse putant,
quam eo, quam revera sunt. And yet what are these Portugals? a rude rabble or
pack of slaves; for the number of them in some places are very near as great,
if not more then the inhabitants; And there are very few places where there is
so little distinction among them; for they scarce make any difference between
men and beast, and they are both sold in the market at an equal rate, so that
they may lawfully be termed a Crew of Heathens, or Pagans, notwithstanding
their pretended zeal to Religion. But that is but a fair pretense to set off
their vill any the better, a mere ceremony among them, and indeed so much
ceremony, that it has almost eaten out the substance of Religion, Bible,
Alchoran, Talmud, or Golden Legion, all is one; Religion serves but for a mere
Stratagem, and their Priests, that were ordained (or at least should be) to
exorcise devils, are the greatest fiends, and should, if rightly served, be
cast out themselves. But now, as to the foundation of their imagined Grandeza,
that they have brought their Government unto, as they imagine: The very form
thereof is very unpleasing to a subject, for they had rather rule by fear than
love, and where she acquires any of the latter, it is drawn as a thread through
the eye of a needle out of the apprehension of fear: it being one of their
State-maxims, That Obedience proceeding from such a love, is the surest and
safest, in regard that Fear being the greatest and most careful Governess of
our passions, sways all the rest with more power and controulment, and keeps
them still in subjection, and so consequently makes as good subjects, as it did
Gods at first.

Primus in orb Deos fecit timor --
Fear first created Gods. --
Nay farther, the chief and highest Ministers they employ, are so much for
their private lucre, and self-interest, (which most commonly proves the
destruction of a Kingdom) that it is grown to a Proverb, Some of them gnaw,
others eat, and some devour, where they are deputed to signorize and govern.
But, now it is time to change our subject, and to be a little more mild in
their Description and Character.

In this foregoing Discourse you have seen their most heinous Vices, cruel
Plots, hellish Designs, and barbarous Enterprises; as also their imperious
Minds, proud and haughty Spirits, their base Tempers and Dispositions, and
their depraved Natures, erroneous Tenets, and wicked Customs; Now that we may
not be thought to be altogether made up of spleen and choler, and to have dipped
our pen in aquafortis, or vinegar, we shall take a short survey of their
Virtues, and noble Qualifications, to the end we may demonstrate unto you that
they have somewhat among them, which may merit commendation as well as
condemnation. And first, the Soil is healthful, having for a long time a
constant serene Air, which made the Prince of Greek Poets, and several other
Authors place the Elisian fields here; for there are no gross, caligmous vapors
rising up from Bogs or Fens, but there are most refreshing, soft Zephyres or
Breezes, that pierce the circumambient Air, and enliven both man and beast;
nay, Mariners that use to traverse those Seas, can tell when they approach the
coasts of Spain by the odoriserous smell of Rosemary, and other Aromatic
Vegetals that grow there up and down the common fields, and perfume the Air
with their fragrancy: She is not parcht with such excessive heat as Africa, nor
shaken with such impetuous winds as France, nor tossed with such earthquakes
as Italy, nor nipt and pincht by the benumming thumbs of Winter, as Holland,
Swethland, and several other Regions; but enjoys a moderate and temperate Air.
Spain abounds with the most generous Wines, and the best Oils; as also the best
Fruits, as Figs, Raisins, Almonds, Orenges, Lemons, and Pomegrannets, and all
other kind of Vegetables, as Herbs, Roots, and Flowers. Besides her bowels are
richly furnished with Metals, as Iron, Steel, Quicksilver, and Gold. She
produces good Silk, Flax, an excellent Wool, though they are beholding to us
for that commodity.

Now for that generous Animal the Horse, she surpasses all Countries; for
their Cordovan Gjnnets excel those of Turkey for fierceness; those of Barbary
for their light feet, or nimble heels, as we term it; and those of Italy in
comeliness of proportion. Her stately Fabrics, Structures, and Cities, are as
numerous as stately; which occasioned the Proverb, Quien no ha visto Sevilla,
non ha visto Maravilla: Quien no ha visto Lisboa?, no ha visto cosa boa. He
that never saw Sevil, never saw a miracle; and he that never saw Lisbon, never
saw any thing that was rare; but the cadency of the words in the Spanish, is
far more harmonious than in the English Dialect. To prove which, I need mention
but one, and that is the Monastery of St. Laurence, near the Escurial, which
for matter and form is not to be paralleled. Claudian breaks out into an
Elogium of her, which concludes thus:

Dives equis, frugum facilis, pretiosa metallis. The patience of the Spaniard
is commendable; their valor notable; their fidelity very signal, which was the
reason that Julius Caesar used to have a Guard of them, and Augustus a Band of
Biscayners or Cantabrians about him. In their Military discipline they are
admirable, very strict and severe, and obedient to their Commanders; as may
appear by that Spanish Sentinel, who was found dead in the morning in a tower
upon the Citadel of Antwerp, with his musket in his hand, in a defensive
posture, and standing on his legs upright, like one that was alive and in
health to their seeming, yet all frozen. Besides, they are infinitely careful
of their National Honor, and very industrious to promote it. For their
Discoveries of other Countries, they have had great success, and rendered
themselves famous thereby. And though they have received vast heaps of gold and
silver from the Americans, in requital whereof, that they might not be
altogether ungrateful, they received Christianity, and we^e civilized by them,
when as before the Savages did resemble bruit beasts more than rational men.

It was the Spanish Navigation that first confuted that erroneous opinion, that
there were no such persons in esse, as the Antipodes; when as be ore there was
a Bishop imprisoned at Rome, for verifying this now uncontrovertible Tenet,
which is understood almost by every plebeian. The Friars in the West, and the
Jesuits in the East Indies first planted Christian Religion, and cultivated
those parts, and made a fruitful vineyard of them, baptising them in the Laver
of regeneration; nay, it is credibly reported, that one single Franciscan Friar
did christen 400000 of them. And though the Proverb has it, Espania las Armas,
Italia lapluma. Spain is more for the pike, then the pen, yet they have
produced some famous lights of the Church, as Fulgentius, Isiodore, Paulus
Orosius, Justinian, and others, and some Rabbis, though of different sect, yet
may they have a place in the Catalogue of learned men, as Rabbi David Chimcho,
Rabbi Abenezra, and Rabbi Mases, and more that might be mentioned.

Now for eminent Doctors in the Civil Law, she has brought up no small number,
as Alvarus Valascus Goveaneus, that is confessed, and approved of for the best,
and truest interpreter that ever commented upon Justinian, Calixtus the third,
and Pinellus.

As for Physic she has produced many that have bin very eminent, as Garcias
ab Horto, Averroes of Cordova, Christopher a Vega, Avicenna of Sevil, etc.

Nor has she bin destitute of Philosophers, witness Seneca who transcended,
and surpass't all his Predecessors and Posterity hitherto in precepts of
morality, and many more that might be mentioned. She has flourisht with store
of Poets that deserved the Bays, as Silius, Italicus, Lucan, and several others
that might be specified.

Seneca the Rhetorician was an offspring of their own, who was famous for his
tenacious memory and several famous Historians, as well as Orators, Justinus
the great, Trogus Pomperus, Ludovicus Vives, Pomponius Mela Martial Columella,
and Fabius Quintilianus. All which, have added very much to the Republic of
Literature, and bin famous for their several works now extant: And that you may
not think Learning to be a qualification that men are only adorned withal,
you shall find it shine in the contrary sex, for they can boast of one Aloysia
Sigea, a famous female, Pallas Alcera, a second Minerva, who was excellently
versed in five several languages, and those that are the radices of all others,
as Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldaick: and some of the epistles that
Paul the third wrote to this Toledo virgin, are extent to this very day. That
her confines extend incredible, will appear by this, that there are but 360d in
the Zodiac, and Portugal herself is thought to take up 200. Now it must
necessarily follow, that her policy and prudence in governing so many squandred
kingdoms, and so great a number of inhabitants, of several humors,
constitutions and tempers, must needs be great. The King of Spain may imperare,
but the miracle is, how he makes them parere; it is not so great a wonder that
he governs them, as that he makes themobey, when as we all know that the vulgar
are very apt to be rebellious, and raise a mutiny in one single country, and
yet he makes multitudes of people, and those of several countries, bow to his
Scepter. And as she is famous for her Government and Policy, she is also
eminent for the number of Princes that she has brought forth, and bestowed
upon other Naations, as well as those that have swayed the Spanish Scepter; and
first she produced Ferdinand of Arragon, who first founded the Spanish
Monarchy, by matching with Donna Isabella, queen of Castile, and Philip the II.
who was termed Philip the Prudent, by a Parliament in Spain, and afterward
solemnly confirmed by a Consistory at Rome: Besides, she has brought forth
Princes to other nations, as Theodosius the I. and the first Emperor noted for
Morality and Virtue, who rebuilt and raised up the tottering Roman Monarchy:
And Trajan the Emperor, who had as great a share of Piety, as Augustus had of
Felicity; as also the Emperor Hadrian, and Ferdinand the First, who was an
Infant of Spain; a Prince, who for all Virtues and Qualifications suitable to,
and necessary for one of his dignity, came short of none of his Predecessors.

To conclude, and draw to a period: The Spaniard is very much to be commended
for his Policy, Prudence, and deliberate Consultations, for his Patience,
Gravity, and admirable Choler; his noble, and liberal Disposition; his Valor,
Magnanimity, Constancy, and height of Spirit: As for Spain her self, she may be
termed The Exchequer of Christendom, and the Nurse of stout Champions, who
exceeds in Men and Mines, and Arts as well as Arms. Her Kings are the longest
armed Monarchs in the world, who have as many Kingdoms as some have Provinces;
as many Fleets, as some have Ships; as many Viceroys, as some Marshals; and as
many Capitains by Sea and Land, as others have private Soldiers. Fortune her
self may be called the King of Spains Wife, who has brought with her such vast
Treasures for her Dowry. And thus having given you a taste of her Vices and
Virtues, Power and Weakness, Perfection and Imperfection, I lay down my Quill,
being come to my Ne ultra.

Books to be sold by Nath Brook at the Angel in Cornhil.
1. THe Accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery revealed in a
more easy and perfect Method then has been published in any Language; expert
and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl and Fish, the raising of Pastes,
the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the most poinant Sauces,
with the terms of Carving and Sewing, etc. By Robert May, in the time of his
attendance on several persons of Honor.

2. J. Cleaveland Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable Pieces: A second Impression with many Additions.

3. The Exquisite Letters of Master Robert Loveday, the late admired Translator
of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuaring his memory:
published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

4. Englands Worthies: Select Lives of the most Eminent Persons, from
Constantine the Great to the death of O. Cromwell late Protector: By W.
Winstanley Gent. An excellent Piece.

5. The Scales of Commerce and Trade: the Mystery revealed as to Traffic with
a Debtor or Creditor, for Merchants Accounts after the Italian way, and
easiest Method; As also a Treatise of Architecture, and a Computation as to all
the Charges of Building: By T. Wilsford Gent.

6. William Clowes his Chyrurgical Observations for those that are burned with
flames of Gunpowder; as also for the curing of wounds, and of the Lues venerea.

7. Moor's Arithmetic, the second Edition much refined, and diligently cleared
from the former mistakes of the Press. A Work containing the whole Art of
Arithmetic, as well in Numbers as Species. Likewise,

8. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova: Or, a new Mathematical Contemplation on the
Oval Figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Midorgius his Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical
Sections may be easily understood; a Work much desired, and never before
published in the English tongue: By Jonas Moor, late of Durham.

FINIS.
printer's device of Nathaniel Brook, featuring an angel holding a large
feather or quill N B




