THE CHARACTER OF ITALY: Or, The Italian Anatomized BY An English Chyrurgion.

Dissicile est Saty^am non scribere. -- LONDON: Printed for Nath. Brook at the
Angel in Cornhil. 1660.

TO THE READER.
THat this Epitome should suit with the Grain of all Men's Dispositions, is far
beyond my expectation; because I am sufficiently sensible that Men's minds are
as discrepant, as their Physiognomies are various: And it has been the fate of
all Writers that ever appeared in public, (especially under the notion of
Satyrists) to be attended by some carping Zoilus: But fall back fall edge, I
will be armed with a sufficient stock of Patience to undergo the Success of
this Publication. I know already, that if some carping Critic light on it, he
will cast it aside, and say, these Whimsies are but Ingenii lascivientis
flosculi, the superfluous Excrescencies of lasciviating wit. Or probably some
Squeamish Zealot, who through Hypocondraick Melancholy, is become a mere Lump
of quickened Care, may disgust it; yet the more frollickish Genius, who no
doubt is freer from intended mischief then the thoughtful man, will digest it.

Let not the smallness of the bulk occasion your contempt; for the more
vigorous a thing is, the narrower is the circumference that contains it. And it
is usually said, The smaller the Volume, the fewer the faults: Some there are
undoubtedly, which have either escaped the Printer, or else were occasioned by
my own neglect; but my Sanctuary is the hope of your accustomed Candor and
Clemency, which may shroud me from any false imputation: However, here you have
it as it is; and as a man takes his wife, so must you take this Piece, for
better for worse* Here you have my Cruse of Oil, as well as my Bottle of
Vinegar; some sweet smelling Flowers, as well as bitter Wormwood: Nor was it my
intention in publishing this Pamphlet to bespatter any single person; but, like
a Fencer in a public Show, wave my Sword about, aim at all, and hit none; yet
the mildeness of the Conclusion will mitigate the severity of the Exordium: And
the most natural Italian will be compelled to confess that I end well, though I
began ill, and will vouchsafe to give his Plaudite to the Epilogue, though the
Prologue displease him.

Now there is none of the Readers so illiterate, I presume, as to be ignorant
of that as true, as ancient Sentence, Finis coronat Opus; which I have taught
to speak English thus:

If the end crown the Work, as th Proverb says,
Then a Black-pudding deserves double praise.
For that has two ends, and so have I, as well as two parts; the one
Vituperatory, and the other Laudatory.

Reader, peruse it, if thy more weighty Affairs will permit, it is but small,
and so will put thee to no great Expense either of Money or Time, and if thou
gainest any benefit by the surveighing of it, it will not repent thee of thy
perusal. All that I shall say to thee at present, is only this, Be charitable
in thy Censure, and so

Farewell.
Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that there is lately published an excellent Book,
Entitled, Adam in Eden: Or, Natures Paradise, The History of Plants, Fruits,
Herbs and Flowers, with their several Names, whether Greek, Latin, or English,
the places where they grow, their descriptions and kinds, their times of
flourishing and decreasing; as also their several Signatures, Anatomical
Proportions, and particular Physical Virtues: Together with necessary
Observations on the Seasons of Planting, and gathering of our English Simples,
with directions how to preserve them in their Composition, or otherwise. A
Piece very useful for Physicians and Chyrurgions.

THE CHARACTER OF ITALY.
It Is a Cisalpine Clod, a Gowty Leg of that Huge Monster the World, a rotten
Charnel where the Ganymed's supplant the Layses; a Nest of Lizards, the
Merdaille of Nations, and the Excrement of the Earth. It Is a Hell, whose
Cerberus is a great, old, fat Bear, (the Host of their [Innes] Osteria's I
mean, which usually stand alone remote from any village, so that Passengers
must rest satisfied with the mean accommodation those Tabernae afford; for he
that seems to disgust their feeble Minestra, may chance to meet with nothing at
his Departure but an Allegramente for amends: and if you should menace your
Host, he will retort with double insolence, knowing that if his Stilletto
should decide the Controversy, the next Church is his Asylum, where no Law nor
Violence dare attempt him. Pure Saints! that can convert the Church of God into
a Den of Thieves, and make his sacred Mansion a Shrouding-place or Refuge for
Assassines and Murderers. Besides, you are in continual fear both at Bed and
Board, by reason of those hellish snares they usually lay to irretiate and
massacre strangers; so that your delight is entombed in a perpetual horror.

As for the People, they are an execrable residue of the Goths, the spurious
Issue of a salacious Messalina, a mere frippery of Bankrupts; his Bastards that
closed the eyelids of centoculated Argus. And since they were once preserved
from the invasion of the Gauls by Geese, they merit praise from none but
Gozzelings. There are three things that usually deterr men from visiting this
Country: The first is the horrible Inquisition. The second, the execrable
Outrages committed by the Bandito's. The third, those troublesome Bedfellows the
Cimici, Fleas in folio, yet so dainty withal, that they will choose their
flesh, and cohabit with the fairest skin; nay, which is worse, they are very
noisome to the nostrils of him that destroys them. What stout Champion can
endure the biting or sting of the Tarantula, that kills with laughter, if not
remedied; the consideration thereof is enough to procure death, were there not
a hope of resurrection from the cure, viz. Dancing. But there are Arguments
almost innumerable of greater solidity and weight, than the praementioned: To
instance in a few (because prolixity is inconsistent with a Character) The
Milaneze will teach you to be Juglers; the Bolognois, Liars, the Venetian,
Hypocrites; the Neopolitan, will metamorphose you into Satyrs for Lust; the
Florentine instructs in the Artifice of Poison; and Rome implungeth you into
an impure Ocean of Idolatry and Superstition.

But now let us take a Survey of their stately Fabrics and Towns, whose native
Pens have exalted them to a higher bulk, than ever their Pike-axes intended
that first dug their foundation.

And first let us consider Rome, that reputed Mistress of the World, and
Metropolis of Italy, whose Encomiums has devoured more reams of Paper, and
drunk up more bottles of Ink, than would repair a decayed Stationer, and we
shall find her to be according to their own Proverb: Nido di tradimento ove si
cova,
Quanto mal hoggi per ilmondo si trova.
A Nest of Treason, where more mischief's done,
Than by all Nations else under the Sun.


That Rome that now usurps the Name, is but her carcass or sepulcher, her vice
being the cause of her ruin; which made Scaliger vent this as bitter as true
Jest of her, because the wines of Italy last not long: Urbem illam esse novum
^ncetum pessimum veteris vini optimi; That it was the worst new vinegar of the
best old wine: And indeed it is neither founded in suo solo, nor in su^
purissima and primitiva puritate. Once Rome was an Hospital for maimed
Soldiers, now a Spittle of diseased Opinions. Her streets of old did shine with
triumphing Caesar's and Consuls in their trophaeal Chariots, now they glisten
with the bald pates of Baals Priests, who lacquey his Petrified Sanctity riding
a Cock-horse on men's shoulders. Heretofore she maintained one of the noblest
and greatest Garrisons the world could boast of; now she supports her self by
the most abominable Stews that ever the earth bore. Old Rome revenged her
Affronts with the point of the Sword, but New Rome steeps her Revenge in a Cup
of Poison, which clearly manifests that old Verse no Paradox: -- Romae
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esso bonus.
-- At Rome by haly rood,
All things are lawful, except being good:


Nay farther hear but what a Character Mantuanus, an Offspring of their own,
bestows upon her: -- Petrique domus polluta fluenti
Marcescit luxu; nulla hic arcana revelo:
Sanctus ager Scurris, venerabilis Ara lynoedis
Servit; honoranda Divum Ganymedibus Aedes.


Here Simony and Sodomy, like two impudent Sisters, brazen it in public, and
no one controules them: As to the former, consider this Satirical Dystick:
Vendit Alexander Claves, Altaria, Christum;
Vendere jure potest; emerat ipse prius.
As for the latter, our Modern times have furnished us with too too many
instances, so that we may sing with the Poet, and have good reason to prompt us
to it: Nunc caput es sceloris, qui caput orbis eras.
Thou that wast Mistress of the world,
Into a Sea of Sin art hurld.


It Is a market, where Sins and Pardons are saleable, nay Staplecommodities. A
Juglers Shop, whose Master plays finely at fast and loose with Oaths and Vows.
A Mill, where the blind and ignorant Laity grind for the fat Clergy. A Magazine
where more Scripture is stored, than ever their Maker inspired. A Church that
depraves the Text, and pins their Faith upon other men's sleeves. A
Slaughterhouse, where the Butchers bring in all sorts of persons, and now and
then a Monarch. A woman that has been a Whore all her youth, and now is turned
bawd to Sin. In fine, she is a Monopoly of profa^eness, and her Inhabitants
wallow in wantonness and impiety.

This City that is founded upon seven hills, is the residence of of that seven
headed Hydra, the Pope, and here he does tyrannize over his submissive Vassals,
far more than ever Nero or Caligula. He must not pass without a Satyrick nip,
and now I think on it, I could wish my pen were dipped in Lie and Gall, that I
might lash him sufficiently: He it is, yet causes whatsoever he parrot (or if
you will have it Anagrammatically) praterlike twattles, to pass for Bullion,
and current, though hammered in the impure mint of his own Chymaerical
Pericranium, and speaks freely whatsoever he thinks without contradictions, so
that his Ipse dixit will countervail, and overbalance all the Ergo's in the
World: His tongue is confited in Pepper, and has pierced the sides of
Christendom more shrewdly than ever Mahomets Sword did: He it is, with his
Accomplices, that maintain Error to get them a maintenance; He dethrones the
Deity, and deifies wood and stone; yet he is there Deus in Terris, The Dagon
which they have set up; the Idol which they adore, whose indulgences make his
Kitehin smoke, by the help of his coadjutars the Jesuits, that fetch him fuel
from most parts in Christendom. There is no such Pick-purse under the Heavens
as his fictitious Purgatory; and could men's consciences be as thoroughly purged
as their purses, they would excel the Angels themselves in purity. Another
trick he has that helps him to hill up his fatal riches, and that is the Papal
Necromancy, or singing and praying for the dead, which does so flux the pocket,
that contrary to the current of all Philosophy, it makes them cry out, Datur
vacuum. He it is that plays the Chyrurgion, and his Clergymen are the
Apothecaries, that exhibit so many Purges and Clysters to the poor ignorant
people, blinded with preposterous zeal, that their purses at length cannot hold
out longer, but give up the ghost. Not a day passes, but they extract fresh
Silver (rare Ecclesiastical Chemists) from the hot furnace of their Purgatory:
And when they find that [Silver] Luna shines upon any person with her silver
rays, then is the time of singing Mass, and praying for the delivery of Souls;
Not a door, wicket, or window in Purgatory, but it is then open, that Souls may
have as free a passage, and swarm forth as thick as Gnats in August. Pretty
devices to engross and monopolize all the wealth to themselves: But you know
the old Proverb, Male parta, male dilabuntur; Badly come, badly go: witness
Alexander the Sixth, who during his Chairship scraped together so much wealth,
that his son Caesar Borgia loosing 100000 Crowns one night at Dice, broke out
into this expression, Germanorum tantum haec peccata sunt: These are only the
Sins of the Germans; so that it is evident what the Father gathered together
with a Rake, the Son spread abroad with a Fork: So that sordid Lucre and Gain
is practiced by the Clergy, and those of the higher, as well as of the lower
sphere: nor can there be perpetrated a Crime, how heinous soever it be, but it
falls within the compass of a remedy from his Dispensations, provided the Lady
Pecunia be your Suada or Oratress, verifying that old saying, Dulcis odor Lucri
ex re qualibet. Take this story for instance: Lubin comes from Bresse to Rome
and was entreated by Friar Zeno, to beg his pardon of the Pope for having gelt
his Ass: Lubin obtained it, who being returned, he demanded whether he had done
him the prementioned favor; Yes replies he, and to be real with thee, without
any farther diffimulation, for a few more Julio's there had been a permission
for thee to marry thy Ass, if thou had had any fancy or affection to a
four-footed Bedfellow. Had Castlehaven been a Catholic, he had kept his head
upon his shoulders, and not have been executed for his lechery. 'Twas an
excellent quip bestowed on a Pope by a Painter, who had made the face in the
Effigies of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, somewhat more red then ordinary; and
being demanded the reason, he replied as tartly as suddenly, That they blushed
to see the wicked lives of their pretended Successors. And though I hold it
profane ludere cum sacris, yet I judge it recreative jocari cum fabulis; and if
the Consistory of Cardinals should seem to be offended with me, if they chance
to light upon this piece, I will bid them reflect upon themselves, and blame
the accursed pen of that more accursed Author of the Pruril Asinus, who has
turned the sacred pages into scurvy Jests, and not only abused them that God
has created Gods on earth, but even the Deity it self: If it were possible for
the Devil to swive a Witch, their mutual copulation could not produce such a
horrid Monstar, as the Author of those Queries. Whereas were a man disposed to
sport with the holy Writ, he might pick jest out of every verse in the Bible
against the Pope, and his Romish Superstition: Take a moderate one for
instance, by way of Question and Answer: It is demanded why St. Peter Wept
after his denial of Christ? Answer. Not for his own fault, but because his
prophetic Soul foresaw, that his illegitimate successors should confess the
name, but deny the nature of our Savior, taking him in as it were at the gate,
and thrusting him out at the back door: nor indeed can any person qui vel
unciolam sane mentis habeat, that can lay claim but to a scruple of
rationality, but affirm, that the Pope does imitate St. Peter in nothing but
his denial. I was about to insert here an old latin sentence, though somewhat
harsh, and no Ciceronian style (not but that I durst because I am man^mitted
from the rigor of the Ferula) but lest his Holiness should meet with this
piece, and in a holy indignation tear it, and carry it to the House of ease,
and so it should scortigare sedem Apostolicam, blister his Apostolic Seat; to
prevent which distemper, lest that blister might turn to a disease called the
Pyles, incident to the Anus, charity commanded me to omit it. It Is worth your
observation, that the Popes do usually arrogate to themselves the names of
those Virtues for Sir-names, which they are most averse from; as Pius,
Benedictus, Clemens, and the like; when as their whole life is but a continued
series of villainy and barbarism: So that they have made themselves a Ludibrium
to all neighboring Nations. The Jews laugh at this Ecclesiastical Sultan, and
his Sanhedrim of Cardinals, and scoff at his golden Legend, and well may it be
termed so (not for the purity of the substance, but for the vaste heaps of
wealth that those forgeries rake into his Treasury:) who can but smile at their
tales of St. Francis of Hobgoblins walking in Churchyards, and of St.
Anthonies being in two places at one time: I know a Gentleman of that name that
would give much to be endowed with that property, for his soul is divided
between two Wenches; now were he thus qualified, he might enjoy them both at
one and the same time. Nor has the Pope been withstood by those of a contrary
opinion only, but even by those that are of his own brood, and dedicated to
the same Superstition; for the City of Venice stood it out against Pope Paul
the fifth, for the privilege of her Political Government; And the King of
France after that grand clash between Philipe le Bell; and Boniface wrote to him
very resolutely in these words; Que ta tresgrande sottise scache; Let your
monstrous sottishness or simplicity understand, that we are subject to none but
God; and utterly disown your Supremacy over us. But I presume we have sat long
enough in the Porphyry Chair: And since the Air of Rome is so contagious and
unhealthful that it wants a Clyster; besides, all the ink in my pen cannot cure
the letters and ringworms of the Popedom, we will leave them, and travel to
Naples, which according to their own Proverb is, Un Paradiso piantato da
Diavoli, a Paradise peopled with Devils, so pleasant is the place, and so
vicious the inhabitant: Here Bacchus has his inner Cellar, and Veus exercises
her cortine abominations: for it has been observed that in Naples at one time
there have been registered 30000 Courtizano's; that for paying some small
tribute to the Pope, have had a dispensation to play at Stretch-crupper,
Whipper-ginny, Tick-tack, In and In, and such unlawful Games as these, cum
privilegio.

Jusque datum sceleri canimus, says the Poet: which may very well be
appropriated to this Kingdom. It Is a place extremely populous and consequently
vicious, so that he that desires to lead a retired life, must not pitch his
tents here: for as their gardens are filled with Oranges, so their Houses want
not their Lemans. It Is a Maxim here, that Bawdy-houses are to be tolerated in
all their quarters, and it is ranked in the number of Professions, for the
profit that accrews to his Holiness thereby is considerable, so that the true
Campus Veneris is now found, where the Campus Martius stood before. It Is
confessed that she swarms with Nobility, which are seen to trot about all day
long, as fast as Pease boiling in a pot, but of such slender Estates, that
accordding to Aretines Observation, three Marquesses were found at once eating
Figs off of one tree to keep them from starving: they are swelled and pufft up
with large Titles, but their Acres are but few, and their substance small. Here
it was that the Morbus Gallicus, as it is vulgarly termed, though more genuinely
Scabies Neapolitana, was first known in Christendom.

As for the Inhabitant, he is according to the quality of the Soil, of a fiery
boiling temper, which causes the Spaniard to ride him with a Bit and a
Martingal; and he has as many Windmils in his brain, and quicksands in his
breast, as the French, or any other Nation, witness those various Innovations:
for in two years, she had no less than five Kings, and those fetched out of
several Countries, in so much that you shall hardly read in any History that
ever any political Instrument was so often out of tune, having known popular
revolutions in less than four hundred years, and that of Masaniello was the
last and most violent, like a candle burning at both ends, so that you would
judge the people to be so much distracted, as if they had been stung by a worse
Reptile than a Parantula. 'T was strange that this poor inconsiderable
Fisherman, with a small handful of boys armed only with fury and a baston,
should be such a nine days wonder, and during that interval of time should ride
the proud Neapolitan Courser and snaffle him, til he foamed at the mouth, their
Nobility lay then dormant: and this same redounds very much to the
disparagement of the Neopolitan Signiors. But to pass by this, they are born in
a Luxurious Country, and they are taken to be the greatest Embracers of
pleasure, and Courtiers of Ladies, and the most indulgent to themselves of any
other nation whatsoever: insomuch that no command from the King, can force a
Neapolitan Gentleman to march upon any disigne for three months in Summer till
the extremity of the heat be over; Lecherous they are beyond measure, witness
the Accusation of Duke Offura Viceroy of Naples, after he was Italianated.

The fifth Article exhibited against him, was: That he entertained the
Marchiones de Campolatero publicly, as his Concubine, to accomplish which
design, he accustomed to send the Marquess her Husband upon remote employments.

The eighth was, He committed Rapes upon many young Maids and Virgins, and
bored a Woman at the very Altar, and had to do with another in the Chancel of
St. Mary's Church, O horrible! Convert the Church into a Charnel house?

Ninth, He frequented Nunneries, not out of devotion, but for recreation, or
more significantly procreation, our of profane and sacrilegious ends.

Tenth, He made a feast of flesh upon Maundy Thursday, contrary to the Canons
to their Holy Mother the Church, and was never observed to keep fasting, but
feasting days always.

Eleventh, He made other feasts for some of the Principal Courtisanos of
Naples, and that in Don Pedro de Toledo's garden, whom he compelled to confess
with how many Clergymen they had traded, and commanded an Inventory of their
names to be taken immediately. Blessed saints! that disapprove of lawful
matrimony, but approve of unlawful meretricious actions: it grieves them to see
such pure Nuns flesh, as they do sometimes, barreld up in penitential pickle,
yet for all the pretended strictness of their Religion, they can break a Lent
to seed upon them.

Twelfth, He would often ride abroad in the Coach with Juana Maria a Lady of
pleasure, that was as common as a Barbers Chair, no sooner one was out, but
another was in.

Thirteenth, He had always in his House a Morisco slave, on whom he begat a
Bastard, and suffered him to be educated in the Mahume^ ^n Superstition, and
after his decease was entombed according to the Turkish Rites and Ceremonies.

Twentieth, He did innumerable other acts of obscenity and wantonness, as
inviting the fairest Concubines into his garden, where he had provided as
sumptuous as luscious a Banquet for them, after which he commanded them to
strip themselves stark naked (where it is to be observed he had a fancy to see
the naked truth) whilst he with a hollow trunck, shet confits at their naked
bodies, which they were to take up standing upon their high Chiappins.

Twenty one, He caused a Barber to strip himself stark naked, and shave his
Dutchesses quod ad have, she being likewise naked, and he all the while
standing by with a great knife in his hand to cut off his privities, if he
found any motion in them all the while: a wretched fellow, and egregious
Cox-comb, who deserved to wear a pair of horns that should reach from one end
of Naples to the other, and that not a condign punishment for his crime.

O old Rome! All thy Floralia, wanton Feasts and Games, come far short of those
of thy modern issue: no Pagan, Turk, Jew, nor Heathen, (nay, I Will be loath to
say, Hell it self never entertained such a Smell-smock, such a Linnen-lifter,
as this salacious he-goat, this wanton Satyr, Duke Ossuna. But lest this
discourse should be unwelcome to the chaste ears of the Reader, we will turn our
discourse to a more pleasing subject; And begin with the Peasant, who though he
passes all the week in drudgery and servility, yet is so puffed up with vain
glory and pride, that on Sunday and Holy Days, he will be sure to have his body
well clothed, though his belly want furnishing; and his Wife, that works day
and night for a hungry living, will be so pranked up, that if you were
unacquainted with the phantastique humor of this mimical people, you would
mistake this Joan, for some Lady of repute, and honor in the country: And
indeed they are all so highly conceited of their deferts, from the Cedar to the
shrub, with their imaginary Revenues, and the Chimera's that they hatch in
their brains of their own dignity and Grandeza, that there is not one of them
but will speak thousands, rather then betray their indigency: One will sit at
his door picking his teeth, and condemning the Capon he eat last, when alas
poor despicable wretch! His throat is an absolute stranger to such dainty
Viands; for a dried morsel of bread, hoary and crusted with a second bark,
whose leather'd outside would not court a dog armed with the edge of appetite,
to eat it, would be adainty bit to cramb his empty gorge. Another will beg in
this method: First he looks to see whether the coast be clear, before he will
utter one Suppliant syllable, and then he approaches with such submissiveness,
as a slave uses to his Patron; yet if any chance to glance that way with his
eye, immediately he retreats to familiarity, pressing the justness of his
demands, till he squeezes your Alms; which if it be a penny, or some such
inconsiderable sum (as they judge so small a piece to be) he throws it
contemptibly in the donors face; but soon after peaceably looks for it, finds
it, and has the grace to say an Ave Maria, or a Pater Noster for the
Benefactor. But now I think we have breathed the Neapolitan Courser
sufficiently, let us turn our Bridle, and travel to Venice; which is taken to
be no other then a Boat, that some Castle does embarque by the Magic Laws of
Urgandus, when he would have sailed to great Albion to visit Amadis, as he did
in times of the year: and it is observable, that the world never produced such
unheard of Machiavilian Devices to surprise an Enemy unawares, as the Venetian
has been Author of: for here you may see a Pocket Church-book, with a Pistol
hid in the binding, which turning to such a page, discharges a plot to ensnare
him to whom they bear a prejudice, whilst at his Devotion, when there is least
suspicion: Execrable wretches! that make Gods Word the Cloak to palliate all
their Villainies and Murders.

Another of their infernal Inventions is a pocket Stone-bow, which carried
under a Cloak, discharges Needles with such violence, that it pierces
thorough a man's body and leaves a wound, whose Orifice is scarcely discernable
by the most Eagle-ey'd Chyrurgion.

A third, a Walking-staff in appearance, at the top whereof is a spring, which
graspt hard, at the end jets forth a Rapier with force enough to kill a man at
a yards distance.

A fourth is a Gun, to be discharged with wind, which for six paces fails not
of execution, with little or no report. And give me leave to add a fifth Knack
of theirs, which is their Bergamasque hanging up in the third Chamber of the
Grand Dogues Gallery; being an Invention to lock up female frailty; an
irrefragable Argument of the Italian Jealousy, with which inhumane constraint
they do so persecute and prosecute their Consorts back and belly, and so cramp
them hip and thigh, that if a poor despicable Crab-louse should chance to be
cloistered up within these ferraments, he has not room to breath, and what
would become of the poor Flea should it be his fate to be thus confined? I
presume he could not take his frollikish Lavaltors. This Enginery of theirs
manifests that they have a care of the hinder, not the forepart, altogether
insensible of that old saying, Felix quem faciunt aliorum cornua cautum: Surely
those men happy are, Whom others Horns make to beware.

Yet I dare be bold to say, notwithstanding this rigid confinement, that no
women of what nation soever, do oftener turn their Husbands back out of the
Primmer into the Horn-book, or so often dub them Knights of Acteons order. As
for the Venetian Ladies, when their stature is promoted by the artifice of
their Chiappines, they look like walking May-poles: And their faylings or
fallings in the manner aforementioned (for they are most of them
she-Astrologers, and love to lie on their backs, contemplating on the Heavens,
remembering what the Turks say, when they celebrate their nuptials, Look upon
the Stars, consider their number, and let that be an argument to induce you to
multiply:) It Is to be imputed to the too too much rigor of their Consorts, and
Parents: for the proof whereof let his ensuing Story satisfy you, taken out of
their own Annals, and that of no meaner a person then the female issue of one
of their gowned and grave Senators, who being cabled up by her Father from
humane sight, and confined to the narrow round of a Chamber (then which no
thing thwarts the grain of female disposition more; for they love to indulge
their Genius, and have the swinge of their natural fancy) had a prodigious
birth by her over-familiar Play-fellow, her Dog. To this se^ious Historical
truth, give me leave to add a pretty story of an ingenious servant to a more
ingenious Master, and that one of the Venetian Grandees; no other then the
Magnificentissime Figlivolo di san Mario, who when his wife was sick, and the
Physician was to cast her water, was at a loss for a term to bid her make
water, that might both suit with his dignity, and please her fine ears that
were absolute strangers to such a foul word, as pissing: The Grand Dogue being
somewhat troubled, and wanting a Dictionary to furnish him with a word; his man
reading his distemper in his face, desired to be made sensible of the source of
this his distemper, (for it was water that caused it) his Master to be rid of
his importunate servant, not expecting any satisfaction from his tattle or
endeavors, discloses the business to him; which after he had done, he assures
him that he would take it upon him, and find out a way to express his mind by
circumlocution, to signify pissing; which was thus: He boldly accosts his Lady
with the Urinal in his hand, saying, Chara Signora, fate quello che fate
dinanzi al cacare. I beseech you, Madam, do that you use to do immediately
before you sh -- Pardon me Reader, if I offend thy nostrils with this unsavory
discourse, for I have it only by tradition, and you receive it from me, as I
read it, so that it is the more excusable, especially in this Characteristical
Treatise; But lest we should too too much presume upon your modesty, we will
leave Venice with this unsavory discourse, and come to Padua.

That reputed Nursery of the Muses, and Supportatrix of all Arts and Sciences:
and here we must consider their gowned Gentry, which are so horribly debauched,
that we may safely say they study over the Bottle more then Aristotle, and mind
their Plate more then their Plato, so much are they devoted to Bacchus, that
they could be content to turn Cyniques, so that with Diogenes they might dwell
in the cask when the wine is exhausted, and live by the sent of that wainscored
room for the future, nor would they desire any other Tomb, than the Barrel; or
at least they could willingly entreat the Gods condemn them to such a death, as
the Duke of Clarence had, viz. to be drowned in a But of Malmsey All the
Rhetoric they study, is to persuade the Vintner to credit them till the
revolution of the Grand Philosophical year; nor do they imagine any Figure
comparable to that of Synecdoche, to pay part for the whole. To drink beyond
measure among them, is the highest of Sciences; falling backward is their
star-gazing; They delight in no music, but the sweet harmony of
Good-fellowship, with now and then a discord. Wine is their Grammar; Sobriety a
mere Solaecism, and to study before the Pericranium is elevated, is a
preposterous heusteron proteron. And when they stand in need of a Physician, a
Receipt of full Cups (in their opinion) is the best Vomit; and forgetting of
Debts, is their only Art of Memory. They are Copernicans, and explode all
ancient and modern Philosophy, adhering solely to his Tenets; for they love to
deal roundly with the world, because they are never so well learned, as when
their heads run round: And thus could I expatiate upon their Encyclopaedia of
Sciences, but that I fear in the description of this Circulation, I should
prove eccentrique, and draw too long a line from the center of my intentions:
But that which is more heinous, is, that Murder is so far from being counted a
Venial Sin, that it is no Crime at all, as it should appear by their neglect in
executing the Offenders. Their mode is here, to go armed with a pair of
Pistols, and a Stilletto by their sides* It Is strange, methinks, to see Minerva
so closely linked to Mars, to find Students in such a Warlike posture: This
custom they say, proceeds from some old inbred Dissension between the
Vicentines and the Brescians; which two contrary parties do so fill the streets
with slaughter, that no man can walk securely at night for fear of their Chi
va la: And which is a more notorious sign of their Barbarism, on the illars of
the Porch or Arches, that run before the House of this City, one may discern
where Bullets have passed; nay, so trivial a business is Homicide among them,
that if at any time they are destitute of a Body for the Anatomical Lecture,
they make it a business of small consequence to kill a poor Fachin or Cobbler,
to exercise upon him by Dissection, which proves that Simile of Learning to
Scanderbeg's Sword, it either does much good or much hurt: for indeed according
to the School Axiom, Corruption optimi est pessimae, The best Wine makes the
sharpest Vinegar; and good wits once depraved, usually sail into an Ocean of
Debauchery: And such are they that have brought an odium upon Minerva's
followers. But we will leave them and their Extravagancies, and strike toward
Genoa.

Of which place it is proverbially said, That they have Mountains without wood,
Sea without fish, Women without shame, and Men without Conscience: and it is
apparent that their haughtiness has given occasion to those that are least
critical to term it Genoa the proud. As to the nature and disposition of the
Inhabitant, he is as lofty as his Building, so proud and gallant in his garb,
that it is reported by those that have been so unhappy as to travel there, that
the first night of their arrival into this place, a company of Fiddlers ('it is a
favor to call them so too) come to bid them Welcome with their music: but
with so stately a Prologue, and so grave an Apology for themselves, that all
the Gentlemen-strangers withdrew from their Seats, and began to salute them,
imagining them no less then Magistrates, or persons of the highest degree. So
that a Stranger may soon be deceived, as to their education, if unacquainted
with their bladder'd insolency. The most dunghill spirit of them all is swelled
with the tympany of Pride: Who could ever imagine that such inconsiderable
fellows as they, that blow away their days in mirth, only to procure a mean
livelihood, that are slaves to all company, should be so ambitious, as to
cloth their drossy bodies in such noble array: well may it be said, that the
bark is better then the tree, the external show and pomp, then the internal
substance and solidity. They are all attired a like, somewhat tending to the
Spanish mode, and of so haughty a spirit, that they will hardly condescend so
far below themselves, as to be associates for strangers. Alphonso king of
Arragon was often heard to have this expression proceed from him Rex
illiteratus est Asinus coronatus; An illiterate Prince, is but an Ass crowned.
But the Genuesian Lady was of an opinion diametrically opposite unto it: so
much did she affect the prick of zeal, had the impudence to affirm publicly,
Penna non facit hominem, sed Penis: Not the Pen but the P -- qualifies a
person: Could any one imagine a Faustina so lecherous as to belch forth such an
expression, as has recorded her for a Lady of pleasure; so strange it is that
it would even stagger the faith of a Solifidian to believe it, were it not
inserted in their own Annals, and nothing can carry a stronger condemnation
with it, then what proceeds from their own mouths. But we will quit this
obscene discourse, and pace it to Florence, to see what matter may be found
there conducing to the perfecting of this Character.

And we shall find that for curious illegal tricks of Poison, they are
damnably wicked beyond all comparison. No Nation in the world so vindicative as
they: They will poison with the smoke of a Candle, the smell of a Candle, or
indeed any way imaginable; some of their poisons are mortal by smelling, others
given now, may operate many months after; nay, it is almost impossible to think
that the depraved wit of man should ever machinate such damnable Devices for
their mutual destruction, unless they had received assistance from Hell. Some
of them will attempt to poison whole Rivers, and not fail of their design, if
they can find out the source. And even to this day at Milan there stands a
pillar that does stigmatize them, called Colonna Infantae, raised where a
Magicians house was pulled down, who for a time poisoned all the Rivers
belonging to the City; which stands still as an everlasting monument of
perpetual Infamy to them and their Heirs for ever. But lest we should be too
much stung with this infectious discourse, we will leave it, and seek for an
Antidote in Sicily; but I fear the remedy will prove worse then the Disease.
It Is a Proverb that bears as much truth as antiquity in the front of it. Omnes
Insulanos esse malos, pessimis vero Siculos. All Islanders are bad, but the
Sicilians are worst of all. They are very inconstant, and wavering like a
Weathercock, and you may as soon cut out a Kirtle for the Moon, as dissuade
them from their volatile humor; so that hence arose the Proverb, Gerra Sicula:
Sicilian prittle-prattle, according to the pretty tattle of our infancy:
Besides, they are of a very envious, suspicious, and destructive temper,
incapable of receiving an injury, and furiously vehement in the pursuit of
revenge, as appears by that great and inhuman massacre they made of the French,
known by the infamous name of Vesperi Siculi, where an infinite number of
French were most barbarously butchered at the sound of a Bell: An irrefragable
Argument of their prepens'd malice, that would not allow them a sufficient time
time for Repentance. Pluto is deeply engaged to the Sicilian, and the Milaneze,
for their true and faithful vassalage unto him; for it seems by all History,
that it is their sole design to people his dominion, and add as many slaves to
his infernal Scepter as possibly they can. You have had an instance in the
Sicilian, it is pity you should want one of the hellish Milaneze, who meeting a
quondam friend of his in a place convenient for his barbarous design, and
bearing him some grudge, through the rancor of his spirit for some former,
only supposed injury offered unto him, set a knife to his throat, and bid him
abjure God, or he would make him sup with Pluto that very night, or if you will
have it more plainly expressed, murder him, which the man attended with human
frailty, (as all are,) and somewhat terrified at the name of death (...), as
the Philosopher calls it, did; which after he had thrice done, he dispatcled
him, and like an insulting Hell-hound immediately after this execrable murder
triumphed, saying, That he had sent both soul and body to Hell with one fatal
blow: Such unheard of inhumanity, what History can parallel? No nation under the
Sun, in my judgment can be so diabolical: But let us commit them, and all
their actions to their Master, bellowing Belzeebub, who beyond all controversy
will in time pay them their wages.

Now let us in general descant upon their Vices, and visit first of all the
Sun-bak't Peasant in his rough-hewn-cottage, and we shall find that he lives a
drudging slavish life, liable to all Gabels, Taxes, and Impositions from
Superior Authority, in so much that it is proverbially said: The Rich Men of
Italy are the richest, and the Poor men the poorest in the World. Excellent men
they are, said once an Hispaniolized Italian, but for these three things. In
their lusts they are unnatural, in their malice unappeaseable, and in their
actions deceitful: To which let me add a fourth, and a fifth; They will
blaspheme sooner then swear, and murder sooner then scandalize a person. It Is
also an ancient Proverb of the people of Mazara, That they did build as if they
should live ever, and cram themselves, as if they intended to live no longer:
mere Epicures, that made this old Verse their Motto: Lude, bibas, and edas;
post mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, drink, and play at leisure;
For after death 's no pleasure.
Besides, so contagious is this Nation, that if a stranger begin once to fancy
the place, ten thousand to one if it change not his inclination: It Is a Paradox
to me, that the change of Air should have so great an influence on the mind
and constitution of man, were it not verified by several examples: Take this
for one: A German Bishop was so taken with their delicious Wine that grows
about Monte Fiascone, that he sent his servant to all the Taverns thereabout to
find out the best, and where he found it, to write over the door Est, Est; of
which liquor he sucked so much, and made a Tun of his Belly, German like, that
he swam to the other world through an ocean of Wine: he was interred in
Favonia's Church, and being a Clergy man, it is pity his Tombstone should want
an Epitaph, and his memory consume with the ashes in his Urn, wherefore his
servant made this ingenious Epitaph: Propter est, est, Dominus meus mortuus
est: a Conceit no less facetious than quipping; nay, it is a Proverb of their
own, Tudesco Italianato e un Diavolo incarnato: An Italianated German is a
Devil incarnal. It Is taken pro confesso, that they have no less than twenty
species of these intoxicating liquors to please the gusto at first, but carry
their sting in their tails, fume up into the head, that though they are not
immediately distempered, yet there is by their epotation laid the seed of all
future maladies, that break to their ensuing destruction: The most delicious of
all, which is their Ethnique Nectar, though they are so horribly blasphemous,
as to term it in a Christian phrase, Lachrymae Christi; which made one that had
tasted, break out into this extravagant passion, O Domine! cur non lachrymisti
in terris nostris? O Lord! why did thou not weep in our Country? That they
are ambitious is apparent, for among the Vieentines it is an usual Title for a
Gentleman to be styled Signor Conte, which is equivalent to My Lord with us:
before they merit the degree of Knighthood, they must be Lorded. Not a Pedlar
among them known under the title of Vuestra Signioria; And for the Nobility, so
mean they are, that according to their own Assertion (for I will bang them with
their own weapons) I Marchesi di Cova, I Conti di Piacenza, I Cavaglieri di
Bologna: The Marquises of Ceva, the Lords of Piacenza, and the Cavaliers, or
Gentlemen of Bologna are grown poor, even to a Proverb.

It Is generally reported, that those of Crema are deceitful, those of Venice
insolent, the Genuesian proud, and the Paelnvinian lecherous: as for their
women it is grown to a Proverb among them, That they are Magpies at the door,
Saints in the Church, Goats in the Garden, Devils in the House, Angels in the
Street, and Sirens at the window; Besides it is an ^sual expression among them
Let God make them tall and fall, (for the title of a comely woman is much
prized among them) and they will make themselves fair enough: But enough of
that, their very Towns have by their judicious Godfathers been baptized with
names suitable to the nature of the inhabitants, as Genoa the proud, Pistora
the barbarons, Perugia the bloody, babbling Siena, and Furli the fantastic or
wanton: They are all in general a heap of Fiddlers, for you can scarce pass a
street, but you shall hear them rudely jarring, without stops, or time, and
with reverence to Ge, Sol, Re, Ut, be it spoken, this harmony is made up of so
much discord, that you would imagine it afar off to be a Consort of
Jackanapes's squeaking in rutting time. Yet I will not say they are ignoble,
but they are the corrupters of nobility: nor that they are illiterate, but the
perverters of Learning: Martial and Juvenal amongst them were famous, yet they
were both obscene: Persius foolishly affected obscurity, and would appear in
public like an unintelligible Ass. Virgil himself sucked all his Poetic
honey from the Hives of Homer, Theocritus, and other Greek Poets: And how much
they reward the Learned will appear by that fate of Philelphus the most
accomplished person of his time, whose surviving friends were compelled to sell
his Library at Bologna, to defray the charges of his Funeral; so little do they
mind or regard their Learned, though men of the most accute wit, and piercing
understanding, persons that might take the right hand of Aristotle in the
Vatican; it is a brand to the whole Nation upon record, that will never be
consumed by the iron teeth of Time, or huried in the grave of Oblivion, that
they that are such great pretenders to Learning, and such adorers of Ingenuity,
as they would fain induce the world to believe them, should be of such a
mechanic, base, ignoble, dunghill spirit, as not to defray his Funeral Charges
at the public Cost, but to make sail of his Books to that purpose: the
consideration hereof were enough to dissuade Posterity from study, and
disencourage men herafter from sweating in the pursuit of Learning, when their
dead bodies shall not have decent Christian Burial, though they promote the
good and interest of the Republic wherein they live, by their indefatigable
pains and industry, if their Coffers be not well lined, and they able to leave
behind them mountains of Gold, as well as the immortal Monuments of Wisdom.
Besides, how do they encourage ingenious persons, though they have the
affluence of all the goods of fortune? Pope Pius the Second who was indebted to
the Muses for his fortune and preferment, when he came to the Popedom, being
presented with several poetical pieces, returned them this Dystych, in lieu of
a recompensation. Pro numeris numeros a me sperate Poetae,
Carminaque est animus reddere, non emere.
Numbers for Numbers, you receive from me,
I do return, and not buy Poetry.
And though for ostentation, and an outward show of learning, they may strike
high with those of their own stamp, yet if you respect the substance or
solidity of learning, you shall find but little among them; Muretus will
inform you as much, In media Italia (says he) in medio Latio, in media Grecia,
vix centesimum quemque invenias, qui Latin aut Graece loqui sciat: In the
middle of Italy, Latium, or Greece, you shall scarce find one in a hundred that
can understand either the Greek or Latin tongue. But you may be confident,
they are so well trained up in the School of Venery, that there is scarce a
Peasant among them, but has Ovids Epistles more perfect than their Pater
Noster; and can recount unto you how many obscene postures there are in Aretine
more readily then the number of the Commandments in the Decalogue. Nay, many of
their Popes, those Princes of the Christian Commonwealth (as they are termed)
are so illiterate, that they deserve not to have the preferment of Servitors
under an ingenious Junior Sophister; a poor Freshman in the University that
scarce knows how many Colleges there are in Cambridge, would puzzle, if not
put them to a nonplus with a Syllogism in Celarent. Paul the second, who
succeeded Aeneas in the Popedom, had a wicked design to demolish all
Literature, and to extirpate all the Learned out of the Land, esteeming all
Students and Philosophers no other then Heretics and Magicians; And it is grown
into a Proverb among them, concerning those that Commence among them, and
travel thither on purpose to be refined and bettered in learning, Nos accipimus
pecuniam, and mittimus Asinos in Germaniam: We receive Money from you Germans,
and send you a company of Asses in requital. This manifests the tender
Conscience of his Sanctity, which it seems is so large, that Cromwell when he
was alive, with all his Teem of Committee Men might be Canonized by him; nay,
I Will be bold to say it is so large, that a Country Wagon and six horses might
easily turn there; nay, they have entered such villains into the Catalogue of
Saints, that a Red-coat of their own (a Cardinal I mean) used to say, Novihi
Sancti de veteribus mihi dubium movent: These new Saints of theirs, makes me
begin to doubt of the old. And as the place of his Residence was first founded
by Fugitives, Slaves, Thieves and Robbers, and afterward huddled up into an
Empire variis and magnis latrociniis, by diverse great Robberies, gained by
oppression, rapine, and tyranny, so she may still be said to be a Harpye, and
to cheat almost all the Christian world with hermercenary Pardons, Bulls, and
Indulgences: what forces them to bestow such bitter invectives, and scandalous
Titles upon us, but only because we endeavor to pull down their pride and
ambition, to deprive them of their external pomp and vanity? Nor had Luther
ever been branded with the name of Apostate, had he still adhered to their fond
and Apish Superstition: But what think you was the chiefest cause? No other but
this, because he took the Popes Mitre off of his head, and pulled down the
Monks bellies; down stomach, down, you had never been so high sed, nor had such
good Commons, if he had been your Sewer: he was resolved to prescribe you a
good, though mean Diet, and so keep you still in health, whereas now you gorge
your selves with variety of delicate Viands, so unmeasurably, that you may be
said to be animalia propter convivianata, brute beasts calv'd only to put in
and put out. You are greatly devoted to the Goddess Cloacina, and the God
Stercutius, and grand Benefactors to T -- T -- the Scavenger. Now Reader, take
this ensuing Story for an Argument and Proof of their gluttony and excess,
though it be quite contrary to their function, who ought to check and curb
their sensual appetites, yet they do the quite contrary: It is chronicled of
one of our Kings, that having bin hunting with some of his Nobles a
considerable time, and somewhat tired at the sport, strayed from the Game, and
finding his thirst to be great, and his stomach to have struck twelve, resolved
to make to the next house to refresh himself with some Victuals or other that
the place could afford; which happened to be a Monastery, whereinto he enters,
calls for the Abbot, and desireshim to give him the accommodation of the house
how mean soever it were; he looking steadfastly on him, soon discerned by his
countenance that he was some person of quality, wherefore he presented him with
a piece of Roast Beef, a Capon, and some other Joints of Meat, making a large
Apology withal for the meanness of the Fare, assuring him it was prater solitum
for them to be so poorly furnished: The King fell to it, for he had a coming
stomach, and plied it tooth and nayl, withal admiring that the Monastery should
be accustomed to such variety, imagining before they had lived very
penuriously, according to their profession; then he ruminated on the Abbots
excuse, which possessed him with a conceit that they used to feed upon more
dainty Cates: and that that moved him to this opinion most of all, was the
Abbots saying, Lord Sir, I do very much admire how you can feed so heartily
upon such homely meat; I could not eat of such mean fare, I promise you: The
King returned him no answer till he was satisfied, but then he gave him very
many thanks for his noble Entertainment, and so took his leave of him and
departed, resolving to make them change their diet, and not cram themselves
like Capons that are to be killed; and with these thoughts he passed away the
time till he met with his Attendants, who were all very much astonished at his
long absence, but he gave them no account at all of what had passed; but the
next day sent a Messenger with a command to bring the Abbot before him, which
accordingly was executed, and he appeared: The King began to relate unto him
the whole story, and how that he was the person he mistook for the Country
Gentleman, withal checking him for his luxury, promising that he would make him
feed on roast Beef ere he had done, and say it was excellent good fare too, and
so commanded him to be taken into custody, and be secured in the Tower; which
accordingly was done, and he to remain there the space of three days without
any natural sustenance; at the end of the third day the King sends to know,
whether or no Beef would go down yet: O Sir, replied the Abbot, Roast Beef or
any thing, Roast Beef or any thing; so according to the Kings order, a piece of
a cold Loin of Beef was sent him, upon which he fed very heartily; which the
King hearing, he immediately Knighted that Joint of Meat, so that is called A
Sir-loin to this very day. His Majesty it seems was resolved to allow him but
little diet, till he heard that his nice curiosity had left him; 'twas too gross
and heavy meat for his squeamish stomach, during his residence in the
Monastery, but when transplanted from thence to the Tower, 'twas the best piece
of meat that ever he exercised his teeth upon. But we must not hit him in the
teeth too much with it, therefore we will proceed to another story of the sordid
Covetousness of a fat bellied Popish Priest among them: there was an old Sybil,
one Goody Tully by name, who had sadled her prognosticating Nose with a pair of
Amsterdams Spectacles, at this very time 60 years, and better; this old Adage
knowing that ere long she should be one of Proserpina's fold, began to consider
her end, and resolved to make her last Will and Testament, her household stuff
was but little and mean, for she had nothing but a pot, a stool, a bed, and a
candlestick, besides a vexatious Hen that played such mischievous tricks, as
fretted the old woman to the soul, and fo^c'd her to these passionate
expressions oftentimes Pox take thee, The devil take thee; But she being, as I
told you, ready to expire, did in her Will bequeath this Hen to the Priest,
which he, as soon as he heard of, before the old woman's death, came and fetched
away; which being related to her, she played the wag upon her deathbed, and
cried, I have bid the Pox take her, and the Devil take her several times, but
'twas to no purpose; but I bid the Priest take her but once, and he has fetched
her from me; nay, without doubt if he can get any thing once within his
clutches, you may as soon persuade a Genevan to turn Jesuit, as to talk it out
of him: There is no redemption from hell, they say, nor is there a possibility
of recovering any thing from these hellish Priests, when once in their own
possession, they are extraordinary good at Holdfast, and will as soon lay hold
of a promise, as any men upon the earth. These are their pious souls, devout
devils, they are appointed to exorcise evil spirits, and they had need be cast
out themselves.

But we shall not yet quite cast them out of mind, for we must ha^t^other bout
with them, and manifest their simplicity to be as great, as their irreligion is
hateful, and that thus: A certain Friar being on Pilgrimage to some of their
Saints, or Ladies, ('it is no matter which of them) being somewhat wearied with
his hard travel, took up a Lodging for his little youth and himself for that
night, resolving there to pitch his tents, and to walk no farther till the next
morning. It seems in the night he was troubled with a dream that did disturb
him much more awake then asleep, which he must communicate to his Boy (he was a
wise man the while you must imagine) and it was this: That he dreamt he was
kissing his own Breech, (and that is the way to break his own neck all the
world knows) so calling his little Lad to him, cold him, that he dreamt he
kiss't his own Breech; I but Master, says the Lad, as nimbly as wittily,
dreams always prove contrary, you must kiss mine; He it seems must be the Art
midorus to interpret his dream, and he did it to some purpose: Here was old
kissing between them both, yet the Friar had had the worst on it which way
soever it had happened, his little Lacquey quite outwitted him.

How excellently learned they are will appear, if you consider their insight in
the Latin tongue; for a Priest being put once to construe a sentence out of
Tullius de Officiis, that is known to every Schoolboy in his Corderius, and it
was this, Indutus toga virili, which he turned thus: Indutus, having put on,
toga virili, his green Gown: He thought surely he was tumbling with the lusty
sanguine complexion'd Girls in a green meadow, or else he could never have hit
of such a translation. Another being demanded by one of our Clergy men in
England, how many Sacraments there were? replied, Nine: at which he being
amazed, he asked him how he could prove it: to which he rejoined, seven beyond
sea, and two with you: at which the Bishop smiling, though pitying his
ignorance, dismissed him. One more instance I have for you, and then I have
done: A certain Priest among them coming often to visit a Merchant, one of his
Parishioners, because he was one of his noblest Benefactors, was so much taken
with his Wife, that for the future he resolved to associate himself with the
Mistress, and not the Master of the House, which accordingly he did, and
solicited her incessantly for a nights lodging (see what it is to be troubled
with the Pr -- of zeal) but she like a chaste Matron, scorning to be disloyal
to her husband, (^f Lamberts Lady had been so loyal, Nol had never made him
wear the Bulls Feather) and withal she did inculcate, and repeat the scandal
that it was to those of his Coat, to entertain so much as a thought of coveting
his neighbors wife; but he a servant to the flesh more then to the spirit, grew
the more earnest for being repulsed, and renewed his entreaties and persuasions
with more vigor, then formerly: She perceiving it was impossible to avoid it,
unless it were by discovering him, resolved to do it when her husband came
home; which accordingly she did, who after he understood his design, bid her
promise him the use of her body, and he would be in the next room ready to
enter in the very height of opportunity, and spoil his sport; so the next time
he came, he persisted still in his accustomed humor, and she at last with a
kind of unwilling willingness, seemed to be overcome with his persuasions, and
so consented to let him have the fruition of his desire, which he over-joyed to
hear, made all possible speed to the Bedchamber, where in the twinkling of a
Bedstaff, he disrobed himself of his Pontificalibus, and was just skipping into
bed, when her husband rattled at the door, which she hearing, bid him get into
the Press that stood by the Bed side, to hide himself; which he did in all
haste, glad at his heart that he was cloistered within those wooden walls from
the sight of the Goodman of the house, who coming in in the interim, taking no
notice at all of the bustle he made with tumbling into the Press; How do
thou, my dear? says he, Prithee what is the reason that this Press is always
left open? and so locked it, and put the Key in his Pocket: Now you must note by
the way, that this fell out to be on Saturday night, as fortune would have it,
and the Priest, next morning being Sunday, was to officiate in the Pulpit; the
day began at the length to appear, and the time draw nigh wherein people
usually frequent the Temple, there all service was performed, the Saintsbell
rung, and the people gaping in expectation of the Priest, who as yet was
cabinetted up in the Merchants house, who had a design upon him to make him a
public example of infamy to the people, and ignominious and hateful to the
Clergy, at least in appearance and outward show, (though they can pass by such
tricks of youth without examination or punishment) which was this, he caused
the Press to be carried into the Church, and placed behind the Pulpit, at
which sudden and unexpected sight the Congregation was amazed, and immediately
gave order that the Press door should be opened; which was no sooner done, but
the Priest like a ghost newly come from among the tombs, steps into the Pulpit
with these words in his mouth, Sic resurrexit Lazarus e sepulchro: In this
posture did Lazarus arise out of the grave, and preached upon it as his Text; for
which his religious zeal, he was highly extolled by the people (they being
altogether ignorant of his lusty zeal that first caused his confinement) and
the Merchant perceiving how ingeniously he had cloaked this his piece of
knavery, did not divulge it at that present, but kept it within his own
breasts: But we must not scratch the pates of these bald Priests too much, lest
we draw blood: now to the Canonist. The Canon Law that has so great a vogue in
Italy, will sooner be condemned for vicious, then extolled for just, when you
consider that it makes the Crown do homage to the Mitre; the Scepter to the
Crosier, and the Emperors Throne to the Popes Chair.

Among the Italians he is accounted no less then a fool, that is not melancholy
once a day: They are only liberal to their Superiors, from whom they expect
greater benefits; to all others the purse is closest shut, when the mouth opens
widest: nor is there any probability of your getting a piece of Cake there,
unless yours be known to be in the Oven. To add to their treasure, they will
light a candle to the Devil. In Legorn they allow a Jews Synagogue; nay, you
may be what Devil you will there, so you push not the Pope with your horn. They
are the greatest embracers of pleasure, and esteem of pearls as pebles, so
they can but satiate their Gusto, in point of pleasure, Here you may find Love
and Hatred, Virtue and Vice, Superstition, and Religion in their extremes, for
the greatest wits once depraved prove ever the most dangerous. They are in
their Lusts unnatural, in their hatred irreconciliable, and in their thoughts
unfathomable, so that with one breath they blow both hot, and cold, and to
compass their own ends, and accomplish their own designs, they will play the
Devil incarnat: But now we will wring them no more by the nose, lest we fetch
blood, wherefore we will allay the bitterness of this potion with the
edulcorating ingredients of their virtues.

Italy is the Garden of Europe, the Terroir being gentle and copious, and
produces a more stately crop, then the Husbandman oft-times expects: and some
Soyls there are, that afford four Latter-meaths of Hay and Grass: For their
delicious wines no Country can parallel it, besides it excels in large and
stately Cattle, nor is i^ altogether improbable, that she receive her name
therefore from (...), which signifies a Calf: The fame of the Neapolitan
Coursier has run through all the habitable world: for the number and luster of
Nobility, no nation exceeds them, which makes most ingenious spirits
transported with the desire of visiting her Territories: As for the ingenuity
and dexterity of the inventive brain of the Italian, if you respect either
Artificers or Opificers, all Nations have been benefited thereby; nay they have
been almost adored by by the residue of the Europian part of the world.

For all speculative and theorick Sciences, the Italian equal most Nations
under the heavens, as may appear by the almost infinite number of Wits that she
has nursed, as Virgil, Eunius; Lucrece, Statius, Plantus, for divine Poetry;
for according to the Stagirite, (...), Poesy is a divine thing.

For Prudence in the Law, Alciat, Pancirolus, Peregrinus, and Hondaus, were
very famous.

In the Secresies and Operations of Medicine, none could excel Fracastorius,
Matthiolus, Fallopius, Aldrovandus, Johannes Baptista Porta, and Talicotius,
who could imitate Nature even to admiration, in making artificial Noses, Ears,
and Eyes.

For History, Francis Guiceiardine, Cardinal Bembo, Vergerius, Magirus, Cardan,
Picus Earl of Mirandula, Zabaralla, and Ursimus, veyl to none for Philosophy.

Nor has Mercury only his Seminary here, but Mars has his Standard also,
being very exact in the Rules of Military Discipline, and excellent Engineers:
And as to Treaty, never did any Nation come near him, he was never outwitted
that way.

She has produced many noble Sons of Mars, as Scaliger Prince of Verona,
Castruccio, Sforza, and Ambrosia Spinola; as also Alexander Farnese Duke of
Parma. They are excellent Navigators; 'twas Americo Vespucio a Florentine, that
baptized the new world; And Christophero Columbo, which acts of his all past
Ages cannot equal, and he only by the dexterity of his wit and insight of the
Mathematics, performed it.

Nor are her Cities less famous then her inhabitants: and first of Rome, which
is judged the Emperess of the world, the Protecteress of all Arts and Sciences,
and the Fountain from whose streams of Virtue and Piety, the rest of the
Christian world is watered. 'Twas the cordial wish of that Father of the Fathers
of the Latin Church St. Augustine, that he might compass the sight of three
things. Our blessed Savior in the Flesh, St. Paul in the Pulpit, and Rome in
her highest flourish, and the meridian of her glory. Give but an ear to what
Martial the Epigrammatist sings, as her due Encomium. Terrarum Dea, Gentiumque
Roma Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum. What a vast Circumference she had,
may be guessed at by the number of Cobwebs that Heliogabalus caused to be
gathered there, which amounted to a thousand weight.

As for the renowned Republic of Venice without her, as an eminent Author of
our times notes, Italy should want her chiefest Ornament, Liberty a refuge,
Europe her Bulwark, Neptune should be destitute of a Mistress, and Nature of a
Miracle. She is a Lady that has encroacht more upon Neptunes dominions, then
any State in the World: She commands a fortress that is built according to the
most exact rules of Enginery, that stood her in two millions the erecting, and
charges her with a hundred thousand Crowns per annum, her yearly maintenance.
Her Arsenal is as famous a wonder as her illustrious self, she would ecstasy a
foreiner with the sight of her stately fabrics. This City, says one of our
well-worded Grandees, that is adorned with a double portion of Parts, and Arts,
Manners, and Manors, has continued a Virgin nere upon these fifteen hundred
years, yet withal such an Amazon, that she has wrestled with the most potent
Monarchs in Europe, and thrown some of them flat on their backs, but none of
them could lay her in such a posture, as to get her Mayden-head. Her grandees
are noble Patriots, Patres Patriae, they have public spirits, are fage in
Councels, and solid in their judgment, constant in adverse, and moderate in
good fortune: Nor does her incolumity depend upon the slender twist of the life
of one single person, but upon the prudent management of an immortal Senate.

The Characters that the Learned confer upon her are many, noble, and what she
deserves in their own judgment. Mamertinus the Panegyrist, calls her Gentium
Dominam, the Mistress of all Nations. Rutilius Numatianus, Coelestem mundique
Reginam; A Heavenly thing, and Empress of the world. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,
Totius Orbis optimam: The most famous Country in the whose universe. And
others, Caput Orbis, The Head of the world, and that not undeservedly, for
either Pike or Pen, Mercury or Mars; no Nation whatsoever that comes into the
balance with her, but will be outpoiz'd, if held up by an unbyassed hand.

Touching her Excesses, and principally those of the Popes, which have been
sufficiently anatomized by several Authors, it is incontrovertible; that among
so great a number some will be found culpable: There is no Wheat, but some
Chaff; no Wine but some Lees. In the first Election that our blessed Savior
made, among twelve there was one found bad: But let it not be buried in
oblivion, that the first thirty three Bishops of Rome suffered Martyrdom: And
if that the Ecclesiastics Purple seem to dazzle the eyes of some weaksighted,
and slenderly-grounded persons, and that the Clergy seem to them to lead a life
in too much external pomp and outward glory, the Capuchians frock and the
recluse and austere lives of Mendicant Friars, and other abstenious persons,
may serve in lieu of an Apology for the prementioned Extravagancies.

Though Venice and Naples be crammed with Courtizano's, yet the chastity of so
many thousands of pious cloistered souls, who have totally weaned themselves
from all mundane frothy delights, and adhered to heaven, and the hopes they
have of the fruition thereof, may make some satisfaction for their Excesses.
But Scaurus has penned among his Works a Sentence that deserves consideration,
and that is, Non minus magnam virtutem esse scire desinere, quam scire dicere.
It is no less virtue to know when to put a period to a Discourse, then to write
the Exordium; wherefore I judge it far better to strike sail, then to launch
any farther into so vast an Ocean of Matter, as the Praise of the I^alians:
Thus having bid adieu, I make an

END.
Books to be sold by Nath Brook at the Angel in^^ o^n^^.
1. THe accomplis^^ Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookely revealed in a
more easy and perfect Method then has been published in any Language. By
Robert May in the time of his attendance on several Persons of Honor.

2. J. Cleaveland Revived: Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable Pieces: A second Impression with many Additions.

3. The Exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Translatour
of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory;
published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

4. Englands Worthies: Select Lives of the most Eminent Persons from
Constantine the Great, to the death of Oliver Cromwell late Protector: By Will.
Winstanley, Gent.

5. A Character of France: to which is added Gallus Castratus; or, an Answer to
a late slanderous Pamphlet, called, The Character of England; as also a fresh
Whip for the Mounsieur, in answer to his Letter, in vindication to his Madam,
the second Edition.

6. William Clowes his Chyrurgical Observations for those that are burned with
flames of Gunpowder, as also for the curing of wounds, and of the Lues venerea,
etc.

7. The Saints Happiness, together with the several steps leading thereunto,
delivered in diverse Lectures on the Beatitudes, contained in the 5th of
Matthew: By Jeremiah Buroughs late Preacher of Stepney.

8. His Gospel-Revelation, in three Treatises: 1. Of the Nature of God. 2. Of
the Excellency of Christ 3. Of the Excellency of man's Immortal Soul. By the
same Author.

FINIS.

