HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON DROIT.

By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas it is found by Experience, That Traffic with Infidels and Barbarous
Nations not in Amity with Us, and who are not holden by any League or Treaty,
cannot be carried on without the Establishment of Forts and Factories in places
convenient, the maintenance whereof requires so great and constant Expense,
that it cannot be otherwise defrayed, then by Managing the whole Trade by a
Joint Stock; We in Our Royal Wisdom taking the same into Our serious
Consideration, and more especially having found by experience, That the whole
Trade of the Coast of Guiny, Buiny and Angola, and other parts and places of
Africa, so much importing our Service, and the Enriching of this Our Kingdom,
was very much abated, and attempted to be Engrossed by Foreigners, and in
eminent danger to be utterly lost, and taken from Us, and Our loving Subjects,
not only by Foreign Force, but by the Violence and Inconstancy of the Heathen
Natives: For the Recovery and Preservation whereof, We were Graciously pleased
to encourage and invite Our loving Subjects to Raise a Joint Stock to be used
and employed therein: And in consideration thereof, and for the better Securing
of such as should come in and be concerned in the said Joint Stock and Trade,
We did by Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, bearing date the
Seven and twentieth day of September, in the Four and twentieth year of Our
Reign, Grant unto several of Our loving Subjects, the whole entire and only
Trade into and from Africa, from the Port of Sally in South Barbary inclusive,
to the Cape de Bona Esperanza inclusive, with all the Islands near adjoining to
those Coasts, and comprehended within the Limits aforesaid, and did Incorporate
them by the name of The Royal African Company of England; And the said Company
having raised a very great Stock sufficient to Manage the Trade thereof, have
since, at their great Expense and Charge, Fortified and Settled diverse Garrisons,
Forts and Factories, by which means they have so Secured the said Trade, that
the same does now begin to flourish, and if not disturbed, is likely to be
further improved to the great benefit of this Our Kingdom; Nevertheless, We are
Informed by the humble Petition of the said Company, That diverse of Our
Subjects in several of Our Plantations in America, who are not Members of the
said Company, nor any ways concerned in their Stock, do endeavor to reap the
Benefit and Fruit thereof; and to that end have already sent several Ships into
those parts to Trade, and are providing more, the which if it should be
permitted, and not strictly and presently prevented, will disable the said
Company from supporting the great Charge of maintaining the said Forts,
Garrisons and Factories, and consequently, unavoidably occasion the loss of the
whole Trade of those Countries: Wherefore for remedy thereof We have thought
fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish and Declare Our Royal Will
and Pleasure to be, And We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every
of Our Subjects whatsoever, Except the said Royal Company and their
Successors, at any time or times hereafter, to send or Navigate any Ship or
Ships, Vessel or Vessels, or Exercise any Trade from any of Our Plantations,
Dominions, or Countries in America, to any of the Parts or Coasts of Africa,
from Sally to Cape de Bona Esperanza, or any of the Islands near thereunto, as
aforesaid, or from thence to carry any Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth,
or any other Goods or Merchandises of the Product or Manufacture of the said
Places, to any of Our American Dominions or Plantations, upon pain of Our high
Displeasure, and the forfeiture and loss of the said Negro's, Gold, Elephants
Teeth, and all other Goods and Merchandises, and the Ships or Vessels which
shall bring or carry the same. And We do hereby also strictly Require and
Command all Our Governors, Deputy-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals,
Generals, Judges of Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and
Castles, Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals,
Marshals, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Wayters, Searchers, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea or Land, in every
of Our said American Dominions or Plantations, to take effectual care, That no
person or persons whatsoever within their respective Limits or Jurisdictions
(except the said Company and their Successors) do send or Navigate any Ships
or Vessels, or Exercise any Trade from any of Our said Dominions or
Plantations, to any part of the said Coast of Africa, within the Limits
aforesaid, or from thence to Import any Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth,
or other Goods of the Product of any of those Parts, into any of Our said
Dominions or Plantations in America; And if any person or persons shall presume
to act or do in any wise contrary to this Our Royal Proclamation, to the end
Our Will and Pleasure herein may be the better observed, We do further Will,
Require, and strictly Command all Our said Governors, Deputy-Governours,
Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of Our Court of Admiralty, Commanders
of Our Forts and Castles, Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace,
Provost-Marshals, Marshals, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Wayters,
Searchers, and all other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea
or Land, in every of Our said American Dominions and Plantations, That as often
as need shall require, they be Aiding and Assisting to the said Royal African
Company, their Successors, Factors, Deputies or Assigns, to Attach, Arrest,
Take and Seize all such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, Negro Servants, Gold,
Elephants Teeth, or Goods, Wares and Merchandises, wheresoever they shall be
found, for Our Use, according to Our Royal Charter Granted to the said Company,
upon pain of Our high Displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary at
their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Thirtieth day of November, in the Six and
twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.


