HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION For Prohibiting the Importation of Commodities of
Europe into any of His Majesty's Plantations in Africa, Asia, or America, which
were not laden in England, and for putting all other Laws relating to the Trade
of the Plantations, in effectual Execution.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by one Act of Parliament made in the Fifteenth Year of His Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, (An Act for the Encouragement of Trade) it is Enacted, That
from and after the Twenty fifth day of March 1664, no Commodities of the
growth, production or manufacture of Europe, shall be Imported into any Land,
Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory or Place to His Majesty belonging, or
which shall belong unto, or be in the possession of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, in Asia, Africa, or America, (Tanger only excepted) but what shall
be bona fide, and without fraud Laden and Shipped in England, Wales, or the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and which shall be carried directly thence to the
said Lands, Islands, Plantations, Colonies, Territories and Places, and from no
other place whatsoever, any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding, under the Penalty of the Loss of all such Commodities of the
Growth, Production or Manufacture of Europe, as shall be Imported into any of
them, from any other place whatsoever, by Land, or by Water; and if by Water,
of the Ship or Vessel also in which they were Imported, with all her Guns,
Tackle, Furniture, Ammunition and Apparel; the said forfeitures to be disposed
as by the said Act is directed: Provided, that it shall be lawful to Ship and
Lade in such Ships, and so Navigated, as in the said Act is expressed, in any
part of Europe, Salt for the Fisheries of New England and New Foundland; and
to ship and lade in the Maderas, Wines of the growth thereof; and ship and lade
in the Western Islands, or Azores, Wines of the growth of the said Islands; and
to ship and take in Servants or Horses in Scotland or Ireland; and to ship or
lade in Scotland, all sorts of Victual of the growth or production of Scotland;
and to ship or lade in Ireland, all sorts of Victual of the growth or
production of Ireland, and the same to transport into any of the said Lands,
Islands, Plantations, Colonies, Territories, or Places; Any thing in the
foregoing Clause to the contrary notwithstanding. And whereas His Majesty is
well informed, that notwithstanding the said Act of Parliament, great
quantities of other Commodities of the growth, production and manufacture of
Europe, (then what are by the said Act permitted) have been, and are daily
Imported into several of His Colonies, Plantations, and Territories, in Asia,
Africa and America, (besides Tanger;) and that His Majesty's Subjects of some
of His Colonies, and Plantations, have not only supplied themselves with such
Commodities not Shipped in England, Wales or Berwick, but have conveyed them by
Land and Water, to other of His Majesty's Colonies and Plantations, to the
great prejudice of His Majesty's Customs, and of the Trade and Navigation of
this Kingdom: His Majesty therefore for the prevention thereof for the future,
does by this His Royal Proclamation, (with the Advice of His Privy Council)
Require and Command all and every His Subjects, that they do not for the future
presume to Import any Commodities of the growth, production, or manufacture of
Europe, (except what may be Imported by virtue of the Proviso aforesaid) by
Land, or Water, into any Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory or Place
to His Majesty belonging, or which hereafter shall belong unto, or be in the
possession of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, ( Tanger only excepted)
but which shall be bona fide, and without fraud laden and Shipped in England,
Wales, or the Town of Berwick, and carried directly from thence, according to
the true meaning of the said Act; whereof all persons concerned are to take
notice, and yield due obedience thereunto. And His Majesty does further
strictly direct and require all Governors of His Colonies, and Plantations,
and of all Lands, Islands, and Places in His possession in Asia, Africa, and
America, (Tanger only excepted) to take care that this His Royal Proclamation
be put in due execution: And also that one Act made in the Twelfth year of His
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and Increase of Shipping
and Navigation,) and one Act made in the Two and twentieth and Three and
twentieth years of His Reign, Entitled, (An Act for the Regulating the
Plantation Trade,) and also one other Act made in the Five and twentieth year
of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, (An Act for the better Securing the
Plantation Trade) together with all other the Laws of this His Kingdom of
England, relating to the Trade of His Plantations, be duly observed and put in
execution in their respective Governments: And His Majesty does further require
all His said Governors, and that they Command all Officers, Civil and Military
under their respective Commands, to be aiding and assisting therein, and to the
Collectors and other Officers of His Majesty's Customs under them, in the
Execution of their respective Offices in order thereunto, as they and every of
them will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty fourth day of November, In the
Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.


