HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT

By the King. A PROCLAMATION FOR Prohibiting the Imbezlement of His Majesty's
Stores for Shipping.
CHARLES R.

WHereas notwithstanding diverse good Laws made and Enacted for the preventing
of the Stealth and Imbezlement of His Majesty's Stores of War, and for the
punishing the same, His Majesty finds by experience, that whether by the
negligence or unfaithfulness of His Officers, or through difficulty of the
work, those Frauds, Stealths, and Imbezlements are not prevented (as they
ought) but are daily practiced, particularly in Stores relating to the Navy,
not only to the great prejudice of His Majesty's Service, but likewise to the
hindrance and discouragement of such Tradesmen, whose profession and livelihood
it is to make and sell such Stores and Commodities to Merchants Ships; who
finding a cheaper way for furnishing their Ships, by buying the Stores
purloyned and imbezled, as aforesaid, decline the lawful sellers of such like
Provisions. For the preventing these and the like abuses for the future, His
Majesty is pleased hereby strictly to Charge and Command all His Officers, not
only to endeavor the discovery of the said abuses (as aforesaid) but also
strictly to prosecute the persons offending, according to the rigor of the
Laws in such cases provided. And for the more easy discovery of the same, and
to the end the receivers of such stolen Goods may not pretend ignorance, His
Majesty does hereby Command, Publish and Declare, That all the Rope-makers who
shall hereafter work in His Majesty's Yards, or shall elsewhere make any sort
of Cordage for the use of His Majesty's Navy, shall make the same in manner
following (viz.) All Cables, Hawsers, and other Cordage of the larger sort,
shall be wrought with one small hair-line through every strand thereof; all
Coyls of smaller Cordage shall have two strands composed of even threads, and
the third shall have one odd thread. The Sail-makers, working for the use of
His Majesty's Navy, shall table the Sail with white Twine, whereby they shall
be distinguished from such as are made for the use of Merchants Ships. And for
preventing the abuse which has been of late practiced concerning Flags,
Pendents, and other Ornaments, His Majesty does hereby strictly prohibit and
forbid the use of His Majesty's Colors in Merchants Ships, and does Authorize
and Command all Commanders and Officers of any His Majesty's Ships of War, not
only to take from Merchants Ships all such Colors, but likewise to seize the
Commander of such Merchant-Ships wherein after the First day of April next they
shall be used, and to bring them to condign punishment. And His Majesty has
appointed that the Flags, Iacks and Pendents of His Majesty's Ships shall
henceforth be made of Red, White, and Blew, to the end the Offenders herein may
not pretend ignorance or mistake. And His Majesty does further Command, That on
all other Stores, where it may be done without prejudice to the said Stores, or
Charge to His Majesty, as Nails, Spikes, and other the like Stores, That the
broad Arrow be put on some part of the same, whether by Stamp, Brand, or other
way, as shall be particularly directed by the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, to whom the care thereof is committed. And
His Majesty does hereby forbid all Artificers to make any Stores or Provisions
so marked, except for the use of His Majesty's Navy; and does likewise hereby
Command all His Majesty's loving Subjects, that they forbear to buy or receive
from any person whatsoever, any Stores marked as aforesaid (without particular
order and leave from the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesty's
Navy) upon pain of being proceeded against as Receivers of stolen Goods, and as
Imbezlers of His Majesty's Stores. And to the end that His Majesty's Officers
may not be negligent in the performance hereof, or for any indirect
considerations omit to place and affix the marks and distinctions, as is above,
or shall be hereafter directed, His Majesty does recommend it to the care of
His most dear and entirely beloved Brother, James Duke of York, His High
Admiral, that such Officers or Workmen who shall neglect or disobey the
Directions herein contained, be discharged from their Employments, and be
further punished as their offense shall deserve. And for the better discovery
of such as shall notwithstanding this His Majesty's Proclamation, Imbezle any
of His Stores as aforesaid, His Majesty is pleased to Declare, That any person
who shall discover to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Navy, any
Cordage, Iron-work, or other Stores imbezled or purloyned out of His Majesty's
Yards, Stores, or Ships, shall receive as a reward and encouragement for such
his discovery, one full third part of the value of such Stores so discovered;
Provided that he likewise discover either the Imbezler and Purloyner of them,
or at least the Receiver of the same. And for the better and more certain
publishing the Marks which are not herein particularly specified, His Majesty
does hereby enjoin the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesty's
Navy, with all convenient speed to cause Patterns of them to be sent to
Shipwrights and Ironmongers Hall respectively, there to remain for the
information of such as are concerned in the knowledge thereof.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Nineteenth day of November 1661. in the
Thirteenth year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


