HONI (...) PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT.

By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the better Ordering the Transportation of
Cloths and other Woollen Manufactures into Germany, and preventing the
Encroachments on the Fellowship of the Merchants-Adventurers of England in
relation to their Trading in those Commodities.
CHARLES R.

WE being sensible how much it imports the Profit and Honor of this our Realm,
that the Trade of Exporting of Woollen Manufactures into Germany, and the
Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands be encouraged and preserved under a due
Regulation, which has of long time been maintained and carried on by the
Company of Merchant-Adventurers, by virtue of several Grants, Charters, and
Confirmations to them by Us and Our Royal Predecessors heretofore made and
Granted, to the great Advancement and Increase of the said Trade; And being
given to understand by the said Company, That their said Trade, and the
Liberties and Privileges by Us and Our Royal Predecessors to them Granted,
have been very much of late Invaded and Infringed, and principally by Aliens,
and other Foreigners, to whom We have extended Our Grace and Favor of
Naturalization or Endenization; Who in requital of Our Grace and Favor toward
them, make it their endeavor to destroy the said Company, and being under no
Rule or Regulation for Exporting the Woollen Manufacture, do take upon them to
Ship, Transport, Carry, and Convey the Cloth and Woollen Manufactures of this
Kingdom unto the Town of Hambourg, and other parts of Germany, whereby, and by
several deceitful practices of the said Foreigners, in counterfeiting the
Marks, Seals, and Tillets of Persons Free of the said Company, the said Trade
will be in great danger of being impaired, if not totally lost to the Natives
of this Our Realm: And for that the said Company have submitted it to Us and
Our Privy Council, to admit into the Freedom of the said Company, any of Our
Subjects, whether Natives, Naturalized, or Endenized, upon such Terms as We by
the Advice of Our Privy Council shall judge reasonable. We therefore of Our
Princely Care for the Preservation and Regulation of the Trade of Cloth, and
all other Woollen Manufactures now made, or hereafter to be made within this
Our Kingdom, have thought fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council, to Declare and
Publish Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, and We do hereby strictly Will and
Command, That no Person or Persons, Subject, or Subjects of Our Realm of
England, Alien or Foreigner, Naturalized, or Endenized, shall from henceforth
Ship, Transport, Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried
or Conveyed either from Our City or Port of London, or from any other City,
Town, Port, Haven, or Creek of Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, any Woollen Cloth, either White Cloths, Colored
Cloths, Dressed and Dyed out of the Whites, Cloths called Spanish Cloths, mixed or
of one Color, or any Bays, Kersies, Perpetuanos, or any Stockins, or other
Woollen Commodities whatsoever, now made, or hereafter to be made within Our
Realm aforesaid, unto any the Cities, Towns, Ports, or other Places within the
Countries of Germany, or the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, saving
only such person or persons as are or shall be Free of, admitted and continued
as Member of the said Fellowship of Merchant-Adventurers of England, and none
others. And that no Freemen of the said Fellowship shall Ship, Transport,
Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried or Conveyed, any
Cloths, or Woollen Manufactures made within Our Realm, Dominion, and Town of
Berwick aforesaid, without special License of the said Fellowship, into any the
parts of Germany, or the Seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, save only to
the Public Marts, Staples and Residences declared by the said Fellowship,
within the parts aforesaid beyond the Seas for the time being, or to one of
them. And to the end that this Trade may be the better improved in an orderly
and well Governed way, Our Will and Pleasure is, That the said Fellowship of
Merchant-Adventurers of England shall from henceforth from time to time, admit
and receive into the Freedom of their said Fellowship, all and every such Our
Subjects, and such as be Naturalized, or made Denizen, as shall at any time
hereafter desire and demand the same: Paying Thirteen pounds six shillings
eight pence as a Fine to the said Fellowship for their Entry, Income and
Admittance thereunto: That is to say, such as are of London, to be mere
Merchants, and exercised in that Profession, and no Shopkeepers, except giving
over their Shops, and such as are of the Out-Ports, if bred in Merchandise,
though Shopkeepers. Provided that every such Person, both of London, and of
the Out-Ports aforesaid, do demand their said Freedom, and be actually admitted
into the same within one Year next ensuing the Date hereof, and that their Sons
and Servants shall at their several Admissions and making Free, be admitted for
the Sum of Six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence, according to the
Statute of the Twelfth of Henry the Seventh. And Our further Will and Pleasure
is, That no person or persons not qualified as aforesaid, shall presume to
Trade in any the above mentioned Commodities, into any the Foreign Parts above
named, upon pain of Our high Displeasure: For that We, in case We shall
perceive that any person or persons shall neglect to take hold of this Our
Grace hereby offered them to be admitted into the said Fellowship, and shall
yet continue to Trade disorderly into the parts of Germany, or the Seventeen
Provinces of the Netherlands, and out of the Mart and Staple Towns of the said
Fellowship of Merchant-Adventurers therein for the time being, We shall not
only have cause for the future utterly to deny and exclude them of this Grace,
but will require a strict account of such persons for their contempt and
neglect of this Our Royal Command herein, and will take such course as shall be
fitting for their punishment, and for the future restraint of such Disorders.
And to the end that the Charters and Government of the said Fellowship may be
the better put in execution, and to the intent that all Offenders against the
same may be discovered and brought to Justice, and such Punishment inflicted
upon them for such their Offenses, as by their said Charters, Orders and
Constitutions ought to be inflicted on such as wilfully and contemptuously
transgress against Our Charters, and this Our Proclamation in pursuance of the
same; We do by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby Will and
Command, as well the Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty, as the Marshal and
Underofficers of the same, as also Our Commissioners or Farmers of Our Customs
for the time being, and the Searchers of Our Customs in all Our Ports of
England, and the several Officers of what kind soever, belonging to, and
attending the Service of Our Customs outward, as also Our Admirals,
Vice-Admirals, Commanders, Captains, and Officers whatsoever of any of Our
Royal Ships, or any of Our Castles, Block-houses and Forts respectively, and
all other Our Officers and Ministers in their several Places to be Aiding and
Assisting unto the said Fellowship and Company of Merchant-Adventurers of
England, and all such as they shall Employ in all matters and things tending to
the Supportation of the Government of the said Fellowship and Company, and
Regulating of their Trade, and for the Preservation of the Privileges,
Jurisdictions, and Franchises by Our Royal Predecessors to them Granted, and by
Our Self to them Confirmed by Our Letters Patents.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Thirteenth day of June 1683. In the five and
thirtieth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


