(...) unto all them that obey him.
And the (...) and last End of the Righteous.
TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT GRAFTON, November 15th, 1772. Being the last delivered
in public there By AARON HUTCHINSON, A. M. Then PASTOR.

Printed at the Request of and for the Subscribers.

A new heart also will I give you -- and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27. For by one offering he has perfected forever them that
are sanctified.

Heb. x. 14. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we
die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lord's.

Romans xiv. 8. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each
one walking in his uprightness.

Isaiah lvii. 2. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.

Psalm. xxxvii. 37. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND JOHN FLEET. 1773.

The PREFACE To the Reader.
THE Legalist has been, either regular in his conduct in life from his youth
up, keeping all the commandments; so as to say from his deceitful and
desperately wicked heart, what lack I yet? or his good deeds, in his own view*
rise so superior to his evil ones, as to think it unjust that his failings
should be marked against him: Or, if he was once abandoned to enormous vices,
against the light of natural conscience, yet he can now thank God that he is
not as he once was, but has escaped those gross pollutions of the world, and
become a religious observer of the external duties of religion.

He thinks his piety and practice of duty will go far to satisfy for his past
misconduct. He hopes a merciful God will not deal with him in strict law and
justice; and that Christ will satisfy for his defects; and his hope in the
mercy of God, and the merits of Christ, is greatly emboldened by the
consciousness of his own worthiness, the paucity and trivial nature of his
sins, and his abundant duties. He has so little to ask of God, it would seem to
him hard, severe, and in a measure unjust, to he denied So he goes on in the
way of death, hoping for life. He knows not God, his perfections and majesty;
nor the strictness and purity of his law. He has no proper meaning, in using
the words grace, mercy, or the righteousness of God; and ignorantly hopes, God
will save him in a way that never entered into the heart of God to save one of
all the rebellious race.

So the infidel Jews, not seeing Christ to be the end of the moral, and scope
of their ceremonial law, practiced upon the Sinai-law, as a covenant of works,
and vainly hoped, by doing these things, to live in them, not regarding the
plain expressions of their own law, cursing every man that continues not
(perfectly) in all things written in the book of the law to do them: and so
perished under the bondage of corruption. Gal. iv. 24, 25. -- The one
(covenant) from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. For
this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is
(the present carnal infidel Jews) and is in bondage with her children.

The Antinomian, not having a thorough conviction by the law as a transgressor,
or a regular divorce from it, in order for a lawful marriage with the king of
grace, in a prevailing and criminal self-love upon some superficial or delusive
manifestations, closes with the gospel promises of life by grace through the
redeemer, and rejoices in hope of seeing the glory of God. But the moral law is
not (as in all true disciples) written upon his heart; hence he has no such
knowledge of sin by the law as to abase, shame and confound him. He is not like
the father of the faithful, who, when God revealed his covenant love, fell on
his face; or like Job, who in a like case abhorred himself, and repented in
dust and ashes; or like Ephraim, who, after that he was turned (effectually by
divine grace) repented, and after that he was instructed (by the holy Ghost,
and led into all truth both of law and gospel) smote upon his thigh, with grief
and indignation, was ashamed, yea even confounded, because he did bear the
reproach of his youth; or like penitent Mary, who stood behind her Savior,
washed his feet with her tears of godly sorrow, and did wipe them with the
hairs of her head, which had been (it is presumed) the fuel of her pride and
wantonness.

But the Antinomian convert is ravished with his own goodness, not knowing the
plague of his own heart, is pleased with the good temper thereof, trusts to
himself that he is righteous and despises others. The self-flattering
assurance of his conversion is the head-spring of his joy. His spirit does not
rejoice in God his Savior, but in himself, in his own supposed humility and
gracious feelings. Nevertheless, he remains at enmity with the law as holy,
just and good: he sees not the shape, and hates the character of God in his
word, rejects the kingly office of Christ; while he calls him Lord: and
discards his law; while he swears allegiance to his person. His faith is dead:
his hopes are vain and delusive.

Some of the most profoundly ignorant Legalists, and of the most elated class
of Antinomians, have in time attained to a fancied sinless perfection, which is
gotten by losing sight of the law; for where no law is there is no
transgression: hence they are bold to say, they have no sin, and so deceive
themselves, and show to all sensible people, that the truth is not in them.

Some have found a way to build themselves up in most of these delusions, by
only a mere belief of the simple truth of the gospel propositions, without the
least shadow of the compliance of the will, or with the heart believing unto
righteousness. Respecting both these denominations the one of which splits upon
the rock of salvation, and the other sucks poison out of the balm of Gilead, we
may say to all the real disciples of Christ, distinguished by having the moral
law and testimony of God bound and sealed in their hearts; ye have not so
learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and been taught by him, as the
truth is in Jesus.

The Legalist and Antinomian seem as directly opposite to each other as the
antipodes or poles of the world; yet are exactly agreed in essentials. The one
places his chief confidence in his external duties; the other in his supposed
seize. The one is fully sensible of the importance of his good duties;
the other has the inward feeling of his good devotion, and pious disposition:
both reject Christ and his perfect righteousness. In all their prayers for
themselves, their hearts mean, as did the Jews in their application to Christ
for the Centurion; he is worthy, for whom thou shall do this thing: for he
loves our nation, and has built us a synagogue.

The like devout and pious strain of the Pagans, in their addresses to their
idols, we find in the writings of their poets, Virgil, Homer, etc. We (says the
holy apostle) are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. "Grace itself
trusted to (says Mr. Burkitt) is flesh."

The design of the following discourses will not be frustrated, nor the labor
lost, if they serve, by the blessing of God, to guard us against those two
extremes, and point out to us the true plan of that christian doctrine, which
is in all it is branches according to godliness, being every way adapted to
abase the sinner, magnify the moral law, display the exceeding riches of
unmerited grace, to extol the divine Redeemer in all his mediatorial offices,
to inspire with inherent holiness, and engage us to the practice of all serious
piety.

It is humbly hoped, that every pious, devout, and candid reader, that is
conscientiously and cordially willing to live and die by the sentiments in
these discourses, will kindly overlook any tautologies, want of labored
periods, or proper arrangements; and make all fit allowances for sermons
delivered, according as, after eating the roll, a door of utterance was opened,
to a considerable audience indeed of people of this and the neighboring towns,
but without a thought of their thus coming abroad; seeing three months elapsed
(till some other things intervened) before the subscription and motion for
printing them took place; and that they are as ellaborate as may be reasonably
expected, being modelled but once in haste, without leisure to refine the
sentiments or polish the expressions.

That we may all know and practice the truth both of the law of faith, and
moral law, and neither make shipwreck of faith, nor of a good conscience, but
keep them both inviolate unto the end and so be saved, is the prayer of

The Author.
Grafton, 15 March, 1773.
CHRIST a perfect Savior unto all them that obey him.
HEB. v. 9. And, being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him.


AS in the adorable Trinity there are three persons, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, in nature coessential, in dignity coequal, and in being coeternal; so
they perfectly unite and cooperate in all the works of creation, providence,
and grace. My Father works hitherto, and I work. Whatever the Father does,
the Son does the same likewise. The word for God, Genesis i. 1. is plural, and
includes all the persons in the Godhead, who said one to the other, Let us make
man, etc. Christ, the essential word or wisdom of God, was present when the
heavens were prepared; and the soundations of the earth were laid: and by him
were all things created, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or
dominions, principalities or powers: all things were created by him, and for
him. The holy Spirit moved also on the face of the waters in the creation; as
the same Spirit of the Lord afterward caused Israel to rest in Canaan; and by
his Spirit he garnished the heavens, and by the finger, i. e. by the Spirit of
God, was the moral law written on the two tables of stone. The whole Bible is
the revelation of Jesus Christ, which God the Father gave unto him; and is all
by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. In all the dispensations of grace in the
gospel we have the kindness and love of God the Father* our Savior, the
renewing of the holy Ghost, shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ.

And in the great day of retribution God the Father is judge himself, but will
judge the world in righteousness by that Man, whom he has ordained, and by the
Spirit of judgment. Whatever therefore may be said of our incarnate Deity, his
creating, instructing, governing, and finally judging the world, and being the
author of eternal salvation unto his willing and obedient people; we must not
suppose the almighty Father, or eternal Spirit, secluded from any of those
wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge.

We shall consider, I. What the adorable Redeemer was, before he was made
perfect as a Savior. II. How he was made perfect. III. That he hence became
the author of eternal salvation. IV. -- Unto all them that obey him. LASTLY,
The Improvement.


I. What the adorable Redeemer was, before he was made perfect.

Although some kind of imperfection is intimated, yet, if we rightly consider,
we shall find none to his dishonor, none but what arose from the perfection of
God, his rectoral righteousness, the majesty of the law, and the nature of
things.

Consider,

1. There was not the least want of perfection in him as God. To him all divine
attributes, and all the peculiar works of God are ascribed. His name is Jehovah
our righteousness: The I am that I am, the self-existent, ever being One; the
omniscient, omnipresent, almighty One, dwelling in his own eternity, or
inhabiting the whole of eternity, past and to come, in one eternal NOW. He
rules by his power forever. He gloriously rides on the heavens by his name
JAH. and in his excellency through the sky. He treads on the waves of the sea,
and knows the balancings of the clouds, those stupendous works of God. He
rules the raging of the sea, and sustaineth the whole creation. In the
beginning he laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of
his hands. He is, and ever was, in the form of God, and it was no robbery for
him to be equal with God, and says, I and my Father are one divine essence.
Christ is not (as the Socinians vainly imagine) merely a delegated God, but God
by nature, begotten of the Father before all worlds; though no man or angel can
declare his generation. As God, he receives the adorations of Angels, and no
dispute ever arose in heaven about his divinity, among elect angels or saints.
Christ is perfect God, not made, supreme, independent. God over all, rich unto
all that call upon him. This is his name and memorial in all generations.

2. There is no want of perfection in him as man. So far is the human nature of
Christ from the least deficiency, that in him it has the highest perfection it
is capable of. A Lamb without the least blemish, natural or moral. That was an
holy thing, that was born of the virgin Mary, and is called the Son of God,
begotten by the creating power of the holy Ghost. The Lord created a new thing
in the earth, a woman compassed a man. He is God's holy child Jesus, who knew
no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; but was perfectly holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made in holiness and dignity higher than
the material heavens, which are not clean in his sight, or than the holy
angels, that are chargeable with comparative folly. His human soul might in
order of time, as well as by way of eminence, be the very beginning of the
creation of God. And a body was prepared him with divine counsel, as in the
volume (or head of the book, Genesis iii. 15.) had been written of him, he is the
very image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature, and in all
things has the pre-eminence. The only visible image that God ever made, or
allowed to be made of an invisible most pure spirit. The human nature of Christ
is the visible effulgence of the divine glory, and the express character of his
substance, and will appear so in the great day, when the man Christ Jesus shall
visibly be seen with the power, glory and majesty of God; and that shall be
said of him truly, which was of Simon Magus blasphemously, This man is the
great power of God. In a word, the manhood of Christ is as glorious and holy,
as may reasonably be expected from the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily
in him.

3. The God-man had not the least imperfection in regard to his undertaking,
but was completely furnished for it; and was the only personage in the universe
that was so. Had the tallest mere Angel in heaven undertook to obey for us, be
could have done no more than his own duty as a servant to the Most High, nor
could a mere finite creature have merited any thing by suffering for us. If
this Lord from heaven had not been perfect man, he could not have suffered, and
if he had not been perfect God, he could not have merited.

And if the union of the divine nature and human soul of Christ has subsisted
ever since, or rather before, time began, then was he well qualified to manage
all the affairs of his church and people, even before his incarnation.
Accordingly his goings forth have been from of old, even from everlasting, in
an human form, as a pledge of his coming in the fullness of time in the fashion
of a man. He walked in the garden of Eden in the cool of the day; and
afterward appeared to Abraham as the God of glory, but in the form of a man.
Thus Genesis xviii. 1, 2. The Lord appeared to Abraham, and he saw three men; and
when he met them, he could distinguish Christ from the Angels (I suppose by the
Shechinah, or divine glory) as well as we can distinguish the sun from the moon
or stars. This was that glory of the Lord that appeared in the pillar of a
cloud and fire in the wilderness, and afterward dwelt betwixt the Cherubims of
glory, shadowing the mercy-seat, in the tabernacle and temple of old; and which
departed from Israel before the captivity, and never after returned.

This God-man was seen with bodily eyes by our first parents, as the Lord God.
By Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as their God. Yea, Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
all saw this God of Israel at mount Sinai; and Moses afterward saw his back
parts. Joshua saw him, as Captain of the Lord's hosts, in all the conquests of
Canaan. He was seen by Gideon, as his commissioner, and Israel's deliverer. And
it don't appear that there ever arose any dispute among the saints of old about
the divinity or future incarnation of Christ.

When the Jews stumbled at the meanness of his appearance in the flesh, they
ought to have remembered his former discoveries of himself in the days of their
fathers. If his visage appeared to them marred more than any man's, and his
form more than the sons of men; they should have considered that he had been
seen of their great ancestors as the God of glory; and that at mount Sinai, in
the view of their fathers, his glory covered the heavens, and the earth was
full of his praise. If they were tempted to stumble at this King of Zion, his
coming to them riding on an ass, and on a colt the fool of an ass; they should
have recollected how he used to ride on the heavens, and on a cherub for the
help of his people. This God man was therefore completely furnished for the
arduous work of our redemption. He comes with all the bowels and tender mercies
of a God, as well as the most tender compassions of a man, touched with the
feeling of our infirmities.

Where then is the imperfection intimated? not in him as God, or man, or both;
but only as a Savior. If we may say without any reflection upon the glorious
God (yea say to the honor of his adorable perfection) God cannot lie, nor deny
himself, any more than cease to be; may we not say, that Christ, consistent
with the rights of the Godhead, the laws of government, that are a transcript
of the moral attributes of God, could not save sinners without accomplishing a
work necessary thereto? Thus far we may venture to affirm, that, when the
counsel of peace was betwixt the Father and Son, there was no proposal made for
our recovery, but in the manner Christ undertook to accomplish it. Men are so
far from any ability to save themselves by any works of righteousness of their
own, that it don't appear the Lord of glory could save them without working out
a righteousness for them.

II. We are to consider, How he was made perfect. -- By finishing the work
which the Father had given him to do. By his obedience unto death, even the
death of the cross.

If modesty forbids us absolutely to affirm, that infinite wisdom could not
have devised other means for our salvation, than by the death of Christ; yet we
may say, It became (was decent, honorable and becoming) him for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory to make
the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb. ii. 10.

And it is certain, that to this end Christ both died and rose, and revived,
that he might be made mediatorial Lord both of the dead and living; and have
authority, as mediatorial king, to give eternal life to as many as the Father
has given him. As soon as he had done his work on earth, and could say, It is
finished; he bowed his head and gave up the ghost.

He had then full right, authority, and power by the covenant of redemption to
break the prison of the grave, for himself and people -- to ascend on high, and
lead captivity captive, and receive gifts for men even for the rebellious; that
the Lord God might dwell with them, and load them with his benefits. He had
full power to send the holy Spirit to carry on the work of grace, to sit as
King forever, to command Angels, and control Devils, to have the key of David
and reign over the house of Jacob forever and ever; and to have power over all
flesh, so as to give endless felicity to his people. He has entered by his own
blood into the holy place above, as our advocate and intercessor. He there sits
a Priest on the throne of universal dominion, and can never be at a loss in any
of his administrations; for there are seven lamps of fire burning before his
throne; and he has seven eyes, complete wisdom and skill, and seven horns of
power to execute, and full authority to judge the world, and dash all his
enemies in pieces with his iron rod, and welcome all his redeemed to that
kingdom he is gone, as their forerunner, to prepare for them. Being thus made
perfect, he is a complete, all-sufficient Savior, able to do, exceeding
abundantly for us, above all we ask or think; and to save to the uttermost them
that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them,
and to plead the merits of his death on their behalf. By one offering he
procured for his people righteousness, strength, and all that is needful for
their eternal happiness; and in effect perfected all them that are sanctified.
When this Son of the Highest bowed the heavens and came down to the dust of
death, all the mountains in the way of our salvation flowed down at his
presence. He that trod the wine press of wrath for us is mighty to save. And is
set by the Father at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens, from thence to dispense all needful blessings to his people. But if he
had not first shed his blood for our ransom, how could he have entered thereby,
not into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us? By his
death he destroyed Death and the Devil, overcame the world, not barely for
himself, but for all his people. His strength to save is in his own merits; and
being infinite in merits, and having all power in heaven and earth, he is an
almighty Savior; and is most surely believed and safely trusted by all that
know his name. Christ cannot be a Savior without these three things, viz.

1. He must be sanctified, designated, called and sent by the Father. Christ
glorified not himself to be made an high priest, but was called of God, as was
Aaron. John x. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into
the world? etc. So Jeremiah was sanctified before his birth, i. e. set apart by
the decrees of heaven to the prophetic office; and Paul was thus separated from
his mother's womb to the office of an apostle.

2. He must sanctify himself with his own blood. John xvii. 19. And for their
sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.
How he sanctified himself, see Heb. x. 29. -- counted the blood of the
covenant, wherewith he (Christ) was sanctified, an unholy thing. And it is
certain that he could not have sanctified the People with his own blood, if he
had not suffered without the gate. Heb. xiii. 12. Nor could he be a priest
without having somewhat to offer. Heb. viii. 3.

3. He must enter by his own blood into heaven itself, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. He is now a priest on the throne, has an unchangeable
or impassible priesthood, and abides a priest forever; which could never have
been, if he had not shed his blood, by which to enter within the veil. Hereby
he is made perfect, as the word (...) is rendered in the text, and in chap. ii.
ver. 10. and chap. 7. ver. 19.

But as the word is constantly used by the Seventy, Exodus xxix. and Lev. viii.
for the consecration of Aaron and his sons to the priesthood, and rendered
consecrated, Heb. vii. 28. And as Dr. Hammond asserts, and it is warmly
insisted upon by Dr. Whitby, that the word is to be taken as denoting
consecration, and it is thus rendered by them, " and being consecrated,
sanctified or dedicated by his sufferings to his priesthood, part of his
mediatorial office." I am willing to vail to the authority of these learned
critics, which is so far from militating against what is advanced above, that
it abundantly confirms and corroborates it, that without suffering Christ could
not be a Savior; so far from it that he could not even be consecrated to that
important office without it, and his very consecration or dedication thereto
consisted in suffering.

And all divines (as far as I know) will allow, that Christ could not enter
into the most holy place above, as a priest forever after the order of
Melchisedeck, i. e. abide a priest continually, as Melchisedeck did
historically, from his ascension to the end of the world, without first
shedding his blood, by the which he entered into that holy place, having by one
offering, viz. of himself, obtained eternal redemption for us.




III. We are to show, That he hence became the author of eternal salvation.

The original word ((...)) may denote the procuring cause. He gave his life a
price of redemption, and so purchased the church with his own blood. The word
in chap xii. 2. rendered author, is (...), where Christ is said to be the
author and finisher of faith. It is rendered captain in chap. ii. 10. The
captain of salvation. And in Acts v. 31. the same word is rendered Prince, A
Prince and a Savior. The Lord Jesus is the leader and commander of his people,
the captain of salvation, under whose banner they fight their way to the
heavenly crown; and the author, i. e. the procurer and worker of faith and all
graces in the soul. But the word in the text leads us to his death, as
procuring all saving benefits and graces. The author of salvation in such a
sense as he never could have been, had he not been made perfect through
sufferings.

"Father, I sing thy wondrous grace,
I bless my Savior's name;
He bought salvation for the poor,
And bore the sinner's shame."
All that come to Christ are taught of God, and hear and learn of the Father,
and are convinced also by the divine Spirit; but both are through the mediation
of Christ. And the dead in trespasses and sins do hear the voice of the Son of
God, and live spiritually. From this Sun of righteousness are derived all the
beams of divine light and grace that irradiate, warm, comfort, refresh, and
make fruitful in the word of righteousness the hearts of all his people.

Christ is the author and procurer of salvation from the bondage of sin, and
from deserved misery, of and all the pledges and earnests of salvation in this
life, and of complete and everlasting felicity in heaven. He will raise up all
his saints at the last day, and, being heir of all things as Mediator, will
admit his people to be coheirs with him of the inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them. All his saints
are a possession purchased by Christ for himself, as the fruit of the travail
of his soul; and heaven is a possession purchased by him for his people. All
the redeemed, when they come to the heavenly Zion, will with one heart and
voice ascribe their salvation to Christ, as one that loved them, and washed
them from their sins in his own blood, and made them kings and priests to God
and the Lamb.

IV. -- Unto all them that obey him.

Though the rewards are all of grace, and the gift of God is eternal life
through our Lord Jesus Christ, yet eternal life is freely bestowed upon none
but the obedient. If ye be willing and obedient to the law of faith, and the
moral law, ye shall of divine bounty and grace eat the good of the heavenly
land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword of his
indignation; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. We must wash our hands
in innocence, or by repentance, and so compass his altar; for none but such as
have clean hands and pure hearts can ascend into the holy hill above. If we do
well we shall be accepted of God in Christ, but if we do not well, sin lies at
the door of conscience, ready to gripe and torture us. Behold God will not cast
away a perfect man, i. e. a sincere, upright man; but in the great day the
Judge of all will render eternal life to all, that by patient continuance in
well doing seek for glory, honor, and immortality; while to them that are
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, he will
render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, even upon every soul of
man that does evil. The whole Bible speaks the language of Isaiah iii. 10, 11.
Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the
reward of his hands shall be given him. In the great decisive day every man
shall receive according to things done in the body, whether good or evil. If we
obey and serve him, it shall be well with us; for where Christ is there will
all his servants be forever. And, all that in humility serve the Lord Christ,
shall be honored of the Father. Blessed are they, and they only, that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God, and may enter in through the gates into the
celestial city: while all the workers of iniquity shall be bid to depart. He
that does the will of God shall enter into heaven; while the wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.

He, that is ordained of God to be Judge both of quick and dead, has no
commission to save any adult persons, but the obedient: and all those his
enemies, that would not that he should reign over them, will be brought forth
by his supreme command, and slain before him: they shall perish and be as the
fat of lambs, into smoke shall they consume away; for God will early destroy
all the wicked of the earth. God has set his King on the holy hill of Zion, and
by his word must all his servants be ruled. More stress is laid upon obedience
than many imagine. Jer. vii. 23. But this thing commanded I them, saying, obey
my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all
the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. Deuteronomy. v. 29.
O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all
my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their
children forever! The father of the faithful must command his children and
household after him, and they must keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment, as they expect the Lord should bring upon Abraham the great and
precious things promised him in the gracious covenant. Our free will offerings
will never atone for wilful wickedness. Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice; and to hearken than the fat of rams.

Here a weighty and important question occurs. viz. What is that obedience that
evidences our title to eternal salvation? In general, it implies more than a
reverence of the moral law, as resulting from the moral perfections of God, and
containing the "everlasting" tables of right reason and justice.

The light of nature, natural affections, and the eternal rules of
righteousness in the moral law, are not vacated, but fully established by the
holy religion of Jesus: We must nevertheless obey Christ in obeying the moral
law. He has adopted it in the sermon on the mount, and we must receive it at
his mouth as a perfect rule, in it is kind, for holy living to all his
followers. Hence in regeneration he always writes his moral law in the hearts
of his people, and puts his fear into their inward parts; that they may not
wickedly or wilfully depart from him. All, that are converted into a notion of
salvation by grace, in contempt of the moral law, do separate what God has
joined, and deceive themselves with a vain hope. The righteousness of the law
must be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; so
far at least, as with our mind to serve this law of Christ, and love it,
because it is pure, and to delight, after the inward man, in this holy, just
and good law of God.

We must also believe and obey the gospel, which is styled the law of faith, as
having the force of a law enacted by the supreme majesty. The original word for
obey in the text signifies as much as -- to hear with an obedient ear -- humbly
to wait for his counsel -- to incline our ear and hear, so as to live. We must
hearken to the whole form of sound words in the holy Bible, and cordially
entertain the gracious words that proceeded out of Christ's mouth.

All that fear God with a devout reverence and godly fear, and believe in God
the Father, his perfections and glory; and believe also in Christ, as the
Prophet, Priest and King of his church. and submit to be taught, ruled and
saved by him, and unfeignedly repent and turn from all their transgressions,
trusting in Christ for pardon, and taking his yoke, being effectually persuaded
to come to him for life; these are the obedient in the text, and all describe
the same character. Call them believers, or fearers of God, or his obedient
people, or the righteous, or godly, all come to the same thing. But to be more
particular,

1. Obedience must be universal. None can properly be called obedient but such
as are universally so. Not that they yield a perfect unsinning obedience; for
so, there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not. And
they that say, they live without sinning, do evidently deceive themselves, and
the truth of divine light and grace is not in them. But they sincerely aim to
do all his commandments, and practice his whole revealed will, having a good
conscience, willing in all things to live honestly. And as a good, honest
hearted man is satisfied from himself, i. e. in being conscious to himself of
his own sincerity and integrity in the whole of his duty; so all will sooner or
later be ashamed, that have not unseigned respect to all God's commandments.
James ii. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all; as he thereby wilfully affronts the majesty, and
despises the authority of the lawgiver, trampling on the law, and refusing, in
one instance at least, to have Christ to reign over him. Matt. v. 19, Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, i. e. have no
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, or of God. The Jews esteemed that, which
forbad the taking a bird and her nest, the least of all the commands. But
though it seemed comparatively little unto them; yet it proceeded from the same
authority as the greater commands of the law; and a Jew, that wilfully
disregarded it, cast off the fear of God, disowned his allegiance, and was
verily a rebel.

How disobedient then, and even rebellious, must they be reputed, that omit the
most weighty matters of the law and gospel? Such as these: This is his
commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ: Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thyself.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them: for
this is the law and the prophets. What did the tithes of garden-herbs avail the
Pharisees, while they passed over the love of God, and justice, mercy, and
fidelity toward their fellow creatures?

In vain are a few external observances, while we are at enmity with God and
his law, while anger rests in our bosoms, and we carry grudges one against
another. We must esteem his statutes concerning all things to be right, and
hate every evil and every false way; and walk in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless; and walk affectionately and charitably one
toward another. For he that says I love God, and hates his brother, is a
liar. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God, whom he has not seen?

2. Our obedience must be regulated by the sacred rules of holy living in the
book of God. In particular, respecting the matter, manner, and design of
obedience.

The matter of our obedience must be what our King and Lawgiver has required
of us. For so has the Lord commanded, is our warrant for any duty. This must
heedfully be observed and regarded; for surely, "Unrequired duties, uncommanded
acts of obedience, can never be pleasing to God." If it be said, that both
these are plain contradictions in terms, it is acknowledged; and therefore may
better serve to show the affrontive absurdity of will worship, and the setting
up human inventions, the statutes of Omri, or our own superstitions, in the
place of divine institutions. We may be sure, that every thing will be utterly
abhorred by the Lord of divine worship, of which he can say, I commanded it
not, spoke it not, neither came it into my mind.

Our obedience respecting the manner of it, must also be regulated by the holy
book of God. We must love God, and so keep his commandments from a principle of
benevolence, loyalty and love; obey from the heart that form of doctrine
delivered unto us: My Son, give me thy heart. God requires truth and sincerity
in the inward parts. He is a Spirit, and in his worship bodily exercise
profits little. They that worship him must worship in spirit, i. e. with the
soul, understanding, will and affections, and in truth, agreably to his word;
with supreme love, with devout affections to God and his whole revealed will.
If the heart be right with God and steadfast in his covenant, and there be a
willing mind to do his will, it is accepted.

Moreover, our obedience, respecting our aims and ends, must be guided by the
sacred laws of righteousness. We must ultimately regard the glory of God, and
in close connection therewith, and in subordination thereto, our views and aims
must be, in glorifying God, to enjoy him forever. We must not despise the
pleasant land, but respect the recompense of reward in the future world;
counting nothing dear to ourselves, in comparison with finishing our course
with joy. We must seek the honor that comes from God only, and with an holy
ambition pursue the dignities and preferments of the world of glory, desiring
God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ in our salvation; giving
God the glory of all his works of grace. This is to do more than others, and
like Caleb, who was a man of another spirit, to follow the Lord fully, or fill
up after the Lord, as the margin reads it.

It is questioned, whether the most refined hypocrite in the world has
advanced so far as to pay even an external regard to all God's commands. Some
wilful sin, or omission of duty is allowed and connived at, which he calls an
infirmity, and says, The good Lord pardon his servant concerning this thing:
but by not grieving for it, he proves it to be not an infirmity, but an allowed
sin. So Naaman the Syrian, though so much of a convert as to resolve henceforth
to worship no other but the God of Israel, yet will externally practice and
uphold idolatry, rather than give up his place at court. Herod Antipas will
retain his Herodias. Ananias and Sapphira do not forsake all, and go after
Christ, and so are not worthy of him. Ahab after all his humbling himself, and
going softly, does not restore the vineyard of Naboth.

But if we allow the unsanctified to be never so uniform and universal in
external obedience, it will little avail them, since they all to a man fail in
the other two, and come short of the glory of God. They set the creature above
the Creator: never supremely love God, or aim at his glory. For want of these,
how exact soever their obedience may be in the matter thereof, it is at best
but the shell without the kernel, the carcass without the life: and God is not
pleased or honored thereby.

If we allow Jehu very punctually and exactly to have executed the letter, and
matter of the divine command, in destroying the house of Ahab; and that he was
rewarded therefore by his sons sitting on his throne to the fourth generation;
and all his boasting of his zeal for the Lord God: nevertheless, because he
meant not so, neither did his heart think so, but it was in his heart to get a
kingdom, and vent his pride and despite against those he looked upon as his
rivals; the righteous Judge makes inquisition for blood, and visits that blood
of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and causes to cease the kingdom of the house
of Israel. For as he thinks in his heart so is he. The Jews fasting in
Babylon four days in a year, during their seventy years captivity, was in
itself decent, proper, and, for the matter, good; but what do all those fasts
come to, before this one close question, brought home to conscience? Did ye at
all fast unto me? even to me?

Israel at mount Sinai (Deuteronomy. v.) spoke well, as to the subject matter, all
that they said in their engagements to God: but, O, says God, that there were
such an heart in them. It was very ill in them, that they did flatter him with
their mouths, and lied unto him with their tongues; that their hearts were not
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant; and that in
contempt of their own most solemn vows, they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit.

How can ye (says Christ to the Pharisees) being evil speak good things? For
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. For the matter of it they
might speak well. The Devil, as to the matter of his sayings, may speak as well
as an Angel. Mark i. 24. -- I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. And
another, Acts xvi. 17. -- These men are the servants of the most high God,
which, show unto us the way of salvation. If we observe only the subject matter
of these sayings, we might imagine they dropped from the mouth of some holy
Angel: but how do they appear, as proceeding from the heart of a Devil? They
are therefore justly rebuked and cast out.

Hypocritical Israel would draw nigh to God with their mouth, and honor him
with their lips, but removed their hearts far from him. Thus Jeremiah complains
to God of the Jews, Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
What were all the pompous sacrifices of the Jews, the Searcher of hearts could
say, I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.

3. That, which crowns all true evangelical obedience, is the renouncing it all
in point of justification and acceptance with God. As unprofitable servants
doing only our duty. Hence present our supplications before the throne of
grace, not for our righteousness, but for his great mercies, and for the Lord
Redeemer' s sake, and look for the mercy of Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
Thus that pious Governor, Nehemiah, after all the good he had done, in seeking
the welfare of the children of Israel, prays thus, Remember me, O my God, for
good, and spare me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. And holy
David thus, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified: If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who
shall stand? His heart was fixed, and fully established to go on in every duty
in the strength of divine grace, and to make mention of the righteousness of
Christ, even of his only, as his plea for acceptance.

"But when I stand before thy bar,
The blood of Christ is all my plea."
Surely shall one (and every true saint) say, in the Lord (Jehovah our
righteousness) have I righteousness and strength. In him shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and in him shall they glory. For a man to search his own
glory in any of his good works, is not true glory, but to be poor in spirit,
and to search the glory of the grace and righteousness of the Mediator, and to
trust in the mercy of the Lord forever; this is true glory, and will issue in
glory everlasting.

Lastly. The improvement in a few inferences, and a word of exhortation to the
obedient and disobedient.

1. We must not divide the offices of Christ, nor take up with gospel promises,
in contempt of any of the laws, precepts, or ordinances of Christ. The Lord
Jesus is anointed by the Holy Ghost not only to be our atoning sacrifice, but
also as a Prophet to reveal the mind of God, and teach, and lead his people
into the green pastures of heavenly doctrine: and as the Captain of Salvation,
as Leader and Commander, to conduct his Israel through the wilderness of this
world to the heavenly Canaan. If we set aside one of his mediatorial offices,
we reject the Savior of the world, and neglect this so great salvation. For
Christ will not be divided. They, that dream of happiness by grace in Christ,
and a trust in his righteousness, while they do not take the yoke of his
commandments upon them, would do well to consider, that in the work of
regenerating grace the moral law is written on the heart by the Spirit of the
living God, and both the moral law, and testimony of God, viz. the pure gospel
are bound and sealed in the hearts of all his true disciples. Faith and
obedience have such a connection, that the apostle uses them promiscuously.
Your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. Your obedience is come
abroad unto all men.

Faith works by love. And if ye love me, says Christ, keep my commandments;
for this is the love of God that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous to the inward principle of holiness.

2. Hence appears our need of a work of sanctifying, renewing, converting
grace. It is made known unto us by the witness from heaven, that every one of
the human race is wholly depraved, to that degree, that no one of all the
species naturally understands his duty, or things spiritual, but they are all
gone out of the way, and are together become unprofitable, there is none that
does good, no not so much as one. We are not sufficient of ourselves, so much
as to think any thing as of ourselves, that is truly good. In our flesh there
dwells no good thing. We must then be his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works; and by a union with Christ derive strength to obey him.
He must work all our works in us and for us.

He, that imagines himself able without the efficacious grace of Christ, to
work out his own salvation, and become willing and obedient to Christ, is,
alas! a great stranger to God, to the extent of his law, and the purity of
gospel precepts, and quite unacquainted with himself, not knowing the plague of
his own heart, nor how his whole head is sick, and his whole heart faint. He
knows not, that from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, there is no
soundness, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores; that have never been
closed, bound up, nor mollified with ointment: and never can be healed, but by
the sacred balm of Gilead, and sovereign physician there. All the loyal
subjects of King Jesus are the trophies of his victorious grace, and are made
willing in the day of his power.

3. All, that are created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, are sanctified
in every part, and all the graces pertaining to the new creature are implanted
in them. They have put off the old man, which is corrupt -- and are renewed in
the spirit of their minds, and have put on the whole new man, which is renewed
in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, after the moral image of him
that created the new man. Hence they fear God, and stand in awe that they sin
not, reverence his majesty, dread his displeasure, and tremble at the words of
the living God. They fear God even for his mercies, and tremble at his goodness.

They love his adorable perfections, and gratefully acknowledge the
condescentions of his grace, They love his law for its purity, and admire the
whole plan of grace in the gospel covenant. They love the people of God for the
truth's sake that is in them: and love the habitation of God's house, the place
where his honor dwells. They call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord and honorable. They delight to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his temple. They are merciful, in a measure, even as their Father in
heaven is merciful. Having hearts of flesh, they love their enemies, and have
their minds benevolent to all mankind. Having the fear of God before their
eyes, they honestly endeavor to walk before God in uprightness of heart, in
all the duties of a godly, sober, and religious life. They esteem God's
statutes concerning all things to be right, and hate every false way. And while
they do good, they trust in the Lord, plead the merits of the Redeemer for the
acceptance both of their persons and works. And by faith in Christ, and
patience in well doing, they inherit the promises, receiving the end of their
faith proved by their works, even the salvation of their souls. 1 These. v. 23.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

4. Aiming to please, honor, and glorify God, is essential to all acceptable
obedience. Not simply our giving a cup of cold water to a disciple, but the
giving it to him, as a disciple, and because he belongs to Christ, entitles to
the reward. So the receiving a prophet, in the name of a prophet, will show our
title to a prophet's reward. It is the gracious respect to Christ in duty, that
is pleasing in his sight.

The Pharisees gave alms to be seen of men, and verily they had their reward
then in hand. For they were seen of men, which was the reward they coveted, and
all they received. Though a good end will not sanctify a bad action, yet a bad
end will always spoil a good one. As he thinks in his heart, so is he in the
sight of God. If self be our center, we fast for ourselves, eat and drink for
ourselves, and do nothing to God, even to God. My son give me thy heart.

5. How great is the deceit of the Legalist and Antinomian? The one sets up the
law against Christ; the other sets up Christ against his own law. The one
frustrates the free sovereign grace of God, which streams to us only in the
blood of atonement, and by supposing righteousness comes by the law, virtually
says that Christ is dead in vain; the other makes void the law through faith, and
represents Christ as the minister of sin, as if (with reverence be it spoken)
the holy Jesus came not into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, to
condemn sin by his sufferings in the flesh, and save his people from their
sins, but to purchase a liberty to sin, and to continue in sin that grace may
abound. Thus they turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and wrest the
scriptures to their own destruction.

6. The way to heaven now lies plain before us. The way of faith, and of the
fear of God, the narrow way of holiness. This is the King of heaven's highway
(Isaiah xxxv. 8.) in which we must travel to the better country. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. All that
faith is dead, that does not purity the heart, and work by love; or that leaves
the soul destitute of a principle of holiness. All that embrace the promises in
contempt of the precepts of Christ, and hope for the remission of sins through
the mediation of our atoning Priest, while they trample on his kingly office,
and will not have him to reign over them, are under a gross delusion. In all
their self pleasing, self-flattering dreams of life by grace in Christ, they
only suck the most pernicious poison out of the balm of Gilead, and split upon
the rock of salvation.

A word of exhortation, and we have done.

1. To the unconverted, the unbelieving, the disobedient, and gainsaying. See
yourselves in this class, and do not go away and forget what manner of men you
are. Dead in trespasses and sins, in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, at enmity with holiness, in rebellion against Christ, and obnoxious
every moment to his avenging justice. I beseech you to consider, and lay it to
heart, Shortly will the Lord Jesus be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. Flee from the wrath to come: Up, escape for thy life, O sinner! and
do not linger in a graceless condition. Now the power of the Lord is present to
heal. The door of hope is open. To you is the word of salvation sent. Christ is
on the mercy-seat. Behold, now is the accepted time! behold, now is the day of
salvation! Cry for mercy. Arise, O sleeper, call upon thy God, that thou perish
not. Press in while there is room. Come to Christ for life; trust in him for
pardon; call him Lord; ask what he will have you to do, and put your necks
under his yoke. His almighty power can conquer your hearts; and the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin.

2. To the believing, obedient, fearers and worshippers of God. Live by the
faith of the Son of God, and be you in the fear of the Lord all the day long:
trust in the mercy of the Lord forever, do good, and serve your generation by
the will of God. You, that have believed in God, must be careful to maintain
good works, and adorn the doctrine of God our Savior: Hereby is God glorified
that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye appear to be his disciples Meditate in his
law day and night, ponder the path of your feet, and turn not aside to the
right hand or left. Run the christian race for the prize set before you. Be
imitators of God as dear children, and followers of the steps of Enoch,
Abraham, and those ancient saints, who in their day walked with God, and by
faith and a patient continuance in well doing, inherited the promises Let the
righteous hold on his way, and he that has clean hands wax stronger and
stronger, in the grace that is in Christ for holy living.

1 Cor. xv. 58. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord. Heb xiii. 20.21 Now the God of peace that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through
the blood of the everlasting covenant make you perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever.

AMEN.
SERMON II. The death and last end of the righteous.
NUMB. xxiii. 10 -- Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end
be like his.


AS Caiaphas, the high priest of the Jews, at the head of the Sanhedrin, in
great pride, and casting off the fear of God, and all pity, and in contempt of
all the laws of justice, honor, and sound policy, was advising to put to death
the innocent and adorable Jesus to save the nation from the Romans; He, that
made man's mouth, and instituted that sacred office, put such dignity upon it,
as so to overrule that he should utter one of the greatest oracles in the
world, and to prophecy that Jesus should die (as a sacrifice of atonement) both
for Jews and Gentiles.

So Balaam, the great conjurer of the east, having loved the wages of
unrighteousness, musters (as we must think) all the force of his enchantments
to curse Israel; but by the overruling power of Israel's God that curse was
turned into a blessing. All his attempts were baffled, and he finds that there
is no enchantment against Jacob, nor any divination against Israel. God will
bless his people, and he cannot reverse it. Let not the most heaven-daring
sinners, then, say, with our tongues will we prevail, our lips are our own. The
answer of the tongue is from the Lord, and God can cause the tongues of men to
fall upon themselves. So far is he from cursing Israel, that he blesses them
altogether three several times. He prophesies their happiness, and of the star
out of Jacob, and of the ruin of Amalek the first, and of Antichrist the last
of the enemies of Israel. So let thine enemies perish, O Lord. Such a sense has
he of the felicity of Israel, in covenant with God, and a people saved of the
Lord, that in a rapture he says, Let me die the death of the righteous, and let
my last end be like his. Not barely when he dies, but he is willing now, in his
present pang, to resign this mortal life, provided he might die as the
righteous Israelites, and like them be blessed after death. Two things are here
taken for granted, viz.

1. That death is the end of all men. Balaam expects to die sooner or later,
and knows he cannot live always. It is appointed to men indefinitely once to
die. Let men be good or wicked, they must shortly go the way of all the earth.

2. The immortality of the soul, and the retributions of the future world.
Balaam is sensible the Israelites are blessed in the felicities of another
world after this, and that the congregation of evil doers are miserable in the
invisible state, q. d. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody
men, but bind up my soul in the bundle of life with the Lord: and may I sit
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of God, and with all the
true Israelites indeed inherit everlasting life. A devout wish indeed for so
vile a man! The happiness of saints sooner or later will be acknowledged by all
the world.

We propose to consider, I. The wish of Balaam. II. The death of the righteous,
in a sense that never entered into the heart of Balaam. III. The last end of
the righteous. IV. The application.


I. The wish of Balaam, q. d. I wish while I live to continue in sin, to walk
in the counsel of the ungodly, to stand in the way of sinners, and sit in the
sent of the scornful. I wish I may have the pleasure to go in company with the
workers of iniquity, and live at enmity with God and his people. May I have
frequent opportunities to help the ungodly, and to love them that hate the
Lord. I desire while I live to belong to the congregation of evil doers, and to
sit with the wicked as my chosen companions. And may the counsel of the
righteous be far from me. But, having lived a life of sin, I wish I may be as
happy after death as the righteous; and that I may not reap as I have sowed,
but be as happy as the most pious Israelites. I love sin, but hate misery, and
earnestly wish to be delivered from that death which is the wages of sin. Let
me here enjoy the wages of unrighteousness, and hereafter be as happy as the
honest, devout people of God. May I live in contempt of God, in a close union
with his enemies, and yet be as happy after death as the best friends and
favorites of heaven. I wish I could ensnare Israel to sin, and so to ruin. I
could be glad to see their woe. I wish I could blot out the name of Israel,
that it be no more remembered. I would with all mine heart break in pieces
God's people, and afflict his heritage; but I wish the God of Israel may never
behold my mischief and spite, to requite them with his hand, but show me the
same favor in the coming world which he does to his own people, and let me see
the good of his chosen, rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and glory with
his inheritance.

Who does not see the gross absurdity and palpable contradiction of this
nonsensical wish, which is plainly and pungently confuted by the apostle? Gal.
vi. 7, 8. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap. For be that sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption (and ruin) but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life everlasting. However, thus much we may learn from this one instance,
viz. that the wicked, the lovers of this present world, the malicious, that
will not now take part with them that fear God, but vex the soul of his turtle
dove, and do all in their power to curse and devour his saints; in the day that
is coming will be glad to claim kindred with them. To which of the saints will
they not desire to turn? Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out. The
rich man (Luke xvi.) with a lamentable and bitter cry begs for a drop of water
to cool his scorched tongue, by the hand of that very Lazarus he had slighted.

So inconceivably dreadful is it to make one's grave with the wicked, and to
lie with the uncircumcised, and have the soul gathered with sinners; that had
holy Job uttered his most severe revenges against his most implacable enemy, he
would only have said (chap. xxvii. 7.) Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he
that rises up against me as the unrighteous.

II. I am to speak of the death of the righteous, in a sense that never entered
into the heart of Balaam.

The righteous perish, i. e. die a temporal death as well as others, and
merciful men are taken away from this world, nor are the most useful men
suffered to continue by reason of death. This is the end of all men. The mosaic
law made provision for cleansing an house infected with the leprosy; it must be
taken down and removed into an unclean place. The body is the house of the
soul, and, being defiled with sin, it must be removed into the grave; and those
members of the body, that have been instruments of sin, must be meat for worms,
and moulder in the dust. The gospel covenant has made no provision to secure
his saints from a temporal death. Although Christ be in them, the hope of
glory, dwelling in their hearts by faith, and by his holy Spirit; yet the body
is dead because of sin, i. e. as good as dead, is a mortal body, and will
surely die at the time appointed. For what man is he that lives, and shall not
see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? That is the
house appointed for all living.

The property of death, however, is changed, when it comes in the line of the
gospel covenant. Hence we find death in the inventory of the believer's
portion. All is yours, whether life or death. Death divested of its sting, is
not what it once was. If a man keep my sayings (says Christ) he shall never see
or taste death; never experience death in the bitterness of it, nor be held
always a prisoner to it; shall by no means see or taste death forever, as the
margin reads it. At the resurrection death will be swallowed up in victory.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints, and precious
should their blood be in our sight. All, that are sincere upright walkers with
God, at their death, do sleep in Jesus, enter into peace, and rest in their
beds; and their flesh rests in hope of the resurrection. They have a quiet
repose in the dust, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest. Death to many saints has been a pleasant walk through the valley of the
shadow, not the substance of death, a valley low indeed, but fruitful with
comforts. Death is the Jordan that divides the saints from Canaan, but may be
safely passed under the protection of Christ, the ark of the new covenant, and
is an inlet to glory. They that have seen the Lord's Christ, and seen, and
waited for the salvation of God, do freely give up the ghost at the call of
God, and depart in peace. They have hope in death, and peace in their latter
end.

But, what is chiefly in view under this head, is to teach the righteous how to
die to the glory of God and their own everlasting peace. They are said to die
to the Lord, and in the Lord. They die in union with Christ, and in a covenant
which death cannot dissolve: thus dying to the glory of God, they honor God in
a dying hour, show his strength to the generation that survive, and leave their
dying testimony for God, and his holy religion.

These seven things may be implied, viz.

1. They call on God as their only hope and refuge in a dying hour. The soul,
now on the brink of eternity, and beyond the reach of all other helpers,
looks up to the heavenly hills, whence comes all her salvation, and to the
Lord as the last resort in such a day of trouble. No salvation is hoped for
from any creature. The best friends on earth are miserable helpers, and
miserable comforters all. Therefore says the dying saint, I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. They, that
thus look unto the Lord, and call on his name, shall be saved. They, that with
a good hope through grace, do look up to the compassionate Redeemer for mercy
and grace to help in such a solemn time of need, will doubtless find mercy of
the Lord in that day. They call on the Lord, and he hears them, and
delivers them from all their fears. They look to him, and are lightened, and
eased, and their faces are not ashamed. They receive strength for their last
combat; so that the floods of great waters do not come nigh them, though Jordan
may overflow all his banks. They are kept in the evil day, and are hid in the
secrets of his pavilion from the terrors of the shadow of death.

The prophet Jonah amidst a thousand deaths, and from the belly of hell, looked
toward God's holy temple. The poor distressed man cried, and the Lord heard
him, and delivered him out of all his troubles. Look unto me, and be ye saved,
all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else. Rom x. 13. For
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

2. The righteous die to the Lord, and have inward peace, by submitting to his
will in going at his call. They own the sentence just, that they return to the
dust, whence they were taken, and are obedient in dying, in a sweet resignation
to it and to the declared and providential will of heaven. As satisfied with
life they can say, Lord vow let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word. So Abraham (it seems) yielded up the ghost in a free and cheerful
submission to the will of God, and was gathered unto his people. So Moses the
servant of the Lord died according to the word of the Lord, or at the mouth of
the Lord. He had earnestly desired to go over and see that goodly mountain and
Lebanon, but God bade him speak no more of that matter. He had other work for
him to do: he must go up into the mountain and die. Moses is all submission to
the sovereign will of his master in heaven, is willing and obedient to the last
moment. Thus he died to the Lord the death of the righteous. All the toils and
sufferings of the saints are designed by God to prepare them for dying. That
they may learn obedience by the things they suffer, so as at last to hold out
in their faith in a dying hour. Those that faint under less adversities, should
consider what they shall do in that evil day. Jer. xii. 5. If thou have run
with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with
horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustest, they wearied thee,
then how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

The unrighteous do not thus submit to God. They may be secure, insensible of
danger, have no bands in their death, and like silly sheep be laid in the
grave, and so lie down in horror and disappointment forevermore. But if they
have any sense of their danger, how far from an holy submission! Their death is
very shocking and terrible. They are arrested, Luke xii. 20. (as the Greek is)
Thou fool, this night do they require thy soul, q d. The Bailiffs are now ready
to seize thee. Hence the soul is haled away to the Judge, and delivered to the
officer, and cast into prison. How amazing was the death of Doeg! Psalm. lii. 5,
7. God shall likewise destroy thee forever: he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living.
Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

The wicked are cut, or cast down in a moment.

"Death! it is a melancholy day
To those that have no God,
When the poor soul is forced away
To seek her last abode."
They cannot retain their spirit, neither have they power in the day of death,
and there is no discharge in that war. But they are as rebellious in dying as
they have been in living, and are consumed away as briers, thorns, or stubble
before a devouring fire, or they are driven as chaff before the wind.

3. The righteous in dying desire rather to be delivered from sin, than out of
trouble.

It is the temper of all the unsanctified to choose sin rather than affliction.
Troubles and reproaches, poverty and pains in this world, seem to them the
greatest evils. Hence it has been common in days of calamity for men to seek
death as the period of their troubles: and when they cannot find it, they do
sometimes blaspheme the God of heaven, because of their plagues and sores, and
repent not to give him glory. Hence all the real suicide in all ages of the
world.

But though the righteous have a natural desire to get out of trouble, if so is
the will of God, yet they more earnestly wish to get rid of indwelling sin,
that body of death -- that they may never sin, offend, and dishonor God --
that Christ may never more be broken with their whorish heart -- and that they
may no more vex and grieve his holy Spirit. Their language is, Take away all
iniquity. They desire to be made perfectly holy, and to finish their
sanctification in the fear of the Lord. Happy they that can say, As for me, I
will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy
likeness.

4. The righteous in dying have a gracious respect to the holy felicity of the
heavenly state They regard not their stuff in this world, when they have in
their eye the good of that land of promise. They are willing to leave their
dearest friends in this world for better kindred in heaven. They have a desire
to depart and be with Christ which is far better, having a respect to the
recompense of reward. From an holy principle they desire an holy heaven.

And the chief thing in their felicity is to behold the King of grace in his
heavenly beauty, and be before his throne; yet it is laudable in them, that
they desire to see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and other saints, in the kingdom
of God; as also their acquaintance, which they may as well expect to know in
heaven, as the apostles knew Moses and Elias, when they appeared in glory at
the transfiguration on mount Tabor.

It is laudable for saints to rejoice that their names are written in heaven,
to set their affections on things above, and run for the prize. The holy
apostle knew, that if the earthly tabernacle of his body was taken to pieces,
he had a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
Hence, he groaned earnestly, desiring that house above. No matter how covetous
or ambitious any are of the felicities and honors that come from God only. We
must not despise the pleasant land, but look for the blessed hope, viz. all the
inestimable benefits hoped for in the future world. Happy all the living or
dying, that thus prefer heaven to earth, and things eternal to things temporal!

5. The righteous die in charity with all the world. They forgive from their
heart every one his brother their trespasses. They breathe love, tenderness and
benevolence to all mankind. They love their enemies, and wish their everlasting
welfare. They forgive, and shall be forgiven. The same mind is in them, in a
measure, that was in Christ Jesus, who prayed for his enemies, Father, forgive
them, they know not what they do. So the first christian martyr prayed in great
earnest for his persecutors and murderers, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge. Such tender hearts are meet to be the vessels of mercy, and will have
all their sins blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. For if ye forgive men their trespasses (says Christ) my
heavenly father will also forgive your trespasses. The stout-hearted, the hard
and unforgiving, so dying, as they show no mercy, must have none shown unto
them. Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy, and cursed are the
unmerciful; for they shall not obtain mercy. They that delight not in blessing,
it shall be far from them. They that delight in cursing, it shall come upon
them. All men fare well or ill at last, as their temper is. If they are kind,
tender hearted and forgiving, they will find God has bowels of mercy, while the
men of spite shall reap vengeance.

6. The righteous die in a special tenderness for their souls. The soul is
their darling, the better part. They have little concern for their bodies,
except that their flesh may rest in hope of the resurrection to eternal life.
The pomp of a funeral is not their desire, but that their spirits may enter
into peace and rest, and that their precious and immortal souls may be
delivered from the lowest hell. They are blind and insensible indeed, that are
careful, and troubled about many things respecting their bodies, their sleeping
in the dust; while the poor soul is left to shift for itself, and take a leap
in the dark into the invisible world. The good part, which is the only portion
for the soul, is slighted, and so great salvation neglected. They that are thus
cruel and unmerciful to their own souls, are likely to be blotted out of the
book of the living, and not to be written with the righteous, and to have
neither part nor lot in the world of glory. Prove. viii. 36. But he that sins
against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death. All that
sin against God, are sinners against their own souls; and they, that provoke
the Lord to anger, do provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces.
But all the righteous, that regard the glory of God, and esteem his favor as
life, and his loving kindness better than life, will be tenderly affectionate
to their own souls.

7. The righteous die prudently committing their departing souls to the care of
the Lord Jesus. They know his name, and put their trust in him. They know he is
a safe hand, and that they may venture to appear in his righteousness, even at
the dread tribunal. They trust their souls with him, being fully persuaded that
he is able to keep what they have committed to him against that day. So the
penitent thief ventures his everlasting all with Jesus, when he was crucified
through weakness. Lord, says he, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.
So Stephen, in his last speech save one, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Thus
have the righteous courage and hope in their death, and peace in their latter
end. They have boldness to enter into the holiest of all by the blood of Jesus.
Their hearts are fixed to trust in this almighty Advocate; and they shall not
be confounded. He is able to do exceeding abundantly: and will never fail nor
forsake any that put their trust in him.

Thus the righteous depart, honoring and glorifying God in their death, by
dying unto him.

We proceed to consider,

III. The last end of the righteous.

We must leave their bodies to sleep in Jesus, and wait in the grave all the
days of their appointed time, till their change come in the resurrection morn.
God's covenant is with their dust, and they shall not be forgotten. That great
promise, I will be to you a God, secures the resurrection, and eternal
happiness of their bodies. Let us attend to the departing soul.

The spirit returns to God that gave it. The soul is no sooner dislodged from
the dark lanthorn of the body, but it is life, and made perfectly holy, and
receives the open vision of the blessed God. The soul of a poor Lazarus is
carried by the holy Angels into glory in as great honor and triumph, as was
Elijah. Christ as mediatorial King has all the Angels at command. He is the
ladder upon which they ascend and descend to minister in the kingdom of
providence and grace. They receive the departing soul, and convey it in honor
and triumph to the mansions above. And with what joy are those everlasting
doors opened for their reception! They are admitted among the spirits of just
men made perfect, and are by Christ presented faultless before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy. This honor, and this happiness have all the
saints.

But how shall we decipher their happiness in glory! How great good is laid up
in Christ for them! What mansions are prepared! Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, to conceive the things laid up
for the righteous. Their warfare is accomplished, their sorrows are ended in
everlasting triumph and joy. The Lamb that is in the midst of the throne feeds
and leads them to living fountains of water. They see the face of the King of
grace: and the holy society of saints and Angels affords the purest felicity.

And how great their joy in the day for the manifestation of the sons of God!
When Christ shall come to be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them
that believe! When their bodies shall be raised incorruptible, and be like to
the glorious body of Christ, and they in soul and body united inherit all
things, being forever with the Lord to behold his glory! All the trees of
righteousness, that have flourished in his garden on earth, being transplanted
to the paradise above, shall there flourish in eternal bloom. In his presence
is fullness of joy, and -- pleasures forevermore.

IV. The Application by way of inference and address.

We infer,

1. That hope, that is built on Christ and none else, will stand us in stead in
a dying hour. A good hope through grace, which disposes us to pursue holiness,
and purify ourselves even as he is pure, is the only hope that will avail us.
If Christ be in us, the hope of glory, and we have this hope as an anchor of
the soul, sure and steadfast, which enters to that within the vail, and fixes
on the rock of everlasting strength; it will buoy us up amidst the terrors of
the shadow of death. This hope will never make us ashamed: and will issue in
the full fruition of the ever blessed God.

But what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes
away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble comes? Every house (hope for
heaven) built on any thing but Christ, is built on the sand, and will never
stand in the last storm. They only will be safe in the great day, that have
made a covenant with God by the sacrifice of Christ; all others make lies their
refuge, and under falsehoods hide themselves; and virtually make a covenant with
death, which shall be disannulled, and an agreement with hell, which shall not
stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through they shall be trodden down
thereby.

2. As men live so they die, and as their way so is their end. If men live
under the guilt and dominion of sin, they die in sin, and their inquity shall
be upon their bones. If any are taking the broad road to destruction, they are
hastening to be undone. But they that set their faces toward the heavenly
Zion, and walk in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life, will
be admitted into that new heaven and new earth, i. e. that eternal world,
wherein dwells perfect righteousness and peace. The Lord knows, and
approves the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish.
They that go with the multitude to do evil, must go with them to suffer
everlasting evils in the future world. The wicked that join hand in hand in
iniquity, shall be as tares bound in bundles to burn forever.

Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, and to commit fornication, was very justly slain in the war that
ensued, and so made to eat the fruit of his own ways, and to be filled, or
surfeited, with his own devices: while the Lord takes part with all them that
uphold the souls of his people.

They that now put their trust in Christ, and go up through this wilderness
leaning on their beloved Savior, will receive mercy and grace from Christ to
help them in the last time of need. In such a mount of trouble, will he see,
and provide for their relief.

3. Evil men, through the badness of their hearts, do counteract the dictates of
their own reason, and rebel against light. Balaam knew, if he could believe
himself, when under the inspiration of the Almighty, that blessed was every one
that blessed the Israel of God, and that cursed was every one that cursed them:
nevertheless advertises Balak how to draw them to sin, and so under the curse
of God. He knew, and approved what was good, but chose, and practiced evil.
John iii. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil.

Balaam risked and threw away his own life, in contempt of the revelations of
God by his own mouth. The temper of his heart was against God and Israel, and
so is his conduct: and we must leave him to lie with the uncircumcised, and to
have no portion with God, or with his people.

4. All are righteous in their state by the justifying righteousness of Christ,
and inherently righteous by sanctifying grace, and practically righteous by
holy living; or the contrary to all these. The scriptures know of no people in
the world, but the righteous and the wicked, him that serves God, and him that
serves him not. There are no neuters in this world, nor purgatory in the
other. He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned.

5. We must all shortly die the death of the righteous, or that of the wicked.
This is the end of all men. And as the tree falls so it will lie forever. As
death leaves us so judgment will find us.

Our life is but a vapor. Our days pass away as a post upon land, an eagle in
the air, and a ship in the sea; the swiftest in the three elements. Now is our
seed-time, the harvest is in the next world. And on this moment of time do hang
the important concernments of the everlasting state.

A few words by way of address shall conclude.

1. To the unrighteous. Let me beseech you to consider and turn to God now in
your day of visitation. Learn to die while you live. Begin now to call upon
God, to submit to his will revealed or providential. Learn to hate sin, and
love holiness. Get a tender forgiving spirit, and put your trust in the Lord.
Make the Lord your refuge, strength, and shield, a very present help in
trouble, that, like the righteous, you may have a place of refuge in the hour
of death, and in the judgment of the great day. Consider what you shall do in
the evil day, and in the day of the desolation that shall come from far: to
whom you shall flee for help, and where you shall leave your glory. Had Balak
given to a wicked Balaam his house full of gold and silver, what would it have
availed? Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers
from death. You are now to choose your companions for eternity, either the
Amalekites, the implacable enemies of Israel, whose end must be that they
perish forever, or the righteous and holy Israelites, whose end shall be
everlastingly blessed. Behold, now is the accepted time, behold now is the day
of salvation. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

2. To the righteous. Beloved, you are to live all your days in special
reference to dying. If you live well, you cannot die ill. Endeavor to be
thoroughly acquainted with all those seven things to be exercised in a dying
hour. Never repine at the troubles of the world. Fear not reproaches. God
designs by these things to assist your faith in overcoming the world, by
turning the world's most dreadful artillery against itself. If the world is
malignant, consider the world knows us not, because it knew him not. All this
is to reconcile you to the house appointed for all living; where the wicked
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest: and to humble you and prove
you, that he may do you good in your latter end. Look to Christ as Jehovah your
righteousness. Their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. Consider the
recompense of reward, and count nothing dear to yourselves, in comparison with
finishing your course with joy. And while the dying sinner looks up to heaven
with terror and amazement, and looks to the earth, and beholds nothing but
darkness, dimness of anguish, and is driven into darkness; how joyful will you
be at the hour of death, when you see the way into the holiest of all by the
blood of Jesus, and can hope in Christ, and in his word, and in a consciousness
of your own sincerity can say, as Hezekiah, 2 Kings xx. 3. I beseech thee, O
Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. -- And like the holy
Apostle 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Bless God's Israel, and see you do not grieve or offend the generation of his
children, with whom you expect to live as brethren and companions in the
kingdom of glory. Saints should live together in this world as Ruth with Naomi,
Ruth i. 16, 17. -- Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee: for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will
lodge: thy people shall be my people* and thy God my God. Where thou die,
will I die, and there will I be buried. -- You are together hastening to the
better country; see that ye fall not out by the way. Consider the uninterrupted
peace, and holy felicity of the world before you, and reserved in heaven for
you.

Follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, charity, and peace, with them
that call on the name of the Lord out of a pure heart; and God will not gather
your souls with sinners, nor your lives with bloody men. Christ will take you
to himself. You shall die in the Lord, be forever blessed, and rest from your
labors: and though your good works of righteousness will not go before you, to
open the gates of paradise for your admittance, but you must enter by the blood
of Jesus; yet they will follow you as evidences of your faith and sincerity;
and the rewards of grace will be according to your works.

Never let the sun go down upon your wrath, as you must pray after the sun is
set; and prayers in wrath are written in gall: besides you may die at evening,
and how can you think of appearing before the God of grace, expecting the
forgiveness of more than ten thousand talents, while you have an heart to take
your brother by the throat for the petty debt of an hundred pence. That
merciless wretch Mat. xviii. dreamed of forgiveness, and was as visibly
forgiven, as the righteous man, Ezekiel. xviii. 26, that turned from his
righteousness, was apparently righteous; but the hardheartedness of the one and
the gross wickedness of the other, disproved their pretense, they are delivered
to the tormentors. So (says Christ) likewise shall my heavenly father do also
unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses. But why do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou set at naught
thy brother? for we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

Fear not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their revilings; the moth
shall eat them up. Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. How shall a
Balaam, or any other, curse whom God has not cursed? if God be for us, who can
be against us? Who is he that will harm you if ye be followers of that which is
good? that promise belongs to you: no man, or nothing shall set on thee to hurt
thee. If God will own and bless, the curses of men are impotent; and God often
requites his people good for the cursing of men.

Die daily, consider your latter end, say to corruption thou art my father, to
the worms thou art my mother, and my sister. Come boldly to the throne of
grace, that you may find mercy and grace to help in that solemn time of need.
Learn obedience and submission to God by all the things you suffer, respecting
the times that are to pass over you in this changeable world, and respecting
your great and last change. Do not murmur, repine or complain under the
troubles of the world.

You sojourn in a Bochim, a vale of tears, if not in Mesech and in the tents of
Kedar. Christ when on earth set you an example by conforming to the climate.
But let your groans and complaints be holy. O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! respect the recompense of reward, and
set your affections on things above, and look for that city which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Carry no grudge, but put on
charity which is the bond of perfectness.

Consider that anger rests only in the bosom of fools, i. e. of wicked men; and
our enmity to a fellow creature rises from our greater enmity against God. Be
tender to your own souls, and now commit them to the Redeemer, to be ruled and
saved by him. -- Thus by living to the Lord, you will learn to die to the Lord,
and so have hope in death and peace in your latter end. Rev. xiv. 13 -- Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

That we may all live the life, and at last die the death of the righteous, God
of his infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor, glory, power, might,
majesty and dominion, henceforth and forevermore.

AMEN.

