ENGLANDS 's WARNING-PIECE; A SERMON Occasioned by the untimely death of MR.
WILLIAM ALLEN The YOUNGER, Who was most inhumanly MURDERED, by an arbitrary
military POWER, May 10th, 1768.

England's WARNING-PIECE; Showing the supreme and indispensable authority of
the laws of GOD; and the impiety, and fatal consequences of screening, and
abetting MURDER.

A SERMON Occasioned by the untimely death of Mr. WILLIAM ALLEN The YOUNGER,
Who was most inhumanly murdered near his Father's house, by an arbitrary
military POWER, on Tuesday, the tenth of May, 1768.

Preached at the request of his friends, in the Parish church of
Newington-Butts, and published in compliance with the demand of the public.

By JOHN FREE, D. D.

The FOURTH EDITION.

Look to yourselves, and consider of it; who knows but this may come to be your
own case. SENECA of CRUELTY. BOSTON: Printed for J. GREENLEAF, and sold at the
NEW PRINTING-OFFICE, in HANOVER-STREET, 1773.

TO MR. WILLIAM ALLEN, FATHER of the DECEASED.
SIR,
YOUR particular request, and the constant demand of the public, have at length
inclined me to consent to the printing of this sermon; seeing that the armed
force is now removed, which, by the strange use, that was lately made of it,
put us all without distinction in By description, the face of things in
Blackmanstreet, on the 10th of May in the Afternoon, was like that of a town
taken by a foreign enemy, and expecting military execution: The Shops were all
shut up, the people assaulted as they were entering their own houses, driven
about like sheep, and made the sport of such infamous wretches as the common
soldiers, who had the insolence to present their pieces at those who from their
upper chambers looked out into the street. How would the Londoners have liked
such treatment? And yet it is evident, that the Townsmen and housekeepers of
Blackman-street were never in any riot, or had any more concern with the people
in St. George's Fields, than the citizens and housekeepers in Cheapside. As
for the great road and Newington causeway, it was so dangerous, that beside the
death of the people in and near the Hay-market, the balls penetrated the very
shutters of the windows at a great distance from the place of action in the
fields. Ought not proclamation to have been made for the people to have left
their houses? and notice given in the adjacent villages, to have prevented the
inhabitants from coming abroad, who knew nothing of the mischief that was
intended?
danger of our lives. I do not find, however, as yet, any among the great, so
sensible of our case, as to be willing to patronize it publicly, and procure us
redress; and therefore, as you are so deeply and tenderly interested in the
SUBJECT, the DEDICATION, I think, of right belongs to you. Not that I intend
from hence, after the manner of DEDICATORS, to apply to your passions; or make
your wounds bleed afresh, by dwelling upon your misfortunes; but rather to take
occasion, from such an opportunity offered, to console, and fortify you in
bearing up under an evil, which, with respect to yourself, is now past a
remedy; and to teach you an acquiescence under the dispensations of PROVIDENCE;
not upon the tyrannic, and inhuman hypothesis -- " That whatever is, is right,"
but from a better and wiser notion -- That whatever is now wrong, will one time
or other be set to rights. I do not know, whether my religion be suited to the
taste of these enthusiastic times; but it is a religion between God and myself,
and a religion likely to last longer than any of modern invention. I believe in
God, and see the disorders now subsisting in the world; but I do not charge
these disorders upon HIM or his PROVIDENCE. -- "You have lost an only Son," --
that you must have done by the course of nature. -- But you will say, -- " It
was by the hands of Ruffians, pretending authority to slay the innocent." -- No
doubt these are calamities, as heavy, as can be well imagined, and most
grievously shocking to human nature -- but enlarge your view a little, and
consider the present appearance of things, in conjunction with futurity, and
you may find occasion yet to possess your soul in patience. It happens in the
course of this world, that very good men meet with very unfavourable and
injurious treatment, and very bad men on the contrary with much of earthly
happiness. Of this our fellow creatures, being in great measure the
instruments, it really could not be expected, as far as they are concerned,
that things should proceed very regular, and even; since men were constituted
free creatures, and at liberty to behave as the law of God requires; or to
violate it, if through malignancy of heart they choose it.

BUT then you are to consider, with all this, that men are accountable for
their actions, " that God judges the earth;" that is, he discerns between the
good and evil transacted in it, and determines the former to be worthy of a
reward, and the latter to deserve punishment. And thence you are to infer, that
as rewards and punishments in this life are not always connected immediately
with the respective obedience or disobedience of men, that there must be a
future state; which assures you of the immortality of your own soul; and that
in consequence of a life of innocence and virtue here, you will be a joyful
spectator to all eternity, of the exact and punctual dispensations of God's
never-failing and unerring JUSTICE.

I am, Sir, With all Compassion, Your faithful, and Obedient Servant, J. F.
Newington-Butts, Oct. 15, 1768.
ENGLAND'S WARNING-PIECE, etc.
LEVITICUS, Chap. xxiv.21 and 22 verses -- He that kills a man, he shall be
put to death.

Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your
own country; for I am the LORD your GOD.


THE laws of God, as delivered to us by his servant Moses, have been
distinguished into three sorts, or kinds; and pass under the several
denominations of ecclesiastical, moral and civil.

The ecclesiastical laws have respect only to matters in religion, describing
the nature and attributes of God, and the general service, which he challenges
as Creator and Governor, from all mankind; or particular service, which was to
be rendered him by his peculiar people, according to the ceremonies of the
Jewish church.

THE moral laws prescribe rules for a man's private conduct; as a moral agent.

BUT the civil, beside the moral ends and purposes of individuals, have also
the community for their object; and inform a man, how he is to conduct himself
as a citizen, or a subject of a commonwealth.

NOW these precepts, which I have here read, are of a civil nature, and
instruct us how we are to behave as members of a community, in cases of injury
to our neighbor; whether that injury relate to his property or his person. For
the passage more at large is to this effect.

BREACH for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he caused a blemish in a
man, so shall it be done to him again. He that kills a beast shall restore
it, and he that kills a man, shall be put to death. Ye shall have one manner
of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country; for I am the
Lord your God.

ASSIST us therefore almighty God! that with all due attention we may acquire
in the first place a proper notion of thy immence authority, and how far it
exceeds that of human lawgivers; and then we shall be able more clearly to
discover and duly consider the high impiety, and fatal consequences of
screening or abetting murder.

BUT first, as the almighty here urges his authority, as the cause that
challenges obedience to this law; Do it -- for I am the Lord thy God -- Let us
consider with fear and trembling the extent of his authority, and how far it
exceeds that of human lawgivers.

THE authority of God then, as the supreme lawgiver, being founded upon two of
his attributes; his infinite unerring wisdom, in discerning always what is
fittest to be done, on the one hand; and his infinite and irresistible power,
always ready to command obedience to his ordinances, on the other: It comes to
pass from hence, that every human law must either be taken directly from the
laws of God; or else be so strictly subordinate, and conformable to his laws,
as not to carry with it the least appearance of opposition to the same. For if
that were possible, there might be laws of human invention, which might oppose
themselves to the will of God, which attempt we shall find by the sequel to be
not only impious with respect to God, but unwarrantable, and impracticable,
with respect to man.

1st, BECAUSE they are only such laws, as are conformable to the will of God,
that can give a magistrate a right to command obedience.

2dly, BECAUSE they are only such, that can be useful to society: and therefore,

3dly, ONLY such, that will be submitted to by the bulk of mankind, without
rebellion, or resistance.

THE first demonstration then of God's superiority as a lawgiver is evident
from hence, that none but such laws as are conformable to his will can empower
an human magistrate to require, or command obedience. For all human powers
become powers, and derive their whole force from conforming themselves in their
conduct to the will of God. Every act of theirs, which is opposed to God's
ordinances, is in itself null and void. And if the whole administration of any
power be only a repetition of such acts, then that power ceases of course to be
a legislature: The whole series of government from the beginning having been
illegal, in being a power opposing itself to the ordinances of God, and by
consequence no power at all, since the powers, that be, must be ordained by
him, and as such must conform to his ordinances in every act of their
jurisdiction. If any one think that this conclusion is not fairly collected,
let him consider upon this occasion the nature of God's supremacy.

FOR as he is the supreme being, and the center of all power, the power of
making laws and of governing by them must be originally and independently in
him alone. Nothing under God can pretend to that power independent of him. For
the independency of any power necessarily supposes supremacy. As the supremacy
of God therefore gives to him alone the original and independent power of
making laws, so it makes it a property to his laws, that his and only his
excluded all possibility of doubt and hesitation about the obedience, which we
are to render them.

BECAUSE there is no will above his, which we can offend, or power above his,
which we need to fear. His absolute dominion removes every doubt about his
authority. All hesitation on that head arising from a fear of offense to a
person more powerful than him, whom we are ordered to obey, and whose
displeasure may for that reason bring a greater inconvenience upon ourselves.
As therefore there is none more powerful than God, an immediate obedience to
his laws is necessarily and inexcusably due upon all occasions; which thing is
a great intrenchment upon human power, and lays us under a continual necessity
of examining human injunctions by the rule of God's ordinances, in order to see
that they do not clash with them.

FOR as man is so infinitely inferior to God, laws prescribed by any, of human
race, are as different in obligation from those prescribed by God, as a
creature is different from his Creator. It is of the nature of human laws
therefore, by whomsoever they shall be enacted, that they cannot of authority
command obedience, till they appear upon the case to be agreeable to God's
ordinances. Whereas laws which are conformable to the will of God would be
obeyed voluntarily, without any command of a magistrate, for the sole reason of
their use, and excellence.

II. WHICH leads me to another reason why all human laws must be conformable to
the will of God, from the consideration that only such can be beneficial to
mankind.

FOR if we are sensible that the laws of God, as far as they are discerned by
us, do all of them center in the happiness of man, both of individuals and of
whole societies, it is a natural consequence, that whatever injunctions oppose
those laws, must oppose at the same time human happiness.

THIS truth perhaps may strike and effect us more strongly if we illustrate it
by particular instances. For example, let us imagine that natural equity and
justice one of the primary or principal laws of God should be violated for the
sake of some opposite human law, and you will soon see in what degree that
human law will be detrimental. For natural justice and equity having regard to
the reason and fitness of things, and distributing to every one, what his
circumstances in impartial right require, the law which goes about to reverse
it, must overturn all fitness, oppose all reason, and take from every one what
his condition and circumstances by impartial right require. Suppose the
decemviri at Rome, or the whole Roman senate, or the council of five hundred at
Athens, under the pretense of quelling a riot had signed a decree to draw out a
party of their forces, mercenaries, which they paid and fed for their own
defense, and place them in such manner that they should, under the pretext of
the riot, privately shoot at and destroy a number of their innocent subjects
passing at a distance in the public ways upon their own peaceable concerns, and
not suspecting danger.

SUPPOSE, that after the slaughter, they should exult publicly in a weak and
cowardly manner upon the death of these innocent, unarmed, unsuspecting people,
as though they had defeated the army of a foreign enemy, publicly thank their
military executioners for their bloody service, tell them, that they had done
their duty and that they highly approved of their conduct; encourage them
further to do their work of blood with alacrity, promising them all the
protection against the laws, which their office could afford them, if such
protection should ever be wanted upon a like occasion.

COULD ordinances and injunctions like these be beneficial to society, or could
any one pretend to deny, but that by conforming to them all outward order must
be destroyed, and all inward peace disturbed? For what makes the mind of man
easy is, that he sees his affairs run in the right channel, and that he is
dealt with in the manner, that he might reasonably expect to be dealt with: As
on the contrary if any thing reverse the equitable distribution of things, by
causing misery, it as necessarily causes anxiety and discontent, as justice
produces peace and harmony.

FURTHER we are to observe, that when outward order is destroyed by cruelty,
and the inward peace of men's minds disturbed, civil troubles and commotions
must by degrees ensue. For peace and security are the end and aim of all human
labor; we keep our lives for their enjoyment, and hazard them for their
purchase. As men are thus spirited and informed by nature, we may imagine that
they will be very much alarmed under the apprehension of such rules or orders,
as threaten their natural peace and security, and thereby destroy their
happiness.

IT will appear, therefore, in the third place, that such laws or orders as are
not conformable to the will of God, by being of no use or benefit, but really
hurtful to mankind, will be attended with this other inconvenience, that they
will rarely be received or obeyed with quietness.

FOR public discontent and trouble soon pass into open opposition. In such
cases, it is generally, only a defect of the means of resistance, or the power
of helping themselves, which can keep people in subjection, supposing that
those, who are thus oppressed and irritated, are barely permitted but to live.
Human resentment, when continually kept awake, will be contriving all the
means, and observing every opportunity, to resistan unjust and tyrannic
injunction. Similitude of misfortunes soon forms and fixes an alliance*
Alliances multiply in an interesting cause: And as strength increases,
accidents, when carefully watched, are seldom wanting to furnish an opportunity
for open and avowed resistance, to which men are encouraged by that other
consideration, that the law, which opposes their happiness, is likewise
opposite to the laws of God, and therefore at the same time that it would
injure them, in case it were obeyed, it has really no right to command their
obedience. Strong motives for them to disobey! when beside their temporal
interest, other reflections at the same time naturally present themselves, and
give a religious sanction to their cause; as that they are to obey God rather
than man, and regard him in the first place, who is the supreme lawgiver, and
far more dreadful in his punishments than earthly tyranny in all its terrors.

HAVING thus considered the immense authority of God, as the supreme
legislator, and how far it exceeds that of human lawgivers, namely, as far as
infinite excels finite, we shall be able readily to determine, whether any
human power can have a right to oppose or dispense with his laws; particularly
that, which is so clearly and expressly declared in the text, and which make
the foundation of human safety in society. -- He that kills a man shall be
put to death; in support of which I am now to show the impiety and fatal
consequences of screening and abetting murder.

IN the first place then, any opposition to this law would be the highest
impiety. For as the command is so very express and clear, it would be flying in
the face of God almighty to disobey it. And therefore those, who are concerned
in such an attempt, let them be of what rank and condition they will, can
expect nothing but God's vengeance in this life, and the insupportable terrors
of that, which is to come. But besides the impiety of this attempt, and
consequent vengeance of God almighty, there are other arguments drawn from the
injustice of slaying the innocent, and the danger arising from such horrid
crimes, not only to individuals therein concerned, but even to Governors
themselves in their public capacity, as render it quite impracticable by the
law of nature, and all the rules of just policy, that this divine injunction
should ever be repealed or laid aside.

FOR first, by the laws of nature, every man has a right to safety in his
person, effects, and other circumstances; unless that right be some how
forfeited by misdemeanor. And therefore in civilized society men are always
considered in this views and are protected in the enjoyment of these privileges
by the civil magistrate. If that magistrate acts in his true and proper
character, he watches over the safety of the people, and should resist,
repulse, or punish those, who hurt the subject. For imagine only these civil
restraints removed, and a military armed force let loose upon the defenseless
and innocent; and what devastations, rapine and bloodshed, what affliction, and
misery in every shape, and on every side, must overwhelm mankind? To fall
prostrate before these savages, is to invite them to the spoil, and encourage
them to such acts of violence as must end in the destruction of society, by
banishing from among men their safety and their peace.

IT appears then, that in all countries some men ought to be opposers of
injuries by exacting blood for blood: And throughout the known world, where
societies are formed, some men are really set apart for that purpose. It may be
observed in different states and nations, that these are not always people of
exactly the same quality, or denomination: And for this there is good reason;
because those circumstances are to be regulated from time to time according to
the original compact of the state, the great charter, which binds them to
society, and according to the various circumstances, under which, the
commonwealth at different seasons may subsist.

THE right of opposing injuries, and of slaying a murderer, is originally to be
sure in every individual who is formed by nature to defend himself. But upon
uniting in society, men so far transfer this right to those, they call their
Governors, as to exercise it no more themselves, except in cases, where the
Governor's power wilfully fails, or is accidentally not at hand to assist them.
Rulers then, whether they be few or many, or by whatsoever titles they may be
distinguished, are, by their office constituted, and for this end hold their
authority, to be a terror to murderers, and those who do violence, and to
defend the natural rights and privileges of their people. There is by nature a
tacit compact of this kind between magistrates and people: And in most places
an express engagement confirmed by solemn oaths, and obligations on both sides.
In forms of government so circumstanced, if the Governor fail to act the part
assigned him, the condition of the obligation on the part of the people is void
ipso facto: For by losing the character of protector he abdicates the right and
title of a Prince.

SO that the neglect to punish murderers appears to be destructive to Princes
themselves; as it may, and has sometimes proved a means of depriving them of
their authority, at other times of losing the affections of their people, and
drawing a long train of misfortunes upon their own This has been observed of
the posterity of James the first, whose favorite Carr, was one of the murderers
of Sir Thomas Overbury. See more of this affair, and the character of the said
James, in a Poem of the author's, entitled, the voluntary Exile.
posterity. Certain it is, that it has been a means to deprive them of their
authority. Since we find that sovereigns are by their office required as far as
the state can enable them to ward off injuries; and therefore in case of
neglect the people have imagined, that they may resume this delegated power of
resisting injuries, and executing it for themselves.

NOR is this the only case wherein the bad conduct of Princes has furnished the
people with a plea for taking the reins of government into their own hands. For
supposing the supreme magistrate (which is natural enough upon forsaking his
own subjects) to league with the enemy; or upon his own motive, or choice to
grow injurious; the people have then taken upon them to resist that magistrate.

FOR, say they, if those very persons, who are empowered and appointed for the
defense of the society, turn their authority and power against it, and instead
of suppressing, commit injuries, they are certainly to be reputed public
enemies. For a public enemy could do nothing worse. The power of resisting
injuries therefore must in such a case immediately change place; since for the
preservation of society, it must subsist some where: And as the same person
cannot at the same time be both offender and the punisher of his own offenses;
it revolves then back to those who gave it, and in regard it is to be employed
against such as do injuries, it will bear hard upon those, who are really found
in that character, without respect had to any nominal distinction. This is very
evident from the history of Charles the first, who though a King by title, was
formally arraigned for countenancing the murder of his subjects, and executed
accordingly as a criminal. From a persuasion that the laws were equally a rule
of action for the subject, and the Prince; consequently, that if Princes broke
the laws, they must suffer the penalties like other men.

SO dangerous is it for Princes to think, that they have a right of dispensing
with, or opposing the laws of almighty God.

AND the deception has been quite as fatal to such, as have made themselves
their tools or advocates.

THOSE who will take the trouble of consulting our ancient histories, which if
duly attended to, contain treasures of useful knowledge both for the subject,
and the Prince will find these wrerches, I mean the advocates for bloody, and
despotic measures, notwithstanding their high expectation of reward, generally
disappointed of their hopes, treated for the most part as the pests of society,
followed by the execration of the people, or extinguished by a violent death.

IF the time or place would permit, many examples of this sort might be
produced; especially in the reigns of our week and obstinate, or ignorant and
unexperienced In the reign of Edward II. the ridiculous fondness, which that
Monarch expressed for Gaveston, created innumerable disputes. At length the
barons had recourse to arms, and Gaveston was beheaded. After that, Spenser the
father was without a trial, hanged and quartered; and his son executed on a
gallows fifty feet high.

In the reign of Richard II. we may observe the fate of the great lawyers, who
entered into a conspiracy with the King against the laws; and set themselves to
invent new articles of treason or precedents of outlawry, which might take off,
or disable the popular Lords. Judge Belknap, Chief Justice of the common pleas,
foresaw the danger of the enterprise, and therefore entered very unwillingly
into the Royal Plot. There wants, says he, but an hurdle, an horse and an
halter, to carry me to the death I deserve. His accomplices are recorded to
have shared the end he expected. For at the meeting of the parliament, they
were seized, as they sat in judgment, and Tresilian, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's bench, being brought before the parliament, in the morning, was ordered
to be drawn to Tyburn, in the afternoon, and executed in an extraordinary
manner.


Kings.

BUT as events, which are nearest to us, are generally apt to strike and affect
us most* I shall content myself in this particular, with a short review of the
reign of James the second. This Prince deluded by sophistry of his lawyers and
his court, affected to call the laws of England his laws; and therefore assumed
a power of "It was said (says Bishop Burnet) in favor of the prerogative, that
the government of England was entirely in the King; that the crown was an
imperial crown, the importance of which was, that it was absolute; all penal
laws were powers lodged in the crown, to enable the King to force the execution
of the law, but were no bars to limit or bind up the King's power; the King
could pardon all offenses against law, and forgive the penalties; and why could
he not as well dispense with them? Acts of parliament had been often
superseded; the Judges had sometimes given their directions, in charges on
circuits, to enquire after some acts of parliament no more." -- etc. Vol. III.
p. 74. Anno 1686.
dispensing with them as he saw occasion. The consequence of which was, that he
might do what he liked, and indemnify his creatures* just as he pleased, let
their crimes and villainies be as excessive as they would; yet after all these
expedients, could he rescue a KIRK from public abhorrence? Or prevent the fate
of JEFFERIES? Was he not obliged at last to give orders to disband his troops
"And the doing of this without paying them, was the letting so many armed men
loose upon the nation," etc. p. 262.
without paying them? Those executioners of his arbitrary power, whose murder
and excesses drew an odium upon the more generous part of the soldiery, and
made the name of a standing army so odious to the English, that they afterward
voted King William no more than seven thousand men, to which they added, that
they should be all the "King's natural born subjects?" which was not at all a
wonder; the bulk of the nation out of the influence of the court always
esteeming our militia or trained bands as our natural, permanent, and
constitutional defense, and considering the standing forces in times of peace,
as no other than a band of mercenary slaves, whose trade was death, and who
having then no foreign enemy to find them employment, must either be paid for
their idleness, or exercise their violent calling against those very people,
who starve their families to give them their bread. Circumstances! At times so
provoking, as to have forced the subjects of this country to put this
formidable dilemma to their Princes -- disband or abdicate; or else disband or
die.

ALL these have been the consequences of the crying sin of murder, and of
opposing, upon that head, the laws of God, which plainly shows, beside the
impiety and unpardonable presumption of such a crime, the dreadful temporal
evils and calamities, which attend upon all ranks and degrees of men, who dare
to be abbetters of the same.

THUS then I have finished the two points of doctrine, which I intended to
establish from the words of the text, and shown you in the 1st place the
supreme, and indispensable authority of the laws of God; and 2dly, the high
impiety and fatal consequences of screening, and abetting murder, which of
course puts an end to the doctrine of the sermon.

WOULD to God, that I might pass over in silence the melancholy event, which
has been the occasion of it* But I am required to add a short narrative of the
fact, and to tell you plainly, what the inhabitants are already but too
sensible of, that this sermon owes its origin to the late bloody transactions
in the neighborhood of St. George's Fields, where, beside the particular loss
we here lament, by the murderous arrangement and position of the troops, so
many other innocent persons were slain at a distance, who had no manner of
connection with the rioters, but were passing on the high roads to other places,
and intent upon their own concerns. I therefore call this position a murderous
arrangement, because, as the soldiery are represented by the papers to have
taken post with their backs to the prison wall, these fatal consequences were
unavoidable, for their shot in this situation commanded all the avenues across
the fields. Whereas, if the troops had faced the wall, with the rioters between
them and the wall, the wall would have received the random shot, and many of
these evils been prevented, which arose even from the manner, in which they
took their post.

BUT the soldiers concerned in the murder of the deceased, by what authority I
know not, were off their post, and pursuing another man across the road into a
yard where there was a cowhouse; the deceased, who had just parted from a
conversation which he had with his mother, was going about his father's
business, but seeing, as it is imagined, at that instant, from his father's
house, the motion in the fields, went out into the high road before the house,
to inform himself farther; when observing the man pursued, and the soldiers
following to go into the yard above mentioned, he went after them by another
way nearer his father's premises to see the event; by this time the man they
had pursued had made his escape, by shutting the door of the cowhouse against
the soldiers, who coming in just as the deceased entered by another door, would
not inform themselves who he was, but with oaths encouraged each other to shoot
him upon the spot. Thus fell, as the first bloody victim to a new arbitrary
power in (...) land, a valuable, sober, well disposed young creature, the
comfort of his parents, the delight of his friends, and whose life and
conversation were so remarkably harmless and inoffensive, that in this
particular he has hardly left his equal.

THIS eagerness therefore to shed such innocent blood, must give every thinking
man more cause to suspect that the command for using the troops effectually was
very positive, from some quarter or other, otherwise the offense of the
murderers would be still more insolent and presumptuous, if committed of their
own motion. It may be difficult perhaps at present to know precisely, who were
their accomplices, till by a judicial or parliamentary enquiry, matters shall
be brought to light. Something, however, may be gathered from the style of the
warrant from the Secretary of State to the Justices of the Peace, previous to
these hostilities, and likewise from the letter, which has lately appeared in
print from the Secretary at war. The contents of which letter are of a more
extraordinary nature and more alarming than any act of authority, that has been
published in England since the fixing of our constitution, at the revolution
under King William III. A proceeding still the stranger, as by that
constitution our mercenary troops are no See the preamble to an act for
punishing mutiny and desertion, etc. Ano Oct. Georgii 3tii Regis.

The words are "Whereas the raising or keeping a standing army in these
kingdoms in times of peace is against law." etc.


part of our government. They depend upon a vote in parliament, and may be
disbanded every year. Nay, our ancestors at that time were so jealous of these
instruments of tyranny, that after the battle of the Boyne, and the reduction
of Ireland, they even ordered back to Holland the The commons having reduced
the standing army, as was observed above, to so small a number as seven
thousand men, and those all English, a new attempt was made, on the part of the
court for keeping the Dutch guards in England, but that was rejected, though
the King sent a message desiring it.

"In carrying these points, many hard things were said against the court, and
against the King himself. It was suggested, that he loved not the nation; that
he was on the reserve with all Englishmen, and showed no confidence in them;
but that as soon as the session of parliament was over, he went immediately to
Holland, not to look after the affairs of the states, which would have been
more excuseable -- but to enjoy a lazy privacy at Loo -- where with a few
favorites he passed the summer in a way, that did not raise his character," --
Burnet's history of his own times. Vol. IV. p. 329.


guards of the king himself, giving him thereby to understand that the King of
England should have no other guards than the affections of his people, which
was certainly the way to make him more careful not to lose them; but now
according to the true spirit and meaning of this letter from the Secretary at
war, delivered it seems by way of order, the method of depending upon affection
is so much altered, that the people may be murdered with their affections, and
the mercenaries who committed the murders publicly applauded, and promised all
protection in the deed. But does not this promise annihilate or supersede the
laws? And if language has any meaning, inform us, that while we stand gazing
unthinkingly one upon another, our lives and liberties are in danger? that is,
they depend upon another's will, and that it is a doubt, the parole or
watchword being given, whether we have really any longer a place of safety in
our own houses, or a sanctuary to fly unto, if attacked in the very house of
God.

IT is to be hoped, however, and the whole issue of the thing seems at present
to depend on that, that the Lords the judges entertain better principles, and
principles more agreeable to our constitution, than the King's Secretary at
war. Bred to all the distinctions of right and wrong, and used to distribute
justice, they must know it to be a law of the Almighty, that, he that kills a
man must be put to death, and that it will be very dangerous to others as well
as to themselves, to oppose their authority to the authority and laws of God,
who is the only lawgiver, the only potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, to whom both they and we are to show our submission, and by obedience to
his commands to ascribe unto him, all honor* glory, and dominion, which are his
prerogative for ever and ever.

FINIS.

