Samuel Fothergill's SERMON On the 19th of the 11th Month, 1769.

A SERMON PREACHED AT HORSLEY-DOWN, LONDON, The 19th of the 11th Month, 1769.

By Samuel Fothergill.

NEWPORT: Printed and Sold by SOLOMON SOUTHWICK, in Queen Street, 1773.

A SERMON.
A SOLEMEN summons which the Almighty gave, through his prophet Joel, to a
people whom he had owned above all the families of the earth, at a time when
they had revolted and departed from him, has been revived in my mind, with an
apprehension that the same authority requires the republication of it in this
day, to a people likewise highly favored of him, and who have, in like manner,
departed from their first love.

BLOW the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly. Gather the
people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders; gather the children,
and those that suck the breast: Let the bridegroom go forth of his chambers,
and the bride out of her closet: Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord,
weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, spare thy people, O
Lord! and give not thy heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over
them; wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God? Then will
the LORD be jealous for his land, and pity his people.

As I am about to conclude, perhaps finally conclude, my labors among you in
this quarter; I would query with some, with many that are present, whether they
have not heard, intelligibly, the sound of the trumpet, calling them, with a
degree of certainty, to arise and prepare themselves for the battle?

My brethren and sisters, among whom I have been constrained, in the
overflowings of the Father's love, to labor in a private capacity, breaking, I
hope I may say, a little bread from house to house; the everlasting gospel has
been preached among you with all the force of pathetic energy, with all the
tenderness of divine compassion: Let it not be ineffectual. The gospel message
has been delivered with such indubitable clearness, that your judgments have
been convinced; you have assented to the truth as it is in Jesus: Suffer not
the impression it has made upon your minds to be speedily erased.

FAR, very far, be it from me to think highly of myself, to exalt the officer,
the minister; I would not that you should hold any man's person in estimation;
I am deeply sensible that to me belongs blushing and confusion of face: But I
magnify mine office, and the Power of him who has seen meet to employ me
therein. I would endeavor to exalt in your view the adorable goodness and
condescension of the great author of all our mercies, in that he has caused the
trumpet to be renewedly sounded in your borders: Hear its important message
with suitable attention; let it rouse and prepare all the ranks in the armies
of our Ifrael to engage in the glorious cause of our God: Let the daughters of
our Zion arise from the bed of indolence, from the lethargic stupor of a fatal
forgetfulness; from all the deadening, benumbing gratifications of sensuality,
and shake herself from the dust of the earth, that she may come up to the help
of him who has called her with an high and holy calling. -- The trumpet is
blown in her streets -- the alarm has been heard by all: -- O! Let not its
language be rendered unintelligible by the multiplicity of trivial things, that
too much absorb the minds of many. I am fully persuaded, that the gracious
visitation of humbling, melting goodness has been afresh extended to
individuals present, in (I had almost said a very memorable manner) nor will I
recall the expression; for if it be not treasured up in your remembrance now,
for your profit and advantage, it will be memorable in that awful, approaching
period, when every neglected mercy will appear deeply engraven, in a dread hand
writing on the wall, against us: Let me therefore tenderly entreat you with all
the warmth of unutterable affection, as a brother, as a fellow pilgrim, through
the vicissitude of time, to the unmixed joys of a happy eternity, that you will
no longer neglect the offers of mercy, or turn a deaf ear to the reproofs of
instruction.

I FEEL my mind covered with that boundless love, that wishes, that ardently
desires, you may indeed be wise for yourselves; for although I may be deficient
in many qualifications of a gospel minister. I am not wanting in that pure,
disinterested love which seeks not yours, but you unto the Lord.

Blow the trumpet in Zion; sanctify a fast.

IF we were but enough attentive to the sound of the the trumpet, we should see
the absolute necessity of this sanctified fast, a fast from every of those
delusive pleasures sures and slavish attachments that render the mind
insensible of good.

Call a solemn assembly.

THIS branch of the summons some may think belongs only to a few, and we have
no share in the duty it enjoins. I confess I am not of that opinion, I think
every individual has a share in the instruction couched in it.

Call a solemn assembly.

OH, you active ones! Stop a while in your swift career; make a solemn pause:
Stand collected from every object that can gratify or delight the sensual part:
Labor diligently to assemble all the powers and faculties of the foul, that
they may be sanctified by him who gave them. I believe there is no useless,
dead, unactive member in the church of God; and those who can thus assemble the
collected attention of a redeemed mind, devoted to the divine will, those have
an undoubted right from the highest auth city to call an holy convocation. We
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, was the language of some
formerly, who had indeed sanctified an acceptable fast. I must desire that
those who perhaps cannot be so active in promoting this glorious cause among
the sons of men, as some who are called into more eminent stations in the
Church, may, by a circumspect, care, over all their words and actions, see that
they do nothing against the truth.

Call a solemn assembly; gather the people.

How scattered are many of the members of this quarter? Scattered indeed, as
sheep without a shepherd, dispersed up and down in the dark vale of
insensibility, and self-forgetfulness; many upon the barren mountains of an
empty profession; lost to all religious fellowship, unacquainted with that holy
union in which is the bond of peace. How many are the careless I have met with
amongst you, who, alas! it may be said, care for none of those things? -- Oh!
You elders, who might have been as pillars in the Lord's house: You delegated
shepherds, who might have adorned the first ranks, in the armies of our Israel,
if you had not set down and taken up a rest short of those glorious abodes,
which are prepared for them who steadily persevere in the line of divine
appointment! -- To you the call is,

Gather the people.

AM I my brother's keeper? Let it suffice for me that I look to myself, and
that my own family is in tolerable order, is a language that too much prevails.
But Oh! that you had the cause of God more at heart; that you were more engaged
to gather the people; that you might, with a fatherly care, overlook those
whose minds at present resemble the barren desert, the uncultivated wilderness;
that you might comfort and encourage those who tread the gloomy scenes of an
adverse allotment, as it were cut out from every joy, and alive to each painful
sensibility. How would it comfort many of these, if an experienced friend was
now and then to drop into their families, and at times speak a word in the
openings of divine wisdom, suitable to their several states? I believe it would
be a great means of gathering the people. Why should your care be circumscribed
within the narrow limits of your own families, although they might be well
regulated? But you might be more extensively useful if thus engaged in the care
of the household of God: I am persuaded that the divine wing would be over you,
and a blessing would attend your labor. It Is not a time for us to dwell
unconcerned in our ceiled houses, when the house of God lies waste; we have
many of us the same tender connexions as you. I myself have the same endearing
attachments as some of you, the same ties of domestic love as some of you, not
less attentive to every relative and social duty than some of you; my nature is
not harsh, my principles much less so; yet I am made willing to leave all to
come and labor with you, if so be I might be instrumental to rouse any to a
more arduous pursuit of their everlasting interest, and I can freely
acknowledge with humble thankfulness, that I never more fully experienced my
peace to flow as a river, never could with greater joy say, Return O my soul to
the place of thy rest, for the Lord thy God has dealt bountifully with thee,
than when I have been thus engaged in extensive private labors, visiting the
sick, reviving the sorrowful, encouraging the disconsolate; strengthening the
weak, watching over and carefully admonishing the giddy, incautious youth; and
I doubt not but you would have the rewards of peace in your own bosoms, if, as
heads of the society, you were more often thus employed in endeavoring to
gather the people.

Sanctify the congregations; assemble the elders.

I HAVE been deeply concerned to see some of the elders so deficient in ^^ling
the line of divine appointment. If they were more engaged to assemble under the
holy influence of that power in which they should move, they would many of them
be commanded to

Blow the trumpet in Zion.

BUT I know of no state harder to speak to, more difficult to reach, than that
of an elder, whose mind is overgrown by the earthly nature.

Oh earth, earth, earth! Hear the word of the Lord.

I DON'T recollect any other instance, in sacred writ, where attention is
demanded in a similar manner.

OH earth, earth, earth! Thus thrice repeated, plainly signifying the great
difficulty there is in reaching to those, who are as it were buried in the
earth, whose minds are fixed in it.

Gather the children.

You that have the rising youth under your care, let me call upon you, let me
entreat you to, -- gather the children: -- Gather them from all the bewitching,
enticing allurements of the world; gather their attention to that of God in
their own minds. O! How have I secretly mourned to see the poor children so
sorrowfully neglected, so uninstructed, so much estranged from that holy,
divine principle which would exceedingly beautity and enrich them? But, alas!
How few parents are rightly qualified to teach their children the law of divine
love, to instill into their tender minds proper sentiments, to cultivate upon
them those impressions that would be of everlasting advantage; -- and if the
children, when the gracious visitation of the father of mercies moves upon
their hearts, warming and animating them with the love of virtue; raising the
secret sigh, and begetting desires after heaven and holiness: I say, if the
children should then ask the negligent parent, What is this secret something
which I seel; this principle which impresses my mind with the love of virtue?
What is it? What value shall I set upon it? How then can you give them suitable
instruction? You cannot teach then obedience to its sacred dictates, when your
own example speaks a language quite opposite? Oh! Why should the sea monster be
brought against you? "The sea monster draws forth the breast to the young,
but the daughter of my people is become cruel as the ostrich in the wilderness,
that leaves her eggs in the sand, to be hatched by the beams of the sun, and
considers not that the foot of the passenger may crush them." -- The daughter
of my people has left her tender offspring to the uncertainty of being
accidentally benefited, or, I should rather say, to the mercy of God unasked,
unsought, exposed to all the dangers of a dreary wilderness, unaided,
unassisted by the care of a natural parent; the tongue of the sucking child
cleaves to the roof of its mouth for thirst; the children ask bread, and there
is none, in many families, to break it; they want to be nourished by the
sincere milk of the word; but, alas!

The daughter of my people is become cruel.

OH you parents, you delegated shepherds! What account will you have to render
when the Lord of the whole earth arises to make inquisition for blood? Bear
with me my dear friends; slattery and smooth tales may please fools, but they
will not please him whom I desire to serve in the gospel of his son. All that
is within me is moved while I thus earnestly expostulate with you on behalf of
the dear children; suffer me to entreat you for God's sake, for your own soul's
sake, for the sake of the cause of truth, Gather the children, and those that
suck the breast.

THOSE who are filling themselves with the world's consolation, with the
intoxicating pleasures and amusements of a degenerate age; wean them from those
delights: Gather them to the knowledge of themselves, to a sense of the mercies
that are offered them by the great author of mercies, ancient and new.

WHILE thy servant was busied hither and thither, the man made his escape, --
was the vain excuse of the officer to whose custody a certain captive was
committed, with the charge, "Take care of this man till I come, and if thou let
him go, thy life shall go for his life." No plea of other engagements, nor even
want of ability to discharge our duty toward our offspring, will stand us in
stead, if when the Almighty queries with us, -- What have thou done with those
lambs I left under thy care in the wilderness, those tender offsprings I gave
thee in charge? -- We have through neglect, through unwatchfulness, suffered
him or her to go; but we shall most certainly stand accountable for his or her
life, -- I said want of ability, because I assuredly believe, that want of
ability will be so far from a palliation of our crime, that it will rather
increase our condemnation. Can we plead want of ability to him who is always
ready to furnish us with it, if we are but willing to receive it at his hand? I
am of opinion with respect to many of our youth, that if they had been properly
instructed and carefully watched over, if they could have seen the beauty of
holiness shine in the example of their parents, they would not have gone out so
widely as they have.

O YOU parents of both fexes! An important duty is reposed in you. Example your
children in the practice of piety. Example speaks louder than precept, its
influence is far more extensive, and while on the one hand you are excited to a
faithful discharge of your duty toward them, by the certain hope of a glorious
reward; so on the other hand the powerful ties of natural affection, the warm
solicitude for the happiness of those you love, must stir up to diligence in
the work and service appointed you.

Gather the children.

IF after your attentive care has been employed for their preservation; if
after the forcible voice of example, you have called them to the perfecting of
holiness in the fear of God, they will go, they will turn aside, into the by
ways and crooked paths of sin and iniquity, they must stand by their own
choice. You will have redeemed your souls and will be found in your lots at the
end of time. A ponderous crown awaits; you will close your eyes, and open them
to the boundless fruition of unmixed joy, in a happy eternity. We do sometimes
with sorrow observe the unwearied labors of a parent's love, bestowed without
the desired effect: It Is mournful to see children pierce with bitterness and
anxiety the breast that has been their support, in their infantile years; to
fill that eye with sorrow, that has dropped over them the tear of maternal
tenderness; it is a cruel thing for a child to mingle gall and wormwood in the
cup of a parent descending to the grave! Let such be assured that their own
portion of gall and wormwood will be doubly increased thereby, in the solemn
hour of just retribution.

BUT Oh, beloved youth! I earnestly desire that you may never thus widely
deviate from the paths of rectitude It Is on you the hopes of the present age
must shortly devolve: May you wisely choose an early submission to the holy
discipline of the cross of Christ, that you may come up as an army for God.
Consider the uncertainty of your stay here: Consider the important business of
life, and let the love of every unprofitable delight be swallowed up in the
arduous pursuit of glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life. We are daily
instructed by the powerful, eloquent language of mortality. Death invades all
ranks, snatches those of all ages from the busy stage of life. -- She who was
yesterday surrounded with nuptial joys must, tomorrow, be confined within the
cold enclosure of the silent grave.

"Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet."

LET the young be joyous, and those who are in the bloom of life leave every
thing that tends to retard their progress toward the city of the saints
solemnity: Let them relinquish their most exalted satisfactions, rather than
neglect to lay hold on the joys of God's salvation, which are unutterably more
desirable than all the sin-pleasing gratifications that this world can bestow.

'Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the
altar.'

THIS should not be confined to those only whose mouths may be opened publicly
amongst you; for it belongs to all those who preach to others by the regularity
of a godly life and conversation, although we are favored with a living
ministry of divine appointment, who dare not fill the ears of men with a
repetition of unfelt truths nor amuse them with the unprofitable productions of
an empty mind; but are concerned to discharge themselves faithfully, as
stewards of the mysteries of God; yet let them be joined by all those that
mourn for the desolation of Zion, by all who wish peace within her walls, and
prosperity within her palaces.

Let us weep between the porch and the altar, saying, -- Spare thy people, O
Lord! And give not thy heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over
them; wherefore should they say among the people, -- Where is their God?"

IF we are thus unitedly engaged in behalf of our Ifrael, it may be that the
Lord will again be jealous over his land, with an holy jealousy; for I cannot
think that a people whom he has raised by his invincible power, and so signally
placed his name amongst, were ever designed to be only the transient glory of a
couple of centuries. -- I am still revived by a secret hope of better times,
when our Zion shall again put on her beautiful garments, and in her and with
her shall arise judges, as at the first, and counselors, as at the beginning.
Let us weep between the porch and the altar; let us interceed for the people,
that the land may yet be spared. The gracious ear of our heavenly Father is
still open to the supplications of his children, and I believe he will yet be
jealous over his land, and pity his people.

THE time approaches when the great dasher in pieces will more and more come up
amongst us; and may all, who are broken by him, wait to be healed by the
arising of his love: I shall not live to see it, but I live in the faith, and I
believe I shall die in the faith, that the Lord of Hosts will yet beautify the
place of his (...) our Zion will yet become an eternal excellency, and
Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth.

Let us weep between the porch and the altar, for the Lord will yet be jealous
over his land, and pity his people.

THE bowels of adorable condescension yet yearn over his children, with all the
tenderness of a Father's love.

How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? How shall I make thee as Admah, and set
thee as Zeboim? -- How shall I cut thee off from being a people before me?

BY this moving and pathetic language would the great Father of the universe
induce you to return to the arms of everlasting mercy; and if we are placed as
watchmen in Zion, faithfully discharge the trust reposed in us, we shall be
made instrumental in gathering the scattered and dispersed sheep, from the east
and from the west, from the north and from the south, to the great shepherd, to
the one sheepfold, and finally obtain an admittance into those glorious
mansions, where the morning stars join in singing hallelujahs! And where all
the sons of God for ever shout for joy.

Now unto the King eternal, immortal and invisible, the only God, be honor and
praise, for ever and ever!

FINIS.

