Dr. Chauncy's LECTURE SERMON, From ACTS 4.32.

Christian Love, as exemplified by the first christian church in their HAVING
ALL THINGS IN COMMON, placed in its true and just point of light. IN A SERMON,
Preached at the Thursday-Lecture, in BOSTON, August 3d. 1773.

FROM ACTS 4.32. WHEREIN it is shown, that christian churches, in their
character as such, are strongly obliged to evidence the reality of their
christian love, though not by having all things in common, yet by making such
provision, according to their ability, for their members in a state of penury,
as that none of them may suffer through want of the things needful for the
body; and that DEACONS are officers appointed by Christ to take care of his
poor saints, making all proper distributions to them in his name, and as
enabled hereto by the churches to which they respectively belong.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by KNEELAND and DAVIS, in Queen Street, for THOMAS LEVERETT,
in Cornhill. MDCC,LXXIII.

Advertisement.
THE following sermon is printed at the desire of some that heard it preached;
thinking it might happily tend to revive in our churches that spirit of love
toward the poor in communion with them, which was the distinguishing
characteristic of christian churches in the first age of the gospel. They also
hoped, that a publication of this nature might lead DEACONS into clear and just
sentiments of the nature and importance of their office, and churches into as
just ones respecting their obligations to fill their hands for distributions to
Christ's poor, as they are able, and there may be calls for it in the governing
providence of God.

THEY, accordingly, recommend it to the serious perusal, especially, of
Deacons, and the Churches to which they are related; humbly leaving it with the
"God of love" to give it desired Success.

Having all things in Common, explained and improved.
ACTS 4.32. "And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of
one soul: neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he possessed
were his own; but they had all things in common."


THERE is no need* in order to introduce a discourse on these words, to take
into previous consideration either the preceding, or following context. They
are an independent sentence, containing an account of the temper and conduct of
the christian church at Jerusalem, in the beginning of the apostolic times.
Says the inspired writer, they "were of one heart, and of one soul, and had all
things in common".

WHAT I propose is, to dilate upon these words, that we may be let in a clear
and just understanding of them; and, as I go along, to make the proper
reflections upon what may be exhibited as their real truth.

THEY begin, "and the multitude of them that believed". -- The persons here
spoken of were "believers"; that is, converts to the christian faith. And they
were converts from Judaism. For the gospel had not as yet been preached to the
Gentile nations. The apostles, it is true, had, before this time, been
commissioned by their Lord "to preach, in his name, repentance, and remission
of sins, among ALL NATIONS," as we read in Luke ^4.47: But they were expressly
ordered, in the words that immediately follow, to begin their ministry, in
execution of their commission, "at Jerusalem; and to tarry there until they had
been endued with power from on high"; that is, with miraculous power from the
Holy Ghost.

WHY our Lord confined the labors of his apostles, for a while, within so
narrow a compass as the city of Jerusalem, after he had commissioned them to
preach the gospel to all the world, may be difficult to say. But could nothing
else be said, it would be abundantly sufficient, at least to us who call our
selves christians, to say, "So it seemed good in his sight".

I MAY, with propriety, add here, it was an honor, a signal honor, to the city
of Jerusalem, and to the Jewish nation in common, that the first christian
church should consist of Jews, and be gathered at Jerusalem. And, at the same
time, it illustrates that interrogatory appeal of the apostle Paul, in the
first ver. of the 11th chapter of his epistle to the Romans, "has God cast
away his people"? Upon which he adds, "God forbid"! As if he had said, God has
not wholly "cast away his people". No; a number of them were believers in
Christ, the promised Messiah, and so considerable a number, that they might be
called "a multitude". So speaks the text.

"THE multitude of them that believed". And it is with great propriety that
they are thus denominated. "About an hundred and twenty" only, it is true, was
the number at first, as we read in the 1st chapter of the Acts; but, after the
descent of the holy Ghost upon the apostles, in miraculous gifts, they were
greatly increased. "Three thousand were added to them", in consequence of one
sermon, preached by the apostle Peter, the record of which we have in the 2d
chapter of Acts. In the chapter in which is my text, ver. 4, their number is
said to be "about five thousand". And in the next chapter, v. 14, we read, that
"believers were added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women". This
increase of believers was at Jerusalem, and of those who were converted from
Judaism.

I MAY properly take occasion here to reflect with grief upon the state of the
church of Christ at present, with respect to the additions that are made to it
of those that "believe," so believe as that they "shall be saved". It cannot be
now said, as in my text, "the multitude of them that believed". Blessed be God,
there is yet a church of Christ, and there are in it believers in truth,
believers unto life; and this, whether we consider the church in general, or as
constituted of particular individual churches* But the increase of converts is
not now as it was when the apostles went forth in the power of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. There is at this day, and has been for a long time, yea for ages,
an awful withdraw of that success, which, in the apostolic days, attended the
preaching of the cross of Christ. Notwithstanding the revivals of the spirit of
christianity at particular times, and in some particular places, the cause, in
general, has been long languishing, and is, at present, in a sad, decaying, and
almost dead condition.

IT certainly is so in this Town and Land. -- How small is the number of those,
who give themselves up to God in Jesus Christ, to walk in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord, with a becoming care of being blameless? We are
visibly under great decays as to the life of religion. With what little success
are the means of grace accompanied? What an awful unconcernedness does there
appear in all sorts of persons about their souls, and the concerns of another
world? How great is the luke-warmness and indifferency, even of christian
professors? How general their spiritual sloth and negligence? And how many,
what vast multitudes among us, are secure in their sins, unmindful of God,
thoughtless of Christ, allowing themselves to "walk in the way of their own
heart, and in the sight of their eyes"? Let us not be insensible of the
lamentably bad state of religion among us. Let us be humble herefor, and seek
to God to "pour out his spirit" upon us, to "revive the things that remain, and
are ready to die" We cannot unite in a more seasonable, pertinent prayer to the
God of all grace than that, "Turn thou us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy
face to shine, and we shall be saved".

THE text goes on, "they were of one heart, and of one soul". This may respect
their unity in sentiment as well as affection. Such was their faith and such
their love, that it might be said, they, had, as it were, "one soul". There
were no disputings among them, no strife, no animosity. And, instead of hatred,
they were filled with good will toward each other, showing its reality in all
the genuine exercises of christian kindness. They were in judgment, and
affection, the same as if they had been animated with one common spirit.

THEY were one in sentiment, that is, with respect to the divine mission of
Jesus Christ, his being the Messiah, and the only Savior of men. This was the
grand truth the apostles insisted on in their preaching, particularly in my
context; and this, accordingly, was the great object of the faith of this
"multitude". They embraced it as a sure truth, that Jesus who "had been
crucified, and was raised from the dead", was "the Son of God"; and they were
as "one" in this faith.

HAPPY this first christian church, so united in that faith which is the grand
foundation of the religion of Jesus Christ! Happy, that they should, as "one"
build, as the language of my context is, upon "the stone set at naught" by so
many of the jewish builders, and that God had made the head of the corner; in
whom there "is salvation, and in no other".

THIS is the great band of christian union, that "unity in faith", which is
recommended in the new testament writings, and which was exemplified by the
first christians.

It were to be wished, those who profess themselves christians, would preserve
this unity in the bond of peace. Then would they cease from forming themselves
into separate communities, on account of those differences in opinion which
enter not into the essence of christianity, but are rather points of doubtful
disputation. Then would the church of Christ be no longer a collection of
contending sects, and party combinations, but "one body", cemented together,
and united, not in the same sentiments about tything mint, annice, and cumming,
or any other matters of comparatively small importance; but in that faith
without which no man can be a christian, a christian in such a sense as that he
may have good hope of entering into life eternal. This is the unity in
sentiment, the oneness in faith, that is worthy to be desired, prayed for, and
sought after, by all that are the friends of Christ, and the interest of his
religion.

THIS multitude of primitive believers, were not only "one" in sentiment, but
"one" in affection also. With respect to love, it might be said of them, they
had, as it were, but "one heart, and one soul". They loved one another as they
loved themselves; "yea, as Christ loved them". Their love was without
dissimulation. It was not a pretense only, a mere empty verbal compliment; but
a noble reality, appearing to be so by its operation in all the fruits of true
christian benevolence. They "walked in love, even as Christ Jesus also walked".
They "abounded in love", both as an inward affection, and in all those outward
acts that are the proper discoveries of such an affection. And it was eminently
in this way that these first believers, and others also in after days, drew the
attention, and excited the admiration, even of those who were unbelievers: for
they have been heard to say, as their words are recorded by one and another of
the ancient writers, "Behold, how the christians love one another! How
cheerfully, how liberally, they do good to one another"!

AN example this, highly worthy of the imitation of all who would be owned,
another day, as the followers of those who inherited that spirit, which was the
peculiar glory of our common Master and Savior. The law of love is eminently
the law of Jesus Christ; and we are obliged as christians to nothing, if we are
not under solemn bonds to love one another. Love, in the first times of the
gospel, was wrought into the very frame of the souls of believers; and this
they evidenced by their readiness to all the offices of christian kindness
toward each other. -- How different are most christians now from what they
were then! Can it be said, even of those of the same communion, that they are
as "one" in affection? May we not rather take to our selves words, and lament
the flight of that spirit of love, which was once the distinguishing mark of
those who were believers in Christ!

IT is further added in my text, "neither said any of them that ought of the
things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things in common". The
things here said to be "had in common" must not be understood as extending to a
community in every thing. Such an explanation of the words would be an
absurdity in reason, and a direct contradiction to the precepts of revelation.
They ought therefore to be limited to such things only as might, in consistency
with the rule of duty, be possessed and enjoyed in common. The inspired writer
of my text has accordingly taken care to spicify particularly "the things they
had in common". Says he, in the following 34th and 3^th verses, "as many as
were possessed of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the apostles feet; and
distribution was made to every man according as he had need". To the like
purpose, having said, in the 2d chapter of this same book of the Acts, ver. 4^,
"all that believed had all things in common", he goes on, in the next ver. to
give us a distinct and full account of "the thing" he had said "believers had
in common". His words are, "and sold their possessions and goods; and parted
them to all men, as every man had need". It was therefore the worldly estate,
the possessed houses and lands, of these believers, turned into money, that
they all had the benefit of in common. There is nothing said, from whence it
can be collected, that these believers enjoyed, or countenanced the enjoyment
of any thing in common, that would infer a violation of the bonds those are
under, who, as the scripture speaks, are no longer "twain, but mystically one
in the Lord". Some may have interpreted this example of these first christians
in such a latitude. But it may, without the least hesitation, be said, it was
never so interpreted, unless by those, whose eyes were blinded by the rise of
impure mists from a grossly carnalized heart.

THE only question of any importance here is, were christians, from the
beginning, and all along to this day, obliged, in virtue of this example of the
believers at Jerusalem, to sell their possessions, and put all in one stock for
the common benefit of all? Some have imagined, that an affirmative answer to
this question is the true one; but upon insufficient reason. And this I shall
endeavor, in as concise a manner as I can, to make evident to you. In order
whereto let it be observed,

THESE believers, constituting the church at Jerusalem, were not obliged, in
consequence of any apostolic command, to make sale of their possessions, that
they might have all things in common. We have no account of such a command. And
should any affirm there was one, they would only declare their own imagination,
not what is any where wrote in the inspired books. Nay, instead of being
divinely taught, that these believers were commanded to sell their estates,
that they might all live in common upon one stock, we are obviously led to
think, that they were every one left at liberty to do in this matter as they
judged to be right and fit. To this purpose are those words of the apostle
Peter, in the chapter following my text, ver. 4, which he spoke to Ananias with
a direct reference to the sale he had made of his possession; "while it
remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thy own
power"? Surely, he would not have said this, he could not have said it with
propriety, or truth, if Ananias had been under the obligation of a command from
Christ, conveyed by his apostles, to part with his possession, and put the
price into the common stock. Upon this supposition, how could his possession be
so called "his own" as that he might not have sold it? and when he had sold it,
how could the price of it be said to have been "in his own power"? It should
seem demonstrable, from this application of the apostle Peter to Ananias, that
the sale which these believers at Jerusalem made of their possessions, was a
matter of their own free choice, not what they were absolutely bound to do in
virtue of any requirement of Jesus Christ.

AND we may the rather be satisfied of this, as we no where read, in the
new testament, of any christian church, who "had all things in common",
conformable to the example of the church at Jerusalem. And what is more, we no
where, in the inspired books, find a command, directed to any christian church,
or to any member belonging to it, obliging them to sell their possessions, that
the whole community might be supported out of one common stock; which cannot be
accounted for, had it been the will of Christ, that no one of his disciples
should possess, as his own property, either house or land; but that every one,
who professed faith in him, should, without the exception of a single person,
sell his estate for the advantage of all in common.

IT may be further worthy of notice, the new-testament-writers are so far from
reducing all christians to a level, by putting them upon having all things in
common, that they obviously suppose there actually was, and would be, a
difference between them in point of outward circumstances. Hence they often
speak of the members of this, and the other christian church under the
characters of rich and poor; which would have been altogether improper, if
christianity had destroyed this distinction, by obliging all that were
believers to have all things in common. And not only do the apostolic writers
speak of rich and poor in the christian church, but graft many of their
instructions upon this difference there was in the worldly circumstances of its
members. The rich, particularly, are applied to as such, and minded of the duty
they are obliged to in this capacity. Says the apostle Paul, directing Timothy
how to manage in his office as a gospel-minister, 1 Timothy 6.^7. "charge them
that are rich in this world that they trust not in certain riches, but in the
living God -- that they do good, and be rich in good works". Where would be the
pertinency of this charge to Timothy, if the supposition of rich men in the
church of Christ was a contradiction to the gospel establishment? In this case,
the direction to him must have been, say to such as are rich, sell your
possessions, and cease being rich. But not a word to this purpose do we meet
with here, or in any passage of scripture, in what is said to them that were
rich.

IT is still further observable, the apostle Paul, in writing to the Corinthian
church, as "touching the ministering to the saints", gives them this
instruction, 2. Cor. 9 7. "Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so
let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful
giver". Is this an injunction that will, in the least, comport with the
supposition, that the individuals of this church had nothing of their own, but
had all things in common? Every man, you see, is left to give according to the
free purpose of his own heart: Only he is instructed to give with cheerfulness,
and liberality; and upon the encouragement mentioned in the foregoing verse,
"This I say, he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully". But there would be no room for sowing
sparingly, or bountifully, if no member of this church had any thing he could
call his own, but whatever he possessed, more or less, must be thrown into one
common stock for the benefit of all. Had this been the truth of fact, or an
apostolic establishment, the direction, in this passage of scripture, is
altogether unintelligible.

YOU will, perhaps, ask, if the practice of this first christian church at
Jerusalem, in selling their possessions, and having all things in common, was
not intended as an example obligatory on all other christian societies, why was
it recorded? And why so recorded as to lead us into an opinion of their conduct
as truly noble and benevolent?

THE answer is at once obvious, and I hope satisfactory. It is as follows. This
first church, at the time when they came into this practice, were peculiarly
situated. Perhaps, no church, from that day to this, has been in like
circumstances. For it is to be observed, though, from the evidence that had
been held out to their view, they admitted it into their hearts as a truth,
that Jesus was the Son of God, and Savior of the world, that he died, rose
again, ascended up to heaven, and will come in the end of time to confer
eternal life upon all his faithful followers; and though, in the esteem of the
apostles, they were qualified, in consequence of this faith, and a profession
of it, for baptism, and fellowship with believers in all acts of christian
communion; yet it cannot be supposed, but that, in this beginning of their
faith, they should be imperfectly instructed in the nature, doctrines, and
precepts of the gospel kingdom. Further teaching; yea, a series of it was yet
needful. They needed particularly to be guarded against the prejudices, errors,
and corruptions of their former unconverted state, and to be more fully
indoctrinated in the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and Jesus Christ.
And this, until a more regular state of things could be accomplished, it is at
once evident, would take time, and bear hard upon those who had nothing to
depend upon for a subsistence but the labor of their hands. Now, in such a
situation of things, what more nobly benevolent than this conduct of the first
believers, in having all things in common? Especially, if it be remembered, as
it ought to be, that this church was constituted chiefly of Jews that were not
inhabitants at Jerusalem, but occasional comers there from a great variety of
distant places. Hence we read, in the forecited 2d of the Acts, that, among the
three thousand Jews, who were added to the church, at this time, there were
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, dwellers in Mesopotamia, Judea, Pontus, Asia, and
other places. And being thus occasionally at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost,
when the holy Ghost made his descent on the apostles, they were eyewitnesses
of its mavelous effects, and had the opportunity of hearing the sermon then
preached by the apostle Peter, under the inspiration of the Spirit; upon which
they were struck with conviction, professed faith in Christ, and were admitted,
to fellowship, as disciples, in all acts of christian communion. But being at a
great distance from their proper homes, they were incapable of providing for
their own support, should they continue at Jerusalem; and yet, it cannot be
supposed but that, upon their becoming converts to the faith of Christ, they
should be desirous of tarrying here, as it was highly proper, if not absolutely
necessary, they should, that they might be more fully instructed in the way of
salvation through Jesus who was crucified. Besides, they might, by direction
from the Holy Ghost, be influenced to continue here, that, being under the
tuition of the apostles, and enjoying the advantage of christian communion in
gospel ordinances, they might be formed for preachers to carry the glad tidings
of salvation to the several nations from whence they came, and in this way be
instrumental in propagating the religion of Jesus. In this situation of things,
wherein could the believers at Jerusalem have more nobly manifested the warmth
of their love to Christ, and the greatness of their affection for each other,
than by saying, as in my text, that "naught of the things which they possessed
were their own, but that all things should be had in common"? In like
circumstances, the like conduct would be generous and noble, and would be the
conduct of christians, if actuated by that benevolent principle, which reigned
in these first believers, making them all of "one heart, and of one soul". But
for any to plead, that this practice of those primitive christians should form
a law, an established rule, obligatory upon all christians, in all ages,
however differently circumstanced, would be highly absurd, and greatly hurtful
in its tendency and operation.

NEVERTHELESS, this example of their unfeignedly generous love is very
instructive to christians, considered both individually, and as united in
particular societies. It is in this latter view of christians, only I shall
consider the example in my text, as eminently instructive.

AND the instruction they are taught from it is, to take all due care, that
such among them as are in necessitous circumstances, may be so far provided
for, as to be preserved from suffering through want. Though no particular
societies of christians are obliged, after the pattern of the church at
Jerusalem, to sell what they possess, and throw all into one stock for the
common support; yet they are, without all doubt, bound by their example to do
their utmost, that none of their brethren in Christ, especially of the same
community with themselves, may be suffered to drag on life unrelieved under the
straits, distresses* and miseries of unavoidable poverty. And the obligation,
from this example, is the more binding, as it co-incides with the known
practice of all christian churches in apostolic times. Vid. Romans 15, 25, 26. 1
Cor. 26.1, 2. 2 Cor, 8.1. 2, 3 (...).
It was their constant care to provide, by their charitable distributions, for
the relief of their brethren in Christ under distressing circumstances, whether
through poverty, or the unjust treatment of a wicked and unbelieving world. And
they did this under apostolic guidance; yea, by express order from these
inspired teachers of the will of Christ. The practice of these primitive
churches, thus circumstanced, is therefore obligatory upon all after churches;
and while they copy after it, they may be assured, they will fall in with the
mind of Christ, as their practice was founded on apostolic direction, which was
infalibly right; because they were under the immediate guidance of the Spirit
of truth.

The churches of Christ, it is acknowledged, were differently situated in that
day from what they are in this. They were then the objects of the hatred and
contempt of the civil magistrate, not of his paternal care and protection:
Whereas the civil powers, in many places at least, are now on the side of
christian communities, and profess a regard for them, and readiness to afford
them their help.

THIS difference between the state of christians now, and in the times of the
apostles, it must be owned, is a very great one in favor of christian churches
at this day. But what is the natural, obvious deduction herefrom? Surely, it
will not follow, that christian churches, because they are under a christian
civil magistracy, are discharged from their obligations to christian charity.
As our Savior has said, Mat. ^6.11, "The poor ye have always with you", that
is, to furnish occasions for the exercise of charity, and to call to it. The
necessities of those, who are of "the household of faith", may not at all times,
and in all places, so loudly call for equally large distributions in order to
their relief: But in all ages, and in all the churches of the saints, there
will be a number, more or less, of helpless orphans, widows, and poor people,
who must be provided for, or subjected to all the miseries of a destitute
condition in life.

BESIDES what has been offered, it may be worthy of special notice, the
apostles of our Lord, under the extraordinary guidance of the Holy Ghost,
appointed officers in the christian churches they founded, whose special
business it was to take care of the charity of the churches they were
respectively related to, and to make distribution of it according to the
various wants of their several members. These officers are called, in the
apostolic writings, DEACONS, and they have been distinguished by this name from
that day to this.

The first deacons were constituted at Jerusalem, and the work assigned them
was in part extraordinary, being adjusted to the extraordinary circumstances of
the church there. This church, at this time, had one common stock, out of which
they were all supplied. Deacons were accordingly appointed to "serve tables"
See the account at large in the 6th Chapter of the Acts.
or, in other words, to make use of the churches money, which was deposited in
their hands, not only in providing for the Lord's table, but such other tables
as were necessary for the common support.: A work that required great wisdom,
impartiality, candor, as well as labor, in order to a right and commendable
discharge of it.

That which was extraordinary in the work of these deacons, the support of all
out of one common stock, soon ceased; but taking care of the helpless poor
members of Christ still continued the duty of every church, and will continue
to be their duty to the end of the world. And, upon this foundation, the
deacon's office became a perpetual one in the church. All the churches, in
apostolic times, that were set in order, were furnished with Deacons, as well
as Pastors. Hence the apostle Paul inscribes his epistle to the Philippians in
that style, "to all the saints in Christ Jesus, with the Bishops* or Pastors,
and Deacons". And in his first epistle to Timothy, which was intended for the
direction of all churches, in all ages, he particularly specifies the
qualifications of those who are fit to be Deacons, and gives direction that
such only should be put into office.

IT is from hence evident, that the Deacon's* office is a perpetual one, and
that all the churches of Christ, in succession through all ages, should be
furnished with them. And why? Principally, and above all, that, as trustees of
the churches, and as officers of Jesus Christ, they might employ themselves in
ministering to the poor saints. But how should they do this, unless they be
enabled to it? And how should they be enabled, but from the charitable
distributions of the churches whose officers they respectively are, under
Christ, the great head over all? The appointment of Deacons to take care, that
the poor saints be relieved and helped, is, in true construction, a solemn law
of Christ, obliging the churches who choose them to put it in their power, as
God shall give ability, to answer this charitable intention of their office.
Surely, this office in the church would not have been constituted, if it had
been a needless, useless one! And useless, as to the main end of its
institution, it must certainly be, if the churches are not bound, by the
authority of Christ, to a due care to fill their hands for distribution to
charitable and pious purposes. My late worthy colleague, the Rev. Mr. Foxcroft,
in his sermon preached at the ordination of a Deacon, though dead yet speaks to
you, in the following very pertinent words. This officer (meaning the Deacon)
stands in the house of God a constant monitor to the assembly, of their duty to
honor the Lord with their substance. And the church, that elect him, do hereby
practically contract with him, that they will own him in the execution of his
office, find him suitable employment in his station, and supply him, as they
are able, for a liberal distribution to the necessities of saints. I cannot but
look on it a gross incongruity, not to say a trifling formality, and mockery of
a divine institution, to put men, by a solemn church-vote, in the name of God,
under the character of Deacons, and yet not appoint them over their proper
business", nor take the necessary methods to furnish them for using their
office well. -- He adds a little onwards If the church did their duty
"concerning the collection for the saints, every one contributing as God has
prospered them", there would be a sufficiency of work for the officers Christ
has instituted to "serve tables." None, methinks, could then, with any color
of reason, scruple the propriety of a solemn ordination of them. And as for
them, how would it encourage their hearts, to see the churches, they
respectively serve, taking a proper care, that they may be "thoroughly
furnished unto all good works" for the house of their God, and the offices
thereof! How gladly would they receive the gift, and take upon them the
fellowship of ministering unto the saints! -- Thus he.


IN short, either the Deacon's office is an ordinance of Jesus Christ, or it is
not. If it is not, why do our churches, in solemn form, choose men out of their
number to take upon them this office? They must be supposed to esteem Deacons,
officers of divine appointment, or they profanely mock God when they elect
them as such. If they are officers of Christ's appointment, the churches who
choose them are most certainly obliged to acknowledge them in this character, by
enabling them, as they have ability, to afford all needed help to "the saints
that are in Christ Jesus". This is the great end of their appointment; this is
the business in special they are set over: And for churches to elect them to
manage this business, and carry into execution this great and good end of their
office, and, at the same time, to take little or no care to furnish them with
ability herefor, is an inconsistency in conduct that cannot easily be
acccounted for. And yet, this inconsistency most of our churches are justly
chargeable with.

IT is I suppose, the truth, in regard of all our churches, that they have
Deacons, and of their own election; and this, when solemnly met together in the
name of the Lord. And is it not as real a truth, with respect to the most of
them, that their Deacons sustain rather the name of their office, than the
thing itself; having little or nothing to do that is proper to the principal
end of their institution by Christ? May it not be justly said, that too
generally, throughout the land, their main business is to provide for, and
serve at, the sacramental table? As for Christ's poor, they are no more
enabled, by the churches they are related to, to make distributions for their
relief, than if they sustained no office in the church of God. Is this as it
ought to be? May it not rather be said, that such churches are grossly wanting
in those discoveries of christian affection, which were so conspicuous in the
church at Jerusalam, and all the other churches we read of in the
new-testament-books.

IT will, perhaps, be pleaded here, our civil rulers have empowered the several
Towns, within their jurisdiction, to raise such moneys as may be judged
necessary for the support of the poor, and to appoint persons to take care,
that these moneys be disposed of, so as to answer the good end for which they
are raised; in consideration whereof, the churches are excused from those
charities, which would enable their Deacons to do that which is done in other
ways.

THE answer is at once obvious. The laws impowering our several towns to
provide for the support of the poor, respect the poor in common, of whatever
denomination, be their character as it may; not distinguishing any on account
of their membership in the church of Christ: Whereas, it is the requirement of
the gospel of the blessed God, that christian churches particularly regard the
poor saints; taking all due care, that those, who are members of the same
mystical body with themselves, should be so far helped as not to live in
suffering circumstances, through want of the things that are needful for the
body. And, if any of their members are in real necessity, their charitable
assistance is what they are as certainly obliged to, as christians were in the
first, or any other, period of the christian church. Their living in a
christian country, where provision is made by law for the relief of poor people
in general, may make a difference as to the quantum of the charity, that may be
proper and suitable; but it makes none at all as to the thing itself, where
there is real need of it. And, indeed, if the provision that is made by the law
in any place for the support of the poor, in common, cancels the obligations of
the churches to make provision for those of their own body, who are in
necessitous circumstances, it totally sets aside the Deacon's office, though an
apostolic appointment in the name of Jesus Christ. What need of Deacons in the
church of God, if Christ's poor are not to be the special objects of their
care? Why should the churches choose them into office, if they are excused from
putting any thing into their hands for a distribution for the relief of the
saints? The plain truth is, no civil constitution can vacate an institution of
Jesus Christ. And as Deacons are officers of his appointment, and chosen by the
churches as such, they are solemnly bound, and by their own choice too, in
compliance with what they professedled esteem the will of Christ, to own them
in the business they are called to, and set over, namely, that of ministering to
the wants of those, in special, who are of "the household of faith". And that
they may be properly supplied, as officers in the kingdom of Christ, and in his
name, for the execution of the benevolent trust reposed in them, it is, without
all doubt, the incumbant duty of the churches of which they are respectively
Deacons, to endeavor, as they have ability, to put it in their power to
relieve their poor members, as there may be occasion for, and calls to it, in
the alwise, righteous government of providence.

SOME of our churches, thanks be to God, have something of a stock, or fund,
owing to the pious and charitable legacies of those, who were concerned that
the poor disciples of Christ might, in his name, and by his officers in the
church, be taken care of. But it will not be pretended, that any fund, in any
of our churches, will afford that which is sufficient for the relief of all
belonging to them, that are needy and destitute: And what is lacking, this way,
ought to be made up in some other; or even these churches will fall greatly
short of their duty, and leave their Deacons unable to answer, in a commendable
measure, the good intention of their office.

WHAT some individuals in our churches have done, or may still do, in charities
to the poor in general, or the poor of those christian communities of which
they themselves are a part, is known to God, and their own consciences. But may
it not be justly questioned, whether any of our churches, AS SUCH, have taken
that care to enable their Deacons, as Christ's officers, and in his behalf, to
make those communications to his needy disciples, as they had ability to do,
and ought to have done? Had the constituent members of our several churches
been as ready to communicate, that their brethren in Christ, conflicting with
the miseries of poverty, might be relieved and helped, as they have been to
expend their money for that which profits not, would so many of them have so
often been pinched with hunger, and cold, and suffered to groan under distress,
through want, I do not say of the conveniences and comforts, but of even the
necessaries of life? Should I not speak the truth, if I should affirm, that no
visible saint, no member in any of our churches, would suffer for want of what
is needful for the body, if we spared for their relief a small part only of
that which is laid out for rich furniture for our houses, in costly apparel to
deck our bodies, and in luxurious variety to cover our tables? Should each one
that is a member of the church of Christ lay his hand upon his heart, and
declare the genuine dictates of conscience, would he not be obliged to own,
that he had needlessly, might I not say sinfully, spent that, which, if he had
laid up in store for the purposes of charity and piety, would have made the
hearts of many to sing for joy, who have been oppressed, and over-burdened with
the weight of difficulties and straits, arising from the poverty of their
condition? Our churches, my brethren, have lost, in a great measure, the spirit
of the primitive churches of Christ; their spirit of love, operating in all the
offices of charitable goodness, which distinguished them from other men, and
were as a mark, or badge, by which they were known to be believers in him whom
God has sent to be the Savior of the world. We are too generally become lovers
of ourselves, lovers of the gaities, the vanities, the amusements, and
fashionable follies of the degenerate age we live in. The very best of us are
too much conformed to this present evil world, and suffer it so to engross our
affection, as that we have but little, very little, left to show it self in
christian acts of kindness and beneficence to the saints that are in Christ
Jesus.

IT were to be wished our churches were now, as they were in the apostles days,
"one in heart and affection", churches toward each other, and every church
toward every member belonging to it. And that we may be "provoked" to this
union in love, evidencing its reality in works of kindness and charity, as
their may be occasion, I shall briefly propose to your consideration the
following things, with the mentioning of which I shall conclude the present
discourse.

THE first thing worthy of special notice is, that the faith which constitutes
men christians in truth, and love to their fellow-brethren in Christ, not the
pretense of love, but its reality, are so far connected together in the sacred
books, as to lead us most obviously into the thought, that they are, and ought
always to be, inseparable concomitants. Turn to what Paul says to the church in
Ephesus, 1st chap. 1^ ver. To the like purpose he writes to the church at
Coloss, 1st chap. 4th ver. The same connection of love we find, in his 1st
Epis. to the Thessalonians 1st chap. 3 ver. So in his 2d epist. 1 chap. 3d ver.
I might refer you to a great number of other texts, in which faith in Christ,
and love to the brethren, the saints, the household of faith, are linked
together, as though they could not be disjoined, but would ever accompany each
other. And, in truth, it is of the very essence of faith, that faith by which
"the just do live", to show itself in love, not only to God, and Christ, but to
the christian brotherhood, not in word only, but in true genuine deeds of
unfeigned hearty affection; insomuch, that we may assure ourselves, if our
faith is not accompanied with this practical love, it is nothing better than
that empty dead faith, of which the apostle James says, "it profits not".

IT may be again worthy of consideration, the apostolical writers present to
the view of believers in Christ Jesus, such an idea of their relation to each
other as must powerfully tend to excite and draw forth their love to one
another, if their faith is of the right sort, and in exercise. As the apostle
Paul, in the 2d chap of his epist. to the Ephesians. represents the matter, we have
"one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in all" that are disciples in truth. We have all been
"called to one hope", we are "one mystical body", and are actuated by one and
the same spirit, the Spirit of Jesus Christ. We are all "heirs according to the
hope of eternal life, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ to the
incorruptible inheritance in heaven". We expect to be associated in another
world, and to live there, in one grand community, united in love to one
another; and eternally joining as one in "ascribing blessing and honor to him
that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb". Can we have a realising faith in
these truths of God, as we must have to denominate us christians, and not feel
in our hearts the working of affection toward each other; affection that will
show itself in all christian offices of charitable kindness? It is impossible.

IT may be said yet farther, the gospel-motives to christian love, in practice,
as well as principle, are such as cannot easily be withstood, where there is
the exercise of faith in a suitable degree. We are called to no act of love and
goodness to the disciples of Christ, but what we shall be abundantly rewarded
for in the coming world. A cup of cold water only given to a disciple, in the
name of a disciple, and from love to Christ, and in obedience to him, shall in
no wise lose its reward. The more bountifully we sow, the more bountifully we
shall reap. -- What better use, what higher interest, can we put our money to,
than by lending it to the Lord, for the use of his poor? It is the entire want
of faith, or the weakness of it, or the not allowing it its proper exercise,
that shuts our hands from the most liberal distributions to the purposes of
christian charity. Could we be wanting upon this head, if we really and fully
believed, that the good God would amply repay us whatever we should advance for
the help of the saints, if not in this world, most assuredly in that which is
to come.

ANOTHER most powerfully affecting consideration to engage our practical love
toward our brethren in Christ is, that he will esteem what we do to them as if
done to himself. For they are members of that very body of which he is the
Head; they are mystically one with him. It is in consideration of this union,
that he says, as in the 24th of Matthew, "inasmuch as ye have done it to one of
the least of these my brethren ye have done it to me". Do we really believe,
that, if we charitably relieve a brother in Christ, he will accept the kindness
as done to himself? It is difficult to conceive, how we should, in this case,
refrain ourselves herefrom. Our faith in this amazing truth must be weak, or
rather not in present exercise, or it would open both our hearts and hands in
comunications of christian kindness.

I SHALL only say further, deeds of charitable goodness to the poor suffering
members of the church of Christ, are mentioned by name in the account the
scripture gives us of the process of the great and general judgment; and those
only are pronounced "blessed, and bid to inherit the kingdom prepared before
the foundation of the world, who have given meat to the hungry, and drink to
the thirsty, clothes to the naked, and help to the sick, and distressed". If
then we would hope to be acquitted at the bar of the future judgment, and have
entrance ministered to us into the kingdom of Christ that is above, we must put
on bowels of mercy, be kind to one another, tenderhearted, ever being in
readiness, according to our ability, to do good to "the household of faith": So
shall we, of the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, be crowned with
immortality and honor in the coming world.

AMEN.

