THE GODLY FATHERS AND A DEFENSE TO THEIR PEOPLE.

A SERMON Delivered at UXBRIDGE, April 19, 1772, Occasioned by the DEATH of the
late Reverend NATHAN WEBB, Pastor of said CHURCH and PEOPLE: Containing a
summary of his CHARACTER.

And now published, at the Desire of many of the Hearers, to revive and
perpetuate the MEMORY of their said PASTOR.

BY EBENEZER CHAPLIN, A. M. Pastor of a CHURCH in Sutton.

To which is added, The Inscription on said Mr. WEBB'S Monument.

The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. PS. 112.6. The memory of
the just is blessed. PROVE. 10.7. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES in
Marlborough-Street MDCCLXXIII.

To the good People of UXBRIDGE.
AGREEABLE to the desire of many of you, I here present you with a copy of the
Discourse I delivered among you last April, as one of the Bearers of your late
reverend Pastor, with very little correction; and none to alter the sense from
what was actually delivered; and especially where it respects Mr. WEBB'S
character; that part being committed to the press in the original copy: which I
have the rather done, that by your thus approving, and desiring the publication
of the Discourse, you might be witnesses with me, of his worth and amiableness.
I shall therefore need make no apology to you, nor any others, for it is
publication or style, since it is done at your desire, to maintain the memory
of one, who, through more than forty years experience, you are witnesses,
deserved your greatest respect and affection; and to be remembered with love,
gratitude and esteem, so long as you exist a people, or church of Christ. That
you may in due time be led to the blessing of a like amiable and worthy Pastor
to be set over you in the Lord, is still the earnest prayer of

Your sincere Friend, EBENEZER CHAPLIN.
Sutton, March 29, 1773.
II KINGS II. 12. -- My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof.
THIS was the cry of Elisha, when Elijah was taken from him. Though he must
have the greatest assurance possible of his going to a state of rest and peace;
yet he felt the greatest concern for himself and his people, under the sense of
so great a loss; and therefore under this deep sense and concern, he cries out
as in our text, My father, my father, etc. as if it were possible to call him
back to them again, that the nation might have and enjoy the great benefit of
such an eminent man still longer. We have the like expression of the king of
Israel to this same prophet, who uttered these words of our text, when he came
to see him in his last sickness. This king, though he was a wicked man, yet it
seems he had so much sense and knowledge of the great safeguard so good a man
was to his people; as to make him cry with this affecting cry, of words like
our text; expressive of a deep sense of sustaining, or being about to sustain,
a loss so great as even all the military force and defense of the people. The
calling any one father is a most engaging appellation: because a father is one
on whom the child depends for help, support and defense. And the natural
disposition in a father to grant help to a child, or attend to his cry, makes
it the more important.

Again, what makes the text more important is the doubling the call, My father,
my father; which implies earnestness, as though every breath was engaged. The
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, are put in apposition with father:
and the words no doubt are designed to carry this sense or idea; as if he had
said, My father thou art the chariot of Israel: Thou art our safeguard. Or as
if he he had said, By losing thee, we lose all the defensive force of the
Nation. For again he says, My father, the horsemen of Israel. As if he had
said, If you leave us we shall be left naked of chariots and horsemen; or as
defenseless as a people that have none; and oh how sad will our case be, when
it is come to this, and we have so many enemies surrounding us, and seeking our
destruction. O father, what shall we then do? O if you might but be continued
with us! But now we are left defenseless.

By Elisha's calling Elijah father, we are not to understand that he was his
natural father, or indeed of any near kindred: but it is observably very common
in scripture, for those in public stations, to be addressed or spoken of in
that manner; especially those that well filled their places for the good of the
people. As a father at the head of a family takes care of, guides, instructs
and provides for his family; so a good king or ruler, or priest, or prophet,
very justly bears the title of a father to the people they stand in public
relation to. Thus in our text: Thus in what the king of Israel said to Elisha
when on his deathbed; and also when he asked him if he should smite the
Syrians, 2 Kings 6.21. So Joseph is said to be made a father to Pharaoh. So
also, Father is used for those of the same station or profession, who are
advanced in years, as in our text. And hence the young prophets are called the
sons of the prophets. In all these senses the word father is used in our text,
as to age, station, and well filling a public place or character. And in all
these we may use it in the case before us.

In treating upon this subject, we may attend to the following things, for
illustration and improvement.

I. We may observe from the words, that the godly, especially when in a public
station, are a great advantage and defense, as fathers to the people where they
are. (...) Therefore,

II. When such are taken away, it is just matter of very deep sorrow and
lamentation to the people where they have lived.

First then we are to attend to the illustration of the observation, That the
godly, especially when in a public station, are a great advantage and defense,
as fathers to the people where they are.

Our text, as well as the other text hinted, sets them forth to be not only as
fathers, but as a defense, as really as chariots and horsemen: yea, that but
one eminently good man for safeguard, might be accounted to be as all the
martial force of the nation. We accordingly find that God set forth his respect
to good men in this light. Thus he spared the old world for a season, for the
sake of some few good men; of whom we may reckon Methuselah as well as Noah.
The flood was stayed, and nothing could be done, till one was in his grave, and
the other in the ark. That self same day that Noah entered into the ark, the
fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven were
opened. As soon as all good men were out of the way; destruction did not wait
upon the people one day. In like manner we find, when Sodom was destroyed, the
angel said he could do nothing, till Lot was out of the way: but, as soon as he
was gone, not a moment delay before the dreadful storm of God's wrath was
poured down upon them.

To the same purpose we find through the whole of God's dealings with the
children of Israel. While they served the Lord and walked in his ways, things
went well with them. Thus in the days of Joshua and the elders that out lived
him, there was no one able to stand before them. But, as soon as all these good
men were dead, they did evil in the sight of the Lord, and he sold them into
the hand of spoilers that spoiled them. Judges II. 14. So, through the whole
state of the Israelites, when they had a good king it went well with them. Thus
in the days of Josiah, God spared them from the destruction he had threatened
them for the sins of Manasseh till after the death of Josiah. But, as soon as
he was gone, breaches were made upon them one after another, till they were
destroyed, and as it is expressed cast out of his sight. The world indeed
stands for the sake of the elect. So it is expressed in the Revelation, those
angels, that were appointed to destroy, were not permitted to hurt, till the
elect were made safe.

God knows how to save them, that are his own, however the world may be
involved in wickedness; yet will withhold the letting forth his wrath and fury
upon the ungodly, so long as it is for the good and safety of his chosen; so
that they are a special safeguard and defense to all about them, that have any
special connection with them. -- Thus it may with the strictest truth be
affirmed, that the pious and godly are not only as fathers; but a great and
special defense to the people where they dwell.

We may now attend to some particulars showing, wherein they are such a safety
and defense to their people.

1. They are a safeguard to the people where they dwell by their good examples
and persuasions, which have a great and constraining force with them to keep in
awe the vicious, and to prevent their out breakings of sin. Indeed many times
vice gets so much the ascendence, that little regard or reverence is paid to
the examples of the pious and godly, or even to their advice and persuasions.
But when this is the case, it is a sign and evidence, that destruction is at
the door. When the godly have lost all their influence upon those about them,
it is a sign and evidence that their work is just done; and, when that is done,
they will be taken to God himself, and destruction will speedily come upon
those about them. Thus was the case of Lot; we find, just before the
destruction of Sodom, he had lost all his influence, and all he could say to
them, met with no better than insult. When he essayed to diswade them from that
dreadful wickedness they were for doing to the angels, they say, This one
fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge; and go on to threaten
and press upon him to abuse him; yea and when he went as a father to his sons
in law, to forewarn them of their danger, they treated him with the utmost
neglect; all which was the most immediate forerunner of that awful destruction.
The same also appears from what we read of the old man and the Levite, Judge.
19.22 and onward. The most gentle perswasives and entreaties had no effect upon
those that beset the house, which appears to be the cause of dreadful
desolation as to the tribe they belonged to. Thus we may see, that when the
godly have lost their influence, and neither their examples nor persuasions
will avail, it is a leading to destruction, from which we may see, how or
wherein they are a defense by their good examples.

2. They are not only a safeguard and defense by their examples and
persuasions, but by their advice, exhortations and counsels, to reclaim the
ungodly, and to keep them from running to so great lengths in their Sin. And
not only so, but by their counsel and direction, how to conduct, they are a
great advantage and defense; for God guides the just; he orders their goings
aright; he keeps them in their way, so that their feet do not stumble; and,
when a people have such among them, and will adhere to their advice, it makes
their way safe. Such pious godly men, who have their dependence upon God, he
will never leave nor forsake. Thus, while Jehoiada lived, and Joash followed
his advice, he reigned well, and things prospered among them: but, after the
death of Jehoiada, the king forsook the Lord, and it was but a little while
before things began to decline, and in about the course of a year the host of
Syria came against him, and destroyed all the princes of the people: For the
army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered
into their hand a very great host, because they had forsaken the Lord God of
their fathers; so they executed judgment against Joash; see 2 Chronicles. 24.23,
etc. There we see, how that the good instruction and counsel of Jeboiada was an
advantage and defense, and that as a father he guided and guarded the people,
while he continued among them. Thus also we may reckon under this particular,
that the godly are as fathers and a safeguard to their people by their prudence
and wisdom, in advising and ordering affairs; for to such God gives
discretion. So a prudent woman once saved a city by her wisdom. When God
designs good for a people, he raises up some with wisdom and prudence to lead
and to guide them: but when a people are become so bad, that God determines
evil for them, then he hides counsel from the wise, and understanding from the
prudent; or takes away the prudent from among them. It is not a mere political
sagacity, that can guard and defend a people: but it must be a pious godly
prudence, which is founded in a dependence, sheltering; so that here we may see
how that the godly are a safeguard to the people where they are.

3. They are as fathers and a special safeguard and defense to the people where
they are, by their fervent prayers and frequent supplications to God for their
people. The effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails much;
accordingly we find that the earnest and fervent prayers of Moses were from
time to time attended with the salvation of the children of Israel from
immediate destruction. How often God threatened to destroy them in a moment,
and, Moses interposing with his earnest prayers and supplications, God turned
from the fierceness of his anger, and would not destroy them. The same may be
observed of the prayer of Hezekiah and Isaiah against the Assyrian army, and of
Samuel against the Philistines, in both which they did more than all the
chariots and horsemen of Israel could do: and many other instances to the same
purpose may be found recorded in sacred writ; all which shows the safeguard the
godly are by their prayers, more than all the chariots of Israel and the
horsemen thereof.

4. The godly are a safeguard to their people by their trusting in God. When a
person trusts in God, nothing can hurt him; for The name of the Lord is a
strong Tower; the righteous runs into it and is safe, Prove. 18.10. To the
same purpose also we read that The horse is prepared against the day of battle:
but safety is of the Lord, Prove. 21.31. The greatest and most terrible armies
in array are of no avail, unless the Lord go forth with them. The prayers of a
few godly men, who put their trust in the Lord, can blast and destroy the
greatest armies, as appears in the case of Hezekiah above hinted, and many
other places that might be mentioned. There is no safety, where there is no
trust in God, and no danger where there is a gracious trust in him; for such
were never confounded or put to shame. So that herein they are a special
safeguard and defense, so long as people will hearken to them. But, as before
observed, when they have lost their influence, and their work is thus come to a
close, God soon takes away, removes them to some other place upon this earth,
or takes them home to himself in his heavenly kingdom.

5. Once more -- The truly pious are an advantage and defense, as fathers where
they are, by their being public spirited; for there are none more public
spirited than such; for they have a real and sincere love, tenderness, and
benevolence toward all mankind: as fathers they delight to do good unto others;
for they are the children of their father in heaven, who causes his sun to
rise, and his rain to descend on the just and on the unjust, on the evil and
the good: and thus they practice that, which has the strongest force to
assimilate and unite all together, and so to strengthen the whole body; which
alone is that safeguard that can keep every body from destruction, and without
which, as our Savior says, houses and kingdoms cannot stand.

Thus we have considered some particulars, showing, wherein the godly are a
safeguard and defense as fathers to their people. We now proceed to our second
general head proposed, viz.

II. To consider that, when such are taken away, it is just matter of very deep
sorrow and lamentation to the people where they have lived.

Although it is much better for such godly persons to be gone, and to be with
Christ, than to be here in the body; yea great gain, because of the many
troubles they have to meet with in this world. Though it is better for
themselves to be gone; yet, for those where they have lived, it would be
better, if they might be continued among them. To this effect the apostle Paul
speaks, Philip. 1.23, 24. The godly are so great a protection to the people
where they are, as we have above considered, that it is a very great loss for
them to be taken away. In the illustration of this head, we may first take
notice of some instances of mourning recorded in scripture when the pious and
godly were taken away.

In general it is remarked in scripture, that when any man of public note was
taken away, if it was a pious and godly man, there was great mourning for him;
but if it was a wicked man, there was little or no mourning for him. Thus when
good old Jacob died, there was great mourning and lamentation for him; even the
Egyptians were so sensible what a great loss it was, that they mourned with a
very grievous cry. So also when Moses was taken away, all Israel mourned for
him. He had long been their guide, their mediator; led, guided, guarded, fed,
instructed them as their father, and had been their lawgiver; a man of so
great usefulness, that they had indeed very great reason to lament the loss of
him. So also we find, through the account of the kings of Israel, when a good
king was taken away, there was special mention of the people's mourning for
him. Many instances of this kind are to be found in sacred writ: But we shall
proceed to observe some reasons, showing, why it is such just matter of
mourning when the godly are taken away.

1. Because the people are stripped of their fathers, their force, their guard;
the chariots and horsemen of the people are gone; they are as a town environed
with enemies, and all their martial force removed, left naked to the inroads of
their enemies, and nothing to look for, but that they shall soon be cut off,
and made a desolation, unless God raises up some to succeed, who shall fill up
their place. But when God takes away the faithful of the earth, the Inhabitants
thereof have great reason to look upon it as a testimony that God is angry with
them: which is most just cause of mourning, that we have thus provoked him to
anger, and to threaten to destroy us; and it is a loud call to a people to
prostrate themselves in deep mourning for their sins; yea, with deep sorrow and
repentance with unfeigned grief; that we have provoked him to strip us of such
pillars of our welfare.

2. It is just cause of mourning, because we are now deprived of their good
examples. Albeit we may and ought to bear their examples in our minds, so that,
after they are dead, they may yet so far speak to us in their good deeds, and
be still an advantage to us after they are gone from us. And thus we should, at
their departure, bear in our minds a deep sense of their importance, that we
may the longer retain the advantage of their examples, and the blessedness of
their memory.

3. Another thing contained in the loss a people sustain at the departure of a
godly man, and makes it just cause of mourning, is the loss of their fervent
prayers. Such bear upon their hearts before God all, that they stand nearly
related to; like Moses and Job. Moses when any thing threatened his people, was
importunate with God, till it was averted. Job ceased not every day to offer
sacrifices for his children. Such as are pious good men wrestle with God for
all about them. And, while God keeps up such pillars among his people, stirring
up his servants to such fervent prayers, he will answer them; for he does not
say to the seed of JACOB, seek ye me in vain. But when he takes away such from
among a people, it is to be feared he is about to withdraw his favor from that
people, and what can be a greater cause of mourning and lamentation? for then
Ichabod is written upon all their concerns, the glory is departed, church and
state are in danger. This surely is cause of mourning when so many earnest
prayers are ceased from among a people. What a great gap! What a great loss!
How much it calls for weeping, lamentation, and mourning!

Once more.

4. When the godly are taken away from among a people, it is just cause of
mourning to them, that now they have lost the comfort and benefit of their
society. Man was made for society, and it is just cause of mourning, when a
social companion is taken away; and especially, when it is one, whose company
or society tended to make us wise; as the scriptures say, he that walks with
the wise, shall be wise. But when a wise companion is taken from us, this is
just matter of mourning, and will indeed be so to us, if we have any relish for
that wisdom and piety, which grace the lives of the godly; mourning and grief,
that we can no more enjoy that fellowship with them here upon earth. Thus we
have considered some things, showing the loss of the godly is such great cause
of mourning. We may now attend to some

APPLICATION.
And now, beloved, may we not with great propriety apply and make improvement
of this subject in the case before us? Have we not lost a pious godly Father, a
father in age, a father in his being in a public station, a father in his good
examples, a father in giving good advice and exhortations, a father in his
fervent prayers, a father in his prudence and wisdom, a father in his tender
concern for us, a father in his public spiritedness, a father to his church and
people, a father to the poor, a father to his younger brethren in the ministry?
And thus lost, a very great instrumental safety, defense, and protection; yea
what Elisha in our text does not scruple speak of as the whole martial defense
of the people; for although Elijah stood only in a religious public relation
to Israel; yet his life was of that importance to their safety and defense.
David, when Abner was killed, very greatly mourneck, when it was only a chief
military man, and one, that had but newly turned to his side; and he reckons
over his being weak and defenseless, and the greatness of the man lost, as the
cause and matter of his great mourning: and if that was such just matter of
mourning, grief and lamentation; how much more when a father, and all the
defensive force of the people is removed? Beloved, I claim share in considering
him as a father, being myself a younger brother in the station he sustained;
and which has led my mind to the consideration, and applying the words of our
text for your contemplation at this time.

And here, as we considered, that the godly were a safeguard by their good
examples, so it may be to our purpose, to take a short view of the character of
our kind and honored father, who is taken away from us; praying, that, by thus
viewing him, when he is taken from us, a double portion of his spirit may rest
upon us, as it was promised Elisha, it should be unto him, if he saw Elijah
taken from him. And especially, as he was in a public relation, and as a father
both in age and station, we may with propriety look into his character, and
hold it up for our imitation, as well as for our mourning on account of the
loss of him.

1. We shall take notice of one thing specially, that did not belong to his
character, viz. Ostentation, or affecting to make a great show in the world, of
scholarship, or of importance, in polemick points or disputes. He was very far
from showing himself forward in any controversies; though he was by those, who
were intimately acquainted with him, accounted an accurate scholar; and all he
undertook, to effect it with great care and exactness: not aspiring after that
more public appearance, or an affectatious ostentation: or as a blazing star,
that makes a great show, and is so excentric in its orbit, that it is mostly
upon extremes; either very near the sun, or at an indeffinite distance from it;
sometimes passing toward the sun with vehement swiftness, and then again
receding with as great vehemence, in directly the reverse course from that, in
which it but a little before passed toward the sun. This very curiously points
forth to us, the case of those that make a great blaze in the world; and how
they go the reverse one time of what they went but a little before. Not such an
one was our Father taken from us. But he was a regular star, moving in the orb,
in which God had placed him, with uniform luster. Nor was he one of the dullest
or obscurest stars, in reflecting light from the great Sun of righteousness.
But it was of such brightness, that it shone with conspicuous light through the
thick clouds that have for some years past obumbrated our nation and land.

The light which he eminently reflected from JESUS CHRIST the SUN OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS, may be reckoned in a few particulars. 1. Pure and unfeigned
love. The benevolence and compassion of a father, the kindness of a brother,
the faithfulness of a friend, eminently appeared in him. His paternal
compassion, no doubt every one of you can witness to, and especially the poor,
which you have always with you; who have, I suppose, been many times fed,
warmed, and relieved by his charitable bounty. His brotherly kindness has been
abundantly felt by his brethren in the ministry, as I myself am witness; as
well as also his fidelity as a friend.

In his most public exercises or performances at ordination solemnities, where
it very frequently fell to his share to give the right hand of fellowship; a
part which afforded him very ample occasion for expressing this noble
affection; he was not wanting in showing a most eminent degree of brotherly
love and cordial affection toward his brethren in the ministry, and the
churches of God. I believe all, who have had the opportunity of attending upon
such occasions, can witness, how great he was in showing this Christ-like
affection. No less conspicuous did his light shine in this desirable affection,
wherever he was called to have any concern in divisions and difficulties in
churches, wherein he always appeared to have a singular regard for the truth;
as well as love and compassion for those that were borne upon. And in such
affairs he did not put on two faces, and side with them that were next him; but
steadily adhered to the truth and honesty of the cause, and always showed a
very compassionate concern for the good, peace and comfort of the church of
Jesus Christ.

But you have had abundant opportunity to observe, in his public discourses,
what an uncommon degree of sincere love and tender affection appeared. Thus it
appeared to me in what little opportunity I have had of attending on his public
dispensations; and I cannot doubt, but it has much more appeared to you, who
have for so many years been favored with distillings of divine dew, and gentle
rain, from his pleasant voice. No less amiable and conspicuous, did this divine
virtue of pure love and sincere friendship, appear in his more private affairs
of life: He showed a most friendly concern for the good, comfort and welfare of
all, wherever he came; even if he was only a wayfaring man, he was not wanting
in showing a very singular concern for their welfare: so singular was he for
this, that it might I suppose be said of him in this, as God said of Job, that
there was none like him in all the earth, at least none that we know of. Thus
he reflected from the divine sun an uncommon beam of singular love; which
qualification is the fulfilling of the law: by which he appeared, abundantly
endued with that singular disposition, of doing as he would be done by; which
our Savior says is the law and the prophets. (...) Hence,

2. We may remark another very eminent beam of light he reflected from the Sun
of righteousness was his Honesty, in which as to his private affairs, he had, I
suppose, the good report of all men; but his honesty in public character was
most important and most conspicuous; and in this he shone with singular luster.
He was most friendly in his temper and disposition, kind and courteous: but yet
he had no friend so near and dear to him as truth and honesty: he would abandon
any friend, sooner than his conscience, or in he least deviate from truth and
honesty, to which he was so closely attached, and for which he had so great a
veneration; that not even the clofest friendship, could bribe him to turn aside
from the truth; such light did he reflect from the Sun of righteousness, that
he was a star of rare magnitude in this noble qualification.

3. To sum up in a word; the light which he reflected from Christ the Sun of
righteousness, he imitated his glorious Master in love, in patience, in doing
good, and seeking the good both of the souls and bodies of men; giving up much
of his worldly interest in his lifetime; that by all means he might win some;
and at his death, viz. in his last will and testament, having no heirs of his
body, he made you the church of Christ his heir, in such a manner, as that you
shall, from generation to generation forever, feel the effects of his
propitious bounty; so that although after he had served his generation by the
will of God, he fell asleep; yet he has made provision, whereby you his dear
people may forever be fed, by the droppings of the sanctuary, from the fruits
of his labors. Thus his life and his death were devoted to the good, the
service, the well being of the church of Christ. Thus he lived Christ, as he
held forth in his last public labors; and we are in charity bound to believe
he is now reaping that gain, which in the same subject, he held forth there was
to such in death; and especially also, as those words appeared to be his
support, and the refreshment of his soul, in his last hours under the
apprehensions of the near approach of death.

4. What deserves to be here reckoned a reflection from Christ the Sun of
righteousness, and what belongs to the character we are considering, viewing
him as a father: He was a great lover of liberty as a kind benevolent father:
though in a public station; yet he would have all as children free, not as
slaves; all tyranny, either in church or state, was an abomination unto him. He
was for that true liberty; which is, liberty without licentiousness; that
liberty to which we are called, which is a liberty to do good, not to do hurt;
not liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; but in love to serve one another, as
it is expressed Gal. 5.13. He did not appear to have any inclination to have
any liberty to himself, but what he was sincerely willing others should enjoy
the same in common with him. So generous a soul had he, that it was not enough
for him to enjoy freedom alone; but he appeared to have a special happiness and
satisfaction in others enjoying the same he did himself. The freedom and order
of our civil and religious constitution, was very greatly at heart with him.

To say in a word, and to conclude the character of our departed friend; he was
one, that many of the beatitudes may with strictness and propriety be
predicated of, Meek, merciful, a peacemaker, of whom it is declared, by him
that has the disposal of all things, that such shall inherit the earth, obtain
mercy, and be called the children of God. Thus we have attended to some
imperfect hints of the character of him who was dear to us: and therein have
viewed our father when he is taken away from us; we should be careful that we
steadfastly behold him in his examples, wherein he followed Christ, that so we
may obtain a double portion of his spirit. We may now attend to some particular
address to the mourners. And first to her, who has received the deepest wound
by this fore stroke of divine providence, the sorrowful widow. We heartily
condole you, when we enter that house, where we used to find our father, our
friend, our dear brother and companion: what heaviness and grief does it work
in us that there we see him no more! And how much more this must constantly
attend you, we can faintly imagine, though not fully conceive! We know he was
most near to you; when he sustained, not only all the relations to you ward,
that he did to us: but that most near relation of a kind husband; the desire of
your eyes, the companion and partner of all your joys; as well as sustained
your griefs and burdens. But now you are left alone to bear a manifold burden
of grief; and we would willingly take a part of your grief, and bear it for
you. But this we grieve, that it is out of our power: cast thy burdens upon the
Lord and he shall sustain them: you must seek to God for comfort and
consolation, and put your trust in him, who is the God and husband of the
widow, and seek for all your consolation there; and may God grant you all
comfort and happiness, that is most proper for you while here; and bring you at
last to the full fruition of himself, in the world to come.

I must now address myself to the beloved church and congregation of this
place. -- You, beloved, I trust are more sensible what a great loss you have
sustained, than I can describe to you in words. As a faithful and prudent
pastor, he was most near to you; as a kind father and undissembled friend, I
claim a share with you: here should be our comfort, that when father, and even
were it a mother too forsake us, the Lord will take us up, if we trust in him.
Psalm. 27.10. This should be our hope, that although our father, and the
chariots and horsemen of Israel, are removed from us; yet God is a father to
them that put their trust in him; and he is the Lord of hosts; he is the
shepherd of his people; and if he brings us nearer to him, and a more filial
dependence upon him, then it will do us good; and as our dear friend we hope is
a gainer by death, so we shall be gainers by it too. But we feel such a loss,
that though for him to depart and be with Christ is better for him; yet for us
(it seems) it would have been much better, if he might have abode with us. And
therefore we cannot but cry out with Elisha in our text, My father, my father,
the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. What a great loss is here; to
lose such a stind father, and the defensive force of the people!

Beloved, let us take up the mantle of his faith and good examples which he has
left us; and so wear it, as that we may appear to be in very deed his sons in
all things, wherein he followed Jesus Christ, and as a noble star reflected
light from the Sun of righteousness; and carry it with us to the Jordan of
death, to smite the waters thereof, hither, and thither, that we may pass over
without any harm or fear of evil.

And my earnest prayer is, that you may find an Elisha to succeed, that shall
behold your ascended father Elijah; and wearing his mantle of paternal bounty,
as well as of faith and good examples, may lead you by the hand, and ever
maintain in you a filial affection toward him, whose memory deserves forever to
be precious with you even from generation to generation.

And, that you may be led and conducted to such an one, accept a few hints of
advice from one, who sincerely wishes your welfare, and earnestly prays, that
in due time you may have one, that shall fill up the place of your dear
deceased pastor.

You are sensible, that you must look and seek to Him, from whom comes down
every good and perfect gift; Him who received gifts, and who has set in his
church such great and important gifts and members. Have your eyes and hearts
earnestly to him, who alone can give pastors after his own heart. And, in your
choice or election, seek not a blazing star, who makes a great show, and is
soon out of sight, by towering in some high flights of learning or disputes,
which may prove no more edification to you, than if he spoke in an unknown
tongue; and most likely if you keep sight of him, will soon discern him
directly in a contrary course, from what he but a little before went.

Neither set your hearts on one already in the meridian, which may soon set and
fail you: but rather fix upon one that is just rising, which advances with
uniform order and luster, kindly reflecting light from the Sun of
righteousness, in simplicity and godly sincerity; or gently distilling doctrine
as the dew, and as the small rain upon the tender herb; so as that every spire
or tender leaf shall have a portion and refreshment. Not like a sweeping rain
that leaves no food, that smothers the low plants, and beats down the grass and
tender herb.

Make it a special point, that you choose a man of honesty, modesty, meckness;
or you may be sure he will never wear the mantle of your late departed Elijah;
not one that looks upon himself of great and extraordinary importance; but one
that is meek and lowly of heart, or he will never reflect light from the Sun of
righteousness; but will think to lead you by the light of sparks of his own
kindling. And, that you may have all the blessings of one, who shall be a
faithful pastor, a wise guide, an able instructor, a prudent ruler in the house
of God, a kind and affectionate father, a loving and beloved brother, an honest
man, a sincere christian, an undissembled friend, are the sincere wishes and
earnest prayers of him, who has no self interest to serve thereby, but only
that he may have the same satisfaction and social comfort in him, that he has
had in your dear deceased pastor. And beloved, see that ye fall not out by the
way; but be at peace among yourselves.

We shall now close up with some few words of general Application and
exhortation, how to consider and improve our great loss. What gloomy thoughts
does it raise in us, when we consider, we shall hear his pleasant voice no
more? Should we not mourn for our selves? We do not mourn for him, so long as
we trust he is a gainer by the change; since he now rests from his labors, and
his works do follow him: he has changed a world of trouble, perplexity and
grief for an eternal fixed state of (we charitably hope) rest, joy and
happiness; where all sorrow and sighing are fled away; where faith is swallowed
up in vision; and hope in fruition; where there is the full enjoyment of God
and Jesus Christ. Thus we hope our departed friend is triumphing in the realms
of uninterrupted bliss and and happiness; and it remains for us to mourn, that
we have lost such a father, such a friend, such a dear companion; to bewail the
sinfulness of our state, whereby death has taken place and none are suffered to
continue by reason thereof. Even the best, the most valuable, all must go
sooner or later. The fathers where are they; and the prophets, do they live
forever? Even the high priest Aaron himself was not suffered to continue by
reason of death: Elijah who was a man of such eminent worth; must not remain,
though he was indeed exempted from death, yet he must go: Abraham the friend of
God, and David the man after God's own heart must die, must like down and sleep
in the earth. What doleful havoc sin has made of mankind! None escape the dire
effects of it. Hence then we should learn to mourn for sin, to dread and hate
it, when this is the cause of our being separated from our friends, their being
distrained from us by death. What a vile monster is sin! it makes us need good
friends more; and yet scarce have we opportunity to enjoy them before it some
how parts us. What can there be that should more be the object of our hatred
and indignation? Again, from what we have heard in the consideration of our
great loss; we should study to live so as to be ready to follow after, that we
might live Christ, so as that when we come to die it may be our gain. We
should, in viewing our great loss, keep our eye upon him, and imitate him in
all that, wherein he followed the Lord Jesus Christ in patience, in meekness,
in love, in mercy, in uprightness, in honesty, covet earnestly the best gifts.
To what purpose will it be, to reckon up the greatness of our loss, if it be
not to strive after the like in ourselves?

And here as we considered our great friend was eminently as a regular star
moving uniform in the orb God had placed him; alas! this star is now set, gone
out of our hemisphere! But we have taken a view of its course; let us walk by
the same course, every one moving regularly and steadfastly in our orbs; not
like blazing stars or meteors sometimes passing one way and then the reverse,
sometimes this way and sometimes that way. This leads to confusion; but move
steadily in the orb, and motion God has allotted out for us; study what is
duty, what is the mind and will of God, what he points out for us to do, by his
word and by his providence; and attend conscienciously thereto. This is the
way to honor God, and to have the comfortable evidences of being accepted of
him; for them that honor him he will honor. In vain is it to aspire after great
things, and things out of our sphere; it will be of no avail to have it to brag
of at last, that we have cast out devils in Christ's name; and in his name done
many wonderful works, if there be not charity, love and a conscientious regard
to the honor of God, a tender fellow-feeling toward the flock of Christ, the
children of God, the members of Christ's body, all will be in vain. Thus we
should walk, with a steady perseverance in duty, minding those things which
have a tendency to do good. Our father which we have now lost, maintained a
steady course in doing good, in love, meekness and honesty. If all would do so;
move regularly in their spheres; what a different face would there be upon
things? How happy might the world be to what it is now: surely all contention
and jarring must cease; all would be love and harmony. But it must needs be
that offenses come; yet woe to that man by whom they come; while blessed are the
peace makers; for they shall be called the children of God. And those, that
heartily love and delight in peace and truth here, have a happy encouragement
of enjoying of it to all eternity. But what can the unjust, the dishonest, the
malicious, the haughty do in heaven? There will be no room for the exercising
their ungodly tempers there.

Hence all should be exhorted to live and behave so here, as the heavenly
inhabitants do. And how great a thing that would be, to live as they do in
heaven! In love, uprightness and godly sincerity.

Finally, at least one more consideration demands our notice at this time; for
when great and important pillars are taken away, the whole building trembles,
and is exposed to tumble to ruin.

Surely the removal of so great a pillar is foreboding of the vengeance of God
being poured out upon us; when the righteous and the merciful man is taken from
the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. 2.

Thus, in the old world, no sooner was Methuselab gone than the deluge swept
away the ungodly (...). Thus no sooner had Lot left Sodom; but they were
destroyed by fire and brimstone. No sooner was Josiah secured in his grave; but
the captivity began, which finished the Jewish state. O then let us consider,
how shall these threatening aspects be averted? but by an effectual turning unto
God, and becoming steadfast in those things, wherein our friend and father was
eminent, lovely and excellent. Beloved, let all these considerations awaken us.
Let the sense of our great loss, make a great impression on our hearts, a great
change in our conduct, and so a great alteration in the face of things. And may
God of his infinite mercy help, now the godly man cease, and the faithful
fail from among the children of men.

AMEN.
The INSCRIPTION on the Reverend Mr. WEBB's Monument.
Sacred to the Memory Of the Reverend and Learned NATHAN WEBB, Pastor of the
Church of Christ in Uxbridge; Who, after a laborious Life In the Gospel
Ministry, Resigned his ministerial Office in God's Sanctuary For the sublime
Employments of Immortality, March 14th, 1772, In the 67th Year of his Age, And
in the 42d Year of his Ministry.

MEMENTO MORI.
With Paul he said, When all vain hopes are slain;
For me to live is Christ, to die is gain:
This was the theme, that filled his passing breath;
That eased the sting, when he resigned to death.
Blessed man! for harmony and peace beloved:
Blessed man! from show and flattery removed.
O! did like him each preacher take delight,
To paint religion in her native light,
All would like stars in comely order shine,
And fill the spacious earth with light divine,
'Till time shall end, and God shall speak the word,
Arise O saints! and meet your blessed Lord.
Siste viator, tuum respice finem.

