Mr. Howard's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON, JUNE 7th, 1773.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE Artillery-Company, IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 7th, 1773. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF
OFFICERS.

BY SIMEON HOWARD, A. M. Pastor of the West CHURCH in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOYLES, next Door to the Three Doves in
Marlborough-Street. 1773.

AN Artillery-Election SERMON.
GALATIANS V.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free.


MANKIND are generally averse to innovations both in religion and government.
Laws and constitutions to which they have been long used, they are fond of
retaining, even though better are offered in their stead. This appeared in the
Jews. Their law required a burdensome and expensive service: christianity set
them free from this law. Nevertheless, many of them were desirous of continuing
the observation of it, after they became christians; and of having the gentile
converts also submit to it. Accordingly there were some Judaising teachers who
endeavored to persuade the Galatians to this submission. The Apostle,
therefore, in this epistle, particularly in the immediately foregoing chapter,
asserts and proves, that christians have nothing to do with the ceremonial law
of the Jews, they being freed by Christ, from this burden. And then as an
inference from what he had said, and by way of admonition to the Galatians, he
subjoins the exhortation in the text; stand fast therefore in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free.

BUT though the words originally refer to that freedom from the Jewish law
which the gospel confers on the church of God; yet the reason of the inference
holds good in the case of any other real and valuable liberty which men have a
right to: So that this observation is plainly deducible from the text; viz.
that it is the duty of all men to stand fast in such valuable liberty, as
providence has confered upon them.

THIS observation I shall endeavor, by the help of God, to illustrate and
improve: In order to which, I shall show; I. WHAT I intend by that liberty in
which men ought to stand fast. II. IN what way they ought to stand fast in this
liberty, or what they may and ought to do in defense of it. III. THE
obligations they are under to this duty.


After which, I shall subjoin some reflections, and apply the subject to the
present occasion.

I. I am to show what is intended in this discourse by the liberty in which men
ought to stand fast.

THOUGH this word is used in various senses, I mean by it here, only that
liberty which is opposed to external force and constraint, and to such force
and constraint only, as we may suffer from men. Under the term liberty, taken
in this sense, may naturally be comprehended all those advantages which are
liable to be destroyed by the art or power of men; every thing that is opposed
to temporal slavery.

THIS liberty has always been accounted one of the greatest natural blessings
which mankind can enjoy. Accordingly, the benevolent and impartial Father of
the human race, has given to all men a right, and to all naturally an equal
right to this blessing.

IN a state of nature, or where men are under no civil government, God has
given to every one liberty to pursue his own happiness in whatever way, and by
whatever means he pleases, without asking the consent or consulting the
inclination of any other man, provided he keeps within the bounds of the law of
nature. Within these bounds, he may govern his actions, and dispose of his
property and person, as he thinks proper. See Lock on government.
Nor has any man, or any number of men, a right to restrain him in the exercise
of this liberty, or punish, or call him to account for using it. This however
is not a state of licentiousness, for the law of nature which bounds this
liberty, forbids all injustice and wickedness; allows no man to injure another
in his person or property, or to destroy his own life.

BUT experience soon taught that, either through ignorance of this law, or the
influence of unruly passions, some were disposed to violate it, by encroaching
upon the liberty of others; so that the weak were liable to be greatly injured
by the superior power of bad men, without any means of security or redress.
This gave birth to civil society, and induced a number of individuals to
combine together for mutual defense and security; to give up a part of their
natural liberty for the sake of enjoying the remainder in greater safety; to
agree upon certain laws among themselves to regulate the social conduct of each
individual; or to entrust to one or more of their number, in whose wisdom and,
goodness they could confide, a power of making such laws, and putting them in
execution.

IN this state, the liberty which men have is all that natural liberty which
has been mentioned, excepting what they have expressly given up for the good of
the whole society; a liberty of pursuing their own happiness, governing their
actions, and disposing of their property and persons as they think fit,
provided they transgess no law of nature, and keep within those restrictions
which they have consented to come under.

THIS liberty will be different in different communities. In every state, the
members will, probably, give up so much of their natural liberty, as they think
will be most for the good of the whole. But different states will judge
differently upon this point; some will give up more, some less, though still
with the same view, the public good. And every society have doubtless a right
to act according to their own judgment and discretion in this matter, this
being only an exercise of that natural liberty in which all are bound.

WHEN a society commits to one or a few a power to govern them, the general
practice is to limit this power by certain prescribed rules and restrictions.
But sometimes this is omitted, and it does not appear from any act of the
people, but that the power, with which they have entrusted their (...), is
unlimited. In this case common sense will tell us that the power granted to
rulers is to be limited by the great end and design of society and government:
and he must be destitute of common sense, who does not know that this is the
general good, the happiness and safety of the whole society. So that though a
people should, through inadvertency, neglect to prescribe any bounds to the
power of their rulers, this power would nevertheless be limited, and they would
be at liberty to refuse submission to such restraints or laws, as were plainly
inconsistent with the public good.

THERE are some natural liberties or rights which no person can divert himself
of, without transgressing the law of nature. A man cannot, for instance, give
up the liberty of private judgment in matters of religion, or convey to others
a right to determine of what religion he shall be, and in what way he shall
worship God. A grant of this nature would destroy the foundation of all
religion in the man who made it, and must therefore be a violation of the law
of nature; nor would he be obliged to abide by it, if in consequence of it, he
should be required to act contrary to the dictates of his conscience. Or should
a man pretend to grant to others a power to order and govern all his actions
that were not of a religious nature, so that in all cases he must act agreeable
to their direction; this would be inconsistent with that submission which he
owes to the authority of God, and his own conscience. The grant would be in
itself void, and he would, notwithstanding, be at liberty to act according to
his own conscience, though contrary to the command of those to whom he had made
so extravagant a donation.

SHOULD therefore the legislature of a state make laws requiring the subjects
to do things immoral, and which they knew to be so, such, for instance, as were
apparently destructive of public happiness, though it was in consequence of an
express grant of unlimited power, the subjects would be at liberty to refuse
obedience, and not violate conscience or destroy their own happiness. All
conveyance of absolute power, whether to a prince or a senate, with a
preclusion of all rights of resistance, must be a deed originally invalid, as
founded in an error about what is most essential in such transactions, the
tendency of such power to the general good. Dr. Hatch^son's system of moral
philosophy, Vol. ^ Page ^71.
So that only such laws of society as are not plainly inconsistent with the end
of society, or, in any other respect, inconsistent with the law of nature, the
eternal rules of morality, can restrain and limit the natural liberty of those
who belong to it.

IT is to be further observed here, that states or communities, as such, have
naturally the same liberty which individuals have in the state of nature: but
this liberty is restrained, in some measure, by what are called the laws of
nations, which are certain rules, that by a tacit consent are agreed upon among
all communities, at least among those who are accounted the polite and
civilized part of mankind. These, nations are not at liberty to violate.

WHAT has been said may be sufficient to show what that liberty is in which men
ought to stand fast. In a state of nature it is all that liberty which is
consistent with the law of nature; under civil government, it is all which is
consistent with the law of nature, and with such restrictions as they have
consented to come under consistently with the law of nature and the end of
society: and when we consider one independent state in reference to another, it
is all that natural liberty which is consistent with the laws of nations.

AND whatever share men enjoy of this liberty, we may properly say in the words
of the text, that Christ has made them free with it; since after his
resurrection and exaltation to the right hand of the Majesty on high, all power
in heaven and in earth was committed to him, and he now sits, and is to
continue at the head of God's providential government, till he has put all
enemies under his feet; after which, he shall deliver up the kingdom to God,
even the Father -- that God may be all in all.

II. I am in the next place to show in what way men are to stand fast in their
liberty, or what they may and ought to do in defense of it.

IT is here supposed that some attempts are made to injure it. And it has been
found in all ages and places that such attempts have been made by unreasonable
and wicked men. The history of mankind is filled with instances of this;
insomuch that if from the great number of historical books that have been
written, we should leave out those parts that relate to their encroachments
upon one another, their injuries and injustice, most of those huge volumes
would shrink to a very small size. Cain began this practice very soon after the
creation: and it has been continued ever since, both among kingdoms and
individuals. And the same practice is still to be expected, while human nature
continues what it is.

NOW for men to stand fast in their liberty means, in general, resisting the
attempts that are made against it, in the best and most effectual manner they
can.

WHEN any one's liberty is attacked or threatened, he is first to try gentle
methods for his safety; to reason with, and persuade the adversary to desist,
if there be opportunity for it; or get out of his way, if he can; and if by
such means he can prevent the injury, he is to use no other.

BUT the experience of all ages has shown, that those, who are so unreasonable
as to form designs of injuring others, are seldom to be diverted from their
purpose by argument and persuasion alone: Notwithstanding all that can be said
to show the injustice and inhumanity of their attempt, they persist in it, till
they have gratified the unruly passion which set them to work. And in this
case, what is to be done by the sufferer? Is he to use no other means for his
safety, but remonstrance or flight, when these will not secure him? Is he
patiently to take the injury and suffer himself to be robbed of his liberty or
his life, if the adversary sees fit to take it? Nature certainly forbids this
tame submission, and loudly calls to a more vigorous defense. Self-preservation
is one of the strongest, and a universal principle of the human mind: And this
principle allows of every thing necessary to self-defence, opposing force to
force, and violence to violence. This is so universally allowed that I need not
attempt to prove it.

BUT since it has been supposed by some that christianity forbids all violent
resisting of evil, or defending ourselves against injurjes in such a manner as
will hurt, or endanger those who attack us; it may not be amiss to enquire
briefly, whether defensive war be not allowed by the gospel of Christ, the
Prince of peace.

AND there are, if I mistake not, several pasages in the new testament, which
show, that, it was not the design of this divine institution to take away from
mankind the natural right of defending their liberty, even by the sword.

I will not allege the words of John the baptist when in answer to the demand
which the soldiers made; What shall we do? -- he said unto them, do violence to
no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. Luke 3.14.
For though they plainly imply, that, at that time, the military profession was
not unlawful, and, consequently, that men might use the sword when there was
occasion for it: yet it does not follow from hence, that the religion which
Jesus was to institute, would allow of that profession and the use of the sword.

BUT there are other passages proper to be here alleged.

THE first that I shall mention is our Lord's own words to Pilate, when under
examination before that Governor. The chief charge bro't against Jesus was,
that he was going to set up a temporal kingdom inconsistent with the
sovereignty of the Roman Emperor. In answer to which he declared, that his
kingdom was not of this world; and then offered the following argument to prove
the assertion: If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight,
that I should not be delivered to the Jews: But now is my kingdom not from
hence. John 18.36.
There is an ellipsis in the latter clause; but the sense of the whole is
obviously what follows. You know that those who aim at temporal dominion,
endeavor to establish their authority and defend themselves, by force of arms,
when it is ncessary: If this had been my aim I should have taken the same
method, and ordered my servants to fight against the Jews when they come to
apprehend me: Wherefore, since I have made no violent resistance; but, on the
contrary, "hindered one of my disciples from fighting who sought to rescue me,"
it must now be evident to you, that the kingdom which I claim is not of this
world. Our Lord here, plainly allows that it is fit and proper for temporal
kingdoms to fight in defense of their liberty. His own kingdom is not, indeed,
to be defended in this way, which being wholly spiritual, consisting in the
obedience of men's wills and affections to the laws of God, is incapable of
being directly either injured or defended by the sword, as the kingdoms of this
world, and men's temporal interest may.

CORNELIUS, a centurion of the Italian band, was directed by an angel of God to
send for Peter, who should tell him "what he ought to do." Acts. 10.
But we do not find that the apostle directed him to quit his military
profession, or intimated that it was inconsistent with the spirit of
christianity; which he certainly would have done, had the character of a
soldier and a good christian been incompatible.

THE apostle Paul exhorts the Romans thus: If it be possible, as much as lies
in you, live peaceably with all men. Chap. 12. 18.
Which words plainly imply, that notwithstanding all their endeavors to
preserve peace, it might be impossible for them to live peaceably with all men,
or not to contend and be at strife with some; i. e. impossible in a moral
sense, improper, unlawful; for they do not require us to do all which we have a
natural power to do, for the sake of peace, but only all that we can do
consistently with higher obligations, with our duty in other respects.

ONCE more -- let me observe, that in the apocalypse of St. John, where we have
a prophetic account of the future state of the church^^ on earth, till the
consummation of all things, there are several passages which intimate, that the
saints of the Most High, will fight in their defense against their enemies; and
that though they shall in various instances be overcome, yet that they shall at
length, by an amazing slaughter of their persecutors, obtain for themselves the
peaceable enjoyment of that liberty wherewith Christ has made them free. Chap.
XI. ver. 7.XIII.XIV.19, 20.XVII.14.XIX.14 -- 21.
Now it cannot reasonably be supposed that the spirit of God would have
represented his faithful servants, as thus fighting against their enemies, and
being so favored by divine providence, as finally to prevail over them, if
defensive war was inconsistent with the spirit of the gospel.

IT is not, however, to be denied that there are some passages in the new
testament which seem to forbid all war: particularly, our Savior's own words
in his sermon on the mount. Matthew 5. Romans 12.17, 19.
I say unto you that ye resist not evil -- love your enemies; do good to them
that hate you, etc. And those of the apostle Paul; Recompense to no man evil
for evil. -- Avenge not yourselves: and some others of the like import. And
from such passages some have supposed that christians are not allowed to defend
themselves by force of arms, how violently soever they may be attacked.

GIVE me leave then, to offer a few remarks to take off the force of this
objection.

1. WHEN our Savior forbids us to resist evil, he seems to have had in view
only small injuries, for such are those which he mentions in the following
words, as an illustration of the precept; smiting on the cheek, taking away
one's coat, or compelling him to go a mile. And to such injuries it is
oftentimes a point of prudence, as well as duty to submit, rather than contend.
But it does not follow, that because we are forbidden to resist such slight
attacks, we may not defend ourselves when the assault is of a capital kind. But,

2. SUPPOSING our Lord's words to refer only to small injuries, they ought not
to be taken in an absolute sense. Expressions of this nature frequently occur
in scripture, which are universally understood with certain restrictions and
limitations. For instance; Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world. John 2.5.
Lay not up for yourselves treasure on earth. Mat. 6.19.
Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
thou away. Mat. 5.42.
Now, I believe, no body ever supposed, not even the honest Quakers, that these
precepts were to be understood so literally, as to forbid all love of the
world, and all care to provide the good things of it; or to oblige us "to give
to every idle fellow all he may think fit to ask, whether in charity or loan."
And we have as good a right to limit the precepts which forbid^ our resisting
evil, by the nature and reason of things, as we have to limit these other
indefinite expressions.

3. DEFENDING ourselves by force of arms against injurious attacks, is a quite
different thing from rendering evil for evil. The latter implies doing hurt to
another, because he has done hurt to us; the former implies doing hurt to
another, if he is hurt in the conflict, only because there is no other way of
avoiding the mischief he endeavors to do us: the one proceeds from malice and
revenge; the other merely from self-love, and a just concern for our own
happiness, and argues no ill will against any man.

And therefore it is to be observed,

4. THAT necessary self-defence, however fatal it may prove to those who
unjustly attack us, implies no principle inconsistent with that love to our
enemies which Christ enjons. For, at the same time that we are defending
ourselves against their assaults, we may bear good will toward them, wish them
well, and pray God to befriend them: All which we doubtless ought to do in
respect of our bitterest enemies.

ENOUGH has been said to show the consistency of war with the spirit of the
gospel.

BUT it is only defensive war that can be justified in the sight of God. When
no injury is offered us, we have no right to molest others. And christian
meekness, patience and forbearance, are duties that ought to be practiced both
by kingdoms and individuals. Small injuries, that are not likely to be attended
with any very pernicious consequences, are rather to be submitted to, than
resisted by the sword. Both religion and humanity strongly forbid the bloody
deeds of war, unless they are necessary. Even when the injury offered is great
in itself, or big with fatal consequences, we should, if there be opportunity,
endeavor to prevent it by remonstrance, or by offering to leave the matter in
dispute to indifferent judges, if they can be had. If these endeavors are
unsuccessful, it then becomes proper, to use more forceable means of resistance.

A PEOPLE may err by too long neglecting such means, and shamefully suffer the
sword to rust in its scabberd, when it ought to be employed in defending their
liberty. The most grasping and oppressive power will commonly let its
neighbors remain in peace, if they will submit to its unjust demands. And an
incautious peole may submit to these demands, one after another, till its
liberty is irrecoverably gone, before they saw the danger. Injuries small in
themselves, may in their consequences be fatal to those who submit to them;
especially if they are persisted in. And, with respect to such injuries, we
should ever act upon that ancient maxim of prudence; obsta principiis. The
first unjust demands of an encroaching power should be firmly withstood, when
there appears a disposition to repeat and increase such demands. And oftentimes
it may be both the right and duty of a people to engage in war, rather than
give up to the demands of such a power, what they could, without any
incoveniency, spare in the way of charity. War, though a great evil, is ever
preferable to such concessions, as are likely to be fatal to public liberty.
And when such concessions are required and insisted upon, as the conditions of
peace, the only consideration to be attended to by the abused state, is that
which our Savior intimates common prudence will always suggest in such cases:
What king going to make war against another king, sits not down first and
consulteth whether he be able, etc. Luke 14.31


AN innocent people threatened with war are not always obliged to receive the
first attack. -- This may frequently prove fatal, or occasion an irreparable
damage. When others have sufficiently manifested an injurious or hostile
intention, and persist in it, notwithstanding all the admonition and
remonstrance we can make, we may, in order to avoid the blow they are
meditating against us, begin the assault.

AFTER a people have been forced into a war for their own security, they ought
to set reasonable bounds to their resentment, or they may become as guilty as
the first aggressors. They should aim at nothing more than repelling the
injury, obtaining reparation for damages sustained, and security against future
injuries. If, after these ends are obtained, they continue the war, in order to
distress their enemies, or reduce them under their power, they become
offenders, and the war on their side is unjust.

SUBMITTING the foregoing general observations to your candor, I go on to hint
at some things proper to be attended to, by every people, in order to their
being in a capacity to defend themselves against encroachments on their liberty.

1. THEY should endeavor to be united and at peace among themselves. The
strength of a society, as well as its honor and happiness, depends much upon
its union. Our Savior's maxim is founded in reason, and has been confirmed by
the experience of all ages: Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation. When the body politic is divided into parties, and the members make
a business of opposing each other, it is in a fair way to ruin. They are not
likely to unite in measures of defense against a common enemy, and will
therefore lie open to the encroachments of violence and oppression, and become
an easy prey to every invader. ^^e tyrants of the earth, sensible of this, have
commonly acted upon this maxim, divide et impera: let us first divide the
people, whom we mean to enslave, into parties, and we shall then easily bring
them under our power.

2. THEY should endeavor to maintain among themselves a general disposition to
submit to government. Society cannot subsist without government; and there can
be no government without laws, and a submission to laws. If a licentious spirit
prevails among a people, a general disposition to trample upon laws and despise
government, they will probably make but a poor figure in defending themselves
against a common enemy; for, in making this defense, there must be leaders and
followers, some to command and some to obey: And, other things being equal, the
more a disposition to submit to rule and order prevails among a people, the
more likely will they be to defend their liberty aagainst foreign invasions.
Indeed without any enemy from abroad, the general prevalence of a licentious
spirit may as effectually destroy the liberty of a people, as the most despotic
government; for civil "liberty is something as really different from that
licentiousness which supposes no government, as from that slavery which
supposes tyranny: it is a freedom restrained by beneficial laws, and living
and dying with public happiness." Bp. Hoadly.


3. THAT people that would be in a capacity to defend themselves successfully
against encroachments, should take care that their internal government be free
and easy; allowing all that liberty to every one which is consistent with the
necessary restraints of government; laying no burdens upon any, but what are
for the good of the whole, and to which the whole society has actually or
virtually consented. Though the contrary evil takes its rise from the weakness
or wickedness of rulers, yet in every free state it is the right and duty of
all, subjects as well as rulers, to use their influence against it: And where
the subjects have no constitutional right to do any thing to prevent or remove
such an evil, they are already slaves, and it may be though it improper to talk of
their defending their liberty; though they ought, doubtless, to endeavor to
recover it. However, I say, it is highly necessary that this freedom from
unreasonable restraints be preserved, in order to a people's retaining a spirit
of liberty, and being in a capacity to defend themselves against a common
enemy. It is justly observed by that great statesman, lord Verulam, that "the
blessing of Judah and Issachar will never meet, that the same people or nation
should be both the lion's whelp, and the ass between two burdens: neither will
it be, that a people overlaid with taxes, should ever become valiant and
martial." Bacon's Essays, p. 113.
The laying unreasonable burdens and restraints upon a people, will, if they
are submitted to, debase their minds, break their spirits, enervate their
courage, and sink them into cowards: if they are not submitted to, the
consequence will be internal tumult, disorder, strife and contempt of
government; and in either case, the defensive power of the state is greatly
diminished. Behold, then the policy, or rather the madness and folly of
oppressive rulers: if they are successful in their injurious measures, they are
exposing themselves and their subjects an helpless prey to the ravages of some
ambitious neighbor: if they are not; they are raising up enemies against
themselves at home, and, as it were, setting fire to their own habitations.

4 A PEOPLE who would stand fast in their liberty, should furnish themselves
with weapons proper for their defense, and learn the use of them.

IT is indeed an hard case, that those who are happy in the blessings of
providence, and disposed to live peaceably with all men, should be obliged to
keep up the idea of blood and slaughter, and expend their time and treasure to
acquire the arts and instruments of death. But this is a necessity which the
depravity of human nature has laid upon every state. Nor was there ever a
people that continued, for any considerable time, in the enjoyment of liberty,
who were not in a capacity to defend themselves against invaders, unless they
were too poor and inconsiderable to tempt an enemy.

SO much depends upon the military art, in the present day, that no people can
reasonably expect to defend themselves successfully without it. However
numerous they may be, if they are unskilled in arms, their number will tend
little more to their security, than that of a flock of sheep does to preserve
them from the depredations of the wolf: accordingly it is looked upon as a
point of wisdom, in every state, to be furnished with this skill, though it is
not to be obtained without great labor and expense.

IN some nations the method has been to trust for defense and security to what
is called a STANDING ARMY; a number of men paid by the public, to devote
themselves wholly to the military profession; while the body of the people
followed their peaceable employments, without paying any attention to the art
of war.

BUT this has ever been thought, by the wise and prudent, a precarious defense.

SUCH armies are, as to the greater part of them, generally composed of men who
have no real estate in the dominions which they are to defend; their pay is
their living, and the main thing that attaches them to their employers; their
manner of life tends to corrupt their morals, and, though they are naturally of
the same temper with other men, they seldom continue long in this profession,
before they become distinguished by their vices: So that neither their temporal
interest, nor their regard to virtue can be supposed to attach them so strongly
to the country that employs them, but that there will always be danger of their
being tempted by the promise of larger pay to betray their trust, and turn
their arms against it. No people therefore, can with safety trust entirely to a
standing army, even for defense against foreign enemies.

BUT without any such enemy, a standing army may be fatal to the happiness and
liberty of a community. They generally propagate corruption and vice where they
reside, they frequently insult and abuse the unarmed and defenseless people:
When there is any difference between rulers and subjects, they will generally
be on the side of the former, and ready to assist them in oppressing and
enslaving the latter. For though they are really servants of the people, and
paid by them; yet this is not commonly done in their name; but in the name of
the supreme magistrate. The KING'S BREAD, and the KING'S SERVICE, are familiar
expressions among soldiers, and tend to make them consider him as their only
master, and prefer his personal interest to that of the people. So that an army
may be the means, in the hands of a wicked and oppressive sovereign, of
overturning the constitution of a country, and establishing the most
intolerable despotism. What are we to expect, if in a future age an ambitious
Prince should arise, with a dissolute and debauched army, a flattering Clergy,
a prostitute Ministry, a bankrupt house of L -- d's, a pensioned house of C --
ns, and a slavish and corrupted nation? Trenchard's history of standing armies
in England.
It would be easy to show from history, that this measure has been fatal to the
liberties of many nations. And indeed, it has seldom been approved by the body
of a people.

BUT rulers of an arbitrary disposition, have ever endeavored to have a
standing army at their command, under a pretense indeed, of being for the
safety of the state, though really with a view of giving efficacy to their
orders. It has sometime been pretended, that this is necessary to aid and
support civil government. But whoever considers, that the design of government
is the good of the people, and the great improbability there is, that a people,
in general, should be against measures calculated for their good, and that such
measures only ought to be enforced, will look upon this as the idlest pretense.
For rulers to use a military power, to enforce measures of a contrary tendency,
is one of the wickedest and most unjustifiable kinds of offensive war; a
violation not only of the common laws of justice and humanity, but of their own
sacred engagements to promote the public good. The keeping up troops sufficient
to guard exposed frontier posts, may be proper; but to have an army continually
stationed in the midst of a people, in time of peace, is a precarious and
dangerous method of security.

A safer way, and which has always been esteemed the wisest and best, by
impartial men, is to have the power of defense in the body of the people, to
have a well-regulated and well-disciplined militia. Our trained bands are the
trustiest and most proper strength of a free nation. MILTON's Eikon.
This is placing the sword in hands that will not be likely to betray their
trust, and who will have the strongest motives to act their part well, in
defense of their country, whenever they shall be called for. An army composed
of men of property, who have been all their days inured to labor, will
generally equal the best veteran troops, in point of strength of body and
firmness of mind, and when fighting in defense of their religion, their
estates, their liberty, and families, will have stornger motives to exert
themselves, and may, if they have been properly disciplined, be not much
inferior to them in the skill of arms.

IT was by a militia, by an army composed of men of property and worth of their
own nation, that ancient Rome rose to be mistress of the world. The battles of
Agincourt, Poictiers and Cressy are memorable proofs of the martial prowess of
the ancient militia of England. Our own country will also furnish us with many
instances of the bravery of a militia, both formerly and latterly.

CAUTION however ought to be used in constituting a militia, that it may answer
the end for which it is designed, and not be liable to be made an instrument of
tyranny and oppression. It should be subject to discipline and order, and
somewhere in the state should be lodged a power of calling it forth to action,
whenever the safety of the people requires it. But this power should be so
limited and restrained, as that it cannot call it unnecessarily, or oblige it
to commit violence or oppression upon any of the subjects. That wise men have
thought a people might be in danger from their own militia, unless great
caution was used in the direction of it, appears from the following quotation:
Take away from the king the absolute power to compel men to take up arms,
otherwise than in case of foreign invasion; power to compel men to go out of
their counties to war; to charge men for the maintenance of wars; power to make
them find arms at his pleasure; and lastly power to break the peace, or do
ought that may tend thereto; certainly the power of the militia t^^^ remains,
though never so surely settled in the king^^ hand, can never bite this nation.
Bacon on government. lib. 2. chap. 22.


5. ONCE more, it is necessary for a people who would preserve their liberty,
to maintain the general practice of religion and virtue. This will tend to make
them courageous: The truest fortitude is ever to be found where the passions
and affections are in subjection to the laws of God. Religion conciliates the
favor of God, upon whom success in war essentially depends; and the hope of
this favor will naturally inspire a brave and undaunted resolution. Not to
mention that the unity, riches, and bodily strength of a people are greatly
favored by virtue. On the other hand; vice naturally makes men timorous, and
fills the breast with baseness and cowardice. What is here said is agreeable to
the observation of that wise King and inspired writer, who tells us, " the
wicked flee, when no man pursues; but the righteous are bold as a lion.

III. LET me now offer a few considerations to show the obligations men are
under to defend that liberty which providence has conferred upon them.

THIS is a trust committed to us by heaven: we are accountable for the use we
make of it, and ought therefore, to the best of our power to defend it. The
servant, who hid his talent in a napkin, is condemned in our Lord's parable;
and he who through inattention, indolence or cowardice, suffers it to be
wrested from him, is little less criminal. Should a person, for instance, whose
ability and circumstances enable him to do good in the world, to relieve his
distressed brethren, and be an example of charity and other virtues, tamely
yield up all his interest and become an absolute slave to some unjust and
wicked oppressor, when he might by a manly resistance have secured his liberty,
would he not be guilty of great unfaithfulness to God, and justly liable to his
condemnation? This would in its consequences be really worse than hiding his
talent in a napkin; it would be not only not improving it for the glory of the
giver, but conveying it into hands which will, in all probability, employ it
greatly to his dishonor. This reasoning is as applicable to a community as to
an individual. A kingdom or common wealth, as such, is accountable for the
improvement it makes of it is advantages: It is bound to preserve them, and
employ them for the honor of God; so far as it can, to be an example of virtue
to neighboring communities, and afford them relief when they are in distress:
but by yielding up their possessions and liberties to an encroaching oppressive
power, they become, in a great measure, incapable of these duties, and are
liable to be made the ministers of sin through the compulsion of their masters.
Out of faithfulness then, to God, and in order to escape the doom of slothful
servants, we should endeavor to defend our rights and liberties.

MEN are bound to preserve their own lives, as long as they can, consistently
with their duty in other respects. Would not he, who should lose his life by
neglecting to resist a wild beast, be criminal in the sight of God? And can he
be innocent who loses it by neglecting to oppose the violent attacks of wicked
men, oftentimes as fierce and cruel as the most savage beast?

MEN are also bound, individuals and societies, to take care of their temporal
happiness, and do all they lawfully can, to promote it. But what can be more
inconsistent with this duty, than submitting to great encroachments upon our
liberty? Such submission tends to slavery; and complete slavery implies every
evil that the malice of man and devils can inflict. Again,

THE regard which we owe to the happiness of others makes this a duty.

EVERY man is bound both by the law of nature and revelation, to provide in the
best manner he can, for the temporal happiness of his family; and he that
neglects this, has, according to the declaration of an inspired apostle, denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel. But in what way can a man be more
justly chargeable with this neglect, than by suffering himself to be deprived
of his life, liberty or property, when he might lawfully have preserved them?

REASON, humanity and religion, all conspire to teach us, that we ought in the
best manner we can, to provide for the happiness of posterity. We are allied to
them by the common tie of nature: They are not here to act their part: A
concern for them is a debt which we owe for the care which our progenitors took
for us: Heaven has made us their guardians, and entrusted to our care their
liberty, honor, and ^^ppiness: For when they come upon the stage, they will be
deeply affected by the transactions of their fathers, especially by their
public transactions. If the present inhabitants of a country submit to slavery,
slavery is the inheritance which they will leave to their children. And who
that has the bowels of a father, or even the common feelings of humanity, can
think without horror, of being the means of subjecting unborn millions to the
iron scepter of tyranny?

BUT further; a regard to the happiness of mankind in general, makes it a duty
to resist great injuries. Yielding to the unjust demands of bad men, not only
lessens our power of doing good, but encourages them to repeat their injuries,
and strengthens their hands to do mischief: It enables them to give fuller
scope to their lusts, and more effectually to spread corruption, distress and
misery. It is therefore an act of benevolence to oppose and destroy that power
which is employed in injuring others* and as much, when it is that of a tyrant,
as of a wild beast.

ONCE more; from a regard to religion men are obliged to defend their liberty
against encroachments, though the attack should not immediately affect
religion. Slavery exposes to many temptations to vice, and by debasing and
weakening the mind, destroying its fortitude and magnimity renders it less
capable of resisting them, and creates a dependence upon, and subjection to
wicked men, highly prejudicial to virtue. Hence it has been often observed, and
is confirmed by experience, that the loss of liberty is soon followed by the
loss of all virtue and religon. "The conquered also, and enslaved by war
"Shall with their freedom lost all virtue lose
"And fear of God.
Paradise Lost.


BESIDES; the destruction of civil liberty is generally fatal to religious. The
latter has seldom existed long in any place without the former. Nor is it to be
expected that those who are wicked enough to deprive a people of that, should,
when they have got them under their power, suffer them long to enjoy this;
especially as tyranny has generally made these two evils subservient to each
other.

BUT I may not enlarge: The considerations which have been suggested show, if I
mistake not, that it is not only the right but the duty of men to defend that
liberty, with which providence has made them free: And a duty of high
obligation, as the neglect of it may be attended with consequences, the most
prejudicial to human virtue and happiness, and greatly dishonorary to God.

ALL that now remains is to offer some reflections, and apply the subject to
the present occasion.

1. WHAT has been said may serve to caution all against invading the liberty of
others: -- Whoever does this, obliges others to resist him: he puts himself
into a state of war with them, and is justly liable to all the evil which their
necessary self-defence may bring upon him. And though he may think that his
power is so great, and their's so little, that he can be in no danger from
their resentment, the event may convince him of his mistake. Men, who have a
just sense and value of liberty, will sometimes do wonders in its defense.

-- "They have great odds
Against the astonished sons of violence,
Who sight with awful justice on their side." Thompson.

OPPRESSORS may indeed for a time, be successful and overcome all opposition;
yet it seldom happens that they persevere in their injurious practice, without
meeting with such resistance as causes their mischief to return upon their own
heads, and their violent dealings to come down upon their own pates: It is an
old observation, that few tyrants descend in peace to the grave. If therefore,
the laws of God will not, a regard to their own safety, should restrain men
from invading the rights of the innocent.

2. IF it be so important a duty for men to resist encroachments upon their
liberty; then it cannot be improper for the christian minister, to inculcate
this upon his hearers; to exhort them to be watchful over it, and ready to
oppose all attempts against it. This is so far from being improper, that it is,
I humbly conceive, his indispensible duty. Nor can I see how he could answer it
to God, or his own conscience, if, when he thought his country was in danger of
being enslaved, for want of a proper sense of, and opposition to the approaches
of tyranny, he should neglect to point out the danger, and with -- "honest zeal
To rouse the watchmen of the public weal." Pope.



IT is readily owned, that designedly to spread false alarms, to fill the minds
of people with groundless prejudices against their rulers, or a neighboring
state, to stir up faction and encourage opposition to good government, are
things highly criminal; and whoever does thus, whatever character he may wear
among men, is in reality a minister, not of Christ, but of the devil, the
father of falsehood, confusion and rebellion. But to show people their real
danger, point out the source of it, and exhort them to such exertions as are
necessary to avoid it, are acts of benevolence becoming every disciple, and
especially every professed minister of Christ.

3. SINCE the preservation of public liberty depends so much upon a people's
being possessed of the art of war; those who exert themselves to encourage and
promote this art, act a laudable part, and are entitled to the thanks of their
brethren. Upon this account, the company, which is the occasion of this
solemnity, deserves to be esteemed honorable, though its institution were much
less ancient than it is. And as this society has in former days furnished many
brave men, who did worthily in defense of our country; so, from the spirit
which at present prevails among the gentlemen who compose it, we doubt not but
it will furnish others, whenever there shall be occasion for it. How far this
institution, by exciting in others a spirit of imitation or emulation, has been
the occasion of the present general attention to the military art among us, I
pretend not to say: But whatever be the cause, it must give pleasure to every
friend of public liberty, to see this people so generally engaged in military
exercises. This argues a manly spirit, a sense of liberty, a just apprehension
of its danger, a resolution to stand fast in it, and, as far as any thing in
our power can do it, promises freedom to our country.

WE are not, I hope, insensible that peace is a great blessing, and, in itself,
ever to be (...) to war; nor unthankful to Him who rules among the nations,
the God of peace, for the enjoyment we have had of this blessing for a number
of years past. But we have little reason to expect, however ardently we may
wish, that this country will always be the habitation of peace. Ambition,
avarice, and other unruly passions have a great hand in directing the conduct
of most of the kingdoms of this world. British America is already become
considerable among the European nations for its numbers, and their easiness of
living; and is continually rising into greater importance. I will not undertake
to decypher the signs of the times, or to say from what quarter we are most
likely to be molested. But from the course of human affairs, we have the utmost
reason to expect that the time will come, when we must either submit to
slavery, or defend our liberties by our own sword. And this perhaps may be the
case sooner than some imagine. No one can doubt but there are powers on the
continent of Europe, that would be glad to add North America to their
dominions, and who, if they thought the thing practicable, would soon find a
pretense for attempting it. The naval power of Great Britain has been hitherto
our chief security against invasions from that continent. But every thing
belonging to the present state, is uncertain and fluctuating. Things may soon
be in such a situation with Great-Britian, that it will be no longer proper for
us to confide in her power, for the protection of our liberty. Our greatest
security, under God, will be our being in a capacity to defend ourselves. Were
we, indeed, sure that Great Britain would always be both able and willing to
protect us in our liberty, which, from present appearances, we have little
reason to expect, it would be shameful for so numerous a people as this, and a
people of so much natural strength and fortitude, to be, through inattention to
the art of war, incapable of bearing a part in their own defense. Such weakness
must render them contemptible to all the world.

BRITISH America, especially the nothern part of it, is by its situation
calculated to be a nursery of heroes. Nothing is wanting but our own care and
application to make us, with the neighboring colonies, a formidable people.
And religion, honor, patriotism, and even self-love, all unite in demanding
from us this application and care. This people, it may be presumed, will never
of choice, keep among them a standing army in time of peace: Virtue, domestic
peace, the insulted walls of our State-House, and even the once crimsoned
stones of the street, all loudly cry out against this measure. But every
well-wisher to the public, should countenance and encourage a military spirit
among our militia through the province.

OUR political Fathers have it in their power to do much for this end; and we
have a right to expect that, out of faithfulness to God and this people, they
will not neglect it. From the countenance which his Excellency and the
honorable Council show to the military transactions of this day, we would
gladly hope, that, they in conjunction with the other branch of the
legislature, will, in this way, as well as others, prove themselves to be God's
ministers for good to the people.

IT is also in the power of persons of rank and fortune, in their private
capacity, greatly to promote this cause by their example and otherwise. It is
highly absurd, though not uncommon, that those who have most to lose by the
destruction of a state, should be least capable of bearing a part in its
defense. Riches are frequently the main temptation to war. Where a people are
all poor, there is little danger of their being invaded: So that there being
men of affluence among a people, is often the cause of their being obliged to
defend themselves by the sword. It is therefore especially their duty, as well
as interest, to do what they can to put the people into a capacity of defense.
When they spend their time in idleness, effeminating pleasures, or even in
accumulating riches, to the total neglect of the art of war, and every measure
to promote it, they act unbecoming good members of society, and set an example
highly prejudicial to the community.

WHEREAS when gentlemen of fortune, notwithstanding the allurements of pleasure
on the one hand, and the fatiguing exercise of a soldier on the other, exert
themselves to acquire and promote the military art, they are an honor to their
circumstances, and a blessing to the public: Their example will have great
influence upon others; and, other things being equal, such men will be most
likely to fight valiantly in defense of their liberty, whenever it shall be
necessary. By such a conduct, they show their regard to their country, in a way
that will probably be much more beneficial to it, than merely talking, writing,
or preaching in favor of liberty. And it ought to be esteemed as no
inconsiderable evidence, among many others, of a public, truly patriotic spirit
in the honorable gentleman, The Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire
who leads his Excellency's company of Cadets, that he has so cheerfully
endured the fatigue of qualifying himself to be a good officer, and, by his
generous exertions in conjunction with their own, rendered his company an
honor to the town, to their commanders and themselves. This company in
general, is indeed an example of what I was urging; of gentlemen of easy
circumstances giving proper attention to the art of war, and is on that account
the more respectable and important.

BUT we have other laudable examples of attention to arms. The Train of
Artillery A Company commanded by (...) PADDOCK.
has for a number of years past been honorably distinguished, by their military
address. And the respectable appearance which the whole militia of the town
made a few days ago, when called together in honor of his Majesty's birthday,
and the dexterity with which they went through their exercises, must convince
all who had the satisfaction of seeing them, that they are no strangers to a
military spirit, and lead us to hope that by perseverance, the whole body will
soon equal those, who at present excel most. May this spirit still revive and
prevail through the province, till this whole people become as considerable for
their skill in arms, as they are for their natural strength and courage.

THE gentlemen who are engaged in acquiring this art will remember that the
true end of it is only defense; that it is to be employed, not to destroy, but
to protect and secure the liberty and happiness of mankind; not to infringe the
rights of others, but to defend their own. While, therefore, they endeavor to
resemble such men as Alexander and Caesar in military skill and valor, they
will detest the principles from which they acted, in invading and distressing
inoffensive people. For though they have been honored with the name of heroes,
they were, in reality, public robbers and murderers.

THEY will also remember that the most desirable liberty, and which we should
be ready to defend, is that of a well governed society, which is as essentially
different from that licentiousness, which is without law or government, as it
is from an absolute subjection to the arbitrary will of another. This is the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; to which he has given us a right.
While, therefore, these gentlemen will be always ready to stand forth in
defense of true civil liberty, whenever they shall see her assaulted, and be
properly called upon; they will never on any consideration be prevailed with,
to employ their arms for the destruction of good government, by aiding either
tyranny on the one hand, or licentiousness on the other.

BUT above all they will remember, that religion is the main concern of man,
and a necessary qualification for a good soldier. This, beyond any thing else,
inspires with the love of liberty, with fortitude and magnanimity; and this
alone can enable them to meet death with a rational composure and tranquillity
of mind, which is an enemy before which the bravest soldier must fall at last.

TO conclude: This whole assembly will bear in mind, that there is another and
more valuable kind of liberty, than that to which the foregoing discourse more
immediately relates, and which, at this day, so generally employs our attention
and conversation; a liberty, which consists in being free from the power and
dominion of sin, through the assistance of the divine spirit, concurring with
our own pious, rational and persevering endeavors. Whatever our outward
circumstances may be, if we are destitute of this spiritual liberty, we are in
reality slaves, how much soever we may hate the name; if we possess it we are
free indeed: And our being free in this sense, will give us the best grounds to
hope for temporal freedom, through the favor of heaven; and, at length, gain
us admission into the regions of perfect and uninterrupted liberty, peace and
happiness*

ERRATA. P. 15. l. 3 from bot. r. came. P. 17. l. 5. r. church P. 19. l. 5. r.
precept. l. 8 from bot. r. enjoins.


