THE HISTORY, OF INOCULATION.

By M. DE LA CONDAMINE, Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences in France.

Published April 24 th, 1754.

NEW HAVEN, Printed by T. and S. GREEN, near the College.

CONTENTS.
THE first part contains the principal historical facts, concerning
Inoculation. In the second, the objections against its use are examined. The
third part contains, consequences drawn from the facts of the preceding parts,
and the advantages of Inoculation set in a proper light.
THE HISTORY OF INOCULATION.
PART I.
THE artificial communication of the smallpox, an operation more generally
known at present under the name of inoculation, has been practiced time
immemorial, in Circassia, Georgia, and the countries bordering upon the Caspian
sea. Though unknown in the greatest part of Europe, it was in use in the
principality of Wales in England. It was formerly known, and since neglected in
Greece and Turkey, and was not revived again at Constantinople till toward the
end of the last century, when a Thessalian woman practiced it there with great
success; but this was only among the lower class of people. This custom is very
ancient, and generally received in the island of Cephalonia, subject to the
republic of Venice; it is common in the Morea, and the island of Candia. If we
go out of Europe, we shall find it at Bengal, and so long practiced on the
coast, and in the interior of Africa, at Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, that its
origin is unknown, but probably introduced in the time of the Arabs. In the
beginning of the last century, the smallpox was communicated at China, without
incision, but through the nose, by respiring the matter of some dried pustules
reduced to powder. All these facts were buried in oblivion, till Emanuel
Timone, a Greek physician, and member of the universities of Padua and Oxford,
having undertaken to bring inoculation into some vague, gave an ample
description of it in a letter to Dr. Woodward, written from Constantinople in
the month of December, 1713. During the eight years he had attended the
operation in that capital, there were only two fatal events, whose causes were
foreign to inoculation, one of the patients having died of a dysentery the 32d
day, and the other of a marasmus, the 40th after the operation.

James Pilarini, another Greek physician, who had long disapproved the new
method, at last, fully convinced of its utility from the evidence of facts,
wrote an apology for the artificial smallpox, in a small Latin work, printed
at Venice in 1715. The Thessalian woman assures us she had inoculated 6000
persons in the year 1713. Of this number were the greater part of the English,
Dutch, and French merchants settled at Constantinople. Anthony Le Duc, another
Greek, who we also inoculated by this woman, received afterward, in 1722, the
Doctor's cap, at Leyden, maintained publicly the practice if inoculation.

Madam Wortley Montague, the English Ambassador's Lady at the Ottoman Port, in
1717, had her only son, about six years old, inoculated there by her surgeon,
and afterward her daughter, on her return to England, where the example was
followed by several persons of distinction. It was by the desire of the College
of Physicians, at London, that the experiment was made on six criminals; it
saved a life they deserved to lose by their crimes. The late Queen of England
then Princess of Wales, had two of her younger daughters, the late Queen of
Denmark, and the Princess of Hesse-Cassel, inoculated in 1722: This operation,
conducted under the Direction of Dr. Sloane, contributed greatly to inhance the
reputation of this new preservative. Whilst the most famous physicians of
Great Britain, the Doctors Sloane, Fuller, Arbuthnot, Jurin, Mead, etc.
favored the new method, or wrote in its favor; whilst Dr. Shadwell, etc.
practiced it on their children, Blackmore and Wagstaffe, two physicians little
known, and Massey, an apothecary, seemed to endeavor to get a name by
proscribing it. Whilst the Bishop of Salisbury and other casuists suffered
their children to be inoculated, other divines pretended that it brought down
the wrath of Heaven on the nation: To prove this, some were so absurd as to
aledge the great numbers that died of the natural smallpox, and one, in
particular, boldly asserted in his sermon, that the devil himself had given Job
the smallpox, by this infernal method.

However, besides the experiments of Constantinople, where, in one year,
upwards of 10,000 persons had happily passed through this trial, a great number
were inoculated in England without any accident. Dr. Jurin, Secretary to the
Royal Society, published several pieces in 1723, and 1724, whereof some are
inserted in the Philosophical Transactions, giving an account of the successful
experiments made in Great Britain and New England, with several letters by way
of supplement and proofs, and exact lists of the sick, and those that died of
the natural and artificial small pox; together with comparisons of their
effects. It appears from his calculat^^^^* confirmed by others more recent,
that at London, and even in the country, where the distemper is reputed less
dangerous, there died commonly a seventh, sixth, and sometimes fifth of those,
who had been taken ill of the natural small pox, whilst scarce one died in
ninety-one, o^ such as received it by insertion, though it could not be proved
that this death was occasioned thereby, and though (...) yet brought to
perfection. In these beginni^^ (...) experiments were hazarded upon infirm and
(...) subjects; and it was in such circumst^^^^^ that (...) New England, of 300
persons, young, old, (...), inoculated indiscriminately, from (...) ^eventy,
with few precautions, in a time of (...) hot whether, five died* that is, one
in sixty; though it is doubtful whether they died of the effects of the
operation; however it is pretended that one died in forty-nine, and this
misfortune, having fallen upon some persons of distinction, gave weight to the
clamours of such as showed themselves prejudiced. The Magistracy interposed,
the spirit of party interfered, and the operation was not permitted but under
certain restrictions that resembled a prohibitation. It was given out that
inoculation did not p^eserve from the natural smallpox, and yet no example
could be produced, to prove it. The wiser and more moderate concluded, that it
was prudent to wait till time and repeated experiments had given more insight
into the matter.

The success of the new method was first known in France, by a letter M. de la
Cost, a Doctor to physic, addressed to M. Dodard, the King's first physician,
and published at Paris in 1723, with the approbation of M. Burette, a Doctor of
the faculty of Paris. In this letter, followed by some others of M. Sloane, M.
Amyand, etc. the advantages of inoculation are properly stated, the lists and
calculations of M. Jurin are cited, and some new facts are advanced, with
judicious arguments, and answers to objections. Mention is also made therein of
a consultation of nine of the most famous Doctors of Sorbonne, whom the author
had the satisfaction to see conclude at last, `that it was licit, in the view
of being serviceable to the public to make experiments of that practice.' The
same letter supposes, that M. Dodard, and several other famous physicians, as
the late M. Chirac, M. Helvetius, etc. approved the new method. In the same
work is quoted a letter of M. Astruc, wherein he expresses himself, `that he
did not judge that the operation could be attended with any danger, and that he
was glad it was intended to be practiced at Paris.

The false reports that were industriously spread of the ill success of
inoculation, at Boston, during the summer of 1723; the number carried off by
the epidemy that same year at London, and falsely attributed to the operation;
some misfortunes caused by the imprudence of young persons newly inoculated,
who committed excesses; had diminished the public confidence. These reports
reached Paris when the physicians had resolved upon making their experiments.
After the success of those in England, and particularly on the Royal family, it
was high time for making essays in France, at least in the hospitals. They were
favored by the Duke of Orleans, Regent of France; but his eyes were scarce
closed, when a thesis was maintained in the schools of medicine, which,
sounding the alarm against the inoculators, treated their operation as
criminal, those that practiced as impostors and executioners, and the patients
as dupes.

Repeated blows b^ing immediately after given to the new method, it soon fell
into a sort of oblivion till the year 1738. In that interval few were
inoculated, even in England, and since that time the history of that this
practice became almost unknown in France.

Whilst it seemed to lose ground in Europe, it made new conquests in Asia. The
epidemy of 1723, the plague of Europe and America, made perhaps the tour of the
world. The Tartars, among whom the smallpox is not common, were infected, and
the greater part of grown-up persons died of it. Father Dentrecolles, a Jesuit
Missionary, in his very curious letter of the 11th of May, 1726, at Pekin,
relates that, in 1724, the Emperor of China sent physicians from his palace
into Tartary, to sow there the artifical smallpox; this is the name the
Chinese give their method of insertion, of which we shall speak in its place.
Undoubtedly the success of the Chinese physicians was fortunate, having brought
back with them a great number of horses, skins, and furs, which are the riches
and money of the Tartars.

In other parts, the practice of inoculation, after the European manner, was
perfected in silence during the time of its disgrace: Its progress was less
divulged, but its salutary effects were not therefore less conspicuous, both in
the ancient and new world. Much about the year 1728, a Carmelite Missionary, in
the neighborhood of the Portuguese colony of Grand Para, in South-America,
seeing all the Indians of his mission dying one after another of an epidemical
smallpox, and that not one infected person recovered, he saved all those that
remained, by hazarding on them, the method of inoculation, of which he had but
a very superficial knowledge, from an European gazette. His example was
followed not less successfully by one of his brethren, a Missionary on the
banks of Rio Negro, and by some Portuguese of Para. In a new epidemy that laid
waste that province in 1750, the same preservative produced the same effect. A
terrible epidemy ravaged Carolina in 1738; all those who were taken ill could
not resist the violence of the distemper. Then it was that they called to mind
how efficacious the remedy was, which they had neglected since the year 1724;
they had again recourse to inoculation, which succeeded better than ever,
because, in the hot sultry months of June, July, and August, a season very
contrary to inflammatory diseases, and in a country where the method had not
succeeded so well as in Europe, of a thousand persons inoculated, but eight
died, which is only one to 125. It is very probable that in the experiments
made in America, on a multitude of negroslaves, less precautions were used in
preparing the subjects, than in the operations made in Europe on freemen,
whose lives were more precious: Besides, the generality of the negroes are
originally infected with a veneral virus, which they bring from their country,
and therefore the choice of fit subjects for inoculation is thereby rendered
more difficult.

The new success of the practice in Carolina, in 1738, was not equal to that of
the same year in England, when it began again to take place. Of near 2000
inoculated within twelve years at Winchester, and the neighboring parts of
Hampshire and Sussex, none died, according to the account of Dr. Langrish, but
two women with child, who were dissuaded by their physicians to expose
themselves to inoculation.

The year 1746 was, at London, the epoch of the foundation of a house of
charity, as well for inoculating the poor, and diminishing by this means the
devastation, made by the smallpox, of mankind, as for succouring those who
might be taken ill of it in the natural way. It was in the church of this
hospital, and in the same pulpit where, 30 years before, inoculation had been
treated as the work of devils, that Dr. Maddox, Bishop of Worcester, preached
that famous sermon, several times reprinted, whereby he excites the charity of
his fellow-citizens in favor of this practice, of which he demonstrates the
advantages: The annexed notes to this sermon, and the work published by M.
Kirkpatrick, inform us that of 309 persons the greater part adults, inoculated
in the new hospital, and of 1500 inoculated by three different Practitioners,
that is, of 1809, but six died, which does not make one in 300; that M.
Winchester, Surgeon to the Foundling hospital, lost but one child in 186; and
that, of 370 other experiments made else where, one only had proved
unfortunate. M. Frevin assures us, that, of upwards of 300 inoculations at Rye,
but one was unsuccessful. It is true, that at Salisbury four died out of 422,
and three at Blandford out of 309.

In the month of November, 1747, M. Ranby, first Surgeon to his Britannic
Majesty, had inoculated 827, and his experiments, all fortunate, amounted at
the end of 1752, to upwards of 1000. The difference of success may be partly
attributed to the greater or less degree of malignity in the epidemy, partly to
the greater or less share of precaution in preparing and tending the sick, and,
lastly, to the different degrees of experience and abilities of the
inoculators, but especially to the maxim of not hazarding inoculation on
persons of a bad constitution, unwholesome, or suspected of other disorders. The
Greek woman at Constantinople was exceeding scrupulous in all these points, and
it was to her exact observance of them, that she attributed the constancy of
her success.

In resuming the foregoing facts, and several others of which I omit the
detail, I find, that, in the whole, out of 316 inoculated, but one died.

In 1748, one Dr. Tronchin, a native of Geneva, and Inspector of the College of
Physicians of Amsterdam, having been on the point of losing one of his sons by
the natural smallpox, resolved to inoculate his eldest: This was the first
inoculation in Holland. It was followed by nine others, which M. Tronchin took
upon him the direction of. Two years after, he recommended this practice at
Geneva, which being accordingly adopted, M. Calendrini, a famous Mathematician,
and one of the chief Magistrates of the republic, set the example on his son,
no fatal event has since occasioned there any regret. The same year,
inoculation was introduced in Italy, by Dr. Peverini, then physician of
Citerna, in the Ecclesiastical State, with very happy and singular
circumstances. He was imitated by several of his confraternity, and upwards of
400 persons, of all ages, were successfully inoculated in those parts.

In 1753, inoculation began again at Amsterdam with the epidemy, and the most
illustrious families at the Hague were the first to follow the example of M.
Tronchin. The suffrage of M. Swenke, Professor of Anatomy, and a physician of
great reputation in his profession, and the continuity of success, brought the
method into request in several towns of Holland. Switzerland, as well as
England, is indebted for it to the example of a tender mother, a lady of
Lauzane, who, seeing that her son did not catch the smallpox from his two
sisters, gave it to him by the way of insertion.

Such have been for upwards of 30 years vicissitudes of fortune in the famous
method of inoculation. The emetic and bark did not meet with less
contradictions, till their virtues were generally known. But, before we
proceed, it will not be amiss to give a distinct idea of inoculation, as being
an essential part of its history, and of the different manner of practicing it,
by those who know it but imperfectly.

The artificial small pox is probably more ancient at China than elsewhere.
Father Dentrecolles, observes in his letter abovementioned, that if this
custom was introduced from Circassia, or the adjacent parts, into China, it
would, in all probability, have first extended into the western provinces, and
the nearest to the Caspian sea; whereas it is in the other extremity of that
emplie, toward the East, and in the province of Kiangnan, on the sea of Japan,
that the method of Tchong-teou, that is, of sowing the smallpox, is more
anciently known. The Chinese thrust into the nose of children a tent of cotton
impregnated with the matter of the dried pustules of the smallpox reduced into
powder. This trial was made in England, in 1721, on a young woman under
sentence of death: She was more sick than any inoculated in the usual way, and
the Chinese practice, of which father Dentrecolles relates three different
receipts, was judged dangerous.

Both in Greece and Turkey, the liquid matter, still hot, drawn, some moment
before, from pustules of a natural and fovourable small pox, was introduced in
seven or eight punctures made in different parts of the body, with several
superstitious precautions accompanied with offerings of wax candles, by the
means of which Timone suspected that the Greek inoculatress procured the
good will of the Grecian priests, who supplied her with a prodigious multitude
of subjects for inoculation.

The same Timone describes the different operations of two Grecian old women:
The one of Philippopolis, somewhat more simple in her process; the other of
Thessalonica, who joined quackery to superstition, but who, more skilful than
any of her sisterhood, had remarked, as the Chinese, that it was indifferent to
use for inoculation matter taken from a natural or artificial smallpox.
LaMotraye relates the manner of his seeing the operation conducted in
Circassia, by an old woman, much after the way at Constantinople. She only made
punctures on different parts of the body with three pins tied together; the
patient was brought as, is still practiced in Barbary, to one sick of the
natural smallpox. This custom is dangerous, the inoculated party being thereby
exposed to receive the distemper by contagion, before the insertion produces
its effect; but this conformity of practice between the Circassians and the
people of Barbary might be an inducement to presume, that, among the great
number of Circassian slaves, who compose the militia of Cairo, by the name of
Mamelus, some of them had brought the custom from their country into Egypt,
from whence it might have been propagated at Tripoli, Tunis, Algeries, and in
the interior of Africa.

In the principality of Wales, less formality was used. Schoolboys gave one
another the smallpox by pricking themselves with a needle, or by only rubbing
the arm or the hand till the blood appeared, with pustules of the smallpox
that began to dry; he that was to get it, gave two or three pence to him from
whom he borrowed the matter, and this custom had no other name among the Welsh,
than of buying the smallpox. Long experience has given in England the
preference to the following method, which has been long practiced by M. Ranby,
and since attended at Geneva with the greatest success, both on children and
adults to the age of thirty.

After preparing the subject during some days by a regimen and proper remedies,
such as a moderate diet, one or two gentle purges, a bleeding, if the case
requires it, and sometimes bathing; Doct. Dimsdale, undoubtedly one of the most
ingenious inoculators, in Europe, prefers the following method of infecting his
patients. The person to be inoculated, being in the same room, with one who has
the disease, a little pus is taken from a ripe pustule, on the point of a
lancet. With this lancet an incision is made in that part of the arm where
usually issues are placed, deep enough to pass the scarf skin about the eighth
of an inch in length. The wound being opened between the thumb and fingers of
the operator, the matter on the point of the lancet is wiped on the wound.
Neither plaster, bandage, or covering is applied. The Doctor observes, that
this method had never once failed him. At the time of Dimsdale's (...) the
abo^e he had inoculated 15^0 patients without a single (...).
an incision, not exceeding an inch in length, and so as scarce to cut through
the skin, is made in the external and middle part of both arms, beneath the
tendon of the muscle deltoides, that the liberty of motion might not be under
any restraint; in the incision is inserted a thead of the same length,
impregnated with the matter of a ripe pustule, and without redness at its base,
of a pock, either natural or artificial, taken from a wholesome child. This
matter has been found to preserve its virtue for several months together and
from Autumn to Spring: The Chinese have made the same observation. This
apparel, after forty hours is taken off, and the wounds are dressed once a day.
However, this long delay may, in a great measure, be deemed an excess of
precaution; five or six hours were thought sufficient by the Greek inoculators,
who, after pricking in four or five places were only careful to mix well the
blood and variolous matter with their needle, and to cover the punctures with a
walnut-shell.

Though the first days after the operation the patient is in a condition of
going out, yet he is made to keep his chamber and to continue the regimen.
Since De la Condamine wrote, great improvements have been made by Inoculators
in Europe and America. The present and most approved method of treating both
the natural, and artificial smallpox, is that the patient goes abroad in all
weathers, from the time of inoculation, 'till the termination of the disease;
that a free use of cold water as common drink be indulged. Cold air, which
physicians supposed would endanger the lives of those exposed to it, while
under the influence of the smallpox, has been found, First by accident, and
since, by repeated, judicious experiments, to prevent, frequently, the
secondary fever, and always to lessen it. See Dimsdale on inoculation.
He is put to bed the 6th or 7th day, when the fever begins, which is seldom
accompanied by bad symptoms, as they usually cease by the eruption on the 7th
or 8th day: Then the inflammation of the wounds diminishes; they yield more
matter, and the greater part of the venom flows out by that way. The 10th day
after the eruption they begin to fill, the 15th to be cicatrised, and the 20th
they usually close of themselves; if they are preceived still to flow, they
should not be closed too hastily. One incision has been found sufficient; and,
if two are made, it is not only to be more certain that the insertion has taken
well, but also to facilitate, by a double canal, the issue of the variolous
matter, and in order thereby to render that which forms the pustules less
abundant, less acrimonious, less corrosive, and the nature of the smallpox
more benign. Theory agrees wonderfully in this point with experience.

Sometimes all, or almost all, the venom flows out through the two incisions, and
the patient has but one or two pustules, sometimes even not one; he is not
therefore less secure from contracting the smallpox, when inoculated anew. The
more the matter comes out abundantly from the wounds of the arms, the more the
number of pustules are few and distinct; whereas each parcel of the matter of
the internal heat forms a particular pustule in the natural smallpox, which
often makes it confluent, and therefore much more dangerous. Among the
inoculations at Geneva, that kind was scarce observed; and not one retained the
least mark. This was also observed not only in England, but in Greece and
Circassia, whereof the inhabitants adopted the custom with the view only of
preserving the beauty of their daughters.

What occasions the greatest danger in the natural smallpox, is the secondary
fever that happens when the separation begins; but in the artificial smallpox,
that fever is very rare, especially in children, who scarce sicken. Among 20
persons inoculated at Geneva, by M. Guyot, one only, a woman, and the mother of
several Children had that second fever.

This method of inoculating by incision, adopted now upwards of 30 years, by
all the English surgeons, and commonly practiced at Geneva, was brought from
Constantinople to England, by M. Maitland, surgeon to Lady Wortley Montague.
Maitland received it from Timone, who had substituted it to the punctures of
the Greek inoculators. In the first essays made in Italy, the lancet was
sometimes used, and sometimes only the prick of a pin, in imitation of the
simplicity of the Greek operation, especially in country places, where mothers,
unknown to their husbands, inoculated their children, while they were, asleep,
and always with success. M. Tronchin was the first, for aught I know, that used
vesicatories, as less painful and less terrible to children. He applied them to
the legs preferably to the arms, with the view of procuring, for the bedridden
patient, a greater liberty in his motions; but, as the essence of inoculation
consists entirely in the mixture of the variolous matter with the blood of the
person inoculated, it little signifies, provided the mixture operates, whether
the wound from whence the blood is drawn, be made on one of several parts of
the body; with a lancet as in England; with two or three needles as in Greece
and Circassia; with one only as in Italy; by passing under the skin a thread
imbued with matter, as in Barbary; by rubbing the hand till the blood appears,
as in the principality of Wales; or, lastly, in breaking the texture of the
epidermis with a vesicatory, according to the practice of M. Tronchin. All
these routes conduct to the same end, and each may choose that which seems most
agreeable to him.

Whoever has a mind to see this subject treated more in detail, may consult
Kirkpatric's Analysis of inoculation. An Essay on the Advantages of very early
Inoculation: by M. Maty, M. D. R. S. Sec. London medical Observations and
Inquiries, vol. III. p. 287. Tissot on Inoculation. Doct. Ruston on
Inoculation. And Dimsdale's present Method of Inoculation, published in Nov.
1766.

PART II.
PHYSICAL OBJECTIONS.
First Objection. IS it the smallpox that is communicated by inoculation? And
may not the distemper communicated be more dangerous than that which is
intended to be prevented?

Answer. If it was ever doubted that the inflammatory disease which follows
inoculation, was a real smallpox, none now make the least doubt about it; it
would be therefore unnecessary to answer the first part of the objection. As to
the second part, it may be said, that the natural smallpox is not dangerous in
itself, but only becomes so by a complication of disorders with it, or by the
malignity of the epidemy. Such a person, cut off in the flower of his age,
might still have been living, were it not for being attacked by the smallpox
in critical circumstances: That young woman would not have died, if the
accidents of a laborious pregnancy had not exhausted her strength: That young
man would have been out of danger, had not his blood been inflamed by all
manner of excesses: That sick person might have escaped, if a malignant fever
and the purples had not aggravated his illness. This is what we daily hear of
the circumstances that make this distemper mortal. Inoculation will prevent
them all. The greatest art of the preparation consists in preventing foreign
accidents, a complication of disorders, and the epidemy; a proper choice may be
made of the season, time, place, and the dispositions of the subject's mind and
body; the smallpox thus prevented is brought slowly from the circumference to
the center, in a wholesome body prepared for receiving it: Fermentation begins
in the external parts; the artificial wounds facilitate the eruption, by giving
the virus an easy issue. Thus the inoculated smallpox is always simple, and
therefore without any danger.

What comparison can be made between a premeditated disease and one contracted
by chance, on a journey, in the army, in critical circumstances, and especially
for women in a time of epidemy, which multiplies accidents, which transports
the seat of the inflammation in the internal parts of a body, perhaps exhausted
by watching or fatigue? How great is the difference between a disease which is
expected, and one that surprises, dismays, and fear alone may make mortal, or,
appearing with equivocal symptoms, may lead into an error the ablest
physicians? Such are the dictates of good sense, and the most simple reasoning,
but experience is still more decisive; it proves that the matter of
inoculation, though taken from a complicated smallpox, confluent, even mortal
communicates, notwithstanding, a simple, discrete, benign smallpox, exempt
from the fever of suppuration, so frequently fatal; in short, a smallpox which
leaves no marks. Hence it is evident that the inoculated smallpox is not more
dangerous than the natural

Second Objection. Does the inoculated smallpox save from the natural?

Answer. This objection cannot be better answered, than by a history of facts,
whereby it appears, that not one inoculated person had contracted the smallpox
a second time. The enemies of this method have endeavored by all manner of
ways to elude this truth, even by that of imposture. Dr. Middleton was obliged
to declare publicly against a report, that one of those he had inoculated was
again infected with the smallpox, of which he had been very ill. Mention was
made of another, with the letter of one Jones, who asserted the same thing of
his son; Dr. Jurin examined carefully into the fact; the father refused to show
the child's marks, but offered afterward to tell the truth provided he was
well paid for so doing: At last, he confessed, in a letter to Dr. Jurin, that
he knew nothing of inoculation. Dr. Kirkpatrick has inserted this letter in his
work.

But what does it signify to know whether a complete smallpox may be had twice
naturally? Though this fact, which several physicians deny, and which Dr. Mead,
in the course of a long life, says he had never seen, should be well attested,
it would not necessarily follow that a person, after being inoculated, should
be subject to have it again. Granting that it is possible to have the
smallpox, twice in the natural way, might not it be maintained, with some show
of probability, that the natural causes of the contagion do not shoot forth
perhaps but imperfectly in a body the bud of the distemper, so that sometives a
sufficiency remains for a new fermetation; whereas the ferment of the
smallpox, set in motion by a virus of the same nature introduced directly into
the blood by the means of several incisions, flows out in so complete a manner,
that no more matter remains to form a second eruption. A more powerful cause
ought to produce a greater effect: Milk turns and coagulates more surely and
effectually by the direct mixture of an acid, than by the natural action of air
and heat: The artificial smallpox may therefore exhaust the leaven which the
natural may not. But, setting aside these reasons, will it not be sufficient to
say, in order to avert the dread of a second smallpox after inoculation, that
now, upwards of 30 years since it became frequent in England, no example can be
produced of any inoculated person, who had been again infected, either
naturally or artificially? Those, on whom inoculation might have been attempted
without effect, are improperly ranked in the number of the inoculated; the
operation well or ill conducted, when it produces neither pustule nor
suppuration, leaves the suject in the same state he was in; if therefore he is
afterward attacked by the natural smallpox, it cannot be said that he has had
it twice.

Some inoculated children have been made to cohabit and lie with others ill of
the spontaneous smallpox, and none of them took it a second time. Elisabeth
Harris, one of six criminals inoculated on the first trial, after recovery,
nursed upwards of twenty persons sick of the smallpox, and the contagion had
no effect upon her. Inoculation has been repeated several times on different
subjects; but the effects of the first being over, the incisions,
notwithstanding the thread imbued with virus, healed as slight cuts: It is
therefore evident that the variolic virus, though mixed directly with the
blood, is incapable of renewing the smallpox; from whence it may be concluded
with good reason, that the natural contagion, introduced by the air, will have
no effect on a body purged of this leaven by inoculation.

Third Objection. The small parcel of venom, transmitted into the blood by the
way of inoculation, may be the bud or seed of other distempers, which may be
communicated the same way, such as the scurvy, King's evil, etc.

Answer. The risque of catching these diseases, at the same time with the
smallpox, would not be less great, when it is contracted naturally, than when
it is received by inoculation. However, as no instance has been seen of scurvy,
King's evil, etc. contracted in this manner by the contagion of the natural
smallpox; why should the danger be greater in this respect by the way of
inoculation? This is not all: There are positive proofs that this danger is
chimerical, and it is now known by experience, that the variolic matter, though
taken from a body infected also with a venereal virus, communicated only a
simple and benign smallpox: This fact, decisive and not admitting a reply, is
attested in Dr. Maty's British Journal, for April, 1754, page 403; yet, as the
choice of matter for inoculation may be discretionally made, nothing hinders
the taking of it from a wholesome subject, and especially from a child who has
no other distemper than the smallpox itself*

Fourth Objection. Inoculation is sometimes attended with troublesome
consequences, as wounds, tumors, etc.

Answer. Nothing is more unjust than this objection: These accidents are but
too frequent after the natural smallpox, but very rare after inoculation; they
are prevented by purgatives.

MORAL OBJECTIONS.
First Objection. It would be an usurpation of the rights of the Divinity to
afflict with a disease one who has it not, or to endeavor to withdraw him from
it, who, in the order of Providence, was naturally destined for having it.

Answer. This objection, if it can be called so, is that of Fatalists and rigid
Predestinarians. They might be answered that the inoculated was predestined for
inoculation, and that by inoculating him the decrees of Providence were
accomplished; but, without retorting against them this singular argument, they
may be asked, Whether confidence in Providence exempts and dispenses us from
preventing the ills we foresee, and which we may secure ourselves from by a
prudent attention. Those of this principle, if they act consequently to it,
ought to proscribe the use of all remedies of precaution, and of all
preservatives; they ought to imitate the example of the Turks, who, through fear
of acting contrary to the views of Providence, perish by thousands in times of
pestilence so frequent at Constantinople, whilst they see the Franks, settled
among them, secure themselves from the fatal effects of the contagion, both in
town and country, by shutting themselves up carefully in their houses, to avoid
all exterior communication; those who here plead the rights of Divine
Providence, may therefore be asked, Whether, when Providence permits the
discovery of a sure method of preservation from the ravages of the smallpox,
we are forbid to make use of it? It is Providence that presents us with the
remedy, and it would be an offense to reject its gifts with contempt.

Sixth Objection. It is not allowable to infect with a cruel and dangerous
disease one who perhaps may never have it.

Answer. It cannot be said, with any show of truth, that the inoculated
smallpox is either cruel or dangerous. An incision which only cuts through the
surface of the skin, a simple puncture, or the application of a vesicatory, a
slight fever attended with some symptoms which scarce last 24 hours, cannot be
said to constitute a cruel disease; and a disease, by which not above one may
die in 300, or perhaps not one in a thousand, cannot be called dangerous. It
may even be doubtful, whether this death of one, out of so many, can be justly
attributed to inoculation.

But if, out of 320 persons taken at chance, one commonly dies, how comes it to
pass that M. Ranby did not lose one in 1200? The reason is, his choice was
confined to young subjects of sound constitutions. When persons of all ages are
inoculated without choice or precaution, as was done at Boston in the first
trials, the greater part suspected of corrupt blood and humors, and in a time
of epidemy, when several, before undergoing the operation, had already probably
received the disease by natural contagion, there will be no room for being
surprised that one died in 49 or 50.

It may therefore be granted, that the inoculated smallpox is neither
dangerous, nor cruel, as the objection supposes it. `But it will be said, it
cannot be denied to be a disease; why therefore should it be given gratis to
one who perhaps might never have it?' This is the most specious of all the
arguments that can be made against this practice, and yet the easiest to be
refuted.

I answer, first, that this disease is not given to one who might never have it
naturally. For, either all men, without exception, are subject to the
smallpox, or some are free from it: In the first case, it cannot be said that
the disease is given to one who might never have it: The same will hold good in
the second, it being proved by experience, that some could not get the small
pox by inoculation, though the operation had been several times repeated; no
doubt they were no way disposed to receive the distemper. He who has not the
principle of it in his blood, will be free from it by an operation less painful
than a bleeding; the incisions will dry up as a slight cut: Thus he will see
himself for ever delivered from the continual uneasiness those are under, who
have not yet paid the tribute; this proof will be a security to him that he is
for ever safe from the contagion. It is even the only way of banishing the
fears of those, who, by not having the smallpox in a decisive manner, or not
knowing that they had it in their infancy, spend their days so as to make life
a punishment. Therefore a disease, as the objection supposes, is not given to
one who might never have it.

I answer, in the second place, that the smallpox is a disease which may be
called general, and to which Providence is willing mankind should be subject;
that the number of those who arrive at old age without having it, is so small,
that it scarce forms exceptions to the common law. But what is done by
inoculating the smallpox? The very same thing whereby a fit of the gout is
excited, when the particles of that painful disorder are dispersed throughout
the mass of the blood; in both cases a distemper is not so much given to a body
free from contracting it, as the most favorable time is chosen to give vent to
the ferment that occasions it, and which we all have in our blood; the venting
of which ferment is almost inevitable in regard to the smallpox, and ^^ch more
dangerous when it comes of itself, and espec^^^^y in a time of epidemy.

Seventh Objection. It is not allowable to do a less evil, to procure a greater
good.

Answer. This objection is founded on an equivocation. Let us suppose that this
principle is in rigor and generally true, and that it admits no exception, no
restriction, as to moral evil; but it is very false in the application made of
it to physical evil. Certainly it is allowable to pull down a house to preserve
a town or city from a conflagration, though the proprietor of this house with
his family, might be reduced to beggary by so doing; a whole province may be
laid under water, or ruined for several years, in the view of preventing the
further ravages of an enemy; a ship, if suspected to have the plague on board,
though perhaps ready to perish, is refused admittance into a port: And thus the
inconsiderable physical evil of inoculation is nothing, if compared with the
evils of all sorts which are tolerated, permited, and authorized by the laws of
most nations.

Eighth Objection. Inoculation is a moral evil; as a proof of which, it cannot
be denied but some inoculated persons have died; the success of the method is
therefore not infallible; one cannot therefore subject himself to it without
exposing his life, which he is not allowed to dispose of: Therefore inoculation
runs counter to the principles of morality.

Answer. First, the objection may be cut short by maintaining, that none die of
the inoculated smallpox, and that the accidents, attributed to inoculation,
are owing to no other cause than the imprudence of the sick, or of the
physician: Several able physicians have been of this opinion: M. Tronchin was
so thoroughly persuaded of it, that he declared openly, if he lost one single
patient by the artificial smallpox, he would inoculate no more while he lived.

Secondly, the argument, here advanced against inoculation, may be retorted
against bleeding in the arm: How many have died by the pricking of arteries? It
is then certain that life is endangered by bleeding in the arm, which cannot
with the same evidence be ascertained in regard to inoculation; yet no casuist
has hitherto been so scrupulous, as to forbid letting blood in the arm.

Thirdly, it may be observed that the supposed singularity of inoculation, that
is, of giving a distemper one has not, is common to this preservative and all
other remedies of medicine, no natural disorder being cured but by artificial
evils, which are not even exempt from danger, such as bleedings, purgatives,
cauteries, vesicatories, vomitives, etc.

It is granted that it is the duty of every one to avoid the dangers life may
be threatened with; but what becomes of this obligation when the danger is
inevitable? It is evidently converted into that of lessening the danger as much
as possible; but the risque of having some time or other the smallpox, and
perhaps dying of it, is inevitable in regard to him who never had it; therefore
inoculation is a sure means of diminishing, in a great degree, this danger.

It is evident, that, when the smallpox is expected from the hands of nature,
the parties expose themselves to die some time or other; but this risque is
beheld as far distant, because it seems it should not begin but when the
attacks are felt, which are not yet, and perhaps, as they flatter themselves,
may never be. To determine exactly the resque of death incurred by him who
never had the natural smallpox, it would be necessary to know what part of
mankind is not subject to the disease; but it may be said with good reason,
that the instances of those who pass through life, after having arrived at
manhood, and having been within the reach of infection, without undergoing this
direful disease, are so extremely few, as scarce to form an exception; learned
calculations have made it as one to many hundreds.

The risque of dying one time or other of the smallpox, which seems so far
distant in time of health, is almost as great as if one was already effected.
In a word, of 70 sick of the smallpox, 10 die; of 70 who expect it, 9 will
probably die: Could it be believed that between these two risques there was so
little difference?

The risque of dying of the smallpox gradually increases from the moment of
birth. This resque is of a fourteenth for a newborn child; of an eighth for
one of a year old; of a seventh for the usual age of inoculation; later, it is
of a sixth, fifth, fourth, and perhaps there are only two to one, which upon a
wager could be laid for the life of him, who arrives at the age of thirty
without having paid the fatal tribute.

The risque of death one is exposed to by waiting from nature for the fatal
present of the smallpox, is therefore of 9 to 70, that is, of more than an
eighth: The risque of dying by inoculation is computed at 1 to 376, by more
than 6000 experiments. Hence it may be said, that a father, in regard to his
son, has only the option, either to inoculate him or not; here are two hazards
to run, of which one is inevitable. By inoculating his son, against 375
fortunate events, one is to be dreaded; by not inoculating him there is more
than one to be laid against seven that he will lose him; for, if out of 70 nine
die, the bett will be of nine against 61, which is more than one against seven;
so that, this last risque being 50 times greater than the other, he cannot with
reason hesitate in his choice.

This calculation is not exaggerated. Dr. Jurin, having judged from his first
enumerations, that, one year with another, there died a seventh of those taken
ill of the smallpox, found on further and more exact information, first in
14,500, and afterward in upwards of 17,000 persons, that often one in five
died, and commonly two in eleven; so that the peril of the natural smallpox
has not been exaggerated by supposing one in seven. As to inoculation, instead
of the risque of one against 375, as supposed, it is proved by the constant
success of this operation in the London smallpox hospital, on persons of all
ages, that the peril of this method has rather by the calculation been
augmented than diminished.

Whatever might be the advantage of the artificial smallpox, even though one
should not die in 10,000, I would not advise a father to subject his son to it,
if he could be sure that the natural smallpox would spare him; but since,
instead of a like revelation, which we want, the father has only the certainty
of danger by far greater to which he exposes his son, in letting nature act, it
is evident that reason counsels him, and that paternal tenderness requires, he
should diminish, as much as he possibly can, a risque he cannot make void.

Such is the fate of humanity: Upwards of a third of those who are born, are
destined to die, in the first year of their life, by incurable diseases, or at
least unknown: Escaped from this first danger, the risque of dying of the
smallpox becomes inevitable to them; it sheds its influence on the whole
course of life, and in every instant of time increases; it is a forced lottery
wherein we find ourselves concerned, in spite of us; each of us has a ticket in
it, and the longer it delays coming out of the wheel, the more the danger
augments. What is done by the practice of inoculation? The conditions of this
lottery are changed; the number of fatal tickets is diminished: One in seven,
and in more favorable climates, one in ten was fatal, by the natural
smallpox: By inoculation, one in 300, one in 500, one in 1000, of which we
have examples. All future ages will envy ours this discovery: Nature decimated,
but art millesimises us.

PART III. Containing new Answers, Consequences drawn from Facts, Reflections,
etc.
HERETOFORE, to avoid entering into long discussions, I reasoned according to
the supposition that there was some risque in the practice of inoculation, and
I confined myself to prove that this risque was so small, compared with that
incurred by the natural smallpox, that it may be deemed, as of no account.
And, indeed, the risque of one in 300, 500, or 1000, is not of the same kind,
and still less than that to which one is daily exposed voluntarily and without
the least necessity. Some use violent and dangerous exercises, such as hunting,
riding post on horseback, playing at tennis, etc. others traverse the seas, and
have frequently certain death before their eyes. Shall it be said, that it is
allowable to hazard one's life habitually out of curiosity, pastime, humor, or
at best through a motive of convenience or pecuniary interest; and that it is
criminal, I will not say to run once a very small risque in the view of
preventing a great danger, but to convert a great risque which cannot be
annhiliated, into one 10, 20, 30, etc. times less? Such is the consequence the
adversaries of inoculation are reduced to, and that, supposing even that it is
not exempt from all danger: What would it be if the pretended risque was
absolutely nothing, as several eminent physicians are of opinion, and as some
propose to make it evident?

As I shall not engage in a dissertation on a subject, which, in order to be
well treated, would require a profound knowledge both in the theory and
practice of physic, I shall confine myself to simple reflections. What can be
the danger of inoculation? Is it in the operation or in its effect?

New Objection. It is in both: A purulent matter, taken from a body infected
with a dangerous disease, is inserted into the blood of a sound person. Must
not this create horror? A like cause cannot fail of producing a pernicious
effect.

Answer. Let us not take words for things: Let us leave to children puerile
niceties, and let us remember that if reason had not triumphed over prejudices,
and the natural repugnancy the dissection of a human body inspires, all the
disorders anatomy has discovered remedies for, would be incurable. Is not
nature shocked at the sight of the amputation of a limb, the perforation of the
thorax in the empyema, cutting for the stone, the trepan, etc. All these
operations are very cruel, their success very doubtful, and the danger of dying
very great; yet they are confidently practiced every day: What a prodigious
difference between them and inoculation!

I made a distinction between the operation and effects of inoculation. As to
the operation, it has nothing terrible or dangerous. A superficial incision on
the skin differs from a scratch only, in that the latter would be more painful:
But will it be said that one can die of a scratch?

As to the effects of the operation, experience decides what they are. I shall
not endeavor to examine whether the contagious venom of the epidemy is only in
the air that is breathed, that is, in an exterior cause; from whence it would
follow that the choice of a subject which furnishes the matter of inoculation
is indifferent: All I shall observe is, that, since the choice not only of a
subject, but also of the most benign and best conditioned smallpox can be
made, those who choose it such, cannot be censured for inserting in the veins of
a sound man the produce of a dangerous illness. Besides, it is proved by the
experience of several ages, as well in Asia as Africa, and of near an age in
Europe, that, in the hands of an able practitioner, the danger vanishes by the
choice of a subject, by preparation, etc. that inoculation occasions only a
simple smallpox, which gives vent to the greatest part of the venom through
the incisions, and which therefore is scarce ever confluent, but always more
benign than the natural. It is moreover proved, that it leaves no marks, and
that it is not attended with the fever of suppuration, so common and so fatal
in the natural smallpox. Can any thing more be wanting to conclude, that the
life of a patient is secured in the inoculated smallpox by the prescribed
precautions, and that the accidents which might have attended it in a very
small number of cases, ought to be attributed to foreign causes? Is it not
evident by the laws of probability, that, among thousands of inoculated
subjects, some one may and should die, not only forty days after, but in the
week, and perhaps on the day, by the same reason that this person might pay the
tribute to nature eight days, one day, or one hour befors the operation?
Inoculation prevents the dangers and consequences of the natural smallpox; but
it is not therefore a remedy against all the disorders incident to so complex a
machine as the human body, and still less a preservative against sudden death.

In order to remove all impediments thrown in my way by the quibbles of the
adversaries of this mothod, I founded all my calculations on suppositions made
as they fancied themselves; but it is now time to lay in my claim to truth. Let
us then first retrench, from the number of the pretended victims of this
operation, those who die of foreign accidents, as, for instance, children at
the breast, suddenly cut off, in the course of a very benign smallpox, by a
convulsion or cholic, which happens but too frequently to other children of
their age, who seem to enjoy the best state of health; let us not lay to the
account of the artificial smallpox the death of those, who, in a time of
epidemy, have already received the distemper by the natural contagion, before
they were inoculated: This may well be presumed, when the symptoms appear
before the time when it is usual with the operation to produce its effect. Let
us also except, as it is just, on one side, the deaths occasioned by
intemperance, or other excesses the patients were subject to; and, on the
other, the accidents which ought visibly to be attributed to the imprudence of
inoculators in making trials; these accidents are now more rare, but were
frequent enough when the method was first introduced. When all these exceptions
are made, of which we hitherto made none, there will not remain perhaps a
single person whose death can be properly imputed to inoculation.

Make choice of a sound, young subject, and of a good constitution; let a
skilful physician be careful in preparing him; preserve him from the epidemical
contagion; inoculate him; his life is safe.

Last Objection. It is supposed that inoculation of itself is never mortal, but
it may be said, that he who might not have died perhaps of the natural
smallpox till the age of fifty, after having had children, after having served
his country, would be lost for society, if he died in his infancy of the
inoculated smallpox.

Answer. This objection is more specious than solid, being grounded on the
supposition of the real danger of inoculation; it will be therefore unnecessary
to animadvert upon its weakness, even the case of inoculation being not
absolutely without danger: It is clear that even then the great inequality of
risques in the natural and artificial smallpox, the uncertainty as to the time
of life in being attacked by the former, and the danger of dying so much the
more great, as age is more advanced, are so many decisive reasons in favor of
inoculation.

What has been already mentioned, that the smallpox destroys, mutilates, or
disfigures the fourth of mankind, may be taken for an exaggeration; but I mean
the fourth of those who survive the first diseases of infancy: This may appear
from the following reflections.

Toward the end of the 16th century, about 50 years after the discovery of
Peru, this distemper was brought from Europe to Carthagena in America; it
overran the whole continent of the new world, and, in the province of Quito
alone, destroyed upwards of 100,000 Indians. This remark has been taken from an
ancient manuscript of the cathedral of that city. In the Portuguese colonies
the smallpox proved fatal to all the original inhabitants of the country. M.
Maitland, to whom England is indebted from the use of inoculation, relates that
there are years when the smallpox is a kind of plague in the Levant, which
kills at least the third of those it infects; this terrible proportion is not
rare in Barbary. If we consult Dr. Jurin's lists, or those annexed to his work,
among others, Dr. Nettleton's, who informed himself in several towns from house
to house of the number of the sick and dead throughout the year (the surest way
of being exact) it will be seen that at London, and in other parts of England,
there died some years a fifth, and sometimes more of those taken ill of the
smallpox; but among those who do not die of it, how many remain deprived of
hearing or sight, entirely or partly! How many affected in the breast and
lungs, languishing, valetudinarians, maimed! How many others, disfiguared for
life by deformed seams and scars, become objects of horror to those that
approach them! Lastly, in the sex where comeliness is so great an advantage, how
many lose their charms, some the tenderness of their husbands, others the hopes
of being settled in the world, whence a real loss accrues to the state.

The smallpox raises a tribute of a fourteenth on mankind, and, though the
number of victims wounded by its darts should not surpass the number of those
it strikes mortally, it will notwithstanding be always true, that, out of 100
persons who have escaped the first dangers of infancy, thirteen or fourteen are
cut off by this distemper, and that a like number exhibit in themselves, during
their whole life, all the disagreeableness of its dismal consequences. There
are then, in 100 persons, 26 or 28 witnesses to prove that this plague destroys
or degrades the fourth of mankind.

The number of experiments already cited demonstrates that inoculation prevents
all these calamities. The inoculated smallpox is not only neither mortal nor
dangerous, but it leaves nothing after it that might make it remembered with
regret; this consideration alone seems decisive for that half of mankind, to
whom beauty in a great measure is sometimes dearer than life. The astonishing
contrast, M. Maty says, that may be observed in visiting the smallpox
hospital, between the inoculated, and those who had the natural smallpox, in
regard to the effects of the distemper on the face, would be alone sufficient
to determine those who make some account of the advantage of not being
disfigured.

These are not conjectures hazarded by a systematic genius: They are the result
of facts discussed contradictorily, and published in the face of the world by
learned divines, skilful physicians, and able surgeons; they are warranted, and
have received a sufficient sanction from the great names and authority of
Sydenham and Boerhaave; the Bishop of Worcester; Dr. Jurin, Secretary to the
Royal Society; Dr. Mead, the English Hippocrates; and M. Ranby, first Surgeon
to his Britannic Majesty.

Prudence advised and directed that too much precipitation should be guarded
against in adopting a delusive novelty; it was necessary that time should throw
a new light on its utility: Upwards of thirty years experience has cleared up
all doubts, and perfected the method; the lists of those that died of the
smallpox have diminished by a fifth in England, since the practice of
inoculation became more common; it is a truth that seems no longer contested in
London, that the inoculated smallpox is infinitely less dangerous than the
natural, and that it preserves from it. Heretofore in England this operation
was bitterly inveighed against, but now it has not one enemy that dares to
attack it openly: The evidence of facts, and especially the shame of
maintaining a forlorn cause, have shut up the mouths of its most passionate
adversaries.

LETTER I.
SIR,
"HAVING well considered the subject of inoculation, and the state of the laws
respecting it in this Colony, and likewise considering what great improvements
have been made in Europe and America, in the management of both, the natural,
and artificial smallpox, since them laws were enacted: Thought it highly
probable if it could be made appear that inoculation might be practiced at the
pesthouse at Middletown, with safety to the public we might be indulged. Now
it is a known fact that when, some years since, inoculation was practiced at
several hospitals in this government, the public suffered by its being
communicated from almost every hospital. I have this to say in favor of our
being indulged at Middletown, that near three hundred persons have had the
disease at our pesthouse, without one instance of the disorder being
communicated from said house. Farther, I believe any person of sense, will
allow, that it is probable, that betwixt October and May sessions, a
considerable number of persons may have the smallpox at Middletown pesthouse
much to their interest and peace of mind without the government being in the
least exposed thereby. We will allow it possible the smallpox may be
communicated from said house; can any person be so unreasonable as to desire I
should be prohibited from taking the smallpox, which I conceive will be much
to my interest and peace of mind, because that it is possible he may in some
extraordinary way be exposed to it, contrary to the greatest probability? Ought
a mere possibility of my acting being injurious to my neighbor to prevent my
acting, when it is apparent that my acting will be much to my interest and I
stand ready to give him all the security he can desire that my conduct shall
not injure him, and if it does that I will pay all reasonable damages? In most
of our concerns in life we are obliged to act on probability, now I think it
may be made appear, that it is as probable that I, with a number of my
neighbors may have the smallpox at the pesthouse in Middletown, without a
single inhabitant of said town being injured thereby, as it is probable that a
man could ride from New Haven to Hartford in a given time, (viz.) 10 hours. I
now beg it as a favor of the Government, that I with a number more, (who two
years since, solicited the legislature for liberty to suffer inoculation at the
pesthouse in Middletown, our physician being our inoculator) may be inoculated
as above. We stand ready to give bond, for our prudent conduct, are willing to
be under the inspection of a committee, or the authority and select men of said
Middletown, as the legislative shall think proper. It is, I believe, evident
that a greater number of people have suffered the natural smallpox in this
government consequent of inoculated patients coming from abroad without being
duly cleansed, than from an internal inoculation. I myself was knowing to about
sixty people having the smallpox two years since in this government,
consequent of some persons coming from inoculation abroad, without being duly
cleansed.
Numbers of the inhabitants of this colony within this six years have been
inoculated at Eusopus, Poughkeepsie, Norwalk, and New York, and have traversed
the government with infected apparel endangering the public, which danger will
be greatly lessened, if not wholly removed, by a well regulated internal
inoculation.

Farther, I think when it is considered what great sums of money are yearly
sent to New York, to pay them for importing for us English goods, it will be an
inducement to indulge us in our request, to be inoculated at home, when it may
be demonstrated that we can be inoculated at home with greater ease, less
expense I have known several young gentlemen, who procuring inoculation abroad,
have been exposed from 10 to 20 pounds expense. -- We judge inoculation will
not cost us more than three pounds a head, if indulged in our present request.
and vastly more safety to the community.

LETTER II.
SIR,
I Have read over the history of inoculation for the smallpox, you put into my
hands, with pleasure; the author, I think has fully refuted the arguments
against the practice, d^^uced from the tophics of religion and morality; and
there remains no reasonable objection against the admission of the full and
free use of it, as the noblest and best preservative against the ravages of
that fatal distemper in those Countries, where it prevails without restraint,
especially if we take into consideration the great improvements made in the
practice of inoculation since Monsieur La Condamine wrote; but as you desired
my sentiments, whether it could be prudent to introduce inoculation for the
smallpox (if permitted by law) to general use in this colony, I freely answer
I think it would not.

The state of this colony is such, that the greater number of Inhabitants in it
may for some time yet to come, probably pass through life without being exposed
to that disease, and surely those who are in no danger, want no security
against danger, but were inoculation set up and practiced by every physician,
in every place they thought proper, it would lay every one under a necessity to
inoculate, or stand exposed to the distemper in the natural way, the former
would load the colony with a great and unnecessary expense, which she is liable
to bear; the latter would be attended with still greater expense, and would
besides hazard the lives of numbers, especially of the old and infirm and
valetudinary. I am therefore fully persuaded that the indiscriminate practice
of inoculation here would be hurtful to us, and that the legal restraints it
now lies under are in the main, founded in good policy.

At the same time I freely confess to you I could heartily wish that the
legislature would be pleased so far to dispense with the present act against
inoculation, as to permit it to be practiced in some prescribed place in each
county, by approved physicians under the inspection of some gentlemen capable
to direct the due management of the hospitals, and guarded with such
regulations as shall appear necessary to prevent the infection's being
communicated from the hospitals.

This would save a great expense of money now carried out of the colony, and
save to the inoculated the cost of a long journey, which is greater than the
cost of inoculation after the journey is made -- it would put in the power of
parents who intend their children for such trades and professions as will
expose them to the smallpox, to give them the disorder when young, by which
nearly all the remaining danger in inoculation will be avoided -- and as
government could have the whole under their immediate direction, the danger
from persons returning from inoculation not well cleansed, or with remaining
infection upon them will be greatly lessened, if not wholly avoided.

It Is true the smallpox has been spread from the hospitals for inoculation,
which were some years ago used in this colony, but that happened I believe,
principally because no one had sufficient powers, by law, to restrain patients
a competent length of time after their recovery from the disease.

From yours, etc.
Middletown, Sept. 14, 1773.

