CHRIST's Promise to the penitent THIEF. A SERMON Preached the Lord's Day
before the Execution OF LEVI AMES, Who suffered Death for Burglary, Oct. 21,
1773. Aet. 22.

BY ANDREW ELIOT, D. D. Pastor of a CHURCH in Boston.

Pessime fecerunt qui hanc vocem [ hodie] aut cum dico conjunxerunt, aut
interpretati sunt hodie post resurrectionem. GROTIUS. N. B. This discourse was
preached at the desire of the Prisoner, who was present when it was delivered.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOIL, next Door to the THREE DOVES in
Marlborough-Street. 1773.

THE very short notice the Author of the following discourse had of the
Prisoner's desire to attend his preaching must be his excuse for the many
imperfections which will be found in it. A number of his friends thought the
publication might be of service. When he consented to give them a copy, he did
not suppose he had any right to obtrude another sermon in the room of that
which they requested. It appears therefore in it is original dress. May GOD
accompany it with his blessing!

LUKE XXIII. 43. Today shall thou be with me in Paradise.
THAT I may set these words before you in a just light, and may at the same
time improve them to the purposes of religion, I shall go into the following
method.

First, I shall briefly go over the story of which my text is the concluding
part.

Secondly, I shall particularly explain the words now read.

Thirdly, I shall take notice of some profitable lessons we are taught by them.

Fourthly, I shall show, that there is no reason, from this instance, for any
to presume on the mercy of God, so as to neglect, or defer their repentance.

I shall then apply the whole.

First, I am briefly to go over the whole story of which the text is a part.

Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was at this time on the cross, bearing the
sins of his people. To cast the greater reproach upon him, they crucified two
thieves, the one on his right hand, the other on his left; thereby intimating
that he was the most enormous offender of the three. While the inhuman
spectators were deriding and insulting our Lord, "one of the malefactors railed
on him, saying, if thou be Christ, save thyself and us." The evangelist Matthew
speaks in the plural number, and so does Mark, "They that were crucified with
him, reviled him." From whence many expositors suppose, that the thief, who
afterward expressed himself with such penitence and faith, at first joined in
this opprobrious and impious language; but it is more probable, that the plural
number is put for the singular in those evangelists, an hebraism frequently
used in the sacred writings, They who desire to see instances of this may
consult Doddridge, Macknight, Gayse, and others.
and that we are to receive the account given by Luke as the most exact
representation; " One of the malefactors railed on him."

"But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, do not thou fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? and we indeed justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss." Do not thou fear
God, when thou art just going to give an account of the things done in the body
before his awful bar? Do thou dare to add to the enormities of thy former
life, the guilt of insulting one who is like thyself sentenced to die, and
feels the same cruel tortures to which we are condemned. And as for our
punishment it is just. Our crimes deserve all the infamy and distress to which
we are reduced; but this is an innocent man, who is only a victim to envy and
malice; he has not done any thing amiss, he justly claims the character of
Messiah, though he does not vouchsafe to give that proof of it which you
insolently demand, and though he is now suffering as a criminal with us. --
Thus this poor malefactor, when he could do it in no other way, gives glory to
God by confessing his sins, and acknowledging the justice of the punishment
which he now suffered; and at the same time confesses Jesus Christ, though he
saw him in the most humble circumstances, "obedient to death, even the death of
the cross."

"And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom."
We scarce find such an instance of faith in the whole book of God! Our Lord had
been condemned by the Jewish Sanhedrim and the Roman Governor, he was now
suffering as a malefactor, he was deserted by his own disciples, reviled by the
rulers and teachers of the people; his external appearance was more like a
slave than like a Prince and a Savior; yet, under all these ignominious
circumstances, this criminal owns him as his Lord, believes that he had a
kingdom beyond the grave, and looks to him for salvation in the future world.

Some have been very sollicitous to find out how this thief came to the
knowledge of Christ, so as to own his exalted character, and submit to him as
Lord and Christ. Knowledge necessarily precedes faith. "How shall they believe
in him of whom they have not heard?" But though he was a thief, he might have
had frequent opportunities of hearing Christ, before he was apprehended by
authority; if not, he might have heard of him from others, for the fame of
Jesus, of his person, his pretensions, and his miracles, went through all the
country; the sight of Jesus would naturally bring these things to mind; he
might be affected with our Lord's patience under his sufferings, and his
meekness toward those who insulted and abused him; and the Spirit of God
might, by his secret energy, give him a new and transforming view of truths he
had formerly heard with indifference, perhaps with contempt. It seems as if he
must have known something of our Lord's character, or he could not have borne
that testimony to his innocence, "this man has done nothing amiss." But
allowing that this criminal had never heard of Jesus before, he heard enough
this day, even from his enemies, to teach him, that our Lord assumed the
character of the Messiah who was to come into the world, for they expressly
upbraided him with pretending to be the Christ, the chosen of God; and having,
probably, been educated in the Jewish religion, he was acquainted with the
ancient prophecies, and the general expectation there was of the advent of the
Messiah; and from the excellent spirit which our Lord exhibited, and the very
cruel and wicked temper discovered by those who attended his crucifixion, he
might conclude that for envy they had delivered him; and this evidence
presented to one, brought, by divine influence, to a happy ingenuity of temper,
and readiness of mind to embrace truth, might be a rational foundation of
faith. Especially, if to all the rest was added the preternatural darkness
spoken of in the next verse, and which some think was now begun. Whether we
embrace one or the other of these opinions, the history mentions no expression
of regard to Christ, till the other thief railed on him; we may therefore
reasonably conclude that he never had believed till now: Convinced by our
Lord's piety and goodness in such a trying situation, and by the miraculous
circumstances which attended him, he addresses him in the language of a most
noble and vigorous faith. "Lord, remember me, when thou come into thy
kingdom." Nor is his faith more to be observed than his modesty; the disciples
James and John, or their ambitious mother for them, petitioned that they might
sit, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left, in his kingdom, they
could not be content without high preferment. But this thief does not soar so
high; as he had more just notions of the Messiah's kingdom, so he had more low
thoughts of himself. "Lord, remember me," is his humble request. Let me not be
cast out -- Let me be admitted, even when thou come -- I ask no more --
assign me the lowest place -- it is enough -- this is as much as I can hope for
-- it is infinitely more than I deserve. -- This was the prayer of this
remarkable penitent, full of faith and humility, and thus did divine grace
triumph over the malice and wickedness of our Lord's enemies. -- But I come now
to the

Second thing proposed, which was to explain the answer of our Lord to the
request made him by the penitent believing thief. "And Jesus said unto him,
verily I say unto thee, Today shall thou be with me in paradise."

Here are three things which need particular illustration.

First, We are to enquire what we are to understand by paradise, into which
Christ promises this humble penitent an admission. The word originally
signifies a pleasant and delightful garden, and therefore the place where Adam
resided before his apostasy was called paradise by the Jews. It may properly be
used for any place of delight; in our text it intends the receptacle of the
spirits of just men made perfect, in the intermediate state, or during their
separation from the body. To this blessed place the apostle Paul tells us he
was caught up. 2 Cor. 12. 4.
This paradise, many learned men suppose, is distinct from the third heaven to
which the apostle was also taken up, Verse 2.
and where God has fixed his throne, and displays his glory more illustriously
than he does any where else.

The next thing to be explained in the words, is what our Savior intends when
he says, "Thou shall be with me in paradise." This passage is a full
confutation of that absurd opinion, which some of the ancients entertained,
that Christ descended into hell the place of the damned. When our Savior says
by the Spirit of prophecy, "Thou will not leave my soul in hell," the
expression intends no more than that God would not leave him in the state of
the dead. And so we must interpret that passage in the creed called the
apostle's, "he descended into hell," if we receive it at all. Whatever they
intended who first added it, this clause cannot be understood in any other
sense consistent with truth, than that his soul went into the invisible world,
where the spirits of the saints remain in a separate state, waiting for the
redemption of the body. When therefore our Lord says to the penitent thief,
"this day shall thou be with me in paradise," he intends that his separate
spirit should be in that place to which he was going himself. To be with Christ
constitutes the happiness of the saints.

The third thing I proposed to explain is that expression, " To day shall thou
be with me in paradise." This phrase intimates that his soul should immediately
pass into glory; that it should neither be in a place of silence and
inactivity, nor should descend to a place allotted to purge and purify it.

But I hasten to the third general head, which is to take notice of several
profitable lessons which we are taught in this answer of our Savior's to the
penitent thief. Here

First, We observe the astonishing goodness of our Lord Jesus Christ. He heard
the insults and reproaches of his enemies with the most profound silence, not a
word proceeded from him in answer to their invectives; but no sooner does this
humble penitent apply to him, than he attends to the voice of his supplication,
and though he was himself conflicting with the greatest distress and torture, he
vouchsafes to give him a gracious answer. The request was, "Lord, remember me
when thou come into thy kingdom." Our blessed Savior does not in return
reproach him with his former crimes, with his impenitence and obduracy under
the means of grace with which he had been favored; he does not tell him, it was
too late for him to hope for mercy, after having led such a wicked life. He
does not reject him, because he had not believed in him before, or because he
was just now expiring, and so could have no opportunity of testifying his
regard to him in the world. No! -- Our Lord knew the change which divine grace
had wrought in him -- he saw with infinite compassion the penitence and remorse
which possessed his soul -- he knew that his professions of respect and homage
were sincere -- and that in his heart he submitted to him as constituted
Mediator between God and man: He therefore owned him as a disciple, and for his
support and comfort, gave him the strongest assurance of happiness after death.
The humble suppliant asks, "Lord, remember me when thou come in thy kingdom,"
Christ answers, "This day thou shall be with me in paradise." Upon which
Grotius observes, that our Lord promises more than was asked. It is as if he
had said, "Thou have requested, that I would remember you when I take
possession of my kingdom, I will not so long delay the desires of thine heart:
but will grant a part -- some first fruits of the happiness you hope for, this
very day: You shall die safe, and immediately after death divine pleasures
await you." Wonderful goodness! Such as could proceed from none but him who is
goodness itself!

Secondly, In what dignity does our Lord Jesus Christ appear! and with what
extensive dominion is he vested! "This day thou shall be with me in paradise."
He speaks like a King; like a King upon his throne. Hanging on a cross,
attended with every circumstance of infamy and distress, with what authority
and majesty does he "not only undertake to dispense pardons, but to dispose of
seats in paradise!" If he had this power in his dying agonies, as undoubtedly
he had; how readily should we receive his declaration since he arose from the
dead, "all power is given unto me, in heaven, and in earth." Our once crucified
Lord is exalted above all principalities and powers, and has authority to give
eternal life to whomsoever he will. So much seems to be intended in that
description which He gives of himself, Rev. 1. 18.
"I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen;
and have the keys of Hades and of death." Under the word Hades is included the
whole invisible world, the seat of the blessed, as well as the prison of the
damned -- The paradise of God, as well as hell the place of punishment. Of this
invisible world Jesus Christ has the keys, i. e. he has full power and
authority to assign to both the righteous and the wicked, their separate and
very different apartments. "He opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no
man opens." Rev. 3. 7.


Thirdly, We may observe from our Savior's answer to this penitent malefactor,
that the souls of the righteous do immediately pass into a state of
blessedness. That this was the happy case with the thief, we have already
supposed to be implied in our text; and can any one think that this was a
privilege peculiar to him? That this man was honored in this respect above
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and the other patriarchs and prophets? Did the
soul sleep with the body, would the apostle Paul have been at all in a strait
which he should choose, whether to depart or to abide in the flesh? Would not
any christian choose to glorify God, however imperfectly, in this world; rather
than be absolutely incapable of glorifying him at all? Why does Stephen with
holy joy call upon Jesus to receive his spirit, if he was just going to leave a
state of active service for a state of silence and inactivity? Why does our
Savior represent the soul of Lazarus, as taken into Abraham's bosom, and
retaining a power of action, if separate spirits are in a state of
insensibility? It is observable, that, at this very time, when Lazarus is
spoken of as in a state of happiness and enjoyment, the rich man is represented
as in torments, and his brethren as alive and in a probation state. It is
however plain from the sacred scriptures, that the souls of the righteous do
not enjoy that complete happiness, while disunited from the body, which they
will afterward. When Christ comes to judgment he will reward men according to
their works. Then will he say to the righteous, "Come ye blessed, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you:" Mat. 25. 34.
this plainly implies that they were not in full possession of it before; and
therefore the apostle, when he speaks of those who "look for the blessed hope,"
connects with it "the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ." Tit. 2. 13.


Fourthly, This instance of the mercy and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is an
argument against despair of the mercy of God. The greatest, the oldest
offenders, have from hence encouragement, though not to delay their repentance,
yet to repent in hope of their obtaining mercy: Here was one who had been an
enormous sinner, and continued, for aught that appears, impenitent, till he was
actually suspended on the cross, and within a few hours of death; yet, even
this wretched sinner, upon his application to our Lord Jesus Christ, finds
mercy. Surely then none need to despair, but all ought to repair to this
merciful High Priest, who is now highly exalted, to grant repentance and
remission of sins; and whose precious blood cleanses from all sin. There is no
reason to be given, why the greatest and most obdurate sinner, who is brought
to submit to the Savior and Redeemer of men, may not expect pardon and
acceptance. If such sinners are excluded under the gospel dispensation, if
there are any of whose salvation there is no possibility; it must be, either
because the merits of Christ are not sufficient to purchase redemption for
them, or else because they are excluded from the benefit of what he has done
and suffered, by the express declaration of God. As for the first of these,
surely none will venture to assert, that the merits of Christ are not
sufficient to purchase pardon for the greatest and vilest offender that ever
lived. As he is an infinite person, so what he did, as our surety, is of
infinite worth and value, enough to answer all the demands of the law, and to
procure a right to all the blessings he undertook to purchase. If any then are
excluded the benefit of Christ's mediatorial transactions, it is not on account
of any deficiency in what he has done and suffered; it must be by an explicit
declaration. They must be excepted, if not by name, yet by description, from
the general offers of pardon and salvation, or they have no warrant to except
themselves -- no reason to despair of mercy, or to determine that they are
either too great or too old sinners to be forgiven. But where do we find such
exceptions in the word of God? Where is it said, that none shall partake of the
benefits purchased by Christ, whose sins have amounted to such a degree, or who
have continued so long in them? On the contrary, are not the invitations of the
gospel made to all without exception? "Come unto me," says our Lord, "all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." Mat. 11. 28.
"Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely." Rev. 22. 17.
"If any man thirst, let him come." John 7. 37.
Are not the promises made absolutely to every one that believes? "He that
believes shall be saved." Mark 16. 16.
"Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out." John 6. 37.
There is no exception, no exclusion in the gospel, but of those who are
finally impenitent and unbelieving. Nor are any, who live under the sound of
the gospel, excluded from the hope of obtaining faith and repentance, and
consequently pardon and salvation, but they who commit the sin against the Holy
Ghost, which our Savior tells us "shall not be forgiven." All other kinds of
sin have been, and may be pardoned. We find some of the greatest transgressors
have been received to mercy. Such was Manasseh, who filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood. Such were the Corinthians, according to the account the apostle
Paul gives of them, in their heathen state. And such have been a multitude of
others, whom God has called by his grace. Such was the thief on the cross; and
yet our Savior does not in the least hesitate to assure him of pardon after
death, upon his expressing his faith and repentance. And we are hereby taught,
to use the words of another, "that no impurities of life, though never so foul,
no crimes, though never so black, never so numerous, shut us out from mercy,
provided we sincerely repent; that the grace of God can recover wretches, even
when they are at the last gasp, and just dropping into everlasting torments.
Repentance, when true, is never too late, and therefore the thief upon the
cross is a sovereign antidote against despair." But it is a most horrible abuse
of this doctrine, for any to encourage themselves in sin, from this instance of
the grace of God; and to defer their repentance, because this man found mercy
in his last hours. "As to actual repentance itself, and such grace being
extended to those (when they come to death's door) who have been profligate and
habitual sinners all their days, the most that can be inferred from hence is,
that such a thing may be, but it gives us no manner of security, nor so much as
one possible argument that it certainly shall be. Men may outstay the day of
grace, God may deny them both the will and the power to repent; and therefore
this example, when truly considered, is an excellent preservative against
presumption." -- But this brings me to the

Fourth proposition, which is to show, that there is no reason, from this
instance, for any to presume on the mercy of God, so as to neglect, or defer
their repentance. There are so many circumstances which make this an
extraordinary case, that it must be the greatest possible madness and folly, to
reason from this example, in favor of sinners who delay their repentance to the
last moment. This, indeed, shows that God can convert sinners even in a dying
hour, and so long as such an exertion of divine power and grace is possible,
none ought to despair. But there is a vast medium between despair and
presumption, and according to the common course of divine grace, there is but
little reason to entertain hopes of those, who abuse this triumph of the mercy
and goodness of God, to embolden themselves in impiety and vice, and only cry
to God for mercy, when they can sin no longer. To prevent such a vain
confidence, I shall observe several things, which ought, in all reason, to keep
us from such a misimprovement of this affecting and useful story.

First, This is a single example. I do not mean that there never was another
instance, of a sinner's obtaining mercy in a dying moment; God knows how many
more there may have been. But there is no other recorded in the book of God;
and therefore there is no other that we can be positive about. And what color
of reason is there to conclude, that we shall obtain the grace of repentance
because one man did, when so many have gone out of the world in an impenitent
state. We do not conduct thus in other matters. For instance, we are told, that
Mithridates king of Pontus, had, by a constant use of antidotes, rendered
himself proof against all kinds of poison, that he could drink the largest
potion without any sensible ill effect: Would any one, because a single man had
attained to such security, venture to take a dose of poison, upon the
presumption that it would not affect him, when it is known what an awful effect
it has had upon others; and that it has brought multitudes to a most tragical
end? No! -- men act more cautiously where this life is in danger. Alas! Why do
we forget all caution, where the life of our precious and immortal souls is
concerned, which is of infinitely greater importance? Why should we encourage
ourselves from the instance of the penitent thief to neglect our souls, any
more than we do to expose ourselves to temporal danger, because others have
escaped, when in similar circumstances?

Secondly, The penitent thief was an extraordinary instance of faith. Our Lord
was, at this time, in the depths of his humiliation, he was dying on a cross,
and in such circumstances of infamy and distress, that even his own disciples
seemed to question, whether this was he who was to deliver Israel. But while in
such a disgraceful situation, this condemned malefactor acknowledges him to be
a King, owns him as the Messiah, implores his favor, and carries his views to
that spiritual kingdom, which, as one observes, "flesh and blood and human
reason could never have discovered; a kingdom, which no eye, but the eye of
faith could have ever perceived, and which even they, who had enjoyed the
advantage of three years instruction and conversation, never yet perfectly
understood. This was a confession so resolute, so singular, so illustrious,
that no preacher, no apostle, no martyr ever came up to the heightening
commendations of it; none gave so ample a testimony to the blessed Jesus,
because none had this peculiar excellence, of giving it under so many
disadvantageous and discouraging circumstances." His faith is yet more
illustrious, if, as most expositors suppose, he had not heard of Christ before,
but embraced the first opportunity he ever had of confessing him. -- What
pretense can wicked and ungodly men under the gospel have, to draw this example
into a precedent, to support their presumption and obstinate continuance in
sin? Can they make the case of a man, who, perhaps, never heard of Christ, or
only transiently, and who owned him when every one else forsook him, a parallel
to their's, who have all their days sat under the light and preaching of the
glorious gospel, and have refused to submit to this excellent Savior, now the
reproach of the cross is so effectually rolled away, and he is declared to be
the Son of God with power, by his resurrection from the dead? Why should a
delaying sinner take encouragement from this example of the thief, unless he
were sure of having the same ingenuity of mind that he had? It is not, indeed,
to be expected, that every sincere convert should attain to the same eminent
degree of faith to which he arose; no doubt, the least degree of a holy regard
to Jesus Christ will be accepted. But as it was very extraordinary in this man
to profess Christ under such peculiar circumstances; so it is very uncommon for
one who has been careless and profligate in his life, to find a heart to
repent, and to resign himself up to Christ in his last moments. It Is true,
nothing is too hard for omnipotent grace, but the enquiry is not what God can
do, but what, according to his word, and his usual method of dealing with
sinners, we may reasonably expect he will do; and according to these rules, we
cannot look upon the extraordinary case in our text, as establishing a
precedent for common and ordinary cases.

Thirdly, This was an extraordinary time, such as will never be again. The Lord
of glory was expiring on a cross; it was sitting, that, at such a time, there
should be some illustrious trophy of divine power and grace. What singular
glory does the conversion of this sinner reflect on our Lord Jesus Christ? By
this he evidenced his superiority to the powers of earth and hell, though he
saw fit to yield, for a time, to their malice. In this his most humble state,
he, as it were, led captivity captive, by rescuing a soul of which Satan
doubtless supposed himself secure. The other malefactor says to our Lord with
an air of insolent contempt, "If thou be Christ, save thyself and us." Our Lord
could easily have done this and much more, but how then would the scriptures
have been fulfilled, that thus it must be? But though our Lord did not come
down from the cross, to answer the demand of this hardened wretch, he exerted
his power in a manner much more worthy of himself, and agreably to the great
design of his coming into the world; he bowed his companion's heart, and saved
him from the wrath which is to come. But what encouragement can this afford to
delaying sinners? can they suppose that the Son of God will again descend from
heaven and die upon the cross? and if such a time and such circumstances are
never likely to come again, surely, no one can argue, with any degree of
certainty, that he shall become a true penitent, because this was the happy
case with the thief, for whose conversion there was such an extraordinary
reason.

I might go on, and observe the folly and perverseness of those who encourage
themselves in delays from this example, as it is dreadfully uncertain, whether
they shall have an opportunity, in their expiring moments, to repent and commit
themselves into the hands of the Redeemer. Many are snatched suddenly into the
eternal world. Many are deprived of reason by the force of the disease with
which they are visited. Others are stupid and insensible with respect to
spiritual and eternal things. But the time calls me to the Improvement of the
subject.

First, From what we have heard we are led to adore the sovereignty of divine
grace. By sovereignty, I do not intend that God ever acts without the exercise
of wisdom: An infinitely wise Being must always have the highest reason for
what he does. Nor dare I say, that he has no regard to any disposition in us,
when he confers pardon and happiness. But he is not accountable to any of his
creatures, nor does he always bestow his favors on those we should think most
proper to be distinguished, nor in the time and way we should expect: The Lord
sees not as man sees, nor are his ways our ways. Behold a miserable
malefactor exercising true repentance in his dying moments, and received into
favor, while the learned Scribes and Pharisees, the rulers and teachers of the
people, are left impenitent and unpardoned! The boisterous, inhuman jailor
believes and is saved; but the hopeful young ruler, who accosted our Savior
with so much respect, enquiring with great seeming earnestness, and in the
prime and vigor of life, about the way of salvation, went away sorrowful!
According to our view of things, a malefactor condemned to die for his enormous
crimes would be the most unlikely to be saved, but Christ makes him an eminent
example of divine grace. "God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will he hardens." And that which makes the sovereignty of God the more
observable, in this instance, is, the distinction made between the two
criminals. Nothing appears but that they were equal in their guilt, they had
been perhaps partners in their crimes, as they were consigned to the same
punishment: But behold one is taken, and the other left! One remains hardened
in his impiety, the other is melted into contrition and the most ingenuous
sorrow! It was the God of all grace who made them to differ. He, by his
almighty energy, subdued the heart of the one, and made him such an illustrious
penitent; while the other breathed out blasphemies and reproaches against the
Son of God, and was left to perish in his sins. The one has infinite reason to
adore the wonderful grace extended to him, the other cannot complain of
injustice, he received but the just reward of his doings. And we have all
reason to adore the sovereignty of God, in showing mercy to one and leaving the
other.

Secondly, How unreasonable and dangerous is their conduct, who take
encouragement from the thief upon the cross, to delay their repentance! This
instance, you see, is every way extraordinary; and therefore cannot, with the
least shadow of reason, be taken as a precedent, or specimen of God's common
method of dealing with sinners. It may, indeed, with reason be supposed, that
there have been others, who resembled this thief in the sincerity of their
repentance, as they have been like him in the lateness of it, whom God has
received to his mercy; but have we not reason to fear, that the repentance of
most, when they apprehend themselves in dying circumstances, is hypocritical
and deceitful, extorted only by the terrors of an awakened conscience, and the
fear of eternal misery? Though we are to hope the best concerning particular
persons, yet if we judge by examples, can we judge very favorably of death bed
repentances? If we examine the after conduct of those, who have been raised
from the gates of death, and who, in that situation, have appeared with the
strongest marks of humility and penitence; how very rare is it to find any,
upon whom the impressions of religion have been abiding! With respect to the
most," it has happened unto them according to the true proverb, the dog is
turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the mire." And it deserves particular notice, that even at this extraordinary
time, when our Savior was dying on the cross, though he had mercy on one of
those who were crucified with him, yet he left the other in a state of
blindness and insensibility. The one is, as it were, hung up a monument of
vengeance, the other is set up as a trophy of the Redeemer's victory over the
Prince of darkness. There is as much reason that the one should awaken us to
the greatest attention and diligence, as that the other should encourage us to
hope in the mercy and grace of God. Yea, as an attention to the great things of
religion is every one's immediate duty, and will be followed with unspeakable
advantage, and as delays in this case are extremely dangerous, we ought to
improve this whole narration, as an argument to repentance, instead of abusing
it to harden ourselves, against the methods of instruction, with which an
infinitely merciful God is pleased to favor us.

Let us then be excited to repair to our blessed Redeemer for pardon and
salvation. Let none neglect it, seeing it is a matter of the greatest
importance. Let none defer it, seeing life is uncertain, and opportunity may
cease. Let none give way to dejection and despair, however great and aggravated
their sins have been: You see God can extend mercy to such as you, in a
consistency with the perfection of his nature, and the dignity of his
government; and so long as he can, who can say but he will? Your case is
hazardous, it may not be desperate. The merits of Christ are sufficient to
atone for the greatest offenses, there have been instances of great sinners
becoming great penitents, there is no declaration in the word that excludes you
from hope. There can be no reason for presumption, or for continuance in an
evil course, but there is great encouragement to be found in the way of duty.
It is your best, your wisest course to wait upon God, in the ways of his
appointment, who can tell but he may hear the voice of your supplication, have
mercy upon you, and save you? Your case is particularly hopeful, if you are
roused to a deep concern and solicitude about your eternal state. Let your
case be what it will, your sins small or great, many or few, the direction of
the gospel is, "If any man thirst let him come to me;" and the merciful
declaration is, "Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out."

But it is undoubtedly expected by my hearers, that I should more particularly
address the poor prisoner who now stands forth in this assembly, a spectacle to
angels and to men

Unhappy young Man!

It is at your earnest and repeated desire, that I have taken upon me to be
your monitor this day, probably the last Lord's Day you have to see on earth.
My tho'ts very soon fixed on the story of the penitent thief, upon which I have
been discoursing. Your situation is in some respects similar to his -- You have
been a malefactor as he was -- The crime for which you was apprehended is of
the same kind with his -- You are to die, as he did, a victim to public
justice. But your case is very different from his, if he had never heard that
Jesus was the Messiah till he was hanging on the cross: -- You have heard this
glorious truth all your days; -- You have sinned against the light of the
gospel, against the love and grace of the Redeemer. -- You have slighted the
merciful invitations, and kind warnings with which the scriptures abound. --
You have been an atrocious sinner -- an obdurate offender. -- You have been
guilty of secret sins -- You have committed presumptuous transgressions. -- You
have gone on from one crime to another, until your iniquity has found you out,
and you are condemned to die by the law of the land. -- But I mean not to
reproach you with your crimes, or to kindle resentment in the minds of my
hearers against you -- I pity you from my very soul -- My bowels yearn, when I
look upon you -- a young man -- in the strength and vigor of life; and who
might, in a course of nature, have lived many years, and have been, had you
taken to good courses, a comfort to your friends, and a blessing to society,
and consider, that you are, in a few -- a very days, to be cut off from the
land of the living, to suffer a public ignominious death. I pity you still
more, when I consider you as an offender against the great God, the righteous
Governor of the world, and in danger of his eternal wrath. You are, in a few
days, to appear before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ, of which the most
august tribunal in this world is but a faint emblem -- There, you are to give
an account of the things done in the body, of all the actions of your past life
-- There, you are to hear your final doom. -- In this supreme Court, there will
be no occasion of witnesses to prove your guilt; or of any to point out your
violations of the divine law. Your own heart will convict you, and conscience
will be instead of a thousand witnesses -- There every mouth will be stopped;
your guilt will strike you dumb. -- If you fear the destruction of your body,
can your heart endure the thought of this infinitely more amazing condemnation?
-- Well may your flesh tremble for fear of God; with infinite reason may you be
afraid of his judgment. We wonder not, if, in the contemplation of this amazing
scene, you cry out, in terror and distress -- Who shall stand before this holy
Lord God -- Men and brethren what shall I do?

But, is your case desperate? -- Is there no room for hope? Blessed be God,
there is. I bring you this day glad tidings of great joy -- The King of heaven
is a merciful King -- He can be just, and yet justify the sinner that believes
in Jesus -- The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin -- The instance of our
text, though it give you no reason to conclude that your sins will certainly be
forgiven, yet, affords a good argument against despair. You may from hence
entertain some hope that you are yet within the reach of mercy. Have you been a
great offender? Jesus Christ is an almighty Savior -- Are you the chief of
sinners? attend to the words of an inspired apostle, "it is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief." -- Is the wrath of God revealed against all
unrighteousness? Are we told that "the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God" -- Are thieves particularly enumerated, in the catalogue the
apostle Paul gives of sinners who will be excluded this blessedness? Yet hear
what this holy apostle adds, "such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God." 1 Cor. 6. 11.


Repentance, you just heard, is never too late, if it be sincere; and it is an
everlasting truth, he that believes shall be saved. Here then, poor unhappy
youth! is a door of hope for you, even for you; -- Behold a fountain opened for
sin, and for uncleanness, for wickedness of every kind. Look to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. Cast yourself on the infinite mercy of God,
through this divine Redeemer. Our glorious Lord is seated at the right hand of
God, he has entered into his kingdom, he has all power committed to him in
heaven and in earth. Say to him, with faith and the deepest contrition, Lord,
remember me, now thou have taken possession of thy kingdom! You have not,
indeed, such an extraordinary opportunity to confess Christ, nor to show your
regard to him, as the penitent thief had: Christ is now far above the impious
attempts of his enemies: But you may, by an eye of faith, view him as
crucified, as having given his life a ransom for sinners. You may view him,
standing before the throne, as a Lamb that had been slain, and there pleading
the merits of his atoning sacrifice. Though your faith should not attain that
eminence, which distinguished the faith of the thief upon the cross, yet if it
be sincere, it will be graciously accepted, and gloriously rewarded. Gloriously
rewarded it will be, though you should gain only the lowest seat in heaven,
though Christ should only remember you in his kingdom, and you should be last
in the tokens of his favor and love.

If it should be your happy case, to be admitted to the receptacle of the
blessed, and it will be, if you are a sincere penitent and a sound believer,
oh! with what humble gratitude, will you adore that rich mercy -- that
sovereign grace, which, from the chief of sinners, has raised you, to be a
saint in glory! and of a condemned malefactor, has made you a King and Priest
unto God! With what holy joy, will you contemplate the wonders of redeeming
love! and praise the God of all grace, even for those ignominious sufferings,
which through his infinite mercy, have been made to prepare you for a blessed
immortality! This, poor condemned criminal! is the happiness which the gospel
reveals. This is the happiness we sincerely wish you; and which it is possible
for you, who have such a heavy load of guilt upon you, to attain. And will you
not, with unceasing importunity, pray, that God would thus glorify the riches
of his grace toward you? Is there no danger that you will miss of the
blessedness which the gospel reveals? I must faithfully tell you, there is.
While with pleasure I repeat that gracious declaration, so full of
encouragement to sinners, "He that believes shall be saved," I must set before
you the dreadful contrast, "He that believes not shall be damned." If you
continue in impenitence and unbelief, the wrath of God will abide on you; all
the means that have been used, and all the pains that have been taken with you,
by the ministers of Christ and other christians, since you have been in a state
of confinement, (and few have experienced more kindness in this regard) all
these will rise up in judgment to condemn you. The merciful God will have no
mercy upon you -- He will banish you his presence -- and make you fuel for
unquenchable flames. This second death is infinitely more to be dreaded than
that which you are soon to suffer. "Be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do; but fear him, which after he has
killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him." -- I have
this day set before you life and death, blessing and cursing -- oh! be
persuaded to choose life --

Our blessed Savior, with astonishing condescension, said to the thief upon
the cross, "this day shall thou be with me in paradise." While the Son of God
thus displayed the dignity of his character, and manifested his infinite mercy
to the penitent believing malefactor; what sacred joy must it afford this, I
will not say unhappy, but, this truly blessed man, to have his pardon sealed by
the lips of his Savior! To hear this kind assurance from him, who was the
anointed Son of God, the King of Israel! -- How did his heart rise in gratitude
to God! -- How did he rejoice in the thought of being with him, whom he
acknowledged as his Lord! -- How did he anticipate the joys of heaven! -- And
with what pungent sorrow must he afterward be a witness of the death of this
benevolent Savior! -- How must he admire his infinite philanthrophy! -- And in
what a horrid light did he view sin, his own sins, which occasioned the
sufferings of this illustrious person! -- He saw the dying agonies of the Son
of God -- he looked to him, and mourned the wickedness, the cruelty, and
ingratitude of man -- He was humbled and confounded, even though he was assured
by him who is truth itself, that God was pacified toward him -- The larger
experience he had of the grace of the Redeemer, the more would this tragic
scene affect and distress him.

You, my friend, are not to expect, even if you are so happy as to be converted
to God, that you shall have so sensible evidence of this blessed change; you
will not hear your Redeemer assuring you, with an audible voice, that you shall
have a place in paradise -- you will not have an immediate revelation from
heaven, that you are a child of God, and have an interest in the great and
precious promises of the gospel. The way in which God makes it evident to his
saints and people, that they are to have a place in his kingdom, is by
implanting a principle of holiness, and making them like his own blessed self.
It is by their sanctification he makes it clear that they are justified. The
Spirit witnesses with our spirits, that we are the children of God, by enabling
us to exercise those graces, which the scripture makes the marks of God's
children. It is while they walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, that
they attain to the blessed satisfaction, that there is no condemnation
belonging to them. You poor prisoner! are not like to have much time to try
yourself by these marks of grace. You cannot be certain, how you should behave,
if you was again allowed to appear on the stage of action, and was anew exposed
to the snares and temptations of this present evil world. You have known, young
and inexperienced as you are, you have known some upon sickbeds, who have had
such views of sin, as that they have been very confident, they should never
again allow themselves in it; and yet, when God has mercifully spared them,
they have relapsed into their former vices; yea, have become more hardened and
impious than ever. How do you know? how can you know, that you should not be
like these, if you had opportunity? -- You are not like to have such
opportunity -- But as such instances show you the treachery of the human heart,
be very jealous of yourself -- very cautious how you think your state safe --
Be careful to lay the foundation right. "Other foundation can no man lay,
besides what is laid, which is Christ Jesus." All your dependence must be upon
him; and all your expectations from him. Through him alone, you can hope for
pardon. From him you must derive that divine principle, and that holy
disposition, without which you cannot see the Lord. Make it your constant
prayer, that you may not be deceived in a matter of such infinite importance.
Adopt the language of the holy psalmist, "Search me, O God, and know my heart,
try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and
lead me in the way everlasting." It would be dreadful indeed! to leave the
world with a lie in your right hand; to fall from the most towering hopes of
future blessedness, into an abyss of darkness and misery. Be earnest with God
-- Be very importunate -- that you may not meet with such an awful
disappointment.

None of us, who are now with you before the Lord, are able to tell the time of
our death -- Your time is fixed -- Your sentence is pronounced -- In less than
a week, your days will be extinct, the grave will be ready for you. You are to
die before a numerous multitude of spectators. The infamy, which will attend
your death, is a circumstance of little importance. Your great concern should
be, that your soul may be safe. Commit this inestimable treasure, your precious
and immortal spirit, into his hands, who is able to keep that which you commit
unto him against that day. Think of the greatness of your sins -- Think of the
glory of Christ -- Think what he has done for sinful man, that he has laid
down his life a sacrifice -- Think what he is now doing, that he is interceding
for sinners in the court of heaven -- Think of the exceeding greatness of his
power, as well as riches of his grace -- humbly plead for mercy. Like the poor
publican, smite on your breast and say, God be merciful to me a sinner! -- or
take to yourself the language of the penitent thief, Lord, remember me in thy
kingdom.

Never think your work done while you have a moment to live -- make much of the
little time you have before you -- constantly read the holy scriptures -- be
diligent in your devout addresses to him who only can work in you to will and
to do of his good pleasure -- And, God forbid! that we should cease to pray,
that He would extend his compassion and grace to you, and that the destruction
of your body may prove the salvation of your soul -- It may be an encouragement
to you in your prayers, that a multitude of others bear you on their hearts at
the throne of grace.

And now, I sincerely say, Farewell! -- The God of heaven have mercy on you and
bless you, and save you with an everlasting salvation! -- God knows whether we
shall ever again see each other's face in this world; may he, of his infinite
mercy, grant us a happy meeting at the right hand of Jesus Christ!

I should gladly make some more particular improvement of the subject we have
been upon, and of the melancholy spectacle before us, to this numerous
assembly, many of whom their curiosity has led hither at this time. But I have
trespassed on your patience already.

You see an unhappy young person doomed to die by the sentence of the civil
magistrate -- Look upon him -- and be thankful for those restraints of divine
grace, whereby you have been kept from such presumptuous transgressions, as, in
the righteous judgment of God, often terminate in ignominious punishment, and
earnestly pray that he would still keep you from such evil practices. When you
see this sad consequence of indulging vice, let it make you watchful against
your own corruptions, and against even the occasions of sin.

May our children and young people be awakened to think on their ways, and to
turn their feet into the path of God's commandments! Behold! O our children and
youth! what it is to provoke the Holy Spirit of God, by rebelling against him,
and resisting the kind motives he sets before you. No one arrives at the
highest pitch of wickedness at once. You begin with what you think smaller
transgressions, and indulge to secret sins; these silence the voice of
conscience, grieve the Spirit of God, and provoke him to leave you to your own
hearts lusts; and no one can tell, whither these may carry you, nor in what
they may end. This poor man, perhaps a few years ago, thought as little of such
an early and ignominious death, as any of you. Nothing can be so effectual a
security against such great transgressions, as an inward principle of holiness.
This will secure the protection of him who is able to withold you from
sinning against him.

Perhaps, there are some present, who, if their crimes were brought to light,
would receive punishment from men; but remember, that you cannot escape the
righteous judgment of God. Or however innocent you may be according to the law
of man, yet you stand condemned by the law of God. In God's sight no flesh
living can be justified. You must soon die, and give an account to him who will
judge the world in righteousness. Near as this condemned criminal is to death,
you may be taken out of the world before him. Yea, it is possible, that he may
be made a monument of divine grace, and you, who now look upon him as an object
of pity and compassion, may be doomed to eternal torments.

Are you enemies to God by wicked works? This places you in a worse state, than
any temporal punishment, in itself considered, could put you in. You are every
moment exposed to everlasting destruction, which is worse than death. Oh! fly
to Christ now, while there is hope. I have set before this poor prisoner the
only way in which he can be saved. There is but one way of salvation for you
and for him. Make haste, make no delay; you run a dreadful venture every moment
you put off this important concern, because the next moment may finish your
time of probation, and begin your everlasting doom.

It is possible, one who has lived all his days in sin, may repent in his last
moments. But will you venture your eternal all on a hare possibility? It Is
possible, you may be the richest man in the universe; but would not he be
deemed a madman, who, upon such presumption, should neglect to use means to
procure a subsistence? The madness is greater, infinitely greater, to neglect
the care of our souls, which are made for eternity, and are in danger of being
lost forever. Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth. Many, who have depended on a future opportunity, have been cut
off in their sins, and their souls have been lost forever.

Let me exhort and entreat all who may attend the execution of this poor
condemned criminal, to lay to heart such an affecting sight, and to behave with
decency and seriousness on such a solemn occasion. And may the awful spectacle
be a means of instruction and amendment to sinners! May they find their hearts
suitably impressed; and sincerely resolve that wherein they have done iniquity,
they will do so no more! Let us all implore the Spirit and grace of God, to
preserve us from the great transgression -- from every violation of his holy
law -- And may others hear and fear and not dare to do so wickedly!

Let those who have reason to think their peace is made with, and hope, that,
when they leave this world, they shall go to be with Christ in paradise, give
glory to him who has so marvellously distinguished them. Who makes thee to
differ from other men? -- from those who live in vice and sin? -- or from this
poor prisoner? or what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? If God has
thus distinguished us, let us adore the sovereign mercy of God, which has not
only plucked us as brands out of the burning, but raised us to the hopes of a
blessed immortality.

While you give glory to God who has called and chosen you, let me bespeak
your earnest prayers to God for this poor young man, that God would give him
true repentance, and display the riches of his grace in his everlasting
salvation.

Let us with gratitude and joy think of that blessed time when Christ will
receive us into his kingdom -- when we shall be delivered from the trials and
difficulties of life -- when we shall be no more witnesses of the crimes of
others -- and shall ourselves be free from those remains of sin which attend us
in this world, and shall be perfectly holy and perfectly happy. God grant, that
this may be the portion of each one of us, for the sake of his dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord!

AMEN.

