THE EXAMINATION OF Mr. EDWARDS, CONTINUED.

THE "EXAMINATION OF THE LATE Rev'd President EDWARDS's Enquiry on Freedom of
Will," CONTINUED.

SEC. I. On self-determination. II. On the influence of motives in moral
volitions. III. On necessity. IV. On the origin of evil. V. On the connection
between the nature and cause of volition. SEC. VI. Moral evil not best for the
world. VII. On foreknowledge. VIII. On texts of scripture misconstrued. IX.
Objections considered. X. On metaphysical reasoning. XI. Recapitulation.
TO WHICH ARE SUBJOINED, STRICTURES on the Rev'd Mr. WEST's "essay on moral
agency," etc.

By JAMES DANA, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN WALLINGFORD.

Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.

Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN. 1773.

INTRODUCTION.
SOME things which were but just touched, or considered only in a general way,
in the examination of Mr. Edwards, require a further and particular
examination: And other things need a more distinct explanation: His denial of
moral, rational liberty; his distinction of natural and moral necessity;
attributing the origin of evil to the want or withdraw of divine assistance;
seperating the obliquity of sin from its cause; are some of the points that
require a further examination. And those that need a more distinct explanation
are the doctrine of human liberty as maintained by the examiner, and the
consistency thereof with admitting the operation of motives in the choice and
determinations of moral agents.

The examiner has the same opinion still of the intricacy of the subject as
was expressed in his former publication, and means to proceed in it with
caution and diffidence. If he may be so happy as to cast any light on the
abstruse subject of liberty and necessity, or rescue it in any important
respect from its obscurity, his time will not be ill-employed. But the main
thing in view all along has been to vindicate the moral character of the Deity
from the injurious representations, either of designing, or well-meaning but
mistaken men.

The scheme of necessity, in opposition to self-determination, cannot, he
thinks, be defended on the principles of revelation or theism, if this one
thing be admitted, that God is not the cause of moral evil. If it be affirmed,
that he is the efficient cause of it, his moral perfections are denied. If
moral agents themselves are the efficient cause, this is to admit
self-determination.

Some maintain only an hypothetic liberty. On their principles necessity may be
tenable -- provided there is neither holiness nor sin in the creation of God --
no being worthy of moral complacence or displicence, praise or blame.

The examiner begs the reader to keep in mind this single question, Whether Mr.
Edwards's doctrine makes God the efficient cause of all moral wickedness? He is
himself clear in the affirmative of the question, or would not have undertaken
to examine Mr. Edwards's book. If this should also be the reader's opinion, it
is presumed the scheme which contains or concludes in this will be rejected. To
reduce a Christian writer to this is sufficient, without going any further. Nor
will there be occasion to show how different such a scheme is from the
sentiments of those who have been esteemed orthodox in the purest times of the
church: It is with no great propriety, that Mr. Edwards makes it the caption of
almost every section, that his foundation principles are the doctrines of
Calvinism; and the opposite Arminianism. Pelagianism, etc. Were it indeed so,
what other purpose can this serve than to cast an odium, and fix a personal
stigma? But in truth, when have Calvinists maintained, that the vicious wills
of moral agents are derived from God, and unalterably fixed by his efficiency?
that the first existence of sin arose from the witholding his influence and
assistance? Should it also appear that Mr. Edwards's doctrine leaves no room
for a distinction between rational and animal creatures in respect of liberty
and agency -- that it concludes in favor of the mechanism of the human mind,
this is a basis on which Calvinists have not built their scheme of doctrine.

In some parts of the ensuing performance, the examiner has been obliged to be
more abstruse than was his own choice; some readers might otherwise have
thought him wanting in respect to Mr. Edwards, whose book is repleat with such
reasoning; abundant pains being taken this way to deduce his adversaries to
absurdity. But whatever propriety there may be in opposing metaphysics to
metaphysics, yet the examiner would assure the reader, he has taken care not
to substitute any metaphysics of his own for truth; but has endeavored to
suggest some plain things on what he takes to be the real truth in the present
debate. He desires the reader would excuse a few things that may appear
abstruse, and hopes the greater part of what he has written will be thought
sufficiently clear, and adapted to do some good. The whole calls for the public
candor, which he would not forfeit by writing with a sour temper.

He has not been at all intimidated by the opinion or arguments of his
remarker, who thinks the grand pillars of Mr. Edwards's doctrine stand firm and
unshaken. Nor has he any apology to make for undertaking to examine Mr.
Edwards's book. It Is enough, that the examiner treated "this great man" with no
disrepect in his first publication, and determines not to in the present.

March 29, 1773.
SECTION I. On Self-determination.
WE shall first explain the doctrine of human liberty in the sense in which we
maintain it. Secondly, Make a few cursory observations on Mr. Edwards's scheme
of liberty.

Power, motion and agency are terms of various signification. The two first are
frequently used in mechanics, and all of them may be applied to animal
creatures. "Power may reside in a subject that is no agent; as in the case of
physical or natural powers."

When we speak of the motions and revolutions of inanimate bodies, it may
amount to the same thing at last, whether we attribute these to an established
original law of nature, or to the constant agency of the Deity upon matter. The
course of nature is the constitution of the author of nature. It is
demonstrably not so fixed as to preclude special divine interposition, whereby
the operation of second causes is suspended or counteracted. We cannot, indeed,
determine how far this is the case. Many events may be brought about (at least
in part) by second causes, which we may imagine belong to the head of special
interpositions, overruling those causes. It Is difficult to ascertain the
powers of nature, as well as those of moral agents.

There is a sense in which there is no power but of God. And if any choose to
say, that natural causes (so called) are really no cause at all; that God
actuates all the powers of nature, and that from his energy every effect in the
natural world proceeds, we have no objection to make. We only desire it may be
remembered, that mechanic powers, the motions of inanimate bodies, bear no
resemblance to, and give us no idea of, the powers of moral and accountable
creatures. Should one undertake to illustrate consciousness by the vibrations
of a pendulum, it would not be more ridiculous than a pretense to explain the
powers of human nature by the motions of the planets, the growth of vegetables,
etc. These are so far from being any exemplification of moral agency, that they
bear no likeness even to animal motion. For this is voluntary. And we presume
it will not be said that voluntary motion is predicable of inanimate things --
not even by those philosophers who have resembled the powers of moral nature to
those of material bodies.

Nor will the consideration of animal motion and agency, any more than the
motions of inanimate bodies, afford us any proper illustration of moral agency.
Voluntary motion and exertion is indeed common to moral agents and the lower
animals. These have natural power, forecaste, memory, can move this way or that
as they please, or according to the determination of their will. They are
agents -- voluntary agents -- It Is apparent they "act electively" -- from
design -- to certain ends. They are capable of being taught many things. From
the sagacity some of them discover, many have conjectured that they have an
immortal spirit, and are accountable. This, we apprehend, is going too far, and
find Mr. Edwards concurs with us. P. 41.
Whatever gradations there are in the creation, mankind appear to be the lowest
order of intelligent moral agents. The appearances of reason in many of the
brute creatures are easily accounted for without supposing them possessed of a
moral faculty -- in much the same manner as we account for many instances of
the conduct of idiots, who never had the exercise of this faculty; of madmen,
who have lost it; and of children before they arrive to the exercise of it.
What they see and experience from day to day affords them instruction, and
influenceth their conduct, without their having any perception of good and evil
in a moral view. The same holds, in a degree, in the inferior creatures. The ox
knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib. And those animals, who have
no guide, overseer or ruler, give proofs of sagacity and forecaste, the
consideration of which would be of use to many who have reason for their guide.
The animal creatures are also the subjects of certain internal dispositions and
affections. They have a common care and tenderness for their young. Some of the
feebler sort associate for the double purpose of protection and common
usefulness. Some kinds of them are of a fierce, venomous, or ravenous
disposition; others are mild, gentle and harmless. "Spontaneous voluntary
exertion" belongs to every species of them. But though spontaneous animal
motion may approach the nearest to moral agency, of any thing in visible
nature; yet it is essentially different thereform, nor does it give us any
proper idea thereof. A just notion of moral agency we can derive only from
attending to the nature and operations of the human mind -- not from a
contemplation of inanimate or animate nature. The inspiration of the Almighty
has given us understanding. I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made; mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right
well. God created man in his own image.

It seems, notwithstanding, that some gentlemen need to be informed, that man
has a distinctive power from animals. We scruple not to risque the whole
controversy on their being able to point out a difference, still retaining
their own principles.

Hard is our task to be obliged to explain the difference between a man and a
brute in regard of liberty and self-determination. Such minds as acknowledge no
difference, we fear cannot be convinced. In regard to truths we are immediately
conscious of, every medium of proof, all reasoning, not only seems needless,
but rather serves to obscure than elucidate what is proposed to be proved. As
though by removing the object to a greater distance, we would obtain a more
distinct and full view of it.

The distinctive faculty of moral agents we before endeavored to state and
explain -- and we think it was shown, that moral liberty really differs from
animal, and that, "in finite beings placed upon trial, it implies an
opportunity and capacity of choosing and acting otherwise than they in fact do."
Examination of Edwards, Part III. Sect. I.
Further to illustrate and confirm the same thing, we desire the capacity moral
agents have of examining and considering before they make their choice, or
proceed to act, in any given case, may be well attended to. They can determine
to consider the reasonableness or unreasonableness of any proposed object of
choice -- whether it be consistent with, or contrary to, their duty -- whether
it be for their interest upon the whole -- and consequently, whether it is the
part of wisdom to choose or refuse it. They have this power in regard to
speculative principles, as well as with respect to life and conduct. They can
examine the nature and evidence of what is proposed to 'm for truth, and
embrace or reject it as it shall appear to be true or false upon diligent and
impartial enquiry; or give it that weight which its greater or less importance
shall demand. Error in principle is one great source of men's practical
deviations from the paths of righteousness. Hence it is, not infrequently, that
they justify and boast themselves in a way that is not good, imagining they are
doing God service, when in reality they are fighting against him. Now so far as
men judge wrong, and in consequence thereof act wrong, through their own
carelessness, or neglect, or through partiality in their enquiries after truth;
so far they are criminal, and chargeable with all the practical consequences of
their wrong judgment. If the mistakes of mankind on practical subjects are
searched to the bottom, the probability is, that the greater part of such
mistakes will be found to proceed from that cause our Lord mentions, Every one
that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lost his deeds
should be reproved. And this is their condemnation. For what has that man to
plead, who receives not the love of the truth, because he has pleasure in
unrighteousness? From whatever cause men refuse to examine the foundation and
reasonableness of those religious principles they profess to maintain, or
reject; whether it be from education, interest, or partial affection; they are
criminal, and must answer it to him who has given them a capacity to discern
the difference between right and wrong, good and evil -- who has granted them
the necessary means of knowledge, and requires that they prove all things; and
hold fast that which is good -- that they judge even of themselves what is
right. Had that rule, which some have laid down to themselves and others,
"first determine and then examine," been universally adopted, knowledge could
never have increased -- ignorance, superstition and barbarism must have
overspread the earth.

Then in matters which more immediately respect the heart and life, moral
agents have the same power of examining and attending to what is laid before
them. Most of their vicious elections and pursuits probably proceed from want
of attention and consideration. They have a power of reflecting -- of
acquainting themselves which is the wise choice and course. But they do not
stop and consider what is before them -- what choice they are about to make --
what will be the consequence in this world or another. Their conclusions are
precipitate, and they proceed to action as the horse rusheth into the battle.
What strikes their external senses, and promises a present gratification to
their particular affections, lusts or passions, is wont to be greedily embraced
and pursued -- what requires some self-denial and mortification of these is
quickly rejected, before that faculty, which is naturally supreme, and was
given to direct and control the bodily appetites, instincts and passions, can
pass judgment in the case. Wrong apprehensions, wrong affections and conduct,
proceeding in so many instances as they manifestly do from the neglect of
reason and reflection, show of what vast importance it is that moral agents set
down and consider before they pass judgment, or make their election, and
determine what course to take, in things that concern them. Experience concurs
with the sacred oracles in attesting, that the want of attention and
examination is a principal source of the fatal mistakes and miscarriages of
mankind: And how could it be expected it should be otherwise, when the
regulating faculty of our nature, instead of being improved in the search of
truth and duty, is used, if at all, as a servant to the sensitive appetites?
This is a like contradiction in morals as it is in civil life to see servants
on horses, and princes walking like servants on the earth -- or as if the feet
should usurp the place of the head in the natural body.

When in any given case it is dubious what course is our duty to take, or would
be most prudent all things considered, by deliberating on the matter we may
come to be clearly satisfied; whereas if we proceed immediately to action, we
are liable to err fatally -- and should it be otherwise, we cannot have the
pleasure of knowing that we are right -- it is accidental that we are so -- we
merit no commendation, but rather deserve blame for running the hazard of being
in the wrong, when we might have obtained full conviction had we been at the
pains, and given ourselves time, to reflect a few moments.

Or suppose the sense of duty is sufficiently clear, but we are beset by
numerous and powerful temptations, have we not power to make a pause? By this
means, we may obtain such a view of the particular evil to which we are
enticed, such considerations may be suggested to our minds, as that a present
temptation, however strong, shall not prevail, but gradually loose strength and
be overcome. Will you say that men in this case have not power to forbear
immediate action? to reflect a moment? Doubtless they have power to determine
immediately with themselves to consider the matter. Especially must they be
admitted to have this power, if we take into the account the operations of
divine grace on their hearts. In this way many good tho'ts are often injected
in the moment of danger. May they not be cherished, and made our own? By
reflections on the nature of virtue and vice; their rewards and punishments
present and future; the past peaceable and happy fruits of the one; and
contrary effects of the other, in our own experience, or observation of others;
by reflections on the moral perfections and government of God; the person and
offices of Jesus Christ, and calling to mind other considerations suggested by
the oracles of truth, the force of a present temptation may be speedily weakened
through the influences of grace suggesting and concuring with such moral
considerations. While the force of conscience is abated by stifling it is
remonstrances, and harkening to the solicitations of lust and appetite in
opposition thereto; it is sensibility is, on the contrary, proportionably
increased by reflection and attention. Now to say that those who live very much
without moral reflection and attention; therefore cannot determine otherwise
with themselves, is implicitly to deny that they have the faculty of reason.
They can deliberate on the means and opportunities of gratifying their lusts.
What good reason can be offered to show they have not power to turn their
meditations into another channel?

But as it is an important duty of moral agents to accustom themselves to
diligent enquiry and mature consideration, that they may know what they ought
to choose and pursue, and what to refuse and avoid, and not act as the horse and
mule who have no understanding -- so it should not be forgotten, that they
sometimes deliberate with a very different and opposite view -- not to discover
their duty where it is doubtful, but to explain it away where it is plain. In
cases where an uprignt mind can be at no loss, but makes immediate choice, a
dishonest heart will hesitate, and, under a notion of deliberating in order to
discover what may or ought to be done, contriveth excuses for the violation of
a clear command. Sometimes great and scandalous vices are refined upon till
they are though it to be no vices; perhaps are transformed into virtues. Well were
it if some men were as dexterous and ingenious, in calling to mind arguments to
their duty as they are in finding out reasons against it, and means of darkning
and perplexing the sense of it -- as they are in the palliations and excuses
they contrive for their sins, and in what they offer in justification of
themselves. They had rather sin with their eyes shut than with them open. Hence
they take abundant pains to obscure the sense and meaning of the plainest
commands, that they may possess the hope of religion, while they walk according
to the course of this world. A single example will set this matter in a strong
light. Balaam, we read, loved the wages of unrighteousness, while he hoped to
die the death of the righteous. Hence he would not go in direct contradiction
to his duty in order to obtain Balak's reward, but set himself to reconcile his
duty with his views of worldly gain and preferment. After God had plainly told
him once, that he should not curse Israel, it was enough -- he should have
enquired no further, Yet after this he held one consultation and another with
Balak's messengers, and enquires of God again and again concerning the matter
whereof he had already been fully certified. Not succeeding according to his
mind, though he persisted in his resolution not to curse Israel without an
explicit divine permission, yet he proceeded to counsel Balak to lay a
stumbling block before them, which proved their destruction. In this way he
pacified his conscience, while he as effectually broke over the divine
instructions as if he had cursed Israel in the name of God. In many (perhaps
most) cases men's duty is plain at the first proposal. It is difficult to
mistake it. In such cases, deliberation is but a subterfuge to break over the
obligation of it. Hence it is that men affect to doubt in the plainest matters,
i. e. the most important. By indirect means, they evade the sense of moral and
religious obligation, and keep all quiet within, while they do those things in
effect, which they would start back at the thought of doing in a direct manner.
Had they made their choice and acted according to the first appearance of
things, they would have chosen the good and right way: But some favorite
hypothesis must be maintained, some lust or passion gratified, at all events;
and hence it is that they labor to reconcile things contrary, as light and
darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness. It Is hard to give up the hopes of
religion, but harder to sacrifice their worldly views.

Some (and these men of fine parts) have gone further, and prostituted their
superior talents in embellishing vice, and attempting to take off from it it is
just odium; employing their powers in the cause of infidelity, saping the
foundation of every religious principle, and consequently of all virtue. As
though the gift of reason were bestowed on us to subserve the gratification of
the appetites and passions -- that we might make ourselves more vile than the
beasts that perish -- might sin with more delicacy and malignity indeed, but
with no remorse. We could wish there were not so great a similarity between the
writings of some authors of this stamp, and Mr. Edwards's book on the will.

That attention and examination, which, as moral agents, we are capable of, and
is our bounden duty, is of such evident importance that to the neglect of it
are attributed in scripture most of the sins and miseries of men. My people
will not consider. O that they were wise, that they -- would consider!
Consideration is represented as necessary to, and a likely means of, the
reformation of sinners. And the exhortation to consider our ways is in effect
the same as that, amend your ways. This capacity of considering and judging, of
distinguishing virtue and vice, "and their fruits in the present life, which
are the proper samples of" their consequences in another, is an important
distinction of mankind from the animal creatures, and shows that the former
determine themselves in a sense which the latter do not. Especially when we
further consider, that "should reason neglect it is post, conscience is
appointed as an instinctive kind of monitor, perpetually to remind us both of
our interest and our duty." The animal creatures act as impelled by instinct
and appetite. They have not a power of deliberating, reasoning, reflecting --
they wait only for an opportunity of action, without being able to consider the
consequences. And when moral agents act without consideration, they forget the
distinction put on their nature, and haste as a bird to the snare, not knowing
it is for their life.

By suspending judgment, election and action, new reasons often arise to the
mind -- many times diverse from, and opposite to, those first extant in it, and
an overmatch for them. This observation may be applied to matters of
speculation and practice, There is, indeed, no speculative truth of importance
but what relates to practice, in an higher or lower degree, immediately or more
remotely. Speculative error is wont to beget vicious affections, and vicious
affections speculative error. Infidelity and dissolute manners are mutually the
parents and the offspring of each other. That the soul be without knowledge, it
is not good.
and to that twofold design moral agents have in deliberating and suspending,
of which we have been speaking, viz. either to discover the truth and their
moral obligations, that they may the better fulfill their duty -- or to get
confirmed in error, to darken the sense of moral right, and find means to
justify or excuse themselves in their various vicious pursuits. By suspending
and reflecting with the former view, a full persuasion may be begotten in the
mind that that is truth, which before was supposed to be falsehood or error --
that which was doubtful may be cleared up -- the path of duty may become plain
-- new arguments in support of truths before received may be suggested -- new
inducements to profess and live according to them. To which may be added, that
the spirit of truth and holiness is ever ready to direct and succeed the
enquiries of those who have probity of mind; to suggest to them the most
convincing reasons for the truth, the most powerful motives to duty, and to
operate therewith. None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand.

On the contrary, those who suspend and deliberate from the latter view
mentioned above, justly expose themselves to be given over to strong delusions;
their foolish heart becomes darkened, and hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. They become an easy prey to the god of this world, who is permitted to
blind their eyes, so that the arguments and motives of reason and religion have
little or no weight with them.

Much the same may be said of those, whose lusts and passions precipitate their
moral judgment, as of the more deliberate workers of wickedness who take much
pains to darken and bribe it. They alike expose themselves to be delivered over
to the will and power of the deceiver of the nations, the enemy of all
righteousness.

But it is objected, that suspending implies, the mind has already made its
choice; that is, it has chosen to deliberate and examine -- that the
difficulty, therefore, still returns, and the cause of this determination to
suspend remains to be pointed out.

To this we answer, that a moral agent either has power to originate an act of
suspension, and so bring himself into the view of new motives; or the
suspending act proceeds from a motive extant in his mind at the same instant
with some motive to immediate election or action. The former will not be
allowed, as it would be at once to admit self-determination. And on the latter
supposition, the motive to suspend, must be previous to the act of suspension,
else it cannot be the cause of that act -- cannot move or excite to it. There
must be the exertion of the cause before the effect can take place. But if the
motive to suspend be previous to the act of supension, then the other motive to
immediate election and action must determine the will till the motive to
suspend has produced its effect: That is, the agent is determined, his choice
is made, before he determines to suspend; the act of suspension is an after
act. In other words, there is, properly speaking, no suspension at all. Or
viewing the matter in the most favorable light, it will stand thus: A moral
agent cannot be the source of suspension in himself. No motive ab extra to
suspend being extant in his mind, he must immediately make his choice. To say
he had a power of awakening in himself a motive to suspend, or of negativing a
present motive to action, would be to assert self-determination; or to say,
that the act of suspension had already taken place, which, by supposition, can
be only in consequence of some previous motive. There was, then, a temptation
exhibited to the mind of Lucifer, while a son of the morning, to rise up in
rebellion against the Most High. It had positive influence to excite and move
him to this thing. He had no intrinsic power to negative it, or to suspend
election, or view the temptation in any other light than he in fact did. It
necessarily determined him. Upon his revolt, he was an instrument in suggesting
a similar temptation to our progenitors in paradise -- which they could view no
otherwise than they did -- their choice was determined in the same way. Thus
sin and misery came into the world. Here is the true source of all the
wickedness of men and devils. Can it be defended on the maxims of reason,
experience or religion? Is it not wholly forgotten, that moral agents have the
faculty of reason, the power of reflection? Let this single question be
decided, Whether vicious beings derive the state of their wills from the author
of their frame? and the whole dispute will be determined accordingly. The
affirmative makes God the cause and fountain of wickedness; the negative makes
moral agents themselves the cause. Let reason and religion say, which opinion
is to be prefered.

There can, strictly speaking, be no motive to the choice and determination of
a rational creature, but such as comports with the dignity of his nature,
conscience being always considered as supreme. Hence motives of interest,
honor, pleasure, are motives to pursue what is, upon the whole, beneficial,
honorable, pleasurable -- not what may casually gratify the lower affections
and appetites, in opposition to reason, to the true interest, dignity and
enjoyment of a moral and accountable creature. To say, that such a creature, in
case of a competition of objects, cannot stop and consider which reason directs
to, and govern himself accordingly, is either to deny him the power of
reflection, or to suppose him given over to a reprobate mind. When the animal
propensities and the dictates of reason are at variance, (as they often are)
may not the former be negatived? And is it not somewhat of a solecism to say, a
rational creature can have a motive to act unreasonably? In a loose way of
speaking, we are indeed wont to say, that the covetous, ambitious and
voluptuous have motives to the pursuit of unjust gain, unlawful pleasure, and
to make their way to preferment by dishonorable means. But it may be worthy of
consideration, whether, in strict propriety, a motive to such a choice and
pursuit, as contradicts the leading and distinguishing principle of our nature,
really deserves to be called a motive to such a being as man? Be this as it
will, we evidently have a power of deliberating, reflecting, or suspending --
of considering what is before us -- Moral agents have a capacity of being
influenced in their actions by moral inducements and motives, exhibited to the
view of understanding and reason, to engage to a conduct agreeable to the moral
faculty. This capacity in moral agents, admitted and maintained by Mr. Edwards,
is a demonstrable proof of self-determination, as it implies the power of
suspending, which we have been arguing for. A power of suspending election and
action is plainly a power of determining whether we will be governed by reason
and the principles of religion, or not. And can this power be allowed to moral
agents consistently with the denial of self-determination? A learned and very
worthy friend, on perusing what we had wrote on the article of suspending
present volition, deliberating, etc. was pleased to suggest, that as it must
depend on the moral agent himself, whether he will suspend, consider, etc. and
consequently is a full proof, or rather the actual exercise, of
self-determination; so this may be the foundation of an entire difference
between God and the creature. There is no room for consideration, or any act or
exercise similar to it in God, because of his omniscience. But the virtue of an
intelligent creature depends much, very much, not to say wholly, upon it.


While the agency of the animal creatures is as necessary as the rotation of
the earth and revolutions of the planets, the cause of moral volitions is in
the mind itself which is the subject of them, as will appear, we apprehend,
from a little attention to the moral faculty of understanding. This regulating
power of moral agents idiots and madmen have not, and therefore are not moral
agents any more than brutes. And though, as was said before, the motions of
inanimate bodies or of animals are not similar to moral agency; yet were the
dictate of the moral faculty followed without deviation, mankind would as
regularly fill up their place in the creation, as the lower animals do theirs
-- as regularly as the seasons revolve, or the heavenly bodies move. There
would be as great harmony in moral nature as appears in the other works of God.

Superior intelligences, in other worlds, we may suppose, are as regular to the
duties of their station, and fulfill the pleasure of the Creator with a like
punctuality and constancy, as the luminaries of heaven shine. That men on earth
do not, in their measure, fulfill his will as it is done by higher orders of
beings in heaven, is their sin; as they have the same general faculty to direct
and govern 'em, how much soever the inhabitants of the world above may excel in
intellectual strength. Were there not a proper cause in the mind, the exercises
and actions of mankind would uniformly be such as the order of our nature
points out. And the supposition of the fall of angels or men would be as wild,
as the supposition of the everlasting mountains moving out of their place, or
the interruption of the harmony of the spheres. At least it would be viewed in
no other light than any alteration in the material world, or suspension of the
laws of nature. The latter might as well be judged criminal and morally evil as
the former. If the cause of the exercises and actions of moral agents be not in
themselves, then the Deity is the proper efficient cause of them. Now we see
that all his operations, all the effects of his agency in the material world
and animal nature, are uniform and harmonious -- the same from age to age. If
the moral exercises and conduct of rational accountable beings proceed from the
efficiency of the same cause, from the same lover of order and harmony, why
then are they so irregular and out of course? This single consideration is
enough to satisfy us, that the mind of a moral agent is the true cause of his
own election, and actions. The effects of divine agency in the natural world
being uniform, while moral volitions and actions are not so, is a clear proof
that the latter are not, in like manner, the product of divine operation. For
as Mr. Edwards maintains, that the moral world is the end of the natural, can
it be that the God of order acts out of course in events of a moral nature,
which are of by far the greatest moment, while in natural events he observes a
stated method of operation? The supposition of the divine agency in sin,
moreover, confounds the distinction between the agency or influence of God, and
that of the devil. And further, how can that influence, which holy beings are
under, be holy in reference to its cause, unless that which vicious beings are
under is allowed to be wicked in reference to it is cause. However, the devil is
not the cause of men's sins, though it is through his instigation that they
fall into sin.


The author of our beings is the proper cause of our moral capacity -- the
father of our spirits. This capacity the effect of his inspiration, is the
proper cause of volition. It may be well improved, or neglected and perverted.
There are created beings who have improved it well, as there are who have
perverted it. The latter might have made the same use of it as the former, and
herein would have fallen in with the design of the creator, and been workers
together with God for his glory and their own felicity and honor. Therefore
the perversion of this capacity is not to be attributed to God as the cause:
For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. In their
innocent state, men and angels were capable of attending to the calm dictates
of reason -- of perceiving clearly the superiority of this principle to the
instincts and appetites of animal nature. There was nothing "in their wills"
that could indispose them to attend to the voice of reason. God made them
upright -- designed they should continue so, and gave them power to abide in
their first state -- in the knowledge, love and enjoyment of himself. And
however this depended on continued divine communications, these would not have
been withdrawn till the creature had first abused and forfeited them -- as is
proposed to be shown in the sequel. The ablest philosophers and divines have
maintained, that God originally endowed mankind with freedom of will -- that
from the abuse of this "freedom all misery and sin, all natural and moral
evils, derive their existence -- it being more eligible that" man "should be"
created "a free agent, than a mere machine." "There is a gradation or scale of
ascent of the principle of action among creatures, in proportion to their
perfection -- The first being is the sole principle of action in all inanimate
matter. In animal motion, the animals themselves are admitted into a small
participation of the production of the effect, as they have the direction of
some motions, or the power of beginning them. Brutes and men are thus far
spontaneous with regard to the motions of their bodies. But men have further a
power of directing arbitrarily their perceptive capacity to and throughout
their past perceptions, which brutes have not -- and which therefore is the
specific difference betwixt rational and irrational beings. -- What is it to
will? Is it not to act? If it be to act, it is to have the internal principle
of action -- This I take to be the use of the beauty of nature, and that
constancy, those certain stated laws by which the motions and changes in the
world are governed, that free agents could have no fore sight or judgment
without this constancy. There would be without this no choice or judgment,
because there would be no course of things. If we should suppose a contrary
method to obtain, -- what fear and irresolution, what disappointment, confusion
and final disorder might we not apprehend in all human affairs!"

Baxter on the soul, vol. I. p. 177, 178; 203; 208.


It may be difficult exactly to determine what the powers of human nature now
are, or what they were in Adam in his innocent state. We may yet safely assert,
that his duty did not exceed his abilities as he came out of the forming hands
of God. To say it did, would be impeaching the maker and governor or the world
with the injustice which the servant in the parable complained of, Thou art an
hard master, reaping where thou have not sown. And shall we presume to say of
him who is righteous altogether, that he demanded improvement beyond the number
of talents given? If not, then the fall of man was not owing to any want of
power to continue upright, but to his abuse of original ability. His dependence
on divine influence for the preservation of his moral rectitude, as well as of
his existence, proves nothing to the contrary, if it be true, that that
influence would not have been withheld, had not man, by some act of rebellion,
incurred the forfeiture of it. For we pretend not that any creature ever had an
independent power, either for the purposes of life or godliness. But the
creature may neglect or abuse what he has received; and in consequence of
that, what he has may be taken away. Man, therefore, had at first such powers
and communications from God as were sufficient to his continuing and improving
in the knowledge, in the moral resemblance and enjoyment of his maker. His
original sin appears to have been a neglect of reason and hasty listening to the
solicitations of appetite. In all probability it was a very sudden act. By
this he forfeited the presence and grace of God; whereof he was immediately
convinced, and feared to appear before that glorious being whose displeasure he
had incurred, and with whom his correspondence before was most intimate. But
upon the exhibition of a savior to him, under the character of the seed of the
woman, his hopes revived. With the delivery of this original promise to him, he
was put under a capacity of recovering by repentance and faith in the seed
promised what he had lost by harkening to the tempter. In this promise life and
blessing were again set before him, and his offended creator said to him, Choose
life. Whatever power was lost, whatever inability incurred, by the first
apostasy, in regeneration, a similar power is restored as man in innocence had
-- not indeed a power of living wholly without sin; but a general habit of
holiness; such exercises and dispositions of heart as conform the creature to
the creator, and which in scripture are signified by being renewed after the
image of God -- renewed in the spirit of our minds -- sanctified in Christ
Jesus -- being new creatures, etc. Out of a regard to the mediator, great and
precious promises are made to the apostate sons of men-particularly the promise
of the aids of the spirit, through which alone any are renewed in knowledge,
and become partakers of God's holiness. Repentance and faith in Christ hold the
same place in the religion of a fallen creature, as unsining obedience did in
that of our progenitors while they remained upright. By the gospel God calls
upon all men every where to repent, and believe in his son for reconciliation
and salvation. He also gives his spirit with his gospel, of which unregenerate
men receive a measure. And to him that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. We do not ascribe any self-derived, independent power, either to
unregenerate or regenerate men; but such only as they have received from God,
of which they are not, strictly speaking, the proprietors, but stewards. The
latter are faithful stewards of the gifts and grace of God; the former are
unfaithful, and waste his goods. And whatever impotency is derived to us from
the human apostasy, it is sufficient that in regeneration such power is restored
as is equal to the purposes of salvation -- that as men have received grace, so
God is ever ready to support them in duty, while they acknowledge their
dependence, and draw nigh to him. For every one that asks, receives; and he
that seeks, finds.

The things that have been offered are sufficient to prove, that moral
volitions proceed from a cause in moral agents themselves, and to explain in
what sense we maintain this. They serve further to illustrate and establish our
doctrine of human liberty. Further to illustrate and confirm the subject of our
present enquiry, we beg leave to make some quotations from a writer of great
merit.

"The true reason why a person cannot complain of being made answerable for an
action, is, that he has produced it himself knowingly and willingly -- is the
real author, the productive cause, of his actions -- the good or bad effects
from thence arising may be justly attributed and referred to him, as to the
efficient cause -- the author or moral cause. Every thing almost that is said
and done in human society supposes this principle generally received, and every
body acquiesceth in it from an inward conviction -- Every action or omission
subject to the direction of man, can be charged to the account of the person in
whose power it was to do it or let it alone: and on the contrary, every action,
whose existence or non existence does not depend on our will, cannot be imputed
to us. Observe here, that omissions are ranked by civilians and moralists among
the number of actions; because they apprehend them as the effect of a voluntary
suspension of the exercise of our faculties. --

We may impute to a person every action or omission, of which he is the author
or cause, and which he could or ought to have done or omitted. --

With regard to another person's actions, they cannot be imputed to us, but in
as much as we have concurred to them, and as we could and ought to have
procured, hindered, or at least directed them after a certain manner. The thing
speaks for itself. For to impute another man's actions to a person, is
declaring that the latter is the efficient, though not the only cause thereof;
and consequently that this action depended in some measure on his will, either
in its principle or execution --

It is not sufficient to have enlightened the mind in respect to the nature of
those goods and evils that are capable of rendering us really happy or unhappy;
we should likewise give activity and efficacy to these principles, by forming
the will so as to determine itself by taste and habit, pursuant to the counsels
of enlightened reason. And let no one think it impossible to change our
inclinations, or to reform our tastes. It is with the taste of the mind, as
with that of the palate. Experience shows, that we may alter both, so as to
find pleasure at length in things that before were disagreable to us. We begin
to do a thing with pain, and by an effort of reason; afterward we familiarise
ourselves to it by degrees; then a frequency of acts renders it easier to us,
the repugnance cease, we view the thing in a different light from what we did
before; and use at length makes us love a thing that before was the object of
our aversion. --

-- Our mind inclines naturally to that side which seems the most probable; but
this does not debar it from suspending its assent, in order to seek for new
proofs, or to refer the whole enquiry to a future opportunity. --

In respect to things that are evident. It is always in our power to apply our
minds to the consideration of those things, or else to divert them from thence,
by transfering somewhere else our attention. This first determination of the
will, by which it is led to consider or not to consider the objects that occur
to us, merits particular notice, because of the natural influence it must have
on the very determination, by which we conclude to act or not to act, in
consequence of our reflection and judgment. Secondly, we have it likewise in our
power to create, as it were, evidence in some cases, by dint of attention and
enquiry; whereas at first setting out, we had only some glimmerings,
insufficient to give us an adequate knowledge of the state of things. In fine,
when we have attained this evidence, we are still at liberty to dwell more or
less on the consideration thereof; which is also of great consequence, because
on this depends its greater or lesser degree of impression. --

To prove that man is indeed a free agent -- let us therefore consult only
ourselves. Every one finds that he is master, for instance, to walk or sit; to
speak or hold his tongue. Do not we also experience continually, that it
depends entirely on ourselves to suspend our judgment, in order to proceed to a
new enquiry? Can any one seriously deny, that in the choice of good and evil
our resolutions are unconstrained; that, notwithstanding the first impression,
we have it in our power to stop of a sudden, to weigh the arguments on both
sides, and to do, in short, whatever can be expected from the freest agent. --
I find I can abstain from any particular good; I can defer using it; I can
prefer something else to it; I can hesitate in my choice, in short, I am my own
master to choose, or, which is the same thing, I am free --

Sensible proofs like these are superior to all objection, and productive of
the most inward conviction, by reason it is impossible, that when the soul is
modified after a certain manner, it should not feel this modification, and the
state which consequently attends it. What other certainty have we of our
existance? And how is it we know that we think, we act, but by our inward sense?

This sense of liberty is so much the less equivocal, as it is not momentary or
transient: It is a sense that never leaves us, and of which we have a daily and
continual experience -- Reflections, deliberations, researches, actions,
judgments; all suppose the use of liberty. Hence the ideas of good and evil, of
vice and virtue: hence, as a natural consequence, arises praise or blame, the
censure or approbation of our own, or other people's conduct. The same may be
said of the affections and natural sentiments of men toward one another, as
friendship, benevolence, gratitude, hatred, anger, complaints and reproaches:
None of these sentiments could take place unless we were to admit of liberty.
In fine, as this prerogative is in some measure the key of the human system, he
that does not allow it to man, subverts all order, and introduces a general
confusion.

It is natural here to enquire, how it was ever possible for any body seriously
to doubt, whether man is master of his own actions, whether he is free? I
should be less surprised at this doubt, were it concerning a strange or remote
fact, a fact that was not transacted within ourselves. But the question is in
regard to a thing, of which we have an internal immediate feeling, a constant
and daily experience. Strange, that any one should call in question a faculty
of the soul! May not we as well doubt of the understanding and will, as of the
liberty of man? For if we are content to abide by our inward sense, there is no
more room to dispute of one than of the other. But some too subtle
philosophers, by considering this subject in a metaphysical light, have stripped
it, as it were of its nature; and finding themselves at a loss to solve a few
difficulties, they have given a greater attention to these difficulties than to
the positive proofs of the thing; which insensibly led them to imagine that the
notion of liberty was all an illusion. -- We are informed by experience, that
in several things which, in respect to us are in rested with the highest degree
of certainty, there are many difficulties notwithstanding, which we are
incapable of resolving to our satisfaction: And this is a natural consequence
of the limits of the mind. Let us conclude therefore from hence, that when a
truth is sufficiently evinced by solid reasons, whatever can be objected
against it, ought not to stagger or weaken our conviction, as long as they are
such difficulties only as embarrass or puzzle the mind, without invalidating
the proofs themselves.

Burlamaqui's principles of law, Vol. I. p. 17, 18; 24 -- 27; 34, 35; 59, 60;
238; 248; 258.
The remaining part of this section will be taken up in showing, that Mr.
Edwards, though he admits animal and external liberty, denies moral, and in a
few cursory observations on this part of his scheme.

He defines liberty thus: Liberty is power, opportunity or advantage that any
one has to do as he pleases. If he is able, and there is nothing in the way to
hinder his pursuing and executing his will, the man is fully and perfectly
free. Whence it is manifest, that Mr. Edwards had no other notion of liberty
than what respects external action or conduct. Those who desire particular
satisfaction that Mr. Edwards held no other liberty may examine p. 38, 39, 40;
76, 77; 132; 189; 191; 213; 214, 215; 234; 236; 259. -- etc. etc.
The pleasure of the mind, and acting or conducting according to it, are
entirely different. The act of volition or choice is a different thing from the
pursuit or execution of what is willed or chosen. And if liberty consists in
the latter only, it cannot be at all requisite to moral agency and
accountableness. There may be a willing or an unwilling mind when there is not
"power, opportunity or advantage for one to do as he pleases." And moral
agents, it is conceded, may be worthy of praise or blame in cases where they
cannot execute their wills, by reason of external impediment or restraint --
and in cases where they are compelled to act contrary to their wills. And where
natural necessity does not take place, it is conceded, that virtue or vice
consists not in the external doing or forbearing, but in the state and
disposition of the mind or will. Now as, on Mr. Edwards's principles, the whole
of liberty consists in a "power or opportunity to do as one pleases -- to
pursue and execute his will;" it clearly follows, that liberty, according to
his definition of it, is not essential to virtue or vice, praise or blame, Yet
he affirms it is necessary and essential hereto.

Mr. Edwards's reasoning on this point, reduced to proper form, will stand
thus: Liberty is essential to praise or blame. Liberty consists in a man's
pursuing and executing his will. Ergo, If he he cannot execute his will, he
cannot be worthy of praise or blame. Would Mr. Edwards abide by this
consequence? If not, let any one rescue his doctrine from it.

In truth, whether moral agents shall execute their wills depends not on
themselves. Their natural liberty may be abridged of taken away, and yet their
freedom as accountable creatures remain. If then liberty be really necessary to
praise of blame, it must consist in a power either to choose or refuse that
wherein virtue and vice consist. And consequently the will itself, its state,
volitions or acts, must be determined by moral agents themselves -- at least in
some instances, and within a certain measure. There is no occasion to add any
thing further to what we before wrote on this point, Examination part I. sect.
3. and part III. sect. 1.

But admitting Mr. Edwards maintained internal freedom: We ask, of what sort?
moral freedom, or only animal? The latter may be called natural liberty, as
well as the freedom of the executive powers be so denominated. But it is not
essential to praise or blame. Idiots, lunatics and brutes have this liberty,
but are not therefore moral agents. Virtue or vice, reward or punishment depend
not on the having this liberty. Yet Mr. Edwards admits no other. If he means
any thing by the freedom of the soul as a moral agent, it is this, that moral
agents are so framed, have such dispositions con-created with them, or infufed
into them by the author of their beings, that they exercise freely what is
created with or infused into them, and can do no otherwise. The state and bias
of the mind, the particular bent of their wills, by which all their pursuits
are determined, is fixed by necessity. As suppose one has a propensity to
intemperance; another to uncleanness, a third to theft, a fourth to
covetousness and extortion, a fifth to pride, malice or revenge, etc. in
exercising, pursuing or executing these different passions they are
respectively free, they act as they please, or according to their will; but
have no hand in the formation of these various propensities. Let them come by
their several inclinations and propensities how they will, yet if they are
able, and there is nothing in the way to hinder their pursuing and executing
them, they are fully and perfectly free. P. 40.
So are the different species of animals, who pursue and execute their peculiar
propensities -- who follow nature -- that is the instincts and dispositions
implanted in them by the author of nature. We may venture to challenge any man
to point out the least material difference between animal and moral agency on
Mr. Edwards's scheme of liberty.

There is a near resemblance between his sentiments on this point, and those of
a late writer. Mr. Some Jennings, of the board of trade, etc.


Our actions proceed from our wills, but our wills must be derived from the
natural dispositions implanted in us by the author of our being: Wrong
elections proceed from wrong apprehensions, or unruly passions; and these from
our original frame or accidental education. These must determine all our
actions, for we have no power to act differently, these previous circumstances
continuing exactly the same. Had God though it proper to have made all men with the
same heads, and the same hearts, which he has given to the most virtuous of the
species; they would all have excelled in the same virtues; Or had the bias
implanted in human nature drawn as strongly toward the good side, as it now
apparently does toward the bad, it would have operated as successfully, and
with as little infringment on human liberty. Men, as well as all other animals,
are exactly fitted for the purposes they are designed for; and have
inclinations and dispositions given them accordingly. He who implanted patience
in the lamb, obedience in the horse, fidelity in the dog, and innocence in the
dove, might as easily have inspired the breast of man with these and all other
virtues; and then his actions would certainly have corresponded with his
formation. Therefore, in the strict philosophical sense, we have certainly no
free will; that is, none independent of our frame; our natures, and the author
of them. Letters on origin of evil, p. 99, 100, 101.


Other things belonging to the general subject of this section we intended to
have added; but as they will naturally enough fall under the next branch of our
design, we will relieve the reader's patience for the present.

SECTION II. On the influence of motives in moral volitions.
THE near relation this part of our subject has to the preceding naturally
leads us to such observations as may be explanatory of the things already
offered, and strengthen their evidence: While what has been said may answer
the same purpose with respect to what we shall now offer on the relation
motives have to the volitions of moral agents.

The whole dispute turns on the decision of this question, Whether moral agents
have a principle of efficiency in themselves? In what follows, we shall
endeavor further to support the affirmative.

By motives we mean external reasons or inducements exhibited to the view of a
moral agent. Mr. Edwards, in a more general way, intends (as we suppose) an
extrinsic moral cause, by the term motive. We are very sensible he had no fixed
meaning to this word in his writings. We took notice of his vague and arbitrary
use and application of it, Examination sect. 2. part I -- particularly p. 26.
marg. In the sense he sometimes uses the word [motive] it is not extrinsic to
the mind, nor even antecedent to volition, nor distinct from it --
consequently, has not a tendency to excite volition, is not the cause, nor so
much as the occasion of it. To speak of the preponderation and prevalency of
motive implies that the mind is already determined; that its choice is made.
And hence a preponderating, prevalent motive is not the determiner of the
mind's election. The cause of this is still to be sought somewhere else. One
while Mr. Edwards blends motive and volition -- at another time he makes the
former the moral cause of the latter -- then again intimates that motive is not
a proper efficient, but only an occasion of volition -- then turns about and
blends perception and action.


He affirms motives to be moral causes, by way of distinction from natural
causes; and, according to his reasoning, they produce their effects in the same
way -- that is, through the divine energy. Moral effects necessarily follow the
efficiency of their cause -- moral causes are as absolute as natural. (P. 103;
261, etc.)

It might be abundantly shown that Mr. Edwards ascribes efficiency to motives,
from his whole book; and more especially from Part II. Sect. 10. But we shall
only quote the following from p. 134, 135. in confirmation hereof. If motives
excite volition, then they are the CAUSE of it is being excited -- To excite, is
positively to do something; and certainly that which does something, is the
CAUSE of the thing done by it. To create, is to cause to be created; to make,
is to cause to be made -- to quicken, is to cause to be quickened; and to
excite, is to cause to be excited. To excite, is to be a cause in the most
proper sense, not merely a negative occasion, but a ground of existence by
positive influence. The notion of exciting, is exerting influence to cause the
effect to arise or come forth into existence -- The production of an effect is
certainly the causing of an effect; and productive influence is causal
influence, if any thing is; and that which has this influence prevalently, so
as thereby to become the ground of another thing, is a cause of that thing, if
there be any such thing as a cause. Those who are still disposed to question
whether Mr. Edwards ascribes causality or efficiency to motives may call to
mind the story he tells of the animal in Terra del Fuego. (p. 282.)

However, we see not what advantage can accrue to Mr. Edwards's scheme, or what
injury to our own, should it be granted, that upon his plan motives are not, in
a strict sense, the cause of moral volitions. For if so, what was he about when
he wrote his book? Was it not his declared design to point out the cause of
volition? Does he not labor abundantly to prove, that this cause must evermore
be that motive, which, in the view of the agent, is highest? If by this moral
cause, as he speaks, nothing more be meant than the occasion of volition, not
the cause in a strict and proper sense, how has he then answered the question
proposed, viz. "What determines the will? To say that motive is the occasion of
the will's determination; is nothing to the purpose. We want to be directed to
the efficient. This enquiry is of no less importance than it is to know the
proper cause of every moral event. It Mr. Edwards did not suppose motives to be
efficient causes, volition can have no such cause at all on his scheme. -- In
other words, there could be no such effect as a moral volition. For a moral
effect cannot exist without a cause any more than a natural effect: And Mr.
Edwards denies that the subject of such volition, can be the efficient or
producer of it, So that to deny motives efficiency to produce volition, is,
upon his principles, to say, that all moral events are without a cause --
rather, that there are no such events existing.

Should it be said, that creatures to whom moral agency belongs are the proper
efficients of their own volitions, this would be directly to admit our doctrine
-- to assert a self-determining power, and make this the foundation of praise
and blame, rewards and punishments. Should it be said that the first cause is
the proper efficient of every moral volition, this would rather increase than
relieve the difficulty. For it equally militates with Mr. Edwards's scheme to
suppose a self-determining power in the creator, as in the creature. And then
to ascribe the sinful volitions of creatures to divine efficiency, is to affirm
that God is the proper cause and author of wickedness. In every view Mr.
Edwards's scheme is strangely embarrassed. It is conceded, that every moral
volition has an efficient cause. And is it a trivial point whether this cause
be supposed to be in the subject of such volition, or extrinsic to him?

As, on Mr. Edwards's principles, the efficient cause of the moral volitions of
creatures must be either extrinsic motive, or God himself through the
intervention of motive, each of these cases shall be distinctly examined: And
if neither of them can be maintained, the other opinion must be the truth, that
moral agents are the cause of their own volitions.

Now it cannot be that motives are themselves efficient causes. For an
efficient must needs be an agent. A moral efficient must be a must agent.
Abstract notions (as all reasons and motives are) are not agents. Or should it
be said that moral agency belongs to them, it would no way serve Mr. Edward's
cause. For if motives are agents, then they are themselves determined by
motive. To be an efficient is to act, and action implies agency. If motives are
not agents, then either the subject of a moral volition is also the moral cause
of it, or some other agent is that cause. To say some other agent is the cause,
is either to ascribe self-determination to this supposed cause, or to run back
the efficient of volition in infinitum.

Mr. Edwards himself says, that the act of volition is determined always by
that in the mind's view of an object, which causes it to appear most agreeable,
not by the agreeable appearance itself; for this, in his opinion, is nothing
distinct from volition (P. 11, 12.) This matter was particularly considered,
Examination, part I. sect. 2. To save the reader (and ourselves also) the
trouble of repetition, we beg leave to refer moreover, to the notes p. 91, --
95.

If motives are not themselves efficients, let us next enquire, whether God is
the efficient cause of all moral volitions in the creatures through the medium
of motives. Now in a moral estimation, it makes no difference, whether the
Deity be the immediate or mediate cause of sin and moral turpitude. To say he
is the efficient in either sense is equally and infinitely reproachful to him.
To say, the will necessarily follows the last dictate of the understanding --
that the understanding follows the appearance of things Objection: "It is not
in our power to perceive things otherwise than as they offer themselves to our
mind; now our judgments are formed on this perception of things; and it is by
these judgments that the will is determined: The whole is therefore necessary
and independent of liberty."

Answer. "This difficulty carries little more with it than an empty appearance.
Let people say what they will, we are always at liberty to open or shut our
eyes to the light; to exert, or relax our attention. Experience shows, that
when we view an object in different lights, and determine to search into the
bottom of matters, we desery several things that escaped us at first sight.
This it sufficient to prove that there is an exercise of liberty in the
operations of the understanding, as well as in the several actions thereon
depending."

Burlamaqui principles of laws, vol, 1, p. 19.
and that these appearances are all minutely ordered and disposed by the
governor of the world, is ultimately to ascribe all moral evil to his
efficiency. But how consistently with his moral character? For can it be that
the efficient cause of wickedness is not wicked?

Suppose a parent, who had given it in charge to a child, be sure to shun this
and the other vice, should yet lay before such child the strongest temptations
to the vices cautioned against, would not the child naturally conclude that the
parents admonitions are only words of course? that he should not affront, but
please his parent, by listening to the enticements of his own proposing? Would
not all men lay the blame to the parent for seting invincible temptations
before a child? Now the supposition that the parent of the world exhibits to
the minds of his rational offspring, in an irresistible manner, motives to
vice, is really more reproachful, since (by supposition) it is through his
operation and efficiency with them that vice is produced, as the necessary
effect. Does the father of angels and men (who compared with him are children
in understanding) seduce them in this manner, taking advantage of their
ignorance and weakness, and exert his own influence for their ruin? When Mr.
Edwards says, God is the source of all moral ability and agency, (p. 42.) does
he mean that he is the source of all moral evil? There is a sense in which this
observation is doubtless true. But if a divine efficiency in sinful volitions
was meant to be compreheded under it, this is greatly to err.

But if motives are not efficient causes, nor the Deity through the
intervention of them, then moral agents themselves are. If the cause of
volition be not extrinsic, it must be intrinsic, in the agent himself; which is
to say, in other words, that moral agents are self-determined.

By affirming this we mean not, however, to deny the influence of motives in
moral volitions. We may admit the operation of motives on moral agents without
attributing causality to motives. They are reasons exhibited to us to determine
ourselves by; but are not moral causes, as has been shown from the nature of
them, and from Mr. Edwards's own doctrine on the article of motives.

Still it may be said, If moral agents invariably determine themselves
according to the greatest apparent good, this effectually establishes the
doctrine of moral necessity; and, consequently, proves that the highest motive
necessitates volition, if it be not, strictly speaking, the cause of it.

This matter requires a careful examination. For without determing at present,
whether a principle of causation in the mind or agent, in distinction from
motive, is or is not reconcilable with moral necessity; the admission of this
would, doubtless, much weaken the evidence of the point we contend for. It must
be allowed, that if the volitions of moral agents always are as the greatest
apparent good is, this amounts to a proof of necessity in the philosophic sense
of the word. Is there, then, such a constant and unfailing connection or
coincidence between volition and the greatest apparent good, as is pretended?
We are clear in the opinion there is not.

Necessity is uniform and fixed: Edwards 101, 102; 110. Examination 118.
On the supposition of it, no moral agent can ever choose or act differently
from what he does. A single instance, therefore, of the beforementioned
coincidence failing, wholly subverts the doctrine of necessity. Now two
instances of this kind were produced and insisted on in our examination of Mr.
Edwards, viz. the apostasy of angels and mankind, They were under no moral
necessity of apostatizing. Mr. Edwards seems to admit their fall might have
been prevented. Consequently, liberty may be distinguished from moral
necessity. We believe no tolerable answer can be given to these instances. What
has been already said upon them is sufficient, till something is offered to
invalidate or weaken the evidence arising from them. Eximination p. 10, 11, 12;
53, 54; 99, -- 103; 109, 110.


Should it be admitted that motives may, in some cases, be exhibited in so
strong a light, that the mind in which they are extant could not but make the
choice it does; yet unless this can be shown to hold true in every instance,
the doctrine of necessary determination cannot be supported. Admitting, for
instance, this irresistible exhibition of motives to take place, with reference
to angels and glorified spirits in heaven, and in some cases of good men on
earth, and vice versa; it will not follow that the same thing must hold true as
a general principle in regard to mankind upon trial. It was not fact in
reference to apostate spirits, and mankind in their first state.

We have not pretended to state the degree of moral liberty, or sphere of its
exercise by moral agents. All that we have argued for is this, that accountable
creatures either have, or at least originally had, a freedom to choose
differently from what they do. This is no more than the generality of reformed
divines have maintained. A liberty of indifference we have no where asserted.
For though we agree with Dr. Watts and some other writers, who use this term,
in the thing they intend by it; yet as we do not entirely approve the manner of
expression, so we have never once used this term to express our sense of
liberty.

Mr. Edwards represents those writers who argue for a liberty of indifference,
particularly Dr. Watts, as meaning hereby two contrary things, neither of which
was their sentiment. He more generally would have it, that they mean perfect
indifference, or equilibrium. But he has also intimated by his own use of the
word, (p. 9.) that his opponents mean, by indifference, something neither
agreeable nor disagreable, eligible or the contrary. These are two notions of
indifference, altogether diverse, and even contrary. (One thing may be far from
being absolutely indifferent, while another is preferable.) However, neither of
these was the notion of indifference maintained by the authors Mr. Edwards
opposes. The sense in which they assert liberty of indifference is precisely
this -- a freedom in moral agents to choose otherwise than they do -- what was
called in the schools, Libertas indifferentiae ad opposita, a liberty of
indifference to choose one thing, or its opposite. Such a sense of liberty is so
far from being the peculiar notion of Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians, Jesuits,
Socinians, Arminians, and others of the same stamp, as Mr. Edwards injuriously
represents, P. 89.
that it has been maintained by the most eminent divines called Calvinists, as
we shall be ready to show should there be occasion. The examples of such a
liberty, in the defection of beings made upright, are far from being the only
ones that might be adduced -- but they are sufficient in the controversy with
Mr. Edwards. We might mention instances of the will's determination, in which
there is no perceptible preference, either in the object itself fixed upon, or
in the circumstances of it. If there is no apprehended preference, or
perceivable reason for choosing, between two objects, the mind must suspend it is
determination forever, according to Mr. Edwards. For whatever is a motive must
be something extant in the view of the perceiving faculty. (P. 8.) Yet Mr.
Edwards admits, that two or more given things may appear exactly alike, one as
good as another -- as suppose two eggs, or two cakes -- there is no preference,
at least none perceived by the mind, as he allows, in these cases. Is then the
will determined by, or as the greatest apparent good in such instances? He must
suppose so. And indeed he insists, that in all such instances the mind has two
or more general determinations, before it comes to a particular determination
or choice. He supposes the mind has a real preference, if not of the object
chosen, yet of its own action -- that it gives itself up (very deliberately) to
accident. (Does he mean, that this is done with an expectation that chance will
direct the mind to the wisest choice?) Is not this trifling! If there be no
apprehended preference, the mind cannot determine, or be determined at all, by
his principles. In the instances he had before him, he grants there is no
apprehended preference of one object to the other. Here he observes, The very
act of choosing one thing rather than another, is prefering that thing. What
preference is there in the instances refered to? On what ground or reason is
one chosen? To say there is an act of choice, implying preference, between two
objects exactly alike in every apparent respect, and yet no previous ground or
reason of that preference, is very hardly reconcilable with Mr. Edwards's
scheme, or common sense. We believe it will not be doubted by the generality of
mankind, but innumerable instances occur every day of the will's determination
without any perceptible preference. There are determinations, which we beg
leave to call arbitriums, -- implying no prepollency of motive -- not excited
by the greatest apparent good, nor as this is -- nor the contrary; with respect
to which the mind is in aequilibrio. However, such arbitriums seem not to
belong to the subject of morality and religion. They still subvert Mr.
Edwards's scheme of necessary connection.

"The exercise of liberty," says the learned Burlamaqui, never displays itself
more than in indifferent things. I find, for instance, that it depends entirely
on myself to stretch out or draw back my hand; to sit down or to walk; to
direct my steps to the right or left, etc. On these occasions, where the soul
is left entirely to itself, either for want of external motives, or by reason
of the opposition, and, as it were, the equilibrium of these motives, if it
determines on one side, this may be said to be the pure effect of its pleasure
and good will, and of the command it has over its own actions. Vol. I. p. 20,
21.

As to the mind's giving itself up to accident, this case is wrongly stated.
Where the mind has a full persuasion there is no preferableness of one obsect
to another, is instantly convinced they are exactly alike, it cannot be said to
give itself up to accident. It has no choice or preference, is perfectly
indifferent (not whether it has either, but) which it has. It does not tarry
to make one general resolution after another before it comes to a conclusion;
but determines immediately. If the mind may be said to give itself up to
accident at all, it is in instances where it is well known in general, that the
issue of its determination may be either fortunate or unfortunate; but neither
being extant in the minds view beforehand, and the event being altogether
independent of any human circumspection, the mind determines without a
perception of the consequences -- which it leaves to time and fortune. As in
purchasing tickets in a lottery.

To pretend, that though the mind has no preference of the object chosen, in
things indifferent, yet it has of it is own act, is frivolous.




Virtuous or vicious elections must proceed upon motive. And we grant that the
greatest good really ought to determine moral agents; but that it in fact
always does, even where it is perceived, we deny. Where there is both a real
and evident preferableness, there can be no dispute as to the obligations of
moral agents. But even where there is a manifest as well as real preference,
their election is not always governed hereby. It Is too common, indeed, that the
passions bias and pervert the moral judgment. Sometimes they precipitate this
judgment, when a little reflection would have been sufficient to preserve the
rectitude of it. Sometimes they blind and corrupt this judgment by retarding
it, (in the manner observed in the preceding section) to find out palliations,
excuses, or justifying circumstances for vice, that men may indulge their
various lusts, and yet be on good terms with their consciences. By such means,
the light in men becomes darkness; they call evil good, and good evil; put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

Still we think nothing is more evidently false than the opinion, that the
affections evermore follow the last practical judgment of the understanding.
Perception and volition are as different as sight and taste. Moral agents many
times sin immediately against present light and conviction, while they have
full in their view the wiser choice. And what is this but to determine
themselves contrary to the greatest apparent good? Through the impetuosity of
their lusts and passions, they break over the clearest bonds, natural, civil
and religious -- the force of which they have sometimes a lively sense of even
in the article of sining; perceiving the direct tendency of such violations to
ruin them in this world and another. So far are they from acting on the view of
the greatest apparent good, that they have a present sight of the ruinous
consequences of that rash and mad conduct they determine upon.

Every delaying sinner acts against the greatest apparent good, while he
promises himself a future time of repentance, and repents not immediately.
When such hear the importance and excellency of religion represented in some
judicious moral discourse, or see the same exemplified in real life, they
highly approve it in their judgment; they see it to be their wisdom; but their
practice is at variance with the apparent good -- So much at variance, that
they are obliged to make ineffectual promises of becoming wise soon, and are
much dissatisfied with themselves that they have not been long ago. The
situation of many great sinners on a sick bed, in the apprehension of death, is
wont to alarm others of a like character. They see the right and good way; but
persist in their sins against their evident interest.

Different considerations are adapted to influence different persons, who have
diverse apprehensions of interest, according to the diversity of their temper
and talents, education and circumstances. But to confound all distinction
between motives and moral habits, as Mr. Edwards does, is to blend things that
differ -- to contradict reason and himself. For he tells us, volition follows
perception, is excited by it, and the effect of it -- that motives are
extrinsic causes. Surely then they are different from volition. And if (as has
been shown) volition is not always as the highest motive; then, when these
really meet, it is not necessarily; that is, not in the way Mr. Edwards
contends for. One instance failing, the chain is broken. One link, or "10,000,
breaks the chain alike."

Motives exhibited to a moral agent may be strong or weak according to the
attention given to them. Most presumptuous sins may proceed from sudden passion
or inattention. It has been hinted, that Adam's first sin may be accounted for
in this way. And if the manner of the mind's viewing an object may be the cause
of its choosing or refusing, (as Mr. Edwards observes) we enquire, Whence is it,
but from a cause in itself, that the mind views an object as it does?

On Mr. Edwards's scheme and our own, extrinsic motives are concerned, as they
have positive influence, in moral volitions. The difference is, Mr. Edwards
(more generally) teaches, that they are moral causes* and that the will and
the highest motive necessarily unite. We assert, that moral agents are
themselves the efficients of their own volitions, and that there is no such
necessary union between volition and the highest motive. The advantage our
scheme has may, perhaps, appear from applying the doctrine wherein we are
agreed with him to a particular case -- that of the first sinful volition of
the prince of darkness. The motive to this volition was extant in his mind. It
had positive influence to excite and move to the volition. His rebellion was
the consequence. Was it therefore the greatest apparent good? Had he a
principle of action within himself, either to concur with or reject the
exhibited motive? If he had, then the cause of this volition was in himself,
and our doctrine of self-determination is established. If he had not, then let
it be granted that the motive exhibited was the efficient of the volition. But
what advantage will this concession be to Mr. Edwards's cause? It follows from
it, either that this efficiency is ultimately to be ascribed to God, and that
the energy or causality is ultimately his; (since by his disposing and
determining providence such efficacious motive to rebel was presented to the
view of an innocent and holy being) or that God himself is properly no moral
cause, but subject, as creatures are supposed to be, to some extrinsic
efficiency and determination. And indeed this is the true result of Mr.
Edwards's scheme. The divine being is not self-determined -- is no proper
efficient cause. Fatalists and Atheists will not fail to make improvement on
this system. On the subject of moral agency, it is therefore of great
importance to keep up a distinction between the influence of motives, and
causality or efficiency.

To say that volition springs from itself, is a very different thing from
saying, that the subject is the cause of it. Dr. Watts did not deny that
volition has a cause, as Mr. Edwards would insinuate; but maintained, that an
intelligent spirit is the cause of it is own volitions.

Upon the whole, it is agreed that moral agency may consist with the want of
spontaneous, animal agency, or the liberty of the executive powers. Besides,
where there is neither force nor impediment from without, the exertion of our
natural powers depends on our being willing to exert them; but whether we are
willing, depends not at all on ourselves. For though our actions proceed from
our wills, yet our wills must be derived from the dispositions implanted in us
by the author of our being. Such is Mr. Edwards's scheme. Where, then, is
liberty! where moral agency! what pre-eminence has a man above a beast! The
lower animals follow the instincts and dispositions implanted in them
originally, or in which they are "accidentally educated." They have not a moral
faculty, indeed: But if this makes only a constitutional or adventitious
difference in their elections and actions, it is a difference no way material;
since such accidental differences make no beings either virtuous or vicious. It
seems apparent, that Mr. Edwards has totally excluded liberty from every thing
wherein the nature of virtue and vice is properly concerned.

SECTION III. On necessity.
TO make his doctrine of universal necessity consistent with moral agency and
accountableness, Mr. Edwards insists much on two kinds of necessity; one of
which he calls natural; the other, moral. It is needful to exhibit his
doctrine, and make a few remarks thereon, that the reader may judge of the
merits of this distinction. After which some things will be observed with a
view, if possible, to cast a little light on the abstruse subject of necessity,
rendered more abstruse than before, by Mr. Edward's refinements and subtilties.

He frequently advertiseth his readers, that when he applies the term
necessity to moral subjects, he uses it "as a term of art" -- that when the
words necessary, impossible, irresistible, unable, etc. are applied to moral
agency, they are either used in some new sense diverse from their original and
proper meaning, or with perfect insignificance and nonsense: For no inability
whatsoever, which is merely moral, is properly called by the name of inability.
(P. 21, 22, 232, 287. et passim.) Did not Mr. Edwards then mean by moral
necessity any real necessity? Did he use words as "nonsensically" as other
metaphysicians?

While in common speech no proper necessity at all is meant by the use of the
terms moral necessity, When in common speech it is said, that any particular
things are morally necessary, or morally impossible, by way of distinction from
natural necessity or impossibility, nothing more is intended than to express,
on the one hand, the degree of probability, or at most moral certainty, that
such events will take place: Or, on the other hand, the difficulty that is in
the way, and the moral evidence that they will not become effect. It Is not
meant that there is any proper necessity in the case. When we say, We must do
or forbear such things -- we cannot but do or forbear them -- we are
necessitated to do or forbear them, we would only express the strength of
obligation upon us, or the strong inducements we are under, in our present
situation and circumstances, to do or omit them, When we say of a man of
approved veracity and fidelity, that he cannot lie, or violate his trust and
engagements, we mean that we have moral certainty he will speak the truth, and
be faithful to his promises, to the trust reposed in him -- that we have the
highest reason to think so, and no suspicion to the contrary; Not supposing but
it may be barely possible, however improbable, that he may prove false and
unfaithful. (For such men sometimes act unworthy of their general character, to
the great surprise of their acquaintance.) When it is said of those who have
been long accustomed to do evil, that they cannot learn to do well, by this is
only signified the extreme difficulty of their reforming; the great
improbability of it. We sometimes say, it is next to impossible such should be
reclaimed, and find their recovery in scripture resembled to a natural
impossibility. (Jer. XIII. 23.) The meaning is not, that there is any strict
necessity of their persisting in sin. There have been instances of such persons
reclaimed, and there may be again, great as their danger is. Therefore we
cannot say, it is absolutely certain others of this character will never be
reduced; much less that there is an absolute necessity of their continuing
unreformed. The several instances produced by Mr. Edwards (P. 34.) will all
apply against himself. Habit in many instances is indeed so strong, that we are
wont to call it second nature -- observing, however, (to prevent confusion in
our ideas) that it is morally speaking impossible to alter it -- next to
impossible -- Intimating, by this manner of expressing ourselves, that though
it be possible, it is in an high degree improbable. Thus by moral necessity we
mean not a strict necessity, but prefix the epithet moral to prevent any such
inference.
Mr. Edwards manifestly intends hereby a real necessity, and in his definition
of moral necessity includes what properly belongs to natural -- applying to it
the following epithets, infallible, unalterable, unfrustrable, unavoidable --
and saying (P. 30.) "moral necessity is as absolute as natural." But let us
more particularly attend to his own explanation of the distinction between
natural and moral necessity.

"By natural necessity, as applied to men, I mean," says he, such necessity as
men are under through the force of natural causes; as distinguished from what
are called moral causes, such as habits and dispositions of the heart, and
moral motives and inducements. By moral necessity is meant that necessity of
connection and consequence, which arises from the strength of such moral
causes as the strength of inclination, or motives, and the connection which
there is in many cases between these, and such certain volitions and actions.
(P. 29.) To prevent any mistake of his meaning, he gives us notice of these
three things. First, that moral necessity may be as absolute as natural
necessity. Secondly, That moral events are owing to the nature of things.
Thirdly, that necessity, as applied by him to moral subjects, is not used
according to the original design and meaning of the word.

Here we have occasion to apply Mr. Edwards's own words, P. 287. It Is very
evident, that in the metaphysical distinction between natural and moral
necessity, due care has not been taken to conform language to the nature of
things, or to any distinct clear ideas -- which has occasioned inexpressible
difficulty, contention, error and confusion. (P. 279.) Those are a precarious
sort of demonstrations, which men build on the meaning they arbitrarily affix
to a word; especially when that meaning is abstruse, inconsistent, and entirely
diverse from the original sense of the word in common speech. We know of no
writer that his used words more arbitrarily, and abstrusely; or built more
precarious demonstrations on such use of them. What is offered on the article
of necessity seems peculiarly liable to this exception.

To recur to the distinction of natural and moral necessity. The great jumble
and confusion of ideas in the aforesaid explanation is to be regretted.

By "necessity of connection and consequence" we obtain no idea of moral
necessity as distinct from natural. To say in explanation hereof, that the
volitions of moral agents are connected immediately or mediately with what is
necessary in its own nature, and so are necessary by a necessity of
consequence, (P. 25; 29.) is so far from helping us to distinguish moral
necessity from natural, that the attempt to explain does but confound the
distinction, which is supposed to be of much importance. According to this
explanation, moral actions are effects of natural necessity, when traced up to
their true cause. For says Mr. Edwards, Things which are perfectly connected
with other things that are necessary [in their own nature] are themselves
necessary, by a necessity of consequence. The volitions of accountable
creatures not being in their own nature necessary, are so inasmuch as they are
perfectly connected with, and certainly follow from, the divine existence and
perfections. As this is to assert, that God is the original moral cause of sin,
so it is finally to assert that sin arose from a necessity in the nature of
things. Do we yet perceive any difference between natural and moral necessity,
on this state of the matter? The divine existence is eternal, and therefore
absolutely necessary in its own nature. We enquire not into the cause of the
divine existence, which altogether surpasses our perception. Vid. Examination,
Part II. Sect. 1.
The volitions of creatures are perfectly connected with the divine existence
and conduct. And are they not then necessary with a natural necessity.

Further, What does Mr. Edwards mean by a moral cause? "We give in general the
name of moral cause of an action to the person that produced it, either in the
whole or part, by a determination of his will; whether he executes it himself
physically and immediately, so as to be the author thereof; or whether he
procures it by the act of some other person, and becomes thereby it is cause."

Burlamaqui, Vol. I. P. 238.
In the passage under present examination, and through his book, he blends
moral motives and inducements with moral habits, inclinations and dispositions,
as though they were precisely the same, and indiscriminately calls them moral
causes. Here are several things unintelligible.

First, The difference between a moral disposition and a moral volition should
have been pointed out. For moral volitions and actions, upon this scheme, are
immediately connected with moral habits and dispositions as their moral cause.
Or if there be no difference, then it should have been shown,

Secondly, How the same moral habit, which is a moral volition or act, is also
the moral cause of itself -- cause and effect at the same time, and in regard
to the same thing -- the subject of its own efficiency. Were this conceivable,
still,

Thirdly, How is a moral habit [or motive] before and previous to itself? How
has it a tendency, by positive influence and action, to move and excite to
itself? How is it the cause of that exertion, which, by supposition, is exerted
before its influence and motion is applied for the purpose?

Fourthly, If motives are nothing distinct from moral habits and inclinations,
then they are not extrinsic causes of such inclinations and habits, as Mr.
Edwards often styles them -- are not the medium of producing such habits.

Fifthly, If moral volitions are connected with their moral cause by a
necessity of consequence, then it seems, the cause and necessity are prior to
the volitions, and that the volitions themselves follow, as effects follow
their causes. But how can they be consequent, if a moral motive be a moral
disposition, as it is certain a moral disposition is a moral volition? We
would, if possible, discover the peculiar connection which Mr. Edwards
supposes there is between one and the same thing, so as to discern how it is a
moral cause and a moral effect of -- itself! We cannot easily apprehend what he
means by moral necessity; or perceive where the difference lies, according to
him, between natural and moral necessity.

Further, When Mr. Edwards says, that the nature of the connection between
moral causes and effects is the same as in natural causes and effects -- that
they differ only as the terms connected are dissimilar, this does but entangle
the subject still more: For if there be no difference in the nature of the
connection; if this be alike indissoluble in the one as in the other, is not
then the necessity the same? what proper distinction is there between natural
and moral necessity? Does he mean also to confound natural causes and effects
as he does moral? to say, in like manner, that a natural effect is the natural
cause of itself? the object of its own influence and action? producer and
produced?

Further, This connection between moral volitions and their moral causes is
said to take place in many cases. If it ever fails, how is the connection sure
and perfect -- according to established laws? If the connection may in any case
be broken, there is no necessity. It Is not as absolute, as unfrustrable as
natural necessity.

Further, As nothing except the divine existence and perfections is necessary
in itself, or in nature; according to Mr. Edwards himself; when he says moral
necessity is as absolute and irrsistible as natural, does he mean that the
moral volitions of creatures are as necessary as the existence of God? Apply
this to his own doctrine respecting the origin of evil, and either the
absoluteness of moral necessity must be given up, or the moral character of the
Deity disbelieved. Was it Adam's original bias and disposition to rebel against
God? If it was, he was created a rebel. And what tho'ts must we entertain of
the creator, from whom immediately he derived this bias? Can we distinguish his
being created in sin from natural necessity? If this was not his original
disposition, but the contrary, then he was far from being under a necessity of
sinning, as absolute as natural necessity -- his fall was not owing to nature.

Or suppose the first sinful volition really necessary in the way Mr. Edwards
contends for, what essential difference could there be between a necessity
without the will, and a necessity within it? Evil dispositions originally
implanted in the creature, or infused into him afterward, or proceeding from
the want of divine influence and assistance, cannot render the subject thereof
criminal, nor can properly be called evil as relative to him, as may be shown
in the next section. To say in this case, It Is his very nature; he is of a vile
natural temper, it is as natural for him to act so as it is to breathe; he cannot
help serving the devil, etc. Edwards, p. 304.
would be a full excuse, provided such a nature and temper were originally
implanted or infused by the creator, or arose from the want of his assistance.
And as the first sinful volition was as absolutely necessary as any following
ones, and the first in the series determines all the rest, on Mr. Edwards's
plan -- as the necessity he pleads for is not even pretended to derive from the
fall, nor the sin of Adam once mentioned as the source of it, but took place in
his innocent state, and was prior to the fall of angels; so we may well
observe, that in the creature's original state a necessity in the will or
without it must amount to the same thing. In such state, to suppose an
indisposition, or moral inability, or opposition of will to holiness would be
to admit as full an excuse as any inability extrinsic to the will can be -- it
would be a proper natural necessity -- an original defect of powers or
advantages to do what was required.

Might not then the fall of angels and man have been prevented? Mr. Edwards has
intimated that it might. If so, then it is clear, it could not be necessary
with the irresistible, absolute necessity he pleads for. To suppose it was
really necessary, though in the lowest degree, Moral necessity, Mr. Edwards
supposes, admits of degrees.
is the same as to suppose it necessary in the highest degree, the event being
alike sure on either supposition. To illustrate the matter by an instance from
Mr. Edwards. Suppose a man required to lift a weight of 101 lb. whose natural
strength is only equal to a weight of 100 lb. he is as really unable to lift
101 as 1000 lb. And it would be as really contrary to reason to require him to
lift one pound beyond his strength as nine hundred. Was there a moral inability
similar to this in our first parents in their primitive state? In this case
"doing wrong with the will," or from the heart, would be far from being the sum
total of the matter, in our estimation of blame-worthiness. (P. 298, 299.) We
naturally ascend to the source and fountain of this wrong will or heart, and
enquire whether the subject had the necessary means of willing otherwise? If
the state of his will or heart was originally fixed by necessity, common sense
at once acquits him of blame. Were angels and our common progenitors thus
abandoned of God!

In the first sin, there was a want or opposition of will to what was required
by the Creator. Was this want or opposition of will necessary before the first
sin took place? If not, then there was a freedom from moral necessity at least
with respect to the first act of sin. Or if the first disinclination to, and
noncompliance with, duty, was founded in necessity, who placed the creature
under that necessity? He must have had power originally to preserve his
innocence, or the necessity of his forfeiting it must have been a natural
necessity. Which side soever Mr. Edwards's scheme embraces, it is subverted.

To evince the consistency of his doctrine of necessity with the highest
worthiness of praise and moral esteem, Mr. Edwards takes frequent occasion to
observe, that God possesses the most perfect liberty, and is notwithstanding
necessarily holy, etc. In the same view he mentions the necessity of Christ's
holiness. We grant that God is necessarily holy -- that Jesus Christ is so; but
see not how this "clearly and absolutely determines the controversy,"

For,

First, Mr. Edwards maintains, that the perfection of the divine understanding
is the foundation of the immutable rectitude of his will. Now as the moral
intellect in creatures is so very imperfect, there can be no infering the
necessity of their wills from the necessity of the divine. Mr. Edwards would
not say, that the volitions of holy angels are determined to the right side in
the same manner as the divine will is determined to holiness. For then their
knowledge must be perfect as his. Or if, notwithstanding the imperfection of
their knowledge, their wills always have been, are, and will be as unalterably
determined to holiness, then it must be in some other way, on some other
foundation, equally sure and steadfast, not yet pointed out. Should it be
supposed further, that they are now confirmed in a state of holiness beyond the
possibility of a defection; yet we conjecture that they (as well as other
finite beings) have been, in some part of their duration, upon trial in such
sense as implies danger of miscarrying. Beings in their situation once, have
actually fallen.

Secondly, We have no objection to the opinion, that the rectitude of the
divine will is necessary. But why this necessity should be called moral, by way
of distinction from natural, we see not. When we distinguish the moral from the
natural perfections of God, we do indeed suppose that the latter would be no
perfections were it not for the former. At the same time, there is an evident
contradiction in supposing a being to exist, possessed of the attributes, which
for distinction's sake are called the natural perfections of God, without
possessing perfect moral rectitude.

Holiness, justice, goodness belong to the divine nature as much as power,
omniscience, immensity, etc. He is by necessity of nature holy, just and good,
no less than he is, by the same necessity, eternal, infinite, omnipotent,
omniscient. When it is said, God cannot do wickedly, this is to be understood
as denoting a strict necessity. Who ever says, It Is morally impossible for God
to lie? as though it were naturally possible. The terms can, cannot, necessary,
impossible, etc. as applied to God, denote no less a necessity of nature than
of will. "If it be the very nature of God to act justly and faithfully, so that
he cannot will nor act otherwise, it may be called, I think, a natural
necessity, since it springs from his nature; as well as it may be called a
moral one, because it is the action of an intelligent and free agent."

Dr. Watts.
Admitting this, it is not altogether proper to apply to the divine moral
rectitude the distinction of natural and moral necessity. For to say that God
is holy by the necessity of his will, is the same as to say he is holy by the
necessity of his nature.

It does not, however, follow, from the necessity of the divine moral rectitude
above asserted, that therefore God could have done in no respect differently
from what he has. In what properly belongs to moral rectitude, we maintain the
necessity of the divine will, strictly speaking. But did moral rectitude
require there should be exactly so many orders of creatures -- such a certain
number of each order -- brought into existence at such certain time and place
-- endowed with such particular powers and properties -- placed in such
circumstances? That there should be exactly so many grains of sand, drops of
water, particles of light, etc. etc? The scriptures tell us, that God was able
to raise up children to Abraham from the stones. If he was able, then he might
have done it. For to say he is able to do what contradicts moral rectitude, is
to say he may deny himself, which we know he cannot. Omnipotence cannot do any
thing contradictory to moral perfection. But this is very different from
saying, that God actually does every thing that is possible with him.

"To say that God has exerted his power or his wisdom, ad ultimum posse, so
that he can proceed no further, is to say a great deal too much; But we may
with reason assert, that he has discovered infinite wisdom and infinite power;
or in other words, that none but a being possessed of these perfections in the
highest possible degree could have created this stupendous universe." Dr.
Eliot's sermon on natural religion, p. 10, 11.


Jesus Christ the righteous is also holy with the same necessity as is above
ascribed to God -- not a moral necessity by way of distinction from natural,
but a real and proper necessity. Nor was he upon trial in the sense that
implies danger or possibility of miscarrying, as finite beings have been and
are.

Now to say that the holiness of angels in heaven is, and always was, as
infallibly and unalterably necessary as the holiness of God and Jesus Christ,
is to say they never were capable of sining -- and is to make them equal with
God, who charge the angels with folly; in whose sight the stars are not
clean. To say, on the other hand, that the defection of angels which fell was
unalterably necessary, is to say they never were able to stand in their
primitive state; and is to ascribe their sin and destruction, not to
themselves, but to him who is immutably holy, just and good.

There is, indeed, a qualified sense in which confirmed angels and perfected
spirits in heaven may be said to be holy by a necessity of nature; having
passed their trial, and being finally established in a state of moral rectitude
-- which admits of endless improvement. We may say, it is their nature to be
holy -- to be like God. Hence it will follow, that apostate spirits, and such
from among mankind as have died impenitent, having neglected and abused the
time of their visitation, are, by a like necessity, enemies of righteousness,
and cannot but remain so. In neither case was the necessity original, but the
consequence of improving well or ill a time of previous trial.

The same thing holds, in a lower degree, with respect to some of mankind in
this world. There are those the height of whose moral seize and whose
establishment in the divine life are such, that the allurements and temptations
of the world make but a feeble and transient impression on them: Whether the
regenerate principle be or be not, in its own nature, indefectible, Calvinistic
divines have universally maintained, that the promise of God stands engaged to
keep them from falling. On the other hand, there are those who appear to be
given over to vile affections -- or, if not given up of God to their own
heart's lust, have proceeded so far in the paths of error and unrighteousness,
their recovery is become so extremely difficult and improbable, that the words
of the prophet are applicable to them, Can the ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? Long confirmed habit is a kind of second nature: So that
both the former and latter may be said to have superinduced on themselves a
sort of natural necessity.

This notion of necessity Mr. Edwards appears to recur to through his book. Yet
he makes no distinction between a necessity supposed to be original, or such as
is formed and confirmed by custom or use; and the necessity of moral volitions
under circumstances altogether diverse. He proceeds, for example, on the
supposition of a strict, real and absolute necessity in all these cases. The
sins of the unregenerate, under the greatest illumination and conviction from
the spirit of God, the slips and failings of the regenerate, and the first
sinful volition, are as really necessary, on his plan, as the crimes of
abandoned sinners and apostate spirits. The will is necessarily determined, in
every one of its acts, from a man's first existence, by a cause beside
[without] the will, and a cause that don't proceed from, or depend on, any act
of the will at all. P. 113.


Who can believe Adam's first sin, or the slips and defects of good men on
earth, necessary with the same necessity as the perverse wickedness of
abandoned sinners and rebel angels? -- that the moral inability of all
unregenerate men is the same with that of those whom God has given over to a
reprobate mind? -- that the means and assistances of grace, either produce
their effect necessarily, [irresistibly] or have no tendency to excite to that
which is the great end and design of them? Did Mr. Edwards believe himself in
these things? that last mentioned especially. Vid, sermon on pressing into the
kingdom of God.


Preparatory and regenerating grace are the operation of the same spirit. The
transition from one to the other is not very easily discerned. It Is a nice
thing to draw the line exactly between common and special grace, admitting a
specific difference. Can it yet be said of unregenerate men, under those
influences of the spirit which Mr. Edwards allows to persons in their
circumstances, that their moral inability is like that of those who have long
grieved and quenched the spirit, and hereby provoked God to take it from them?

But whatever moral inability belongs to unregenerate men by nature, and
notwithstanding the means and assistances of grace, nothing is plainer than
this, that Calvinistic divines have ever considered the inability of mankind to
holiness as the natural and judicial consequences of sin. They suppose the
first sin of Adam to be the source of such inability in him, and in his
posterity. They suppose it was not natural to Adam, but is to his descendants.
They don't represent this inability in the race of Adam as merely moral, but as
both natural and moral. They equally assert the impotency of the understanding,
as of the will. Were there occasion, this might be abundantly shown. Yet Mr.
Edwards, though he maintains the same inability in the creature, while
innocent, as in fallen creatures, and asserts it to be of the moral kind only,
all along holds his own doctrine up to view as the doctrine of Calvinists; and
represents the opposers of it, through his whole book, as Arminians, Pelagians,
Socinians, Jesuits, etc. With what fairness, let the public judge. By his own
concession Dr. Watts deserved to be ranked with writers of a very different
class. Yet the Doctor's essay on freedom of will is as diverse from Mr. Edwards
on the will as the Christian's bible is from the Mahometan's. He asserted, with
the whole current of Calvinistic divines, both the natural and moral impotency
of mankind. Since Mr. Edwards has stigmatized Dr. Watts as an Arminian, etc.
in the article of liberty, the admirers of the former have been liberal in
loading the Dr. with this reproach. A character so respectable for general
literature, undissembled piety and extensive usefulness, as well as unsuspected
orthodoxy, merited different treatment.
How Mr. Edwards could deny the former consistently with admiting total
depravity (which he would be supposed to believe) is utterly inconceivable. And
while he affirms it to be the doctrine of Calvinists, That there is need of a
physical operation of the spirit of God on the will, in order to regeneration,
why does he represent the inability of the unregenerate as merely moral? (P.
111; 232.)

"The most rigid predestinarians," says Professor BEATTIE, suppose freedom of
will to be in one way or other consistent with eternal and unconditional
decrees: If they cannot explain in what way, they call it a mystery; it
surpasses their understanding; But it must be so; for otherwise the morality of
actions is altogether incomprehensible. Beattie on truth p. 310. 3d. edit.


In our controversy with Mr. Edwards, there is, indeed, no occasion to examine
the impotency of fallen man. According to him, Adam in innocence was morally
unable to retain the spiritual image of God, with which he is supposed to have
been endowed. (This must have been, by the way, a natural as well as moral
inability -- an inability original to him, no less in his understanding than in
his will.) If he had power to have viewed things in a different manner, the
scheme of necessity is overthrown. His first want or opposition of will to what
was required of him was his first sin. How came he by this want or opposition
of will? It was not original to him, if he was created with the moral image of
God. To the efficient cause we must attribute his first indisposition or
opposition to his duty, whoever or whatever that cause be. Edwards, p. 103.
It Is indeed absurd to say, that after this opposition to duty was become
effect, he could have annihilated it, or caused it not to be. But might he have
preserved the same actual will to worship and obey God after the exhibition of
satan's temptation, as before? Did the extancy of this temptation in his mind
make or constitute him a sinner? (No surely; for our Lord himself was tempted
by the devil, yet without sin.) After the temptation was extant, had he an
immediate power to call the motives of religion to view, and resist the
suggestions of the adversary? If not, how could sin lie at his door? Was his
moral inability of his own procuring? or could he remove it? If neither, Mr.
Edwards's distinction of natural and moral necessity must appear trifling. The
state of the moral world depends on the use they make of natural agency, and so
depends on their volitions, (Edwards p. 162.) which volitions are independent
of themselves, and proceed from an extrinsic cause -- even from him who gave
them being. On this plan natural beauty or deformity, superior natural
understanding or the want of common, high or low birth, great wealth or extreme
poverty, bodily health or sickness, are as much virtuous or vicious, in
relation to the subject, as any moral qualities whatever.

Some European writers of late years have made much use of the distinction of
natural and moral necessity: But it is manifest for a pretense only. They
plainly suppose natural and moral necessity do not materially differ; and
maintain necessity in such sense at renders the existence of sin, even in their
own apprehensions, impossible. Particularly Mr. Hume, and the author of the
letters on the origin of evil. The latter boldly asserts, P. 103, 104.
that omnipotence was obliged, either to afflict innocence, or be the cause of
wickedness; it plainly has no other option: What then could infinite wisdom,
justice and goodness do in this situation more consistent with itself, than to
call into being creatures formed with such depravity in their dispositions, as
to induce many of them to act in such a manner as to render themselves proper
subjects for necessary sufferings -- just punishments? Can this author be though it
to be serious? Could he believe that creatures formed wicked originally may be
on that account the objects of just punishment? With the Pagan orator, he
resolves all into divine necessity and fatality.

The scheme of necessity in the actions of an intelligent being, or that all
our volitions, determinations and actions proceed from God, as infrustrable
effects from their proper cause, has hitherto been embraced by a very few,
except infidels, and those of the most malignant class, who have very
consistently given up the doctrine of future punishment. In this they discover
that they have more just and honorary thoughts of God, than those Christians,
who first make God the author of sin, and then represent him as inflicting
eternal punishment on men for it; for that which is originally, and in strict
construction, his own act. Mr. How calls it a black conception of God, that he
should be supposed irrestibly to determine the will of man to the hatred of his
own most blessed self, and then to exact the severest punishments for the
offense done. We should rather choose says he to have our sight, hearing, and
motive power, or what not besides, disputed or even torn away from us, than
even suffer ourselves to be disputed into a belief, that the holy and good God
should irresistibly determine the wills of men to, and punish the same thing.
Dr. Eliot's sermon on natural religion, p. 19, 20.


Whether certainty and necessity are the same, as Mr. Edwards insists, we
reserve for enquiry under the section on foreknowledge.

SECTION IV. On the origin of evil.
MR. Edwards's opinion on this subject is, that sin infallibly followed from
God's ordering man's circumstances when he made him, and withholding or
withdrawing divine influence and assistance. This he otherwise expresses by
saying that sin arose from the imperfection which properly belongs to a
creature, as such. P. 376, 377.
Again to the same purpose, (p. 365.) Sin arises from the withholding of the
action and energy of the most High, and -- necessarily follows on the want of
his influence -- Men never commit sin, but only when God leaves them to
themselves, and necessarily sin when he does so -- (p. 403; 405.) God's own
immediate conduct is original in the series of events -- in his providence he
decisively orders all the volitions of moral agents. Yet he allows not that
sin is the fruit of any positive agency or influence of the most High. Upon the
whole, he takes frequent occasion to illustrate his doctrine concerning the
existence of sin by observing, that there is a vast difference between the
sun's being the cause of light and warmth in the day, by its presence and
positive influence; and its being the occasion of darkness and frost in the
night, by descending below the horizon. Hence he supposes, that no action of
the divine being is the proper cause, efficient or producer of the evil of
men's wills.

In these things we doubt not it may be made to appear, that he alike
contradicts himself, and the foundation principles of reason and religion.

First, He contradicts himself. We shall take notice only of two respects in
which he does so. His own illustration of the subject goes upon the supposition,

(1.) That the existence of sin is the consequence merely of something negative
on God's part, or follows from the want of his influence, and from this only.
Whereas Mr. Edwards constantly asserts, that God is the determiner, orderer,
and decisive disposer of this event. It Is not sufficient with him to say, that
God is the permitter, or not a hinderer of sin; but he is careful immediately
to add, and at the same time a disposer of the state of events, in such a
manner, that sin will most certainly and infallibly follow. (P. 3 57, 367.) Now
is God's determining, ordering and actually disposing things in his providence,
in a decisive manner, a mere negative? Does not his ordering and disposing an
event, with all the previous circumstances, imply something more than
forbearing to act? even his influence and energy, or active providence therein?
Are the determinations and decrees of God, the dispositions of his providence,
nothing positive? Mr. Edwards says expressly, "To direct, decide, or determine
any thing, is to act." (P. 51.) He connects the active and permissive
providence of God -- maintains an efficient determination of, and efficacious
providence in sin.

2. Admit the existence of sin to be the consequence, not of any positive
influence of the deity, but to follow only from his forbearing to influence and
assist the creature, in like manner as darkness and frost in the night follow
upon the departure of the sun -- admit that God is not the efficient cause of
sin; it will then follow, that the sinful being himself must be this cause. Now
to say that the perpetrator of wickedness is the efficient cause of it, is to
establish a power of self-determination, contrary to the principal design of
Mr. Edwards's book. He must either maintain the positive energy and action of
the deity in the introduction of sin into the world, or else admit that it
arose from a cause in the mind of the sinner -- in other words, that he was
self-determined. And though this would involve his scheme in the absurdity he
speaks of, p. 7. that the will acts and produces effects upon itself, and is
the object of its own influence and action, yet there is no evading it. The
actor, agent, or doer of sin, as Mr. Edwards speaks, cannot, according to him,
be the efficient cause of it. Either then the deity is, in this sense, the
cause and author of sin, or it has no proper cause at all. By the cause of a
moral volition, Mr. Edwards says he sometimes means only an antecedent or
occasion of such volition, not any thing "which has a positive efficiency or
influence to produce" it -- and adduceth the beforementioned instance of the
sun in illustration. Que^^ When he affirms that the highest motive is the cause
of, and necessarily determines volition, does he mean that it is a cause in
the same (...) only as the departure of the sun is the cause of darkness and
frost (...) the night? Does he mean by motive nothing positive? nothing that
moves the mind determined by it? nothing that influenceth, orders directs and
disposes volition? Or if he really means by it some positive influence, (which
surely he does) would he admit that the conduct of the Deity determined the
existence of sin in this manner? If not (...) determinate meaning has the word
cause, as used by him?


Secondly, His doctrine is repugnant to the fundamental and most important
principles of reason and religion. It is ascribing sin as really, and in as
obnoxious a sense, to God, as to affirm, his positive agency and efficiency
herein. Mr. Edwards would have been more consistent with himself, had he
embraced the latter opinion. His scheme can hang together on no other
supposition. And on this supposition, the moral perfections and government of
God, and revealed religion, must be disbelieved.

But his doctrine respecting the manner of sin's coming into existence shall be
examined somewhat distinctly.

If sin arose from God's withdrawing his assistance and influence, it will then
follow that the creature had originally such influence and assistance as was
sufficient to prevent apostasy. Otherwise this would not be the consequence of
the withdraw of divine influence, but more properly the consequence of the
deficiency of such influence. And the case of the sun's departure from our
horizon would be very impertinently used to exemplify this event. For suppose
the creature never had sufficient divine influence and assistance to secure his
primitive rectitude, his state would have been analogous to primitive darkness
and eternal night. And because he did not walk in the light of the sun, without
having ever enjoyed its enlivening beams, he is consigned (or obnoxious) to
blackness or darkness forever.

If therefore there is any pertinency in the instance Mr. Edwards brings, the
creature once had such light, influence and assistance as might have forever
secured his integrity. Consequently, the apostasy might have been prevented.
The only enquiry is, whether it were owing to God, or the creature. Mr. Edwards
maintains it was owing to the former. Let us see whether his opinion be
reconcilable with the wisdom, holiness and goodness, or even justice of God.

To say that the apostasy was the consequence of God's forbearing to
communicate his influence and assistance, yet that it was a blameable thing in
the creature, is not less glaringly false and impious than it would be to say,
that God requires a rational conduct of those whom he has not endowed with the
natural understanding of men -- or that he requires moral exercises and
behavior of the brute creatures -- or requires a creature to live after he
has taken away the breath of life. Either would be contrary to reason and
justice -- to demand more than was given -- contrary to that fixed rule of
divine government, To him that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

Again, we might much more consistently suppose, that God would have put an end
to the existence of a rational creature, than have continued such an one in
being and withdrawn his influence, previous to any direct forfeiture on the
creatures part. The latter would imply injustice: But the former might not.
Existence being a free gift at first, the continuance of it would have been so,
had the creature not sinned. The creator might have discontinued it without
doing any wrong, even supposing sin had not taken place. But to continue the
creature in being, and withhold divine influence from him, in consequence of
which he is necessarily plunged into a state of sin, misery and desperation,
would be to give and continue being on terms worse than not to be at all. If
there is no reason for the former supposition; much less is there for the
latter.

This doctrine gives us such an idea of the parent of the universe as shocks
the first principles of reason, and contradicts the clearest notices God has
given of himself by the light of nature and scripture. Moral agents are the
offspring of God. Now is it indeed true, that the father of the whole family in
heaven and earth casts off his children before they have done any thing to
forfeit his paternal care, or incur his fatherly displeasure? Is their
forsaking him the consequence of his first leaving them? Does he expose them
defenseless, and cast them off as orphans, that they may, in consequence of his
dereliction, forget and forsake him, and then be thrust out from his family,
and treated as bastards and renegades! Is this to represent the parent of
angels and men in an honorable light! Can such a thought sit easy on the mind!
Do not reason and religion turn from the hideous sight with abhorrence! Is this
the representation given us of God in the holy scriptures? Do they instruct us,
that he first forsook his rational offspring, and that, as the consequence of
this, they forsook him? Do they not, on the contrary, teach us, The Lord is
with you, while ye be with him? and if ye seek him, he will be found of you;
but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you? As a father pitieth his children,
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Yea, earthly parents may forget; yet
will not he forget: For his compassions fail not. These things confirm our
natural apprehensions of God; and show, that there could not be the least
danger of God's withdrawing his influence and assistance from the creature, had
not the creature first departed from him.

Mr. Edwards's supposition, that creatures never commit sin, but only when God
leaves them to themselves, and necessarily sin when he does so, leaves no room
for a distinction between the case of an innocent creature, and that of those
from whom God withdraws the assistances of his grace in consequence of
obstinate impiety and wickedness, and as the punishment thereof; whom he is
said to give up to their own hearts lust, to walk in their own counsel -- Or
that of rebel angels, whom he has reserved in chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. Surely there is a difference, and one of great
importance, in these cases. Can we suppose that the offspring of God, in their
primitive state, were left to themselves in that awful manner which abandoned
sinners and devils are? But what difference is there, if we admit Mr. Edwards's
scheme? Can we think of the present state of rebel angels, with the judgment
that awaits them, and believe that their fall, their present condition, and the
torments to which they are destined, are the consequence of God's first
departing from them -- withdrawing his influence, support and energy, and
leaving them to themselves! To suppose that sin first came into the world
through the want of divine influence and assistance; and then reflect on the
terrible punishments of it in this and the eternal world, exhibits such a
character of the creator and governor of the world, that universal skepticism
is preferable to such a scheme. We mean not to set forth this doctrine in
colors more shocking to the imagination, and moving to the passions, than it
deserves. It Is impossible. We misrepresent it no otherwise than in not painting
it in it is true horrid colors. This will be allowed, if it can be shown, as we
now propose,

That to ascribe the origin of evil to the want of divine influence and
assistance is not materially different from ascribing it to the positive energy
and efficiency of God. For Mr. Edwards connects with the want or withholding of
divine influence, the divine determination, ordering and disposal of sin, with
all the circumstances leading to it, so as infallibly and necessarily to bring
it to pass. He asserts an efficacious permission of sin -- and supposes that a
train was laid from the beginning of the world to bring to pass the first sin,
and, in consequence of that, every one that has succeeded, or shall succeed,
to the end of time. His own immediate conduct is original in the series, either
his acting, or forbearing to act. Mr. Edwards says indeed, "God don't will sin
as sin." It is above our comprehension, that the Deity should will, order and
determine that action in the creature, which cannot be done without sin, and
not at the same time will the sin of it -- as suppose theft, adultery, murder,
blasphemy. Especially as the action is supposed to be necessary, and this
necessity imposed by the Deity -- and the perpetrator of the wicked deed wills
it no otherwise than as such a will is produced in him by an extrinsic cause.
But admitting this distinction, Mr. Edwards's scheme will be still embarrassed.
For on this supposition, how many effects are there without a cause? as many as
there are sins of men and devils. For they, it it said, "will sin as sin." But
God does not determine, order, dispose, design or will this wicked will of
theirs. Consequently, in willing sin as sin moral agents are self-determined,
or not determined at all. They are themselves the cause of the wickedness of
their wills, or it has no cause. But how is this reconcilable with that
decisive determining providence respecting every event, which Mr. Edwards
undertakes to defend? Moral events he maintains, consist not in the formal act;
but in the internal disposition and state of the will. Therefore, if the Deity
wills only the material actions of vicious moral agents, then he does not will
moral evil, or sin. He cannot will sin at all, unless he wills the inward
exercises of the heart, separate from which sin has no existence. Is the
sinfulness of the volitions of moral agents a thing which God wills? an event
which he determines? If it be, where is the difference between this, and his
willing sin, or being himself the subject of a sinful volition? If he that
wills sin does not will its sinfulness, how can sin then exist? On the
contrary, if the sinfulness of the volitions of moral agents be not an event
which God wills or determines, then he does not will or determine any moral
events of this kind.


On these things we observe, that divine communications were as necessary to
preserve innocent beings in a state of rectitude, as they are to support and
perfect the spiritual life in the regenerate, who are kept by the power of God.
But if the creator not only withdrew his influence and assistance from upright
beings, or forbore to act in their behalf; but also in his providence so
ordered and disposed the circumstances previous to the apostasy, as decisively
and necessarily ensured this event, what shall we say? Will it not follow, that
there is unrighteousness with God? For the same duty was required after the
withdraw of divine assistance; as before. The consequence of which is, that the
duty required of beings in a state of rectitude exceeded their abilities. For
the creature might as well continue to live, after God takes away his breath,
as continue holy after the withdraw of divine influence. We might just as
reasonably suppose him to be culpable for that act of God which puts an end to
his life, as for the forfeiture of primitive righteousness through an act of
divine forbearance, in withholding the assistances of grace.

The representation Mr. Edwards's scheme gives us of the wise and good governor
of the universe is summarily this, By the suspension of divine influence,
beings made holy become unholy, no longer capable of holy exercises -- every
imagination of their hearts only evil continually -- dead in sin -- obnoxious
to all the dismal effects of God's wrath in this world and that to come -- and
an innumerable progeny involved with them in the same deplorable circumstances.
-- All in consequence of being forsaken of their creator and father, before any
thing had been done by them to expose them to such a dereliction. This
dereliction was the next and immediate cause of the first sin of mankind, and
by consequence of all after sins.

No reason can, indeed, be given why divine influence and assistance should be
withdrawn from men and angels antecedent to their fall, which would not equally
justify the governor of the world had he never imparted such influence and
assistance to them. And suppose the case had been so, would their departure
from righteousness have been their fault, when they never had the necessary
means of attaining to, or continuing in it? To say that their defection arose
from the imperfection which properly belongs to a creature, as such, would not
at all relieve the difficulty. For this would be saying that sin properly arose
from the creature's original frame. And if it arose from a defect in this, who
but the author of his frame could be in fault? The creature cannot be
answerable for more than he has received. This way of accounting for the
origin of moral evil is very singular as well as impious. It Is to account for
its existence in a way that denies the possibility of its taking place in the
creation. Now where is the difference between saying, that the want of divine
influence and assistance was the ground and reason of the apostasy; and saying,
that such influence and assistance was from the beginning denied the creature?
Is there a difference that in the least affects any doctrine of religion? On
either supposition the Deity is made the positive cause and fountain of moral
evil -- or it has no proper cause -- or it does not exist. The first of these
Mr. Edwards's scheme embraces, while it seems to deny it: And this is what we
contest with him. He denies that moral agents are themselves the efficient
cause of their own vicious volitions; as it is certain this would imply a power
of self-determination in them: Now if they are not the efficients of their own
sins, the Deity must be; else sin would have no efficient cause at all -- every
sin would be an effect without a cause -- to say which, we agree with Mr.
Edwards, would be absurd.

Admitting then, that God is the efficient cause of sin, mediately or
immediately, what is this but saying that he is the producer and author of it?
Is not the efficient cause of an effect the producer and author of that effect?
And can we say that God produces sin without attributing to him the sin
produced? It the perpetrator of wickedness is only the subject of certain
effects from the operation of the supreme cause, how can we ascribe moral blame
to him? This doctrine of the efficiency of God in moral evil destroys his own
moral character, and renders it impossible that the creature should be a moral
agent. It is to ascribe the sin of man to God in such a sense as we cannot
attribute it to the devil, without bringing a railing accusation against him.
For he can only tempt men to sin: He is not the efficient or producer of it --
has not power over their volitions and actions -- cannot command their choice.
These are reserved in their own power, notwithstanding the solicitations of
the devil. Every man is then tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lusts
and enticed. Shall we then, by saying that God is the efficient cause of sin,
reproach our maker in a manner which a good man would not reproach even the
enemy of all righteousness?

When Mr. Edwards says, that "sin arose from the imperfection which properly
belongs to creature, as such; we suppose he means the same as when he says it
arose from the want or withholding of divine influence and assistance. If by
imperfection no more had been meant than the want of absolute perfection -- or
had he only meant to say, that the creature was not made incapable of sining,
we should have had no dispute with him on this point. But if by imperfection be
intended a want of original powers and advantages to do the duty the Creator
required, we by no means admit this, and deny that such imperfection properly
belonged to the creature; as it would be to ascribe arbitrary requirements to
the most High, all whose ways are judgment. Yet Mr. Edwards must be supposed
to assert the creature's imperfection in this sense, inasmuch as he connects
herewith God's so ordering his circumstances in his innocent state, and
withholding divine influence, that herefrom sin infallibly and necessarily
followed.

If the creature originally had sufficient divine influence and assistance, we
may say, that to continue holy was what properly belonged to him as a creature.
This may be said with more evident propriety than the contrary. For this was
his duty. He had a capacity and advantages for it. It was the end of his
formation in the image of God. It would have been his perfection, glory and
felicity. The degradation of his nature and turning his glory into shame, did
not properly belong to him. What properly belonged to him must have been his
perfection, not his imperfection. Sin did not properly belong to him. It was
contrary to his nature and bias considered as endowed with the spiritual and
moral image of God. Angels and men were made perfect in their order, as
creatures, however capable of improvement, both intellectual and moral. They
were, in this sense, perfect, till iniquity was found in them. God's work (what
is properly his) is perfect -- that part especially which he created in his own
image. Sin, therefore, could not proceed from any defect in his constitution --
from unavoidable imperfection. The imperfection of the creature, as such, i. e.
as a creature, is unavoidable, in a natural as well as moral sense. If
therefore sin arose from the imperfection proper to the creature, as such, then
it was necessary by a natural necessity -- which on all principles of morality
and religion (even on Mr. Edwards's) is a full excuse: That is, sin could not
have been at all on Mr. Edwards's plan. For what fully excuses, and takes away
all blame, is inconsistent with the being of sin.

What shall we then say to a scheme which makes the existence of sin the
inevitable consequence of the deficiency of that nature the creature received
immediately from God, and of those circumstances wherein he was originally
placed? Wherein does it essentially differ from the supposition that men and
angels were first made with a fixed prevailing principle of sin in the heart?
Man never had sufficient divine influence and assistance in order to his being
and continuing holy, according to Mr. Edwards's opinion of original
imperfection. For though he seems to suppose he had, by attributing sin to the
withdraw of divine influence; yet he immediately denies it by saying, that sin
arose from the imperfection properly belonging to the creature, as a creature:
That is, as a creature he was deficient to the purposes of holiness, both in
respect of original powers and divine assistance; and God, by his efficacious
providence, so ordered his circumstances, that he was under an original
necessity of sining -- a necessity resulting immediately from a defect of
nature and advantages -- that is, from God the author of his nature; and
disposer of his circumstances. Now what material difference is there between
forming an intelligent creature so, that from the imperfection properly
belonging to him, and the circumstances he is placed in, the want of divine
assistance, he necessarily sins; and creating of him with an evil disposition?
If there is no material difference, and if on the latter supposition the
Creator must be the efficient and fountain of sin, then this is also the
consequence on the former supposition. To suppose sin really proceeds from God,
is to suppose he is the author and cause, whether it be supposed to proceed
from him directly or indirectly -- immediately, or mediately and remotely. To
say that it proceeds from him in either way, is to say he is the efficient and
fountain of it -- the actor and exerciser of wickedness. Mr. Edwards allows,
that the cause which produces wickedness may be wicked: A cause may be to
blame for being the cause of vice. P. 273.


On the whole, his doctrine, while it acquits the creature from all blame,
impeacheth the Creator as the positive cause and source of the revolt of angels
and mankind, and ultimately fixes all the criminality in the universe on him.
How infinitely reproachful must that scheme of doctrine be, which involveth so
horrid and blasphemous an imputation on the supreme creator and governor of the
universe, who will be justified when be speaks, and clear when he judges!
For if men and devils are indeed destined to do all their abominations, how
then shall God judge the world? Does he exert as real an influence in moral
evil, as in natural good and evil -- as in the conservation of natural life?
Why then are not moral agents culpable for continuing to exist because God's
visitation preserves them, as for going on in sin through his energy and
influence? Did he, who at first commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
in the same manner produce a contrary effect in the moral world, by the
withdraw of his presence, and saying, "Let there be sin," involving the moral
creation in blackness of darkness! What a defiance must such a supposition be
to the first dictates of reason! What a contradiction to the holy scriptures!
where we are taught, God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man. Shall any man then presume to say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God? But what less does the doctrine before us amount to than this, that God
secretly designs all moral evil; places temptations to it before his creatures
in an irresistible manner; and deserts them in the hour of danger? What impiety
is this! Were such things spoken against God by the openly profane and ungodly,
the injury and reproach would be comparatively small. But when they are said
under a notion of honoring his name and government, by the professed friends of
religion, we must beg leave to think, that the utmost candor can find no
sufficient excuse for those who are bold and positive herein. Humility and
modesty in disquisitions of this kind will always be applauded by the wise and
good; but assurance and confidence in asserting, that God is the cause and
producer of moral evil; accompanied with uncharitableness toward those who
cannot believe such doctrine, must be very forbiding. Holy and reverend is his
name. When we speak of his counsels and determinations, the ends and reasons of
his government, it should be with much diffidence -- with jealousy and godly
fear, lest we should reproach and dishonor him, whose glory is above the
heavens. Counsel may be darkened by multiplying words, and ignorance and
temerity manifested rather than knowledge and piety. Behold! God is great, and
we know him not. How small a proportion have we heard of him? Can thou by
searching find out God! This, however, we clearly know, that God cannot do
wickedness, and has no pleasure therein; but delights in exercising
judgment, righteousness and loving kindness in the earth.

Some, with a view to exalt divine sovereignty, may have detracted from the
moral perfections of the Deity, which are his glory. Is it not far more
honorary to his glorious name and character to conceive of him as the parent of
the universe? to represent him like a prince who is the father of his people,
and accounts it his glory to advance their happiness -- rather than a
tyrannical, arbitrary prince, who aims only at his own grandeur, and the
display of his own power, instead of the good of his subjects, having no other
measures of governing than caprice and licentious will? If the former
representation excites the greatest reverence, esteem and confidence in an
intelligent mind, it is most worthy to be ascribed to our maker.

Mr. Edwards agrees with the writer of the letters on the origin of evil in
rejecting the usual solution, which derives sin from the abuse of free will.
And when the latter puts the question, Can it proceed from a wise, a just, and
a benevolent God? Can such a God form creatures with dispositions to do evil;
and then punish them for acting in conformity to those evil dispositions? the
reader will stand amazed at the answer, which is in the following words:
Strange and astonishing indeed must this appear to us, who know so little of
the universal plan! but is far, I think, from being irreconcilable with the
justice of the supreme disposer of all things -- Omnipotence is obliged to
afflict innocence, or be the cause of wickedness; it has plainly no other
option. P. 102, 103.
We shall take the liberty, having had frequent occasion to quote this author,
to give the reader a concise view of his general scheme.

Taking his lead from this principle, that all evil, natural and moral,
political and religious, arises from the necessary imperfection of creatures,
he endeavors to show, that all government among men is founded in violence and
corruption, and all religion in delusion and absurdity -- that our vices are
the support of government, our follies the preservation of religion Ibid. 89;
128; 138.
-- that religion, particularly Christianity, is deficient in every principle
requisite to its answering its own end Ibid. p. 164.
-- that natural evil was unpreventable by God's power, and moral evil
expedient in consequence of natural -- that with regard to God, vice is the
consequence of misery -- that God is, and must be, the author of sin, as the
contrary would be to say, that something exists without any cause at all --
that he is the author of all natural evil, and in the same manner, on the same
principle, the author of all moral evil -- that he made creatures with morally
evil dispositions Ibid. p. 11; 100, -- 109.
-- This scheme, the author affirms, is the only one, on which the doctrines of
original sin, predestination and redemption can be vindicated -- that
Christianity can be defended on no other plan. Ibid. p. 112, -- 120.
On the same general principle, the necessary imperfection of the creature,
this writer endeavors to establish the doctrine of transmigration, and an
eternal succession of states. (P, 55, -- 75.) What friend he was to
Christianity, or even to natural religion, let the reader judge! This writer
has, however, been kind enough to caution us against infering, that the
necessity of vice and punishment make any alteration in their natures with
regard to man -- and says, it does not in the least extenuate men's guilt. Men
may be made inclined to vice, in order to render them proper objects of such a
degree of misery as -- was previously determined for the sake of public good --
that though sin in us is evil and punishable; in God it is not so. (P. 107,
108; 110.) Mr. Edwards's distinguishing the nature of sin from it is cause --
his saying that God wills sin, but not as sin -- that sin is for the best, are
equivalent positions.
But this author's principles will have a firm support, if once we admit those
of Mr. Edwards on the same subject. It is a matter of notoriety, that some
writers in Europe, who have of late years distinguished themselves in the cause
of irreligion and skepticism, (both before and since Mr. Edwards's book
appeared) have built on the same foundation of necessity. It Is to be lamented,
when the friends and public teachers of religion adopt and set themselves to
defend, a scheme of doctrine which gives countenance to infidelity. There are
those among ourselves who have the confidence to insult the religion of their
country and the bible, by publicly delivering the same doctrine, for
substance, as the aforesaid author, with little reserve. There is reason to
apprehend people may soon be taught from the pulpit, in so many words, that
almighty God first infused wickedness into the creature. It is unhappy Mr.
Edwards's book has given so much countenance to this profane, blasphemous
tenet. It seems better not to believe a God, than to entertain such an opinion
concerning him. Whether this be not the result of Mr. Edwards's scheme, we are
content the impartial should determine.

We have now offered the reasons of our dissent from Mr. Edwards respecting the
origin of evil. We are fully persuaded it did not, could not, come into
existence in the way he supposes -- Yet how it in fact came to pass, that
beings made upright have fallen, we acknowledge is to us incomprehensible --
and apprehend it is so to any human understanding; not excepting theirs who
have attempted to account for it. There is a sense in which it is doubtless
true, that sin arose from the imperfection of the creature; that is, the
creature was not made incapable of sining. He was originally endowed with a
freedom to holiness or sin: He might have chosen the former, though eventually
he chose the latter. His felicity or misery was made to depend on his own
election. There was no want of original powers and divine communications in
order to his continuance in a state of moral rectitude. It therefore remains,
that moral evil arose from a neglect or perversion of the powers and divine
communications he had in innocence. Angels and men might have continued holy;
but misimproved the gifts of God, and thus forfeited his influence and
friendship. So far seems clear: And this is sufficient to vindicate the
providence of God in permitting sin and misery to enter into the world. How it
came to pass, that liberty was originally abused, seems to be a matter of
unprofitable speculation. To those who reject this solution of the matter, and
object, that sin could not arise from the abuse of liberty, some farther reply
may, however, be made in the ninth section.

N. B. In our examination of Mr. Edwards, (p. 64.) it was incidentally noted
from him, that "God decisively orders all the volitions of moral agents by a
positive influence" -- he adds in the place refered to, "or permission." We
trust it has been fully shown, that he intends an efficacious permission -- to
"decide, determine, direct, is to act," as he says himself. At the same time
he makes a distinction, it should seem, between an efficacious permission, a
decisive efficient determination, and positive influence: This distinction we
had not so particularly attended to. And though we see not the least room for
it, and have no doubt but what he has said clearly implies a positive influence
of the Deity in sin; yet on revising the aforesaid quotation we find he meant
not to express it. We readily take this opportunity to correct the undesigned
misrepresentation, and wish we could say his doctrine does not contain the
thing, which was not meant to be explicitly affirmed. Some of the advocates for
his scheme maintain a positive influence of the Deity in sinful volitions, and
say it was his real opinion, that God is the efficient cause of sin.

SECTION V. On the connection between the nature and cause of volition.
IT is a favorite distinction with Mr. Edwards, that the essence of virtue and
vice lies in the nature of volition, not in the cause. We before took some
slight notice of the futility of this distinction. We knew, indeed, that the
consistency of Mr. Edwards's scheme depended not a little on the propriety of
distinguishing the nature of moral actions from their cause: But had we
represented such a distinction as really important, upon his plan, possibly it
might have been esteemed invidious. However, we are now constrained to say,
such a representation would have been the exact truth. And though we still
think the distinction futile and evasive, yet we have a reason, which we had
not when we wrote before, for giving this matter a particular consideration.
Our having been publicly called upon (not in very obliging terms Essay on
moral agency, part I. sect. 4.
) to point out the weakness of this distinction, will excuse us with the
reader, should he think more notice is now taken of it, than it really deserves.

We shall first examine the merits of this distinction -- and then remind the
reader of the importance of it on Mr. Edwards's plan.

First, Of the merits of it. To say the essence of virtue and vice lies in
their nature, is only saying, that the nature of them consists in their nature.
Or the proposition might be transposed thus: The nature of virtue and vice lies
in their essence. The word nature needs explaining as much as the word essence.
To use the former as a definition or explanation of the latter, would not be
less trifling than to attempt to explain the term necessary, by the words must,
can, cannot, of which Mr. Edwards takes notice. (P. 18.) We don't advance one
step in our understanding of the subject by such explanations. Should any one
ask, wherein does the essence of virtue and vice consist? and receive for
answer, It consists in it is nature -- would he think the answer less
impertinent, or be less disposed to laugh at him that offers it, than if upon
asking an explanation of the word necessity, he should be answered, that which
is necessary, must and cannot but be?

We desire no logical proof that the nature of virtue and vice lie in the
nature of a virtuous or vicious disposition. We allow that such a disposition
is what it is; and think there was no occasion to fill the page with proofs of
this sort. For who is fool enough to dispute the thing! But does this show us
what constitutes the nature of virtue and vice? what it is that makes any
particular action or disposition virtuous or vicious? Or does it follow, from
admitting that the nature of virtue and vice lies in their nature, that
therefore their nature is seperable from their cause? or that one can be judged
of detached from the other? Were virtue and vice, as effects in the natural
world, produced by the efficiency of some cause extrinsic to the subject, and
in which he is but a passive recipient, then, indeed, we might detach their
cause from their nature. But this is beging the question. It still remains to
be proved, that virtue and vice in rational agents are the production of a
cause extrinsic to themselves.

This distinction of Mr. Edwards's is, therefore, subtle and evasive, as it
carries in it an intimation, that his opponents deny the essence of volition to
lie in it is nature, and maintain it lies in it is cause by way of distinction
from it is nature. But when or where have they affirmed the latter, or denied
the former? Again, this distinction is evasive, inasmuch as it takes for
granted, that if the essence of volition lies in it is nature, then the nature
of volition may be separated from the cause -- which consequence is by no means
admitted. It is evasive also, as it takes for granted that the cause of moral
volitions is not in the mind of moral agents. For if it be indeed true, that
the cause of such volition is in the mind or agent willing, we presume, in this
case, no one would attempt to disjoin the cause and nature of volition. Least
of all could Mr. Edwards.

To treat of moral causes and effects in the same manner as a philosopher would
discourse on natural causes, is a method of handling moral subjects altogether
improper, but much used by Mr. Edwards -- With what advantage to his own
scheme? For in this way of reasoning we ascend from the effect to the cause.
The cause must be proportionable and agreeable to the effect, nor can there be
more in the effect than in the cause, P. 62.
as Mr. Edwards has observed. Admit then that virtue and vice in moral and
accountable creatures are the production of a cause extrinsic to their own
minds, have we not shown, that the cause which produces wickedness, is wicked?
The subject in whom vice is thus produced cannot be vicious at all. Or to speak
more properly, the supposition that a creature can, in this way, be the subject
of a vicious disposition, is a palpable absurdity. A disposition thus produced
cannot partake of the nature of vice, viewed in relation to the subject,
however it does as viewed in relation to the cause and producer of it. If then
this cause be God, (as on Mr. Edwards's scheme we have shown it must be) who
would not shudder at the consequence!

That the nature of moral evil cannot be detached from it is efficient cause, we
presume will clearly appear from stating a few cases. And since it is the
origin of evil we are ultimately enquiring after, these cases shall be stated
upon the different schemes of accounting for the introduction of moral evil,
which have been embraced by divines and philosophers. The first shall be Mr.
Edwards's own.

Suppose then the existence of sin arose from the imperfection properly
belonging to a creature, as such, and from God's withholding or withdrawing his
grace. On this plan can the first sin of angels and man be disjoined from the
cause? If the creature had not original abilities and communications from God
adequate to the duty required of him; or if these abilities and communications
were suspended or withdrawn before any forfeiture was incurred; could the moral
evil of that disposition, which the first sin involved, be attributed to the
subject of it, any more than if he had been created with it? Or any more than
if it had been infused by the positive influence of some other agent? Mr.
Edwards would admit, that if a moral agent was "first made with a fountain of
evil in his heart," or had a vicious disposition afterward produced in him by
the efficiency of the Deity, this would be to make God the actor and doer of
wickedness. Now has it not been shown, that his own scheme runs up to this?
Does it not, therefore, follow, even on his own doctrine, in the case we are
now supposing that the obliquity of sin cannot be separated from the cause --
though (shocking to mention!) he makes the Deity himself that cause? Does this
scheme give us an idea of the moral governor of the world at all different from
what the scriptures give us of the arbitrary prince of Egypt in the time of
Moses, who demanded of the Israelites the usual tale of brick, after he denied
them straw? Or of those who bound heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and
laid them on men's shoulders, but themselves would not move them with one of
their fingers? Should a master require of his servant such a task as he could
well perform, having proper tools to work with -- but never allow him such
tools, or for no fault of the servant's take them from him, so that he
necessarily fails of the performance of his task: Would any body pronounce such
servant wicked and slothful -- accuse him of idleness and want of respect to
his master? Would not every one pity him as having an hard, and unreasonable
master, and attribute all the blame to the latter for denying his servant what
was requisite to his performing the task required? But is there such
unrighteousness with God? There are, indeed, but a very few divines of
eminence, if any, who account for the existence of sin in this way which Mr.
Edwards does.

Suppose in the next place, that the positive agency and efficiency of God was
the cause of sin's first entrance into the world. Can we disjoin the nature of
sin from the cause, in this case, and in this supposition? Would not this be to
make the creature answerable for the act of God? Are moral agents only the
subjects of certain effects from divine agency? Wherein then do they differ
from machines? And if there is no material difference, wherein consists the
moral evil of any dispositions in them? But what an horrid impeachment of the
most High does this doctrine contain? This is, indeed, the clear consequence of
Mr. Edwards's scheme, though he chose not to affirm it in words. It Is more
directly to arraign the perfections and government of almighty God: And hence
many, who have thought favorably of Mr. Edwards's doctrine, reject this with
pious indignation; and did they suppose his doctrine was reducible to such a
consequence, would immediately give it up. But as this ascription of the first
sin, of all sin, to the influence, energy, agency or efficiency of God, differs
nothing essentially from the next case we shall state, we will proceed directly
to

Suppose moral agents created with vicious dispositions -- Suppose a creature
formed with the temper of Lucifer -- suppose he himself had been created with
his present temper. Such a temper is, in it is own nature, exceeding odious. But
could it be so esteemed separate from the creating cause? Would it satisfy any
rational man to be told in this case, that the having such a disposition argued
the high criminality of the subject of it, without our being obliged at all to
consider how he came to have it -- that let him come by it how he will, he is
fully and perfectly free in exercising of it, and therefore deserving of blame
and punishment. Would not this be to make the creature culpable for the
constitution and temper he received immediately from the forming hands of the
Creator? Might we not as justly suppose it, a culpable thing in any human being
that he is not formed with the capacity of Gabriel? or in idiots, that they
have not natural understanding? or in brutes, that they are not endowed with
reason? Can the thing formed be answerable for the act of the former of it?
What is properly God's constitution cannot be the sin of the creature.
Consequently, in the case now put, the having the malignant disposition
supposed, would not infer criminality in the subject, however detestable such
disposition is in itself: But the criminality, if any there be, must be
ascribed to the immediate author and efficient of it -- that is, to the
creating cause. Nor is the supposition of a creature made at first with such a
disposition materially different from Mr. Edwards's opinion concerning the
introduction of sin, viewed in it is natural consequence; as we trust has
already been proved.

Whether, therefore, we suppose that sin arose from the want or withdraw of
divine influence and assistance, or from divine agency and efficiency, or that
creatures were made wicked at first, the nature of sin cannot be separated from
it is cause. Now except these opinions concerning the origin of evil, there has
been no other that deserves to be mentioned but that maintained by the
generality of moralists and divines, that it arose from the abuse of free will
-- in other words, from a cause in moral agents themselves.

Before we dismiss the instances above adduced, we would subjoin this further
observation, that if that energy be an holy energy, which angels and saints are
the subjects of, then that is a sinful energy, which devils and wicked men are
the subjects of, or through which their wills are inclined and determined to vice
-- That if one moral agent (whether creature or creator) is supposed to be the
positive cause of sin in another, so much sin as is to be attributed to the
efficiency of the former, is to be taken from the criminality of the latter,
and set to the account of the cause and producer of it. Quod est causa causae,
est etiam causa causati.


We go on to observe, that as moral agency involves accountableness to a moral
governor, so the laws of God have respect to the inward and outward man. They
require not only such inward principles and affections as correspond to his
perfections and gifts to us, and the relations we stand in to our
fellow creatures; but also external acts of devotion, justice, charity,
self-government. The matter and substance of morality and religion are as much
the subject of command, as the internal principles and affections of heart,
which should regulate and influence to 'em. Now the nature of an external
action is the same, whether performed by a good or bad man. The prayers and
alms of a Pharisee, in themselves considered, or as to the matter of them, are
as commendable as those of the most approved Christians. Mr. Edwards insists,
that moral good or evil lies in the state and disposition of the mind, and
allows of no virtue or vice in external actions, detached from their cause --
the principles they proceed from, the ends aimed at. But why are internal
exercises then disjoined from their cause? It is as evident a truth, that
material actions are good or bad in their own nature, as that the inward
principles and affections are so. External acts are what they are in their own
nature, not depending on the sentiments and volitions of the agent. Though in a
relative view and estimation they vary, according to the temper, circumstances
and advantages of the agent; yet their nature is unalterable. Men's doing
things in their own nature right, with an evil intent; or doing things in their
own nature very evil, meaning to do God service, does not alter the nature of
the things done. Therefore let us connect both internal exercises and external
actions with their causes, or neither.

Again, The same sin may be very differently aggravated in different persons,
or in the same person at different times. But any sin is in it is own nature the
same, by whatever moral agent committed, or however circumstanced. The precise
definition of sin is A NOMIA -- i. e. without law, or a nonconformity to law.
But to determine the degree of guilt in regard to any particular sin, besides
the general consideration of the nature of the vicious affection or act, the
advantages, opportunities and circumstances of the transgressor must also come
into consideration. Moral writers have ever kept up this distinction. Besides
maintaining that some crimes are more heinous than others viewed in their own
nature, they have also maintained, that some are more heinous than others by
reason of several aggravations. The same sin admits of a variety of
circumstances, which either aggravate or extenuate the guilt of it: These
distinctions are carefully preserved in the sacred writings. Now the particular
aggravation and circumstances of crimes are as different from their nature, as
one sin is different from another -- (as different as blasphemy is from some
idle word men may speak) and therefore ought to come under a separate
consideration. But Mr. Edwards's doctrine precludes this plain and important
distinction. For if the separate consideration of the nature of any vicious
volition in itself be all that is necessary to determine the matter of
criminality, then the fame crime must be equally heinous in every person that
commits it, and in the same person at all times. Difference of circumstances
can have no weight, as they do not belong to the nature of any particular vice
-- they only make a gradual, not a specific difference. But the former, it
seems, is of no estimation. In other words, there is nothing that can either
heighten or extenuate the same transgression. Suppose the wills of moral agents
are derived from the author of nature, (which by implication was Mr. Edwards's
doctrine) and we might apply to the general subject of this section such
instances as the following. A good man is, by the act of divine providence;
reduced to a state of insanity -- in consequence of which he is full of the
most implacable hatred, malice and malignity against his nearest kindred and
best friends -- yea, blasphemeth his Maker. This disposition is in it is own
nature exceeding vile. But is it to be so considered in him? It is, on Mr.
Edwards's principles. His having and indulging the aforementioned malignity of
temper, his voluntarily uttering blasphemy, are enough to prove him a malignant
person, and a blasphmer, without considering at all how he came by such a
disposition -- whether it proceeded from a cause extrinsic or intrinsic. For
the madman may proceed as acliberately, voluntarily and designedly in these
things, as one who has the use of reason. In the abovenamed instances "he does
wrong, and does so from his heart." And what more is wanting to constitute him
a most vile and abandoned sinner? nothing -- except that his sentiments and
disposition are not under his own command, during the dolirium. His will is,
indeed fully in these things -- His internal exercises are voluntary -- his
external actions are spontaneous exertions -- he acts leisurely, according to
the present disposition of his heart -- he is under no other necessity than
what is his will's present propensity. But then he is incapable of directing
and governing his own volitions and actions -- therefore not the cause of them
-- therefore not blameable

On the same principle, that agents are blameable for any particular
disposition interwoven with their original frame, we might argue, that the
brute-creatures are vicious. The fierceness of the tiger, the ravening
disposition of the bear and wolf, the venom of the serpent, might be adduced as
examples of a disposition most odious in it is own nature: There is no
opposition in their wills to it -- they exercise it freely -- it is their nature.




The foregoing observations may be sufficient to show, that commendation or
blame is not to be separated from the cause of a virtuous or vicious
disposition, and to expose the weakness of that distinction of Mr. Edwards's,
on which we have been remarking. It is at least true with respect to the origin
of evil, that it is nature cannot be separated from it is cause, nor even in idea
conceived to be so.

Having examined the merits of the distinction itself, we promised, in the next
place, to remind the reader, that however futile and evasive it really is, yet
on Mr. Edwards's plan, and in his view, it was of much importance.

The sense he had of it is importance appears from what he has wrote on this
point -- particularly Part IV. Sect. 1. Nor did he mis-judge, provided this
fundamental principle in his scheme be true, that moral agents do not
originate, in any case, their own actions -- in other words, provided the cause
of their actions be not in themselves. For on this principle, one or other of
these things must follow -- either that virtue or vice is not predicable of
moral agents, or that the essence of them depends not on their cause. The first
Mr. Edwards would by no means admit; the other he saw was a plain consequence
of his principles. He therefore set himself to defend it as well as he could,
that he might exempt the Deity from the charge of being criminal, while, by
supposition, he originates the volitions of his intelligent creatures.

Hence appears the occasion Mr. Edwards had to separate the nature of virtue
and vice from their cause. This is very much a turning point in the controversy
on liberty and necessity, as he has stated it. Whether the distinction can be
vindicated as just and proper, we leave the reader to judge. If it cannot, one
or other of these consequences must follow -- either first, that there is no
sin in the world -- or secondly, that God himself is the only criminal being --
or thirdly, that the cause of sin is in the mind of the sinner. Either of the
three subverts Mr. Edwards's scheme. The last is the only eligible opinion.

Mr. Edwards's subject naturally led him to be explicit on this question,
Whether God or the creature be the proper cause of moral evil? It must have
been full in his view while writing every part of his book. But we don't
recollect that he has once said, or so much as hinted, that the creature is the
efficient cause of sin; though he has said many things which imply that God is
the efficient. Whether he declined being explicit from a conviction, that
though his scheme made God the cause of moral turpitude, the minds of
Christians were not yet prepared to receive this astonishing doctrine, we shall
not say. It is of vast importance, who is the cause of sin. We could wish Mr.
Edwards had not evaded a direct answer to a question, which his subject, in
every part of it, required him to answer in clear and determinate language.

SECTION VI. Moral evil not best for the world.
"I BELIEVE," says Mr. Edwards, there is no person of good understanding, who
will venture to say, he is certain that it is impossible it should be best --
that there should be such a thing as moral evil in the world. Be it so: Is his
inference just? It will certainly follow, that an infinitely wise being, who
always chooses what is best, must choose that there should be such a thing. P.
169, 170, 171.
Many intelligent persons apprehend there is a medium between being peremptory
on either side. While their modesty and humility prevent their saying, they are
certain moral evil is not for the best, they make as great a scruple of saying,
they are certain it is best sin has taken place. It would be no difficult
matter to show, that the latter assertion is as daring as the former, although
Mr. Edwards has "ventured" to affirm the one, and to impeach the goodness of
their understanding who may affirm the other, or choose not to express
themselves with the assurance he does. Whether it argues "good understanding,"
or prejudice and confidence, that he is so exceeding peremtory in this opinion
(as he is in every opinion which he maintains in this controversy with the P.
108.
deniers of necessity) we leave to others to judge.

To one that enquires, "Why did God permit sin?" it would be a proper answer,
You have no right to know: It Is sufficient that he is not the cause of it. The
reasons and ends of the permission of sin, as well as of other events, the
Father has reserved very much in his own power. It Is not for us to know them.
Whatever the consequences of sin are, or might have been, had no redeemer been
provided, God and his throne will be guiltless, if the fall of angels and men
is laid at the right door. Our duty is to bless God who has not permitted the
human apostasy without the provision of an all-sufficient savior, in whom
whosoever believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life -- who has
made us partakers of his gospel and grace in Christ; and to give a practical
assent to this faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners. For thus only can we be saved from the wages of sin, and become the
subjects of that grace which reigns through righteousness unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

The question respecting the reasons of the divine permission of sin, being
useless and impertinent at least, if not presumptuous, we would only take
occasion to observe, that "it is the inevitable result of the nature and
condition of created free agents, that they may possibly err, and act contrary
to right; and the placing them in such a possibility is by no means to be
imputed to any deficiency of wisdom and goodness in God. For example, such a
creature as man, compounded of flesh and spirit, must have a variety of
affections; some higher, and some lower; some which determine him to pursue the
proper perfection of his superior faculties as the chief end of his being, and
others which attach him to the inferior part of his constitution; which must
also be preserved by his care, during the time appointed for his subsistence.
Since then, there are such different tendencies in the nature of man, and
liberty also essential to him, he must be capable of acting differently
according to the different direction of his instincts and affections; and his
acting always right could not be absolutely secured, or the possibility of
moral evil avoided, without such an interposition of almighty power, as would
import an essential change in his frame and his state. In other words, if the
divine perfections required that sin should be absolutely prevented, or not at
all permitted, they required that such a creature as man in a state of
probation, should not be created: Which scarcely any considerate person will
have the hardiness to affirm." Abernethy.


Mr. Edwards, it will be remembered, proceeds upon this supposition, that the
infinite creator, before the world was, having in contemplation all possible
systems, gave the preference to one including moral evil, as best calculated to
manifest his perfections. Hence he affirms it to be part of God's own infinite
scheme of things to choose what he hates, and what is in itself, as man's act,
disagreable to his heart. (p. 380.) He accordingly instructs us to view the
world, with all the wickedness that ever was, is, or will be in it, as the
projection, ordination and production of that glorious being, who has not
pleasure in wickedness, with whom evil shall not dwell. Nothing has ever taken
place but in prosecution of his original plan: Moral evil is a necessary means
through which he effects his designs: and (it is intimated p. 163,) has not
"marred his system," -- nor indeed can this be supposed, if sin is so essential
and material "a part of his infinite scheme of things."

Now were it admitted, that moral evil is for the best, as Mr. Edwards declares
he is certain it is; this would by no means be a bottom broad enough to support
his doctrine; that it came into existence through the divine determination and
decisive disposal. For if he "disposes the mind to" moral evil, then he "
causes the mind to be disposed to, and to will" it; "and that is the same
thing as to be the cause of" moral evil (p. 136.) Again, Mr. Edwards insists,
that the determiner of volition is the cause of it. So that to say (as he does
through his whole book) that God determines every volition of moral agents
from their first existence; is to say, he is the cause of every sinful
volition. But enough has been offered on this head. The opinion, that moral
evil is for the best, is much more tenable on the principles of those who
ascribe causality and self-determination to the creature, and suppose sin arose
from the abuse of free will, maintaining no influence or disposal of the divine
being in it, but only his permission of it, or suffering it to come to pass --
than on the principles of those who ascribe moral evil to his efficiency. The
former opinion shows a respect to the moral character of God: The advocates for
it say, he takes occasion to bring good out of evil -- to overruled the
existence of sin for the best. The espousers of the latter opinion seem boldly
to say, that God does evil, that good may come. Can a being of perfect moral
excellence give existence to sin by his influence? Can it be faulty in the
subject, and yet proceed from him as the cause? We presume it has been made
evident, that neither of these things can be true.

The scheme under examination supposes God to be the cause of every thing, and
consequently of sin -- hence sin is infered to be best, because it is supposed
to proceed from God in this manner. Were moral agents left to determine
themselves, then it is pleaded, the events depending on their determination
would be contingent, and might not come to pass; which is supposed to be
irreconcilable with the prescience and decrees of God -- the plan of his
government. Moral evil being part of his plan, to render it is existence
certain, he determined, it is said, to effect it by his providence -- by his
own power and agency; as much as he determined to create the world by an
exertion of his power. The difficulty from divine prescience shall be examined
in it is place. But if the above mentioned foundation be false, the inference,
that sin is for the best cannot be supported by it, even granting the thing
infered to be true in itself.

On his principles Mr. Edwards (with good reason) supposed it would be
objected, that God may do evil that good may come. But how has his answer
removed the objection, if it be indeed true, as he teaches, that moral evil is
a part of God's infinite scheme -- an effect of his determining and disposing
-- and therefore best? If so, is it unfit and unsuitable in it is nature, or of
bad tendency? Can that be a necessary means of the greatest good in the divine
system, which is upon the whole either unfit and unsuitable in it is nature, or
bad in it is tendency? In order to accomplish his own holy and benevolent ends,
is infinite wisdom compelled to make use of unholy and malevolent means? means
unfit and unsuitable in their nature, and in their tendency bad? How can such
things stand in the relation of means to the proposed end? Mr. Edwards must
either say, that God does evil that good may come, or else that moral evil is a
thing fit in it is nature, and good in it is tendency. For to be the cause of an
evil effect is evidently to do evil; and though such evil be improved as a
means of great general good, the end will not sanctify or alter the means. No
being can, with a good intent, be the designed cause of moral evil. Yet it is
insisted on, that moral evil is determined and designed by God -- "a part of
his own infinite scheme." And if it is his determining act, then he is the
cause of it. Plain common sense, unperverted by metaphysics, teaches the
world, that holy means only are adapted to an holy end; and that no supposeable
reference of moral evil to a good end can justify any moral agent in having
recourse to it to effect his designs -- much less can a being of infinite
perfection, who can be at no loss for proper means to accomplish his own ends,
first be the cause of wickedness, that by this, as a necessary means, he may
bring to pass the purposes of his holiness and goodness. The nature of the
means will be the same, whatever be the end in view. After all the sophistical
pains that have been taken to show, that moral evil, though infinitely hateful
in it is nature and tendency, is yet a necessary well-adapted means of the
greatest good, and as such first effected by the deity, and then improved by
him to advance the greatest happiness in his system, it yet remains
problematical, or far from being proved that unspotted purity can be the author
of sin. If we should grant it to be best that moral evil has come into
existence, will it therefore follow, that it is an effect proceeding from
divine efficiency? or that it is best the supreme cause should be the author of
it? "They who think and talk in this strain ought to remember," that they have
no reason to complain, if the world esteem it "an instance of the greatest
arrogance" and audacious impiety.

"Though the actual permission of evil," says bishop Butler, may be beneficial
to the world: (that is, it would have been more mischievous, not that a wicked
person had himself abstained from his own wickedness, but that any one had
forcibly prevented it, than that it was permitted:) Yet notwithstanding, it
might have been much better for the world, if this very evil had never been
done. Nay, it is most clearly conceivable, that the very commission of
wickedness may be beneficial to the world, and yet, that it would be infinitely
more beneficial for men to refrain from it. For thus, in the wise and good
constitution of the natural world, there are disorders which bring their own
cures; diseases, which are themselves remedies. Many a man would have died, had
it not been for the gout or a fever; yet it would be though it madness to assert,
that sickness is a better or a more perfect state than health; though the like,
with regard to the moral world, has been asserted.

With most Christians it might be laid down for a postulatum, that the
knowledge, imitation and enjoyment of God were his end in the formation of
moral and accountable, creatures. Whence it will follow, that the greatest good
of the intelligent creation is to fall in with that instruction in the oracles
of truth; (contrary to many in modern metaphysics) Let him that glories, glory
in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth: For in these
things I delight, says the Lord. This clearly points out the Creator's view
and design in giving being to moral agents -- what his own scheme is -- what
should be their first and last end, and regarded by them as the one thing
needful -- showing them how they may fall in with the designs and exertions of
infinite wisdom for the advancement of their holiness and highest happiness,
and thereby attain the end of their creation. To live without remembrance or
knowledge of God, in contradiction to the above mentioned moral perfections,
which he displays in his own government of the world, and propounds to the
imitation of the subjects of his moral government -- to sin against him without
fear -- we need not scruple to say, this would be to oppose his designs. If his
end in the creation of moral agents was, that they might be conformed to him
and blessed in his likeness and friendship; perhaps it may be infered, that he
had no secret design contrary to this. Perhaps it may follow, that he did not
make rebel angels at first with this view, that he might be the cause of their
rebellion, and then punish them eternally for what was the effect of his own
determining act, as a means of displaying his holiness and justice and mercy,
of establishing his dominion and authority, of promoting and securing the moral
rectitude of their fellows. "They who talk or think in this strain," seem not
to understand what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Such things published by
unknown authors would be generally supposed to proceed from disbelief of
religion, natural and revealed.

From what has been observed, it follows, that moral evil was not God's end in
the creation of moral agents; and consequently, that it was not part of his
scheme to bring them to the enjoyment of himself, or secure to them this
felicity, by means of moral evil. They who say so ought to prove these two
things. First, That moral evil is a necessary means of qualifying moral agents
for the enjoyment of God, or of their everlasting security of his friendship.
Secondly, That he has prescribed it as the true medium to this end, and
determined it is existence with this view. In other words, that sin is the
appointed medium of holiness and happiness -- necessary to the moral perfection
of the intelligent creation. We are too sensible what sort of employment he
must have who undertakes this, to spend time in exposing the absurdity of such
a scheme.

That holiness is the greatest good of the moral world, we beg leave to take
for granted. We don't desire to maintain a controversy with those who deny it.
This principle being admitted, the enquiry is, what has the directest tendency
to promote holiness? For that is for the best, which has this tendency. Now we
may appeal to common sense, whether moral evil is most eligible in this view.
Whether that which stands in direct opposition to holiness has the most direct
tendency to it, or conduces to the highest degrees of it. Do contraries
promote and advance each other? Is greater happiness attained by a partial
remedy of an evil, than would be by preventing it? Which is most honorable to
the infinite Creator, to say, that the original powers and assistances imparted
to the creature were sufficient to his continuing upright, and that his fall
arose from the abuse of them? Or to say, that his fall arose from a defect of
original advantages, or the withdraw of divine influence?

Natural evil appears plainly to be the consequence of moral, and not moral the
consequence of natural, as a late writer supposes. Letters on the origin of
evil.
Evils of the former kind are the judicial as well as natural consequence of
the latter sort, and designed to correct and amend them -- the evil of
punishment or affliction is designed and adapted to cure the evil of sin -- or
to lead sinners to repentance; and promote a reformation in them. -- So that
moral evil supposes their deviation from the greatest good, from what would
have been best for them. And if their restoration to righteousness is best, let
any one show that their departure from righteousness was for the best -- that
their original permanency in it would not have been the greatest good -- that
the permanency of the whole intellectual system, as well as a part of it, in
holiness, would not have been best.

Mr. Edwards supposes, that all events which have taken place may therefore be
inferred to be agreeable to infinite wisdom and goodness and part of the scheme
of the superintendent of the universe -- and that all events which ever will
take place fall within his plan and design, for the same reason. Whence it
follows, that whatsoever has not, or will not come to pass, is disagreable to
him, contrary to his scheme of government. For were it agreeable to his wisdom
and goodness, he would choose it; and if he chose, he would determine it; and if
he determined it, he would bring it to pass. Consequently, he chooses and
desires not the repentance of such as die impenitent. For this would be to
choose something in contravention of his infinite scheme. Consequently, he has
not commanded them to repent; or if he has, then he has commanded what is not
agreeable to his wisdom and goodness. Or if his desire is expressed in his
commands, then the thing desired not taking place; he must be infinitely
crossed and grieved, in proportion to his infinite love and desire of
righteousness, and hatred of wickedness. For this is Mr. Edwards's own
inference, if any thing is supposed to come to pass which God chooses and
desires not -- or fails of coming to pass which he chooses should come to
pass. Does he therefore not choose (notwithstanding the frequent declarations
and assevertaions in his word) that impenitents (finally remaining such) should
turn and live? Are the riches of his goodness and forbearance, in the day of
visitation, not designed to lead them to repentance? Is it not questionable,
upon the whole, whether he is a lover of holiness? For how much would the
renovation of impenitents add to the sum total of holiness in the universe? But
this is not a thing chosen and desired, because it does not come to pass -- and
for this good reason it would not be best. Or will any undertake to show, that
the impenitency of great multitudes is a means of proportionably more holiness
in other beings -- that the holiness of a small number comparatively is so
amazingly increased by this means, that the amount of holiness and happiness in
the system will be greater, than if all abandoned sinners had been led to
repentance? greater than if all created free-agents had continued holy? Or
admit this, the consequence then is, that the impenitent wickedness and eternal
punishment of the greatest part of the intelligent creation is a necessary
means, through which the governor of the world effects the ends of holiness and
goodness with respect to a remnant that shall be saved. But it yet remains to
be shown, that such means are adapted to the ends of the greatest holiness and
happiness, upon the whole.

If moral evil, and the punishment of it are necessary toward promoting
universal good, then the more wicked men are, the more they promote that good;
and the more they cooperate with their Creator in completing his great and
benevolent plan of universal happiness. It is argued, that since misery brings
with it it is utility, why may not wickedness?

"If storms and earthquakes break not heavens design,
"Why then a Borgia or a Cataline?"
That though sin in us, who see no farther than the evils it produces, is
evil, and justly punishable; yet in God, who sees the causes and connections of
all things, and the necessity of it is admission, it is not so, but very good.
Thus, robbery may disperse useless hoards to the benefit of the public;
adultery may bring heirs and good humor too into many families where "they
would otherwise have been wanting; and murder free the world from tyrants and
oppressors. Luxury maintains its thousands, and vanity its ten thousands.
Superstition and arbitrary power contribute to the grandeur of many nations,
and the liberties of others are preserved by the perpetual contentions of
avarice, knavery, selfishness and ambition. Thus the worst of vices, and the
worst of men, are often compelled by providence to serve the most beneficial
purposes -- and thus private vices become public benefits. Letters on the
origin of evil, p. 86, 87; 109.110.
Therefore these vices are for the best -- and by consequence the vicious
persons some of the most beneficial members of society. The universe would by
no means be so happy without them as with them. Why then do the ministers of
religion warn the wicked, and call upon them to turn from sin to God? why
beseech them to be reconciled to God? Why do they not rather wink at their
crimes, and even encourage them therein? For though by their hardness and
impenitency they treasure up to themselves wrath, yet their incorrigibleness in
sin, and their eternal punishment for those vices to which they were determined
by providence, being necessary to advance the holiness and happiness of the
universal system, they may be excited and exhorted to persist in sin by the
motive of public benevolence; and may have this consolation under the
apprehension of that indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, which
await them, that their destruction soul and body in hell, is for the good of
the universe!

Suppose the ministers of the gospel were to preach to their people, tha^ (...)
conversion of the many who live abandoned and die impenitent is not what God
chooses or desires, not agreeable to his infinite wisdom and goodness -- that
it is a desirable thing they should live and die in sin -- that God has
pleasure herein -- and that, to render the event infallibly certain and
necessary, he "actually effects, by a positive agency and disposal of his own,"
or by his "determining providence," the "hardness of their hearts" -- and this
as a necessary means of manifesting his perfections, and advancing the greatest
good, in the eternal salvation of a small number, whose security in holiness
and happiness depends on their reflecting upon the torments of the damned. --
Would not people justly say, "We are delivered to do all these abominations!"
When they hear the words of the curse, will they not bless themselves in their
hearts, saying, "We will walk in the imagination of our heart: We shall act in
subserviency to God's infinite scheme, and promote the holiness and happiness
of the system, by doing every one what is right in his own eyes. We will
rejoice and be exceeding glad in the addition we make to the public good by our
vices, and will make ourselves more vile." Indeed, he is an enemy to the world,
who does not take satisfaction in moral evil, and praise God for it is
existence, if the doctrine we are examining be true. For has it contributed so
much to the perfection and happiness of the moral world? could not the divine
character have been manifested to the creatures to good advantage without it?
is it is existence the effect of divine determination? and does it become us to
lament or repent of that which was a necessary means of the greatest possible
good? Shall we grudge the happiness of the moral world? Shall we bewail
ourselves, or call upon others to bewail, that which is the grand security of
the virtue and happiness of moral agents? the only means of illustrating the
divine perfections to angels and men, and of establishing his dominion and
authority over them? And if moral evil be an effect of divine operation, why
are we not as much obliged to celebrate his praise for the production of this,
as for his other works which declare his glory -- especially since MORAL EVIL
MORE ILLUSTRIOUSLY DISPLAYS HIS NAME THAN ALL HIS OTHER WORKS?

Upon what evidence, by what reasoning, do men fix down in this conclusion,
that the moral rectitude of holy angels would have been peculiarly endangered
had there been no apostates, the terror of whose punishment is supposed to
secure the inhabitants of the world above in their allegiance? How does it
appear that holy angels would have reverenced their maker and father less, or
been less apprehensive of his authority, had moral evil never taken place?
Whither will this doctrine lead, that the divine perfections could have been
exhibited to the intelligent creation only through the intervention of sin?
Apply it to the character of a wise, just and benevolent earthly sovereign. Can
the ends of his government be attained, and his true character made to appear,
only by means of the rebellion of his subjects! Is it necessary to secure him
that respect and reverence to which he is entitled, that a great part of his
people should revolt, and be capitally punished! Thanks to the lawless, rebels,
and traitors! For it is doubtless best the character of such a sovereign, and
the nature of his administration, should be known, and that the ends of his
government should be effected. In a word, will not the doctrine before us
terminate in this, that it is best there should be no law or government human
or divine? For better no law or government than such as it is best should be
violated and contemned. Yet it seems that from such violation and contempt of
authority, the true excellence and dignity of government is to be learnt, and
it is ends answered; and from hence only. How sagacious are the reasonings of
some men, who measure the Deity by themselves!

It Is well that the understandings of the generality of mankind are not
perverted by metaphysical subtilties. Common people have no manner of doubt but
sin is an evil thing and a bitter -- the source of all misery. They have no
doubt but it had been well for the world had this accursed thing never entered
into it. They never once imagine that God has pleasure in it; that he is the
cause of it, or determines moral agents to it -- they suppose that moral evil
is a thing to which creatures are determined of themselves, agreeable to the
plain sense of the apostle's words, Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed. Common people have penetration enough to keep up a distinction between
God's being the cause of natural good and evil, and his being the cause of
moral evil -- They readily admit a positive influence of the Deity in holiness,
but not in wickedness. If some modern metaphysicians had the sense and
discernment of the vulgar in these matters, it would be happy for themselves
and the world. The common people have been educated in the belief of such
things as these; that the most exalted motives to holiness are a consideration
of it is intrinsic beauty and excellence, it is tendency to dignify the
intelligent nature, to advance the divine glory and secure his approbation.
They have believed that the fear of eternal punishment is but an inferior
principle of action -- a spirit that rules in slaves, not in sons. Are these
mere vulgar errors? So it should seem, if it be true that the punishment of
devils is what secureth the persevering holiness of angels and glorified
spirits, and establishes the divine authority in their hearts.

Mr. Edwards has no where said, that moral evil might not have been prevented,
but rather intimated the contrary. Nor has he denied but the human apostasy
might have been permitted without the provision of a savior. However, on his
principles neither of these things may be supposed. For he has ventured to
say, he is CERTAIN that moral evil is for the best -- and that an infinitely
wise being must therefore choose it. Whether it follows or not from the hints
that have been given, that moral evil is not best for the world, we are by no
means very sollicitous, because we choose not to be peremptory and confident.
Yet we apprehend enough has been said to create such a degree of suspicion
whether it is indeed best, that few "persons of good understanding will say,
they are certain it is best." Or thus much at least we suppose will follow from
the things that have been observed, that the advantage of moral evil to the
world is not proveable in the way Mr. Edwards has attempted to prove it -- the
result of which is, that God may do evil, that good may come. Two propositions
appear to be mutually assumed by him to prove each other: One while he makes a
postulatum of this, that whatever is, is therefore best; and proceeds to argue,
that God determines moral agents to sin. At another time, making a postulatum
of this last position, he proceeds to argue, that sin must therefore be
infinitely beneficial to the world. What part soever of his discourse be
examined, the plain consequence appears to be this, that God is the cause of
all wickedness.

SECTION VII. On Foreknowledge.
Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, foreknowledge, will, and sat,
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Paradise Lost. LIB. II.
NO question on the subject of morals has more perplexed the learned than
this, How is divine prescience reconcilable with liberty in the creature?
While most (and among these the wisest of men) have modestly confessed their
ignorance, and looked upon the question as unanswerable by an human
understanding; some few have attempted to solve the difficulty. But the attempt
has been executed in such a manner as has rather evidenced the folly and
arrogance of the undertakers, than cleared the subject. The reader will hence
conclude, that the solution of this difficulty is not what we propose in the
present section.

But since some gentlemen seem to suppose, that prescience and liberty cannot
both be firmly believed unless the mind of man can reconcile them -- since Mr.
Edwards seems to think his own scheme altogether clear of this difficulty; and
since from the divine prescience he infers his doctrine of necessity; these
things shall be briefly examined in this place.

To say that prescience and liberty are absolutely irreconcilable, because we
ourselves cannot reconcile them, would be to take the dimensions of the divine
mind from our own. An infinite understanding may be able to reconcile them,
when a finite cannot. If any subject involves difficulties, which we cannot
solve, we may not immediately infer a contradiction in it. For what subject can
be mentioned that does not involve such difficulties? If we determine to
believe no doctrines, till we see how these things can be, this will land us in
absolute skepticism. Do we believe nothing but what we can give a rationale of?
It Is manifest then, that we do not believe the divine existence, nor that of
any other beings or things -- not even our own existence. For who pretends to
know after what manner God exists? or to be acquainted with the essences of
other things? The divine eternity, infinity, omniscience, etc. transcend all
our conceptions. We are wholly ignorant how our own souls and bodies are united
-- are lost in the contemplation of our own frame. The trinity and satisfaction
are inexplicable mysteries. The scheme of Christianity, and the whole moral
government of God, are incomprehensible. Nor would they be otherwise, and be
worthy of him who is perfect in knowledge. His judgments are unsearchable, and
his ways past finding out. As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his
thoughts and ways above ours. Although we have such evidence in general of the
truth and reality of the things abovementioned as in a manner compels our
belief; yet when the question is put, How can these things be? we discern
insuperable difficulties -- at the same time we are conscious infidelity would
involve us in difficulties still greater.

With respect to the question before us, if the voice of scripture or reason be
hearkened to, we must admit both prescience and liberty -- and that they are
consistent, though after a manner inconceivable by us. For we cannot believe
evident contradictions.

We use the term foreknowledge in accommodation to our own narrow views and way
of conceiving things. In an infinite understanding, there is no before or after
-- no succession of ideas. To him who calls things that are not as though
they were, and with whom a thousand years are as one day, the knowledge of
futurity is present, knowledge. How then can a finite mind conceive the manner
of his knowing futurity? Is there any thing in visible creation that affords a
resemblance of what we call prescience. When we undertake to speak on a subject
so high and too wonderful for us, it becomes us to be diffident of ourselves,
and very sparing of words, remembering that we are of yesterday -- Those seem
not aware of their own ignorance, and the danger of speaking of God the thing
that is not right, who attempt to explain this matter; as though by searching
they could find out God -- as though he had taken counsel with them. Have thou
heard the secret of God? And do thou restrain wisdom to thyself?

Some men are apt to depart from evident truth out of regard to abstruse
speculations. They turn aside from the plain road of common sense, disdaining a
beaten track, and are carried away with the error of the wicked, under pretense
of new and important discoveries. If any truth be plain, this is, that man is
free. Next to the consciousness of our own existence is that of our moral
freedom. Yet a truth so obvious is called in question by some men, because they
cannot make it agree with the idea they have formed of God's infinite knowledge
and eternal counsels.

As to the manner of God's foreknowing certainly contingent future events, that
is, which have no necessary cause, nor are to be accomplished by his own power,
and the determination of his will, but produced by other free agents; this
seems to be incomprehensible by the human understanding. That any mind should
foresee with certainty a distant event, which does not necessarily proceed from
the nature of things, nor is fixed by the purpose of a voluntary agent, is
wonderful to us and far surpasses our conception. For as our knowledge of
futurity can only rest on one or other of these foundations, we can form no
distinct notion of any foreknowledge without them. It is probably their
apprehending the divine prescience after the same manner, and limiting it to
the same grounds, which has occasioned so much perplexity in the minds of men,
and involved their speculations upon this subject in so much confusion. Some
imagining that contingent events could not otherwise be so ascertained, as to
be infallibly known, have supposed peremptory eternal decrees concerning all of
them, even the freest actions of men; and not only so, but a previous divine
influence on the active powers of rational creatures, exciting them to action:
But others judging this to be utterly inconsistent with human liberty, and,
with respect to evil actions, inconsistent with the purity and goodness of the
divine nature, yet still adhering to the same limited foundation of
foreknowledge, have denied the doctrine of prescience altogether, or doubted
concerning it. I believe the best way for us to get rid of these difficulties
is wholly to neglect the hypotheses, which have been invented to account for
the manner of the divine prescience, acknowledging that it is to us
inexplicable, and yet concluding that this is no sufficient objection against a
doctrine, otherwise well confirmed. Abernethy's discourse on divine omniscience.


"I admire," says Dr. Eliot, the modesty, as well as goodness of heart,
discovered by the great Mr. Lock, in one of his letters to Mr. Molineux; "I
freely own," says he, "the weakness of my understanding, that though it be
unquestionable, that there is omnipotence and omniscience in God our maker, and
I cannot have a clearer perception of any thing than that I am free; yet I
cannot make freedom in man consistent with omnipotence and omniscience in God,
though I am as fully persuaded of both as of any truths I most firmly assent
to, and therefore I have long since left off the consideration of the question.
The Doctor subjoins to these words of Mr. Lock the following pertinent and
seasonable reflection: If some of our modern reasoners, who have not a tenth
part of his understanding, had a little more of his humility, the world would
be free from those angry disputes about fate and free will, liberty and
necessity, which puzzle the heads, but seldom mend the hearts, of those who
engage in them. Dr Eliot's sermon on natural religion, p, 21, 22.


To proceed: Prescience is a difficulty that encumbers Mr. Edwards's own scheme
no less than that of his opponents. For he says, There must be a certainty in
things themselves before they are certainly foreknown, and affirms that the
former "is the foundation" of the latter. (P. 22; 175.) Events have a fixed
certain futurity prior to foreknowledge, and this antecedent necessity of their
coming to pass is the cause of their being certainly foreknown. What is meant
by the certainty in things themselves prior to their existence, is as
unintelligible as his opinion, that there is in the nature of things a
foundation for the knowledge of the being of God, without any evidence of it
from his works; of which notice was taken, Examination, p. 36. marg. If by this
certainty be meant any thing different from the divine decrees and
determinations, then his argument will stand thus: The certainty there is in
things themselves is the foundation of the divine decrees; the divine decrees
are the foundation of foreknowledge; and foreknowledge is the foundation of
that necessity which belongs to all events in the natural and moral world. This
seems to be arguing in a circle. On the other hand, if by this certainty in
things themselves be meant the same as the divine decrees and determinations,
then these being the supposed foundation of foreknowledge, the latter cannot be
the cause of events, as Mr. Edwards represents, but the former. Necessity is
the cause of the knowledge of events, and not the knowledge of them the cause
of their necessity.

Further, If the purposes and decrees of God, or his determinations as to
futurity, be antecedent to foreknowledge, and the foundation thereof, then his
will is determined "at random, by blind contingence," without design or
foresight -- guided by no wisdom, no motive, no intelligent dictate whatever --
he only acts by an Hobbistical fatality. (P. 330, 334.) To speak of the divine
will as determined prior to knowledge, is plainly to suppose it determined
without counsel and wisdom, undirected by knowledge and intelligence. And what
holiness can there be in such determinations? It was surely through want of
"reflection and research" -- through inattention to his own scheme, that Mr.
Edwards grounds the certainty of foreknowledge on an antecedent necessity of
events arising from the divine counsels and purposes. He represents the opinion
of those who teach that God's foreknowledge is antecedent to his decrees, as a
servile subjecting the Deity to fatal necessity; and says, it argues
inferiority and servitude unworthy of him, and comports with the heathen notion
of fate as above the gods; because this is to suppose, says he, that events
have a fixed certain futurity, to which the divine volitions and designs are
subject, and must be accommodated. (p. 352, 353.) It Is not a little surprising,
that Mr. Edwards did not perceive this objection was much more applicable to
his own doctrine, than to that of his opposers. Besides, How do these things
agree with his own words, p. 325. We must conceive of the perfection of the
divine understanding as the foundation of his wise purposes and decrees. As he
is not herein reconcilable with himself, so his principles are not consistent
with the admission of forkenowledge. To say, the certainty of things, or divine
determination of events, is antecedent to his perfect knowledge of futurity, is
to deny prescience, and only to ascribe after-knowledge to God. So that while
Mr. Edwards supposes his own scheme of necessity clear of all difficulty from
the head of foreknowledge, it appears not only to militate with itself, but
utterly to preclude that prescience from which he infers the necessity of all
events.

We will now enquire, in the last place, whether prescience implies necessity.
Mr. Edwards uses the terms certainty and necessity, as though they were
perfectly synonymous; and says, Philosophical necessity is nothing different
from certainty. (P. 22.) It is granted by all who believe foreknowledge, that
this really implies the certainty of all future events -- not only that they
will come to pass, but also that they will come to pass in such a certain
manner. But the inference is not, that they will come to pass necessarily
because fore-known -- that they are indissolubly connected as effects with
prescience as their cause. Now it is in this sense that Mr. Edwards maintains
necessity. If foreknowledge infers necessity (in his sense of the word
necessity) then it implies an irresistible determination of the wills and
actions of moral agents.

Prescience has no causality in the coming to pass of these things which are
the objects of it. So far is it from having any efficiency to produce them,
that it has no influence to their production by way of motive or excitement.
For a motive is something extant in the mind's view. Now can any moral agent
know, previous to any given volition or action, that he shall certainly be
determined to such volition or action? If not, then he cannot know that such
volition or action is certainly foreknown. For this would be to say, that what
may never become effect may be foreknown. And if moral agents cannot tell
beforehand what is foreknown with respect to themselves, then foreknowledge can
have no influence in determining their actions. For what is not perceived
cannot excite or move to action; or determine the wills of moral agents; nor
consequently be considered as the cause, ground, or reason of their being
determined to this or that. "Nothing," says Mr. Edwards, can induce or invite
the mind to will or act any thing, any further than it is perceived, or is some
way or other in the mind's view. (p. 8.) To say that prescience is in the view
of the creature's mind, would be to ascribe an incommunicable attribute of the
Creator to a creature. Foreknowledge, then, has no influence in bringing any
moral volitions to pass -- nor is it even an occasion of their becoming effect.
It does not stand in the relation of a cause, motive, reason or occasion to the
existence of things to come, any more than our knowledge of things past or
present has such relation to their existence. Herein we have Mr. Edwards's
concurrence, p. 175. I freely allow that foreknowledge don't prove a thing to
be necessary, any more than after knowledge. Now does our knowing that a thing
is already come to pass imply that it came to pass necessarily? If not, then
neither does foreknowledge of a future event imply that such event must come to
pass by necessity. That we know certainly an event has already taken place,
does not imply that the nature of that event, or the manner of it is coming to
pass, are determined by our knowledge. No more does divine prescience affect
the nature of events, or the manner of their coming into existence.

Mr. Edwards, as has been observed, makes the divine determination, and
decisive ordering and disposing of all events, the ground of their being
foreknown -- he supposes the divine determinations alike concerned in moral
volitions and actions, as in those things which are the mere work of God --
that it properly belongs to him to dispose, fix and determine the wills of all
moral agents, in every act, from the beginning of their existence. And though
he asserts not in words a positive agency of God in evil actions; yet the thing
in effect is asserted, as has been shown. Section IV.
Upon his scheme God is the author and cause of sin; no less than of natural
good and evil -- the author and cause of men's vices, no less than the giver
and upholder of life, and fountain of their natural endowments and external
advantages and enjoyments -- the author of evil dispositions, no less than of
holy and virtuous ones. But do not reason and scripture show us, that there is
an important difference between his being the author of the former and his
being so of the latter --? that his operation, his determining and disposing
providence, cannot extend to moral evil? Every good gift, and every perfect
gift, is from above, and comes down from the father of lights. But God cannot
be tempted with [moral] evil, neither tempts he any man. James 1.13; 17.
compared. All natural good and evil proceed from God as the proper cause. I,
even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive: I wound,
and I heal. Neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. (Deuteronomy.
32.39.) If it be asked, how can natural evil, any more than moral, proceed from
a good cause? the usual answer is sufficient, that the former is the penal
consequence of the latter. The difference between God's being the author of
natural evil and of moral -- between his being the fountain of holiness and of
sin, is so obvious and important, and so clearly marked in scripture, that it is
difficult to see how any man can excuse himself in confounding these things.
The effects of necessary causes are, properly speaking. God's own works. And
rational creatures have an absolute dependence on him; all their powers are
derived from him, and supported wholly by his providence. Yet it by no means
follows, that the determination of their wills to vice is to be imputed to him
as the cause that they are not themselves the determiners of their own evil
editions and actions.
Does foreknowledge infer such necessity? We need not scruple to say that the
certainty of events, which foreknowledge implies is as diverse from Mr.
Edwards's philosophic necessity as truth is from falsehood, or light from
darkness. To support his inference from foreknowledge, it was incumbent on him
to show, that this is an extrinsic efficient cause, whose influence and
operation brings into effect the things foreknown. To say, that foreknowledge
is an antecedent, and the things foreknown consequents, is but trifling, unless
it can be shown that the latter are indissolubly connected with the former as
the cause of their existence. Mr. Edwards may claim the honor of being the
only author that attributes causation to foreknowledge.

"Foreknowledge," says an excellent writer, has no influence at all upon the
nature of things, to make the least alteration in them. The events which are
necessary are foreknown as necessary, and those which are contingent and
voluntary, are foreknown no otherwise than as contingent and voluntary. -- The
futurity of contingent events is real, though we cannot tell the cause of it,
or upon what grounds it is to be known. A free action now done, was yesterday,
or in any preceding point of duration, as truly future, as it has to day
actually come to pass; therefore it is not impossible (for our minds can
discern no contradiction in it) that an infinite understanding should foreknow
such events, though that knowledge is too high for us, or perhaps any finite
mind, we cannot attain to it. And here we may safely rest, as we find ourselves
obliged to do in our enquiries concerning the other perfections of God, which
are evidently proved to belong to his nature, and therefore believed, though to
us incomprehensible. -- We cannot indeed believe contradictions, and to impose
them upon us is to affront the rational nature; but it is no absurdity to
believe the existence and properties of a being, whom we cannot by searching
find out, nor understand to perfection. Abernethy's discourse on divine
omniscience.


To support his peculiar notion of divine foreknowledge and decrees, Mr.
Edwards denies moral agents all liberty except what is merely external, and the
result of necessity in the mind. What pity is it that men, otherwise
discerning, are tenacious of favorite hypotheses, though most absurd and
prejudicial in their consequences! If intelligent creatures are not free in a
sense different from the inferior animals, they cannot be said to be moral
agents -- the accountable authors of the things done by them: What they do
must, in a moral estimate, be considered as the action of some other being.
There must be self-determination, or freedom, somewhere, in some one being at
least. And is it not very bold to assert, that God is the producer of all the
wickedness in the world, by his agency? He that maintains this principle, that
all our volitions and actions are necessary, would soon be convinced of his
folly were he to reduce the principle to practice. For mankind will think he is
free -- that his actions are his own -- and will treat him accordingly. He must
soon become intolerable to society; and from the reception he meets with, he
may clearly infer, that his fellow creatures universally look upon him as a
moral agent, and suppose he might have acted otherwise. And he must be a
strange creature indeed, if, finding the opinion of necessity in the moral
actions of men (when reduced to practice) disavowed, with one voice, by
mankind, it does not create in him some suspicion wherether it be true,
speculatively considered.

It is a conclusive argument against such a fatal necessity as some men plead
for, that it is contrary to the perceptions of the human mind, -- we have a
consciousness of liberty, we perceive no external influence, we have a moral
sense, we pass a judgment on our own actions, approve or disapprove ourselves
and others. It shows the difficulty, to which a very sensible writer Essays on
the principles of morality and natural religion.
of the present day is reduced, who allows this inward perception, that we are
necessitated to think ourselves and others free; and yet denies the reality of
liberty. God has, according to him, implanted a delusive sense in us, our
feeling is deceitful, the God of truth does continually by a positive influence
deceive and delude us. What strange notions have some men of that glorious
being, all whose ways are truth, and who is righteous altogether! Is it not
better to set limits to our enquiries, and to suppose there may be a mistake in
some curious speculations, than to entertain sentiments so dishonorable to God,
and so entirely subversive of all moral government? Vid. Dr. Eliot's excellent
discourse on natural religion.


SECTION VIII. On texts of scripture misconstrued.
IF from what has been said it should appear, that Mr. Edwards's scheme of
necessity may justly be charged with making an holy and good God the proper
cause of sin, (which is the leading objection we have all along had to his book
on the will) it can be to every little purpose to allege texts of scripture in
support of it. A doctrine so repugnant to our natural apprehensions of God and
his providence cannot be supported by any pretense of authority from him. The
holy scriptures were not given to contradict and subvert those notions of his
moral perfections and government, which God has given us by reason and the
light of nature; but to confirm and improve them, as well as to afford us
important instruction in things which unassisted reason would never have
discovered. If any, therefore, should bring this doctrine to us, that God is
the cause of moral evil, the direction given to the Israelites, in the case of
being enticed to idolatry, Deuteronomy. xiii. 1, -- 4.
is for our learning, and may serve to regulate our conduct. We know not what
right the advocate for such a doctrine can have to any other answer. His
appealing to the word of God to support what he advances is not very
consistent. For if a doctrine of such a nature be true, what faith can be had
in any supposed revelation from God?

Yet it may be of use to some readers to take notice of the scriptures which
are adduced to confirm the aforesaid scheme. As it would be tedious minutely to
examine every particular text, we shall select two or three only, on which the
principal stress is laid. Should these be found not to favor the scheme they
are brought to support, the argument will conclude a fortiori with respect to
other texts, which are supposed to have less weight. The passages in the sacred
writings made use of by Mr. Edwards may be reduced to three general heads.
First, Such as represent the taking place of moral evil to be by the
determinate counsel, prescience and ordination of God. Secondly, such as speak
of his hardening moral agents in sin. Thirdly, Such as are supposed to favor
the opinion of the advantage of moral evil to the universe.

First, Of such texts as represent the taking place of moral evil to be by the
determinate counsel, prescience and ordination of God.

Under this head, such texts are chiefly insisted on as refer to the
crucifiction of the LORD OF GLORY. Particularly Luke xxii. 21, 22. Acts ii. 23.
iii. 17, 18. iv. 27, 28.
Now these texts either imply an efficient determination of the Deity in this
event, or they do not: If they do not, they are nothing to the purpose for
which they are produced by the advocates for necessity. On the other hand, if
it can be shown that they really imply a divine efficiency on the minds of the
murderers of our Lord, influencing and necessitating them to this horrid deed;
then we shall not hesitate to admit, that every species and degree of
wickedness proceeds from the same efficiency. For if God may be supposed to
effect by his agency a crime of such enormity, what should hinder our believing
that all moral evil is the product of his action and influence? But let us
compare spiritual things with spiritual, and form our judgment from such a
comparison in the present case. Hence it may appear much clearer, that an
efficient determination is not intended, than it will from these texts taken by
themselves that such a determination is intended.

There is a twofold sense in which those moral events, which imply blame in the
agents, may yet be said to come to pass by the determinate counsel,
foreknowledge and ordination of God, without implying any active concurrence
or efficiency of divine power herein.

First, Whatever comes to pass agreeable to the predictions of his word, may be
said to take place by his determinate counsel and foreknowledge: Such events
may be called what his hand and counsel determined before should be done.

Secondly, Such events as he determines not to prevent by the interposal of his
power, may also be said to come to pass in the same way. As all possible
futurity was forever known to God, it hence follows, that in this sense the
existence of all moral evil is by his determinate counsel and foreknowledge:
Nor is there any other difficulty in applying this scripture language to all
moral evil that has taken place, or ever will, than in the application of it
to the particular case to which it immediately refers in scripture, -- viz. the
sufferings of the holy one and the just.

What one evangelist has delivered thus, The son of man goes as it was
determined -- Luke xxii. 22.
another expresses in these terms, The son of man goes, as it is written of
him, Matt. xxvi. 24.
To the same purpose says St. Peter, Those things which God before had showed
by the mouth of all his holy prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so
fulfilled. Acts iii. 18.
So Acts xiii. 27. They that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they
knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets, which are read every
sabbath day, they have fulfilled them, in condemning him. See also chapter xvii. 2,
3. Luke xxiv. 25, 26. Thus it was the determinate counsel of God, that Christ
should suffer; and in order to this "it was necessary God should" permit him
"to fall into the hands of wicked men, (for they could have no power over him,
unless it were thus given them from above) and that he should lay no restraints
upon them, from executing their malicious designs upon him; and this
unrestrained permission is all that is, or can be signified by God's delivering
up Chirst into their hands -- His power could not actually concur, or
effectively incline them, to the crucifiction of the holy Jesus." For although
"the hand of God is joined with his council, and applied" to this event; yet
"the hand of God relates not so much to his power, as to his wisdom and
providential dispensations." Whitby.


The construction Mr. Edwards's scheme fixes on the scriptures under
consideration precludes all distinction between the active and permissive
providence of God -- a distinction which has hitherto been esteemed important
by the Christian church. A writer who spared no pains in collecting the
sentiments of critics and commentators, ancient and modern, upon the
scriptures, and has discovered equal judgment and learning in this useful
undertaking, has given us the sense of Christians on this point with so much
perspicuity and precision, that we shall take liberty to make the following
extracts. Constitutum est aeterno Dei consilio, et in S. S. declaratum, etc.

In English thus: It was appointed in God's eternal counsel, and declared in
the holy scriptures. Though God foresaw, and decreed to permit, Judas's
betraying Christ, yet it is not said that God determined Judas should betray,
but that Christ should go. There is indeed a divine decree respecting the sins
of men; but then God only permits, and overrules for good, their sins, and by
no means wills or determines their commission of them -- (Lucas Brugensis.) If
we enquire concerning the actions of Judas, Pilate and Herod, it is certain,
indeed, that they did not happen without the father, inasmuch as a sparrow does
not fall to the ground without him. But the will of God respecting them was
permissive, not efficient; which distinction is more agreeable to scripture, and
the judgment of all the primitive Christians, than their opinion who would
discriminate actions from the viciousness that is in them. This, in regard to
many actions, contradicts the nature of things; for instance, theft, adultery,
and the like, the very naming of which is unintelligible, if the idea of
sinfulness be separated therefrom. Those also are equally unworthy of regard,
who say, that the Deity impels men to such actions for a good end. For the end
alone cannot make such actions right, or justify those decrees which
antecedently impose an absolute necessity of committing them. -- It may be
added, that the name of sin is absurd, according to the hypothesis some proceed
upon. For we cannot commit sin in those actions, which infinite goodness, by a
decree subversive of the liberty of our will, determines we should do. It Is
more just by far to say with St. Paul, (Acts 14.16.) God permitted the nations
to walk in their own ways; and if there are any obscure passages elsewhere in
scripture to expound them in this sense; which all the ancients did. (Clemens
Origin, Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Salvianus.) Agreably all the
ancients constantly affirm, that divine prescience imposes on men no necessity
of action; which were unmeaning, if foreknowledge itself be supposed dependent
on efficient decrees.

Origin, in his disputation, Whether what is foretold must be done? accurately
distinguishes necessity from permission, thus: If the meaning be, necessarily
done, we declare for the negative; for it might not have been done, nor was
there any necessity that Judas should be a traitor. On the other hand, if no
more is meant than not hindering the event, which yet might not have become
effect, we are for the affirmative. Puli Synopsis in Luc. xxii. 22.


P. 362. of Mr. Edwards's book, Dr. Doddridge is introduced in a manner which
may lead the reader to suppose his opinion was the same with Mr. Edwards's.
Only the first part of the Dr's note on Luke xxii. 22. is quoted. In the latter
part of the note on that text, the Dr. has taken particular care to guard that
part Mr. Edwards has quoted against such a construction as this partial view
may induce the public to fix upon the Doctor's words. If the reader turns to
the place in Dr. Doddridge, it may give him a different view of the Doctor's
sentiments from what Mr. Edwards's quotation exhibits.

In his note on Acts iv. 28. the Dr. says, "It is -- rational -- to explain
this determination in such a manner, as to make it consistent with the free
agency of the persons concerned. When God's hand and counsel are said to have
determined these things, it may signify God's having pointed out this great
event so wisely concerted in his eternal counsels, and marked beforehand as it
were all the boundaries of it -- in the prophetic writings."

What the Doctor's opinion was respecting the necessity of moral actions, as
proveable from the prescience and decrees of God, we further learn from the
following passages. Jude v. 4. " Who were registered to this condemnation. The
word [Progegrammenoi] may well signify described and put upon record; that is,
whose character and condemnation may be considered as described in the
punishment of other notorious sinners, who were a kind of representatives of
them. Which interpretation I prefer to any other, as it tends to clear God of
that heavy imputation which it must bring on his moral attributes, to suppose
that he appoints men to sin against him, and then condemns them for doing, what
they could not but do, and what they were, independent on their own freedom of
choice, fated to. A doctrine so pregnant with gloomy, and, as I should fear,
fatal consequences, that I think it a part of the duty I owe to the word of
God, to rescue it from the imputation of containing such a tenet."

Romans ix. 13. "These words in their connection with the preceding and
following, do indeed prove, that God acts with a sovereign and unaccountable
freedom in the dispensation of his favors, -- Nevertheless it is certain, the
apostle does not here speak of the eternal state of Jacob and Esau, (whatever
some may suppose deducible from what he says,) nor does he indeed so much speak
of their persons, as of their posterity; since it is plainly to that posterity
that both the prophecies, which he quotes in support of his argument, refer.
Genesis xxv. 23. Mal. i. 2, 3. His laying waste the heritage of the Edomites for
the dragons of the wilderness, is so different a thing from his appointing the
person of Esau to eternal misery by a mere act of sovereignty, without regard
to any thing done or to be done by him to deserve it; that I will rather submit
to any censure from my fellow servants, than deal so freely with my maker, as
to conclude the one from the other."

Romans ix. 22, 23. "Every attentive reader will, I doubt not, infer for himself
the great difference of phrase, in which they who are vessels of wrath, and
they who are vessels of mercy, are spoken of: It being said simply of the
former, that they were fitted for destruction; but of the latter, that GOD
prepared them for glory. A distinction of so great importance, that I heartily
wish we may ever keep it in view, to guard us against errors, on the
right hand, or on the left."

Secondly, Of such texts as speak of God's hardening moral agents in sin. A
single instance under this head may serve instead of many. The case of Pharaoh
is much insisted on, of whom it is repeatedly said, that God hardened his heart.

As Mr. Edward's scheme inseperably connects the active and permissive
providence of God, so unless it can be shown that God actually effects the
hardness of sinners' hearts by a positive agency and influence, the scriptures
produced under this head by no means help his cause. Now that God did not,
could not, thus harden Pharaoh is manifest from the clearest notices we have of
the divine moral perfections. The oracles of inspiration and reason instruct
us, that God has no pleasure in wickedness, that evil shall not dwell with
him; that he is of purer eyes than to behold it -- that there is no
unrighteousness with him. Therefore, let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man. Is God the cause of that in which he has no pleasure? -- to which he has
an infinite aversion? Does he produce and effect by his positive influence that
which the eyes of his purity cannot behold? Will he punish with eternal
torments that which is the production of his own agency on the creature, and is
there yet no unrighteousness with him? can the Judge of all the earth do right
notwithstanding? Does he determine men to, and by his own operation effect in
them, what he cannot be tempted with, nor entice his creatures to perpetrate?
Indeed, to effect by his power and influence such dispositions and actions in
the creature as involve all moral turpitude, is more than merely to tempt moral
agents. They may be tempted, and resist the tempter. But to say such
dispositions and actions are produced in them by the agency of the Deity
himself, is to charge him, not merely with being accessory to, but the author
of, what we call sin in the creatures. It must forever be impossible to
separate the moral turpitude of such dispositions and actions from the producer
or efficient of them. The scheme of necessity excludes, indeed, the possibility
of sin. For sin is opposition to the will of God. But suppose creatures
determined thereto by divine efficiency, this "would either be a mere passive
obedience to the will of God, or an active compliance with it; but neither way
a contradiction to it."

If then God could not harden Pharaoh by a positive influence and efficiency,
it remains that he hardened him no otherwise than by suffering or permitting
him to harden himself not interposing by an irresistible influence to prevent
his obduration -- or withdrawing divine influence and assistance from him after
enduring him with much long-suffering, and using various means to humble and
reform him. The riches of divine goodness and forbearance, intended and
calculated to lead him to repentance, hardened Pharaoh, as evidently appears
from the scripture account of this matter. Agreably we read, Psalm lxxxi. 11,
12. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me.
SO I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust; and they walked in their own
counsel.

Worthy of remark is the note in Mr. Pool, on Exodus ix. 12. In quinque
precedentibus plagis, etc. In the five first plagues, the hardening of
Pharaoh's heart is ascribed to himself; in the five last, to God. As many times
as he hardened his own heart, God hardened it for punishment. (Lightfoot's
Spicilegium.)

The supposition of the divine agency in the obduration of sinners, is, upon
the whole, incapable of support from the sacred writings. So gross a
contradiction to reason, so glaring a repugnancy to the general doctrine of the
bible, so blasphemous a reflection on the divine author of the scripture, is
implied herein, that it is not a little astonishing any persons who have a
veneration for either should embrace a scheme of doctrine which contains it,
and attempt to defend such scheme by the word of God. It leaves no room for a
difference between physical and moral necessity. It supposes that God may
deceive us. For it is allowed that we act with the conviction of being free
agents, and that the scriptures consider and treat us as such; when in truth we
are necessary agents, all our volitions and actions being determined by divine
agency. One writer affirms, that though man is a necessary agent, having all
his actions determined by fixed and immutable laws; yet this is concealed from
him -- Who conceals it? Does the author of nature conceal it, and this writer
discover it? What deference is not due to the judgment of a metaphysician,
whose sagacity is so irresistibly (I had almost said omnipotently) penetrating!
But, good sir, as you are powerful, you should have been merciful. It was not
kind to rob poor mortals of this crumb of comfort which had been provided for
them in their ignorance; nor generous to publish so openly the secrets of
heaven, and so bafflle the designs of providence by a few strokes of your pen.
If the laws of nature, after maintaining their authority for six thousand
years, are so little able to stand before him, who knows what havoc he might
have made among them in the infancy of their establishment. BEATTIE on truth,
p. 334, 335.


Lastly, Of such passages of scripture as are supposed to favor the opinion of
the advantage of moral evil to the universe. Whether moral evil is really for
the best -- especially whether it be so in that way which the scheme of
necessity supposes, has been already examined. (Section VI.) And what was
offered on this head has in a good measure superseded the occasion for a
particular reply to the texts produced here. Joseph's being sold by his
brethren, and the crucifiction of Christ, are particularly alleged as proofs
from scripture of the bestness of moral evil.

It is granted, that the wisdom of divine providence is many times conspicuous
in bringing good out of evil -- particularly in the instances mentioned,
overruling for great and important good, what was in its own nature, and in
the intention of the authors thereof, exceeding vile. The means wicked men and
devils employ to bring to pass their devices, under the superintendency of the
wise and gracious governor of the world, are made to answer beneficial
purposes, which they thought not of, and contrary to their designs. He takes
the wise in their own craftiness, and carries headlong the counsel of the
froward. But what is this to the purpose of proving, that their wickedness is
for the best? How does it hence appear to be best, that God should effect this
wickedness by his own agency. Unless this consequence is shown to follow, it
will be remembered, that the instances refered to prove nothing to their purpose
who maintain the necessity of moral evil. It may be best God should not
interpose to overruled and necessitate the wills of moral agents; and yet it
might have been best that they themselves had refrained from sin. It may be
best that God did not prevent the existence of sin by an irresistible
influence; while yet it might have been best had fallen angels and men never
abused their liberty, but persevered in virtue.

That moral agents should be necessitated to be vicious, as a means of the
greatest holiness and happiness, is a strange position.

To recite scripture testimonies in opposition to this hypothesis would be
needless, the whole tenor of the bible being in direct contradiction to it.
When the scriptures describe sin as the accursed thing, which seperates the
creature from the Creator -- the root of all bitterness -- the ruin of
individuals and communities -- the wages whereof is death temporal and eternal
-- Shall any undertake to show, notwithstanding, that it is for the good of the
world -- a means of advancing the divine glory, and therefore the production of
his power -- and attempt to support such a doctrine by the oracles of truth? In
order to this, they must prove from these oracles, that God prefereth sin to
holiness -- that the apostasy of men and angels will be matter of eternal
praise in heaven -- that we should sin greedily, that grace may abound -- that
sin is not opposite to the will of God, nor to his moral rectitude -- that the
least sin is yet infinitely opposite to God, and therefore an infinite evil --
that infinite evil infinitely promotes God's glory, and therefore is an
infinite good -- that his wisdom and holiness require he should be concerned in
it by an efficient decree and active providence -- that the divine influence
and agency are alike concerned in the vices as in the virtues of his creatures.
-- When these and similar difficulties are cleared up, it will be soon enough
to answer arguments, formed from texts of scripture to prove, that moral evil
is for the good of the universe, through divine efficiency.

In the next succeeding section, some things will be offered, which may be
applied in this place. We only add here, that while the friends of revelation
exhibit such an idea of it, its enemies triumph. The author of the letters on
the origin of evil, proceeding on the same foundation, takes occasion to
burlesque the doctrine of the gospel in the following manner: This principle of
the necessity of moral evil, and its punishment, is the foundation on which the
whole fabric of the Christian dispensation is erected; the principle itself is
avowed by the author of that dispensation in clear and express words: It must
needs be that offenses come; but woe unto that man by whom the offense comes:
That is, it is necessary toward completing the designs of providence, that
some men should commit crimes; but as no individual is compelled by necessity
to commit them, woe unto all who are thus [i. e. necessarily] guilty. -- The
expediency of moral evil, arising from the necessity of natural, -- is a
master-key, which will, I am certain, at once unlock all the mysterious and
perplexing doctrines of that amazing institution, [Christianity] and explain
fairly, without the least assistance from theological artifice, all those
abstruse speculations of original sin, grace and predestination, and vicarious
punishments, which the most learned, for want of this clue, have never yet been
able to make consistent with reason and common sense -- all evils owe their
existence solely to the necessity of their own natures, by which I mean they
could not possibly have been prevented without the loss of some superior good,
or the permission of some greater evil than themselves. P. 17; 112, 113;
119.120.
This author's view, in attempting to evince the necessity of moral evil,
appears to have been no other than the utter subversion of natural and revealed
religion.

SECTION IX. Objections considered.
IF the book which has been under examination really concludes in this
principle, that God is the efficient cause of sin; but few of our readers will
think it needful to spend much time in considering objections. Whether this
appears to be the true conclusion of Mr. Edwards's principles, from each of the
foregoing sections taken seperately, or from the evidence exhibited in them all
taken together, must now be left to the judgment of the reader. Some of his
friends acknowledge the conclusion we have drawn, adopt it as a principle, and
undertake to defend it.

Can God then be the cause of that which is acknowledged to be contrary to his
nature, law and government? Must it not be a fruitless employment of any man's
time to attempt to make the negative more manifest than it already is to such
as "have plain sense and can follow it?" If the abovementioned conclusion is
clearly fastened on Mr. Edwards, it is such a reductio ad absurdum as must be a
full confutation of his doctrine before believers, either Christians or
Theists. Such as adopt the conclusion, and undertake to vindicate it before the
world, should openly declare on the side of atheism, and skepticism, before
they can reasonably expect any reply.

But if it is taken for granted, that Mr. Edwards's scheme concludes in nothing
short of the divine efficiency in moral evil, why then is this section devoted
to the consideration of objections? Our answer (or rather apology) is, to cut
off occasion from them that seek it. Though all who believe in God may well
take for granted, that there can be no real weight in any reasoning adduced to
prove, that moral evil is an effect proceeding from him as its cause; or in any
objections to the contrary principle -- that whatever subtilty and deception
there may be in such reasoning and objections, there can be no validity therein
-- And though we are by no means fully satisfied, that any objections, which
can with propriety be made on the footing of the divine agency in moral evil,
merit attention; yet we shall take notice of two objections principally,
passing others which cannot so properly be made on the present hypothesis; or
if they could, are less considerable. We shall, for instance, excuse ourselves
from particularly considering this objection: That to say moral agents might in
any instance choose or act otherwise than they do, is to suppose an effect
without a cause -- an objection which has no weight, if moral agents in any
case determine themselves, or are the cause of their own volitions -- as we
trust has been shown.

We shall also pretermit the objection, that the opinion of self-determination
makes the creature independent on the creator -- yea, brings the creator into a
state of dependence on the creature. The reader may, moreover, find the seeming
weight there is in these objections removed, p. 77, 78. of the examination, in
a note.

It must further be added, that some objections Mr. Edwards has made to the
scheme of liberty in opposition to necessity are fully answered in that essay
of Dr. Watts's, which he had before him. Mr. Edwards has proposed the
objections anew without taking notice of the pertinent answers the Dr. has
given them. If the reader will turn to the 6th section of the Doctor's essay,
he will there find many objections fully answered.

The first of the two objections proposed to be considered, and which Mr.
Edwards much insists on, is, That on the principles of those who assert
self-determination, the will of God is infinitely crossed by every act of sin
that happens -- that he endures what is infinitely disagreable to him --
infinite grief or pain from every sin -- that creatures have it in their power
to thwart and frustrate the designs of the creator, and to make him infinitely
the most miserable of all beings. This, he says, certainly follows, if sin be
not, upon the whole, agreeable to the divine will, and what God chooses as part
of his infinite scheme. P. 373.


To this we say, first, It is acknowledged that moral evil is in its nature
infinitely contrary to the perfections, law and government of God. Now we may
with as much reason say, he is frustrated, grieved and pained by the existence
of it viewed in its nature, as that he chooses and is pleased with it viewed in
its consequences -- even admitting it is for the best, all things considered,
that moral evil has taken place. So that if it follows from the opinion of
self-determination, that God is infinitely crossed and grieved by every
individual sin; the same consequence follows on Mr. Edwards's own principles.
Should it be granted, that every act of sin is, in one view of it, agreeable to
the will of God, what he produces by his efficient determination; yet, in
another view, it is admitted, that it is infinitely contrary and hateful to
him. Does it not then follow, on Mr. Edwards's principles, that God must needs
be infinitely pained and grieved by it, in proportion to his hatred of it? He
vieweth it in its nature and tendency, as well as in its consequences. Must he
not then be infinitely the most miserable of all beings, as his hatred of sin
is infinite?

Secondly, It would be conformable to the advice of a wise man of old Prove.
xxvi. 4, 5.
to reply to such an objection, that there are plain and positive declarations
from God himself, that he is grieved and repents at the sins of his
creatures. We read, that it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it
grieved him at his heart -- that he is angry with the wicked every day -- that
they weary God by their iniquities -- vex and grieve his spirit -- walk
contrary unto him. We read of his heart being turned within him, and his
repentings kindled together. Now which shall we admit for truth -- these
express and clear declarations of scripture, or the conjectural reasoning on
which the objection proceeds? If it be said, Such scriptures are spoken after
the manner of men. The answer is, They who thus object have no right to this
plea. For their own reasoning (if reasoning it may be called) represents that
as a reality, which the Scriptures doubtless mention figuratively, and by way
of accommodation to our way of conceiving things. If their notions of the ends
of providence in the permission of sin are not admitted as indubitable truth,
they immediately infer, that the Deity must needs be affected in the same
manner that human beings are, when any of their schemes are frustrated -- that
he is thwarted, pained, grieved, and made infinitely miserable.

Thirdly, This way of objecting, to say the least, is highly irreverent and
unbecoming. It has the appearance of an inclination to bring down to a level
with man that is a worm, that being whose glory is above the heavens. It is
treating the character and government of the LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT with less
deference than is shown to an earthly potentate. Such leveling notions
introduced into religion are of most pernicious consequence. Is the infinite
God to be treated with a familiarity, which we should scarce presume to use
with a fellow-mortal, who happens to be elevated a little above us! Under a
notion of doing honor to his sacred name and government, shall we speak of him
as though he were altogether such an one as ourselves! Shall we subject the
absolutely perfect spirit to human passions and feelings! Would it be less
absurd, or less presumptuous and reproachful, to suppose the Godhead like to
gold, silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device? Does it become a
creature to speak with such freedom of THE HIGH AND LOFTY ONE WHO INHABITETH
ETERNITY, WHOSE NAME IS HOLY! Angels, who excel in strength, and on whom he
shines with the full beams of his glory, confess their ignorance in the deep
things of his nature and providence. They acquiesce in the will of him who is
wonderful in counsel -- whose ways are past finding out -- and humbly adore
his, unsearchable wisdom in his works and administration. Yet man, instead of
imitating these sons of God above, would be wise beyond the measure of his
capacity, and rank in the scale of beings. With the short line of his own
reason he would fathom the abyss of the Deity -- and is wont to view him
through the dark medium of human prejudices and passions. Can God approve our
taking the measure of his nature from our own? Can he be pleased with being
brought to a level with creatures, who dwell in houses of clay, and whose
foundation is in the dust? Has he not admonished us, My thoughts are not your
thoughts; neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are
higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts
than your thoughts.

What we have further to offer in reply to this objection will properly enough
fall under the other objection refered to above; and which we shall therefore
proceed to consider. The objection is this: To suppose moral evil is an effect
of fire-will abused, or of internal causation in the creature, is the same as
to suppose God himself the cause of it, since he trusted this matter with the
creature, who he knew would abuse liberty. And since the most important
measures of his conduct toward mankind, all known to him from the beginning,
were formed upon the supposition of the being of moral evil, which he could
have prevented, how can the permission of it consist with the moral perfections
of the Deity, any more than the supposition of his efficiency in it? It must
eternally be the same thing whether a Creator of infinite power and knowledge
created beings originally wicked and miserable, or gave them power to make
themselves so, fore-knowing they would employ that power to their own
destruction. Letters on the origin of evil, p. 102.


It is indeed a dismal dilemma, that God must either forcibly prevent
wickedness, or be himself the cause of it. The former he has not done: For it
is certain that wickedness is in the world. Must we then embrace the other part
of the dilemma? Is it the most rational way of accounting for the existence of
sin to say, that God creates beings originally wicked, of infuseth wickedness
into them afterward? What relief can it be to the mind of one who really
believes a God to say, that sin proceeds from him as the cause? What answer can
the maintainer of this principle make to the atheist? For whether is better, to
say there is no God? or to say there is a God indeed, but that he, and he only,
is the cause of wickedness? Suppose moral evil is for the best; it is still a
most daring assertion to say, it was best the divine efficiency should bring it
into existence.

Some argue, if sin is not for the best, it would certainly have been
prevented, since God foreknew and might have prevented it. On these premises
they conclude, that sin must be an effect of divine operation and production.
-- A consequence which by no means follows; and which involves such impiety,
that no supposeable difficulties attending the existence of moral evil should
compel us to admit it. To embrace this consequence in order to rid ourselves of
one difficulty, would be to involve ourselves in a far greater -- an
inextricable one, absolutely irreconcilable with the moral perfections of God.
And when he is robbed of these, his glory is taken from him: The name of a Deity
may be retained, but no more.

On the hypothesis before us, how is it possible to know that God is holy? that
he loves righteousness, and hates wickedness? For can he hate the effects of
his own producing -- the operation of his own power -- his own acts? By
supposition all sin is his act -- the fruit of his agency or efficiency. Why
then is not sin very good, as much as any part of the Creator's work? If the
disposition in abandoned sinners and apostate spirits, no less than the
contrary temper in saints and angels, is the product of divine energy, by what
rule can we determine that holiness is pleasing, and wickedness offensive, to
him? Though the operations of our own minds clearly declare to us, that moral
evil is contrary and odious to God; yet what else can we conclude than that
those perceptions are a delusion? And if our own feelings are delusive, this
particular impression or idea, that there is a God and moral governor, may be
so. The supposition of the existence of matter or spirit may be a delusion. Our
own consciousness may be so. We may be deluded in supposing that we ourselves
exist, though the very supposition clearly implies our existence. No paradoxes
were ever brought forth by the most abject superstition, or the most frantic
enthusiasm, more incredible than the wisdom of the present age has produced.
To suppose that the alwise Creator and governor of the world effects by his own
agency what is infinitely repugnant to his pure and holy nature, is as
mavelous a paradox as was ever published. We might rather say, that his
wisdom required all rebels should perish everlastingly, than say, that an holy
God first effected by his own energy their rebellion, as the medium of
displaying his own perfections and communicating the greatest happiness to the
universal system. We might with as much appearance of reason say, that the
happiness of the universe is not the care of the infinite Creator and parent of
it, as say, that he produces moral evil as a necessary means of this
happiness. As well might we say, that wisdom required God should not create the
worlds -- should not form creatures capable of moral evil. What weight, then,
should be allowed to objections which proceed on a supposition so reproachful
to that being whose work is perfect --? a God of truth, and without iniquity? A
scheme founded in a principle so horrible, so shockingly absurd and impious as
this, that an holy, wise and good God is at the same time the efficient of sin,
and an avenger to execute wrath upon the subjects of it, neither demands, nor
will admit any other answer than that in the book, of Job, Far be it from God
that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity. No man should suffer himself to be in the least staggered by
objections formed on the supposition of the truth of such a scheme, whether he
is able distinctly to answer the objections or not. An attempt to support such
a scheme deserves to be rejected with contempt and abhorrence. No possible
objections founded on such a basis can have any weight by reason of the
TERRIBILITY of the hypothesis itself. The public will not think there is
occasion for, or even propriety in, taking up time to consider objections
stated on this basis. It Is sufficient to say with the excellent Mr. How, That
God does by an efficacious influence move and determine men to wicked actions,
I most resolvedly deny.

Some seem to suppose, that the goodness of God, or his rectitude, require the
exertion of his utmost power for preventing evil. But this is not to be
imagined -- The wisdom of God requires that his operation should be according
to the order which he has established, and to the nature of things which he has
wisely framed to be preserved inviolable. As in the government of the inanimate
creatures, he acts suitably to their natures, moving and disposing of them by
the irresistible determination of his sovereign will, so his influence on moral
agents is such as does not destroy the essential powers which he has given them.

"Let it be more particularly considered, first, that perhaps there is not, nor
can be, any being of a limited understanding above the possibility of being
misled in its moral conduct; and all the orders of created free agents must
naturally be in a state of trial, till by a right use of liberty their
integrity is confirmed -- Every imperfect agent, having a variety in his frame,
must have propensions to particular objects which are adapted to the indigence
of his condition; which propensions in a regular moral constitution, are under
the government of conscience; but their being does not depend upon it. They are
excited by the presence of their suitable objects, or perhaps without it; and
though their first motions, and perhaps their continuance in the mind for some
time, may be innocent, yet it is easily conceivable that they may demand a
gratification, in circumstances and degrees, which conscience forbids."

"Here then is a tendency or temptation to evil, from which the creature by the
right use of its own powers may escape, and thereby be more confirmed in
virtue; but a possibility of falling and corrupting itself seems to be
inseparable from every finite nature; and even the danger of it seems naturally
to attend the state of all finite moral agents, during some part of their
existence -- We know that we are capable both of doing right and wrong; and our
moral powers so constituted, with such a freedom, we cannot help thinking a
very high privilege; whereby we are raised above the condition of many other
beings, and have the essential foundation of noble enjoyments."

"Secondly, The human mind necessarily appears to itself the cause both of the
moral good and evil which is done by it -- The capacity is derived wholly from
God, and is preserved by him; the particular determination is from ourselves;
only influenced, so far as is consistent with our free agency, by setting
before us sufficient motives to good. Yet the mind has natural power of making
a wrong choice. We must then be condemned by our own hearts, in charging the
human constitution as defective to the purposes of virtue, and thereby of
happiness, and impeaching the goodness of its author; since we are conscious to
ourselves, that we are furnished with all that is necessary, and know of no
power that is wanting to our doing good and eschewing evil."

"Thirdly, Whereas it is alleged that since God foresaw men would abuse their
liberty, -- goodness required that the occasion of such an abuse should have
been prevented. The answer is, -- that the futurity of the actions of free
agents, of which themselves are the sole causes, is no more determined by the
divine appointment, than the actual production of them is affected by his
power."

"Fourthly, It must be acknowledged that, strictly speaking, God -- could have
created moral agents much more perfect than men are; given them a greater
measure of knowledge; set the motives of virtue in so strong a light before
them, as more effectually to secure their attachment to it -- could have placed
them in a state much more free from temptations, and consequently in less
danger of making detection -- could have prevented the conjuncture of
circumstances in which he foresaw liberty could be abused. But -- shall we take
upon us to say, that the order of the creation, and the ends for which it was
made, did not require, or even allow, that there should be such a rank of
beings in it, constituted as we are, with understanding, liberty, and moral
affections, but capable of sin, tempted to it, and thereby in danger of
becoming unhappy through their own fault? or that the present constitution, in
this branch of it which relates to free agents, is inconsistent with the wisdom
and moral perfections of the supreme Being." Abernethy's discourses on divine
goodness.


SECTION X. On metaphysical reasoning. "The word metaphysic, according to
vulgar use, is applied to all disquisitions concerning things immaterial. In
this sense, the plainest account of the faculties of the mind, and of the
principles of moral and natural religion, would be termed metaphysic. Such
metaphysic, however, we are so far from despising or censuring, that we account
it the sublimest and most useful part of science.

Those arguments also and illustrations in the abstract philosophy, which are
not obvious to ordinary understandings, are sometimes called metaphysical. But
as the principles of this philosophy, however well expressed, appear somewhat
abstruse to one who is but a novice in the study; and as very plain principles
may seem intricate in an author who is inattentive to his expression, as the
best authors sometimes are, it would be unfair to reject, or conceive a
prejudice against, every doctrine in morals that is not perfectly free from
obscurity. Yet a continued obscurity, in matters whereof every man should be a
competent judge, cannot fail to breed a suspicion, either that the doctrine is
faulty, or that the writer is not equal to his subject.

The term metaphysical, in those passages of this book where it is expressive
of censure, will be found to allude to that mode of abstract investigation, so
common among the modern skeptics and schoolmen, which is supported, either
wholly by an ambiguous and indefinite phraseology, or by that in conjunction
with a partial experience; and which seldom sails to lead to such conclusions
as contradict matter of fact, or truths of indisputable authority."

Beattie on truth, p. 401, 402.

Hic labor ille domus, et INEXTRICABILIS ERROR.

AENEID. LIB. vi.
WE mean not to speak contemptibly of metaphysics, as such, and properly
applied. There is probably no science but may (in addition to its advantages in
other respects) claim some merit as being subservient, more or less, to the
elucidation and confirmation of religion and morals. Logic, natural philosophy,
the mathematics, polite literature have been greatly serviceable to mankind in
this view. And possibly metaphysic has been of some small advantage in the
same respect: Though the injury which the misapplication of it has done
religion, at one time and another, if put into the opposite scale, might far
outweigh it is advantages.

Admitting metaphysics may be profitably applied to religious subjects; yet
(without undertaking to prescribe the exact limits) it will doubtless be
granted -- Sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequitconsistere rectum.
HOR.

It may be submitted to public consideration, whether first principles can,
without danger, be brought to the test of metaphysics. The being of a God we
call one of these principles; the immediate consciousness mankind have of
liberty and accountableness, another; and since the supposition that God is the
cause of sin wholly robs him of his moral character, we venture to add, that
the negative of this is another first principle. The works of creation without
us, and the witness for God within us, instantly attest the truth in these
points, as soon as they are mentioned. It Is very questionable whether
metaphysics have been, or can be, used to any advantage, on these manifest
points, even against the sophistry of infidels. We see not why a philosopher
and metaphysician is not obliged to take up with that evidence here which
affords clear conviction to men of plain understanding. When believers in God
have refered the sophistical reasoner against his being and perfections to that
incontestible proof of them which the visible world exhibits, they have done
their duty -- all that is required, or that can indeed be done. Abstract
reasoning, it may be presumed, will afford no conviction, where the constant
attestations to the being of a God in creation and providence do not. The
opposing metaphysics to metaphysics will keep the infidel in countenance. It is
an intimation to him, that he has some reason for his incredulity. For he
pretty naturally concludes, that the being of a God would not be brought into
the field of debate by those who believe it, were there not some reason to
doubt it. Principles manifest on first proposal, if men will open their eyes,
neither need nor can receive any assistance from metaphysics; and those who
would make them undergo the peril of a metaphysical scrutiny may find they have
exposed them to be rejected.

The other two principles mentioned (...) evident as the being of a God, and
require no metaphysical proof -- viz. God cannot be tempted with evil, and
tempts no man; (or, in other words, is not the cause of sin;) and that
mankind are not necessitated or destined to choose and act in every instance as
they do, but might choose and act otherwise -- at least in some instances.
Metaphysics have been so far from strengthening the evidence of these obvious
truths, that, on the contrary, hereby they have been perplexed and made dubious
-- yea, some seem to think they have demonstrated them to be false.

Not one in an hundred of mankind can apprehend a metaphysical proof of
religion -- a subject in which all ranks are alike interested. Common people
are, indeed much better physicians, than metaphysicians. Nor is every good
natural Philosopher skilled in moral philosophy or versed in the abstract
nature of immaterial beings. It is sometimes said, that physic oftener kills
than cures. Such is metaphysic to the mind. Where it prevents or removes a
slight moral indisposition in one instance, it probably brings on a fatal
distemper in more instances. Nor is a corrosive ever eligible, when a lenitive
will answer the end.

The plainest and most important principles of revelation would not endure a
metaphysical disquisition. At least, the sacred writers have not used such
reasoning -- not those of them who were best able to reason in this manner.
Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel and St. Paul have not. Unparralleled samples of
eloquence and the sublime have been often produced from their writings; but we
don't call to mind that any instances of their metaphysical reasoning have been
adduced. Instances of strong reasoning their writings abound with particularly
St. Paul's. But he disclaims metaphysics -- not surely as being above his
abilities; but as of no use on the most essential point of religion -- rather
injurious than helpful. As he is the principal new testament writer, we beg
leave to make a few strictures on his character and writings, with a more
immediate view to the subject of the present section.

He was possessed of an "amazing force of genius, as well as invincible
courage, and a spirit of patience, which no fatigue could overcome, and which
no sufferings or trials could (...). He was versed in the learned arts, and
able to combat the Jewish doctors and Pagan philosophers with their own arms."
Mosheim, Vol. I. P. 25.
His noble birth, added to his natural genius, literary acquirements, ardent
zeal and unshaken firmness of mind, seemed, even in the eye of the world, to
qualify him for a principal instrument in the defense and propagation of the
gospel. Did then the author of Christianity, in the appointment of St. Paul to
this business, proceed on maxims of worldly wisdom? By no means. These
accomplishments, which distinguished St. Paul from his fellow-apostles, were
the most powerful obstacles to his embracing Christianity. They were employed
to root out the gospel. No one persecuted it more furiously than he -- no one
despised it more. But when it pleased God to reveal his Son in him, his shining
talents were fervently applied to the purpose for which they were given, and
became eminently subservient to the furtherance of the faith, which once he
destroyed. Let us reflect a moment in what manner he used them as an apostle of
Christ -- as his example is for succeeding ministers.

Here we have many striking instances of his zeal, eloquence and reasoning. We
mean to take notice of the last more especially -- his reasoning with Jewish
doctors and pagan philosophers -- on the principles of natural religion, and
the revelations of God to the Jews. He well knew what expectations of a
magnificent temporal prince the doctors of the law had raised in mankind -- how
opposite the Christian system was to the reigning philosophy of the world --
particularly what exception the pride of the Grecian philosophers took to it on
account of its plainness and simplicity. He would naturally also call to mind
his own prejudices against the gospel on these accounts. And as he had frequent
occasion to confer with men of this character at Jerusalem, Rome, Athens and
Corinth, it may be worth while to enquire in what manner he reasoned with them?
Metaphysical reasoning would have been best accommodated to their taste: And if
ever there is a propriety in introducing this kind of reasoning into religion,
Paul had occasion for it, and was able to manage it to advantage. It might
particularly be conjectured, that a man of Paul's learning would have offered a
labored dissertation on the abstract nature of the supreme spirit, (which
would have been reasoning metaphysically) when encountered by the learned
philosophers from among the Epicureans and Stoics; when accused of being a
setter forth of strange gods -- when brought unto Areopagus -- surrounded by
philosophers, senators and plebeians -- undertaking to convince them of their
superstition, and reclaim them from their idolatry. But to lead them to the
knowledge of the true God, (their ignorance of whom was proclaimed in the
inscription on one of their altars) what method did he take? Observable to this
purpose is his speech, while he stood in the midst of Mars-hill. Ye men of
Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious -- God that made
the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth,
dwells not in temples made with hands: Neither is worshipped with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing; seeing he gives to all life, and breath and all
things.

How plain, and yet how forceable, is this reasoning? -- adapted equally to
wise and unwise. He does not discourse as a philosopher would on the nature of
spirit abstracted from matter, but makes a familiar appeal to the works of
visible creation and providence, in proof of the existence and perfection of
God, and thence infers the accountableness of mankind to him, as moral governor
and judge. This was to reason as became a minister of that master who sent him
not to preach with wisdom of words.

To the same purpose he observes, that the works of visible nature, and
particularly the operations of their own minds, should have been regarded by
the pagan Romans as demonstrable proofs of the being, attributes and providence
of God -- that their not being induced to glorify him as God, on this clear
evidence, was so far from being any argument of their superior wisdom, that, on
the contrary, it proved them inexcuseable and fools, notwithstanding all their
professions of wisdom. Romans i. 19, 20; 22. chapter ii. 14, 15.
In like manner he says, God left not himself without witness among the
heathen, in that he did good, and gave rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons.
Acts viv. 17.


These instances are examples of Paul's reasoning with Pagan idolaters. He
argues from the works of creation and providence, which lie open alike to
learned and unlearned. Here is no abstract, metaphysical reasoning -- all is
easy to be understood. And he declares he had rather speak five words with his
understanding, that he might teach others, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. 1 Cor. xiv. 19.


When he treated with the Jewish doctors, or the people of Israel, he did not
(as before heathen) recur to the works of nature; but taking the principles of
natural religion for granted, he reasoned with them out of those scriptures,
which they acknowledged were given by inspiration of God. And though all his
writings discover the good reasoner, as well as the good man, full of the holy
Ghost; yet we do not recollect that he reasoned metaphysically, either before
Jews or heathen -- Great plainness of speech appears in all his reasonings, as
became a minister of the new testament. 11 Cor. iii. 12.
He was not ashamed of the gospel of Christ before the Jewish Rabbi's or pagan
philosophers, although it is distinguishing doctrine was to the former a
stumbling block, and to the latter foolishness. The Greeks held the gospel
revelation in great contempt, because they found not that wisdom of this world
which they sought in it. The apostle held their worldly wisdom in equal
contempt, because it set itself in opposition to that gospel which is the power
of God, and the wisdom of God. He came not with excellency of speech or of
wisdom (which he, if any man, could have used) declaring the testimony of God.
His speech and preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom; but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power, that the faith of Christians might
stand, not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. He with his brethren
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the word of God deceitfully, but by the manifestation of the truth
commending themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. I
determined, says he to the Corinthians, not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified -- and expresses his fears, lest by any means
the minds of his Christian friends at Corinth should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. He enters a caution to the Colossians, Beware
lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition
of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. He admonishes
Timothy to avoid oppositions of science falsely so called -- to withdraw from
such as dote about questions and strifes of words. Upon the whole he declares,
that the world by wisdom knew not God -- that what the pride of philosophy
stigmatized as the foolishness of preaching, was the scheme infinite wisdom had
determined upon for the salvation of believers -- that the foolishness of God
was wiser than men, and the weakness of God stronger than men. -- Thus was
fulfilled what was foretold, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is
the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not GOD made foolish the
wisdom of this world?

From what has been observed it appears, that the chief of the apostles,
notwithstanding his learning, was so far from making use of metaphysical
reasoning in treating with those who believed the gospel, that he made no use
of it for the conviction of infidels, either among Jews or heathen -- that he
rather disclaimed it as dangerous, than patronized it as helpful, to the cause
of truth. Speaking of his own ministry, and that of his fellow-apostles, he
says, We speak not as pleasing men, but God who tries our hearts. For neither
at any time used we flattering words -- nor of men sought we glory. And
doubtless the fleshly wisdom mentioned 2 Cor. 1.12. denotes the same as the
wisdom of this world, mentioned in the former epistle, through which it came to
pass that the gospel was despised and set at naught; and in opposition to which
the apostles of Christ had their conversation in the world, in simplicity and
godly sincerity, by the grace of God.

It may be said, St. Paul must have used abstract reasoning on some occasions,
or his beloved brother Peter would not have testified, that there are things in
his epistles hard to be understood. But may not this be owing wholly to the
nature of epistolary and controversial writings? their referring to rites and
customs since altered or laid aside? or to disputes then agitated, with which
distant places or after ages cannot be supposed to be perfectly acquainted? A
general hint might be sufficient for the information of those to whom his
epistles were immediately wrote. Were such hints as well understood by others,
his controversial pieces might be as plain as any other part of his writings.
But if we have not the means of understanding them so clearly, it is a just
conclusion, that we are not so nearly concerned in them.

"It is become a fashion," says Dr. Sherlock, to dress up the great doctrines
and proofs of religion in axioms, and theorems and demonstrations -- Had the
gospel set out at first with this air of mathematics, it had lost one strong
proof of its divine original, arising from the plainness of its doctrine, and
the simplicity of the evidence which was offered in its behalf; which made the
gospel to be a proper tender to all mankind.

But it is more than time to remind the reader what improvement Mr. Edwards
has made of metaphysical reasoning. This we shall do by adducing a number of
instances, which may serve to show the precariousness, subtilty and danger of
such reasoning. All the argumentation of his book really concludes in this,
that God is the cause of sin. This is the capital error, which, we trust, a
professing people will never admit. And though he does not acknowledge it, yet
it must be embraced if his foundation be firm. The following specimen may show,
that his conclusions are by no means fairly drawn from his premises -- or that
one or the other are false.

Because inert matter cannot begin or alter its own motion; hence Mr. Edwards
infers, that an intelligent spirit can in no case begin or alter its own
volitions and actions.

If there can be no effect without a cause; he infers, that there can be no
principle of efficiency in moral agents.

If a moral agent is supposed to determine his own volitions; then he infers,
that the act of volition itself is self-determined, and has no cause.

He takes for granted, that volition, even with respect to the most casual
thing, is an act of preference; and then concludes, that, in the most
indifferent thing, there must be an apparent reason for willing as we do rather
than otherwise.

Because a perfect equilibrium or absolute indifference is not essential to
liberty; he concludes, that a power to choose one thing or its opposite is
incompatible with liberty.

If every moral volition has some motive, then that motive is the cause of the
volition -- and therefore moral agents themselves are not the cause.

Because a thing is in our power, if consequent to our election; therefore it
is in our power, though the election of it is not.

Because the opposition of one's will to what is required, may be no excuse;
therefore the want of a power to be willing is none.

(His reasoning on self-determination may be well summed up thus: Because a man
cannot take the second step without the first; therefore he cannot take the
first without a previous one.)

Because Adam's lapse may be the source of a blameable impotency in his
posterity; therefore original impotency in himself might be blameable.

Because the essence of sin lies in its nature; therefore the doer of
wickedness is not the cause of it -- and therefore it is no reproach to say,
that God is the cause of sin.

It is laid down for a principle, that a creature never commits sin till divine
influence and assistance is withdrawn; hence it is infered (not unjustly, if
the principle assumed be true) that man's first apostasy was owing to the want
or withdraw of divine influence and assistance.

Because natural (or necessary) effects, and moral habits of holiness, proceed
from the positive influence and exertion of the Deity; therefore moral evil
does.

Because God is necessarily holy, etc. therefore the holiness or pollution of
creatures is necessary -- therefore a real and original necessity of sin is
consistent with blame and punishment.

Because God permits sinners to harden themselves; therefore their obduracy is
the effect of his ordination, disposal and determination, as the cause.

Because God certainly foreknows the sinful volitions and actions of his
creatures; therefore they are necessary -- therefore they proceed from his
efficient determination.

If we are not certain sin is not for the best; then we are certain it is for
the best.

Because God brings good out of moral evil; therefore it is best -- therefore
it is a necessary means of the greatest good -- therefore it is part of the
divine plan -- therefore the divine perfections could not have been manifested,
had not sin entered the world -- therefore glorified intelligences are preserved
in their allegiance through terror of the punishment of the damned -- therefore
what is infinitely opposite to the divine nature, law and government is not
contrary, but agreeable, to his will -- therefore God is the efficient cause of
sin, and infinitely pleased with the great good it brings to the world,
otherwise he would have prevented it. What WONDERS has metaphysic wrought! The
Aristotelian philosopher can demonstrate, that the mind is material. "The
Cartesian, on the contrary, spiritualizeth body, and its qualities." He can
demonstrate, that "sound, taste, smell, color, heat and cold, which the vulgar
take to be qualities of body, are not" so; "but mere sensations of the mind."
Yea, "extension, figure, and all the primary qualities" have, by later
philosophers, been held "to be mere sensations, no less than the secondary
qualities. By a kind of metaphysical sublimation all the qualities of matter
are converted into sensations," and "the existence of what we see and feel" is
denied. It Is "a vulgar error" to suppose there is "a material world."

To perfect this system of philosophy, spirit as well as body is at length
"turned out of existence by this short dilemma: Either they are ideas of
sensation or reflection, or they are not. If they are, -- they can have no
existence but when we are conscious of them; if they are not ideas of sensation
or reflection, then body and spirit, cause and effect, time and space, are
words without any meaning." Reid on the mind. Chap. vii.
And thus a total skepticism is introduced.

One writer Kaims
can demonstrate by metaphysic, that our feeling of liberty is a delusive sense
implanted in us. Another, that a person may be regenerated, and yet
unjustified, destitute of faith and holiness, and continue, for a length of
time, a child of the devil. Van Mastricht.
Some writers of our own country have made such improvement on metaphysic as to
demonstrate, (against the clearest and most decisive language of the
scriptures) that the word of truth is not the medium of regeneration.

When a man suffers himself to be reasoned out of the principles of common
sense by metaphysical arguments, this, says Professor Reid, we may call
metaphysical lunacy; which differs from the other species of the distemper in
this, that it is not continued, but intermittent: It is apt to seize the
patient in solitary and speculative moments; but when he enters into society,
common sense recovers her authority. (P. 379.)




This is a just representation of Mr. Edwards's reasoning, though he is not
explicit in the whole of it. If it should be thought, that in such a way of
reasoning any thing may be proved by any thing, it will, doubtless, be
acknowledged, that it is neither eligible nor safe to bring the principles of
religion to such a trial. We cannot be persuaded, that the pains taken in this
way is doing service to men of thought and contemplation: And what occasion Mr.
Edwards could have for it, seeing he had to do with those who believe the
bible, we cannot imagine. It tends to bewilder common people -- to mislead
them, it may be, fatally. It gives occasion to infidels and libertines. Nor can
it seem strange, if from thinking favorably of such a religious system as his
book contains, men come to be unsettled and skeptical as to any religion.

Under a notion of doing honor to the divine perfections and government, men
may push their enquiries far beyond their capacity and the means of their
knowledge. Instead of sailing along the shore with their slender bark, they run
the hazard of launching forth into the main ocean, and plunge themselves in
deep waters. In consequence of such bold enquiries, such efforts to fathom the
abyss of the Deity, no wonder hard and reproachful things are said of him;
which, however piously they may be intended, are extremely injurious to
religion. It seems as if an honest intention can very hardly excuse the freedom
and confidence with which some speak of that Being who possetheth infinite
perfection, and whose nature and operations are unsearchable. As a fine writer
SEED.
has observed, "The Deity is to the human minds, what the main ocean is to
narrow vessels: They may take in as much of his nature as their scanty
dimensions can admit, and yet there will remain an infinite surplus still,
which they want capacities to receive."

SECTION XI. Recapitulation.
MR. Edwards's book was wrote with a view to subvert the opinion of
self-determination, and establish the doctrine of universal necessity. He
endeavoreth to prove, that the volitions and actions of moral agents have a
like dependence on a cause without themselves as effects in the natural world
-- that all events, from the beginning of the world to the end, are
unalterably, unavoidably and circumstantially determined. And while he
teaches, that this necessity, in reference to moral events, is of the moral
kind, and therefore supposes it consistent with the most perfect liberty, he
yet maintains that moral actions are all subject to an original real necessity
as absolute as natural.

In support of this general system, he sets himself to show, What determines
the will? and it is particularly and very largely insisted, as a thing of chief
importance, that the will is always determined by the highest motive, or by
what appears most agreeable to the mind; which is called a moral cause, and the
determination of the will hereby a necessary determination.

Three things have been proposed in the examination of this system. First, An
enquiry into the supposed connection of volition with the highest motive.
Secondly, The indissoluble connection of moral causes and effects. And thirdly,
An attempt to show, that internal, moral liberty, as distinguished from
external or animal, belongs to moral agents -- that Mr. Edwards's scheme of
necessity, if admitted in theory, is not applicable to practice.

Under the first of these heads, it was shown, that if the highest motive were
allowed to be the next and immediate cause of volition, this is no resolution
of the question, as it does not show the original and true cause thereof. The
enquiry is not pursued to the end, the foundation of the will's determination
is not discovered. What it is that gives causal influence to motive, or wherein
its energy consists, remains still to be pointed out. But it was endeavored to
be proved, in the next place, by various considerations, and particularly from
Mr. Edwards's own authority and reasoning, that in truth the strongest motive
is not the moral cause of volition, and that there is no necessary coincidence
between the one and the other. And lastly, that volition is not the proper
cause of external action, any more than the highest motive is of volition.

After the mention of some preliminary principles, it was enquired, under the
next head of the proposed examination, whether the wills of moral agents are
necessarily determined by an extrinsic, or by an intrinsic cause, and whether
there can be natural liberty without moral, on Mr. Edwards's scheme. This
scheme was represented as making God the author of sin, by plain and direct
consequence -- the supposed advantage of sin to the universe was briefly
noticed; and general observations and reflections subjoined, with a view to
make it manifest, that if no being can, or ever could, choose or act otherwise
in any case, it is very immaterial by what name this necessity is called, since
a necessity more absolute cannot be conceived of -- that the running up moral
events, like natural, through a chain of second causes to the first, is
confounding the agency of intelligent creatures with mechanism -- making their
volitions and conduct the agency of the Deity, properly speaking -- or rather,
that, upon the principles of Mr. Edwards, the Deity himself is not an agent,
but an instrument of necessity and fate. There is no self-mover -- direction --
determination, or source of activity, in the universe. Wherein our author
professes himself a friend of liberty, he either contradicts his own
principles, or allows of no liberty that is of any moment, or at all connected
with moral agency.

We endeavored, under the last branch of our general design, to exhibit a
scheme more consonant to reason and truth; showing from the discernment that
distinguishes moral agents from the brute-creation, and their capacity of
choosing and acting otherwise than they in fact do, that internal moral liberty
and self-determination belong to them -- that it no way interferes with this
liberty to admit the exhibition and influence of motives in moral volitions.
The scheme of necessity exhibited in Mr. Edwards's book, if true in
speculation, was, upon the whole, shown to be false in its practical
application -- of most dangerous tendency and consequence. A specimen was also
annexed of Mr. Edwards's agreeing, in his leading sentiments, with ancient and
modern fatalists.

This is a view of the subject so far as it was considered in our former
publication. In the present, the same general design has been resumed and
continued. A further proof of self-determination has been adduced from the
capacity in moral agents of deliberating, suspending, etc. -- the distinction
of rational agency from animal has been stated -- a distinction entirely
confounded in Mr. Edwards's book, which has been further shown to contain a
full denial of moral liberty. It has been argued, that events in the moral
world are not uniform, as in the material -- that the Deity must be the
efficient cause of moral evil, or it has no such cause, unless
self-determination be admitted -- that motives do not necessitate, nor are the
cause of volition, which has a moral person or agent for its cause. The
distinction of natural and moral necessity has been particularly attended to,
and, in Mr. Edwards's use of it, shown to be groundless; since, if he means any
thing, a strict and absolute necessity is equally intended by the former as by
the latter -- we have touched the argument from the necessity of the divine
moral rectitude, and presume it was made to appear, that there is no infering
herefrom a strict necessity in the moral volitions and actions of creatures.
From Mr. Edwards's notion of necessity, it follows, that God is the author or
cause of sin, or it has no cause. This same conclusion has further been shown
to follow from his plan of the origin of evil, which we have distinctly
examined -- a plan which, indeed, renders the existence of sin forever
impossible. His hypothesis, which derives moral evil from the withdraw of
divine influence and assistance, has been shown not to differ materially,
either from theirs who explicitly ascribe it to divine efficiency, or from
theirs who suppose God might make creatures originally vicious. The only
consistent hypothesis is that which derives evil from the abuse of moral
liberty. The distinction of the essence of virtue and vice from their cause,
has, we flatter ourselves, been evinced to be futile and evasive, by no means
to answer Mr. Edwards's purpose, however important he esteemed it, and how much
soever his principles required it. It has been considered, whether moral evil
is indeed best for the world; or suppose it is, whether it be best that God
should effect it by his agency. We have also examined the argument from divine
prescience, and particularly shown, that the certainty of moral events is
altogether different from necessity, the former not affecting their nature, or
the manner of their coming to pass, or any way influencing them, as the latter
does -- that prescience stands not in the relation of cause to the things
foreknown. Texts of scripture usually alleged in support of the scheme of
necessity have been shown to be misconstrued. A reply has been made to some
principal objections, and a dissertation added on metaphysical reasoning,
showing that it rather serves to bewilder than elucidate the present subject.
We have, therefore, made but little use of it; although it has in some measure
been evinced, (as we suppose) in the course of our examination, that the
metaphysician is easily repulsed with his own weapons.

In the examination some arguments were touched, among many which occurred,
evincing the aspect Mr. Edwards's scheme has on the moral perfections and
government of God, and its consequent practical tendency. Other arguments have
been now mentioned with the same view. The opposite truth was there exhibited
in part; we have now further explained ourselves, and pursued the design before
opened, as far as appeared needful at present. To save the trouble of
repetition, we have several times refered the reader to things said in the
examination.

Our aim has been to attend to the principal point in debate, not to dwell on
lesser and circumstantial things. If the former has been kept in view, it may
be reasonably requested, that if any gentleman shall think it needful to
publish remarks on what we have written, he will not make incidental things a
principal object of attention. To divert his own or the reader's mind from what
is most material would be alike injustice to both, as well as uncandid to the
examiner. The main objection to Mr. Edwards's scheme is, that he argues for a
necessity which can be defended on this only hypothesis, that God is the cause
of sin. To this single question, the whole controversy is reducible. Whoever
would defend his book must either show, that the leading principles of it do
not suppose the deity to be the efficient of moral evil; or else that such a
supposition is no reproach to his character and government. We dare affirm he
is not the efficient cause of moral evil; yea, should we presume to affirm that
he is this cause, it would, we doubt not in the least, be striking at the
foundation of all religion.

The pulic attention and candor would now have been asked no longer, had it not
been the opinion of a number of respectable gentlemen, that we are called upon
to take some notice of the "essay on moral agency" etc. through which are
interspersed remarks on what we wrote before, and in some parts of which the
author has condescended more professedly to attend to the examination. Our
strictures on this essay shall be dispatched with all convenient brevity.

STRICTURES on "an essay on moral agency:" (So called) Containing remarks on a
late anonymous publication, entitled, An examination of the late Rev'd
President Edwards's enquiry on freedom of will. By Stephen West, A. M. Pastor
of the church in Stockbridge.
THIS essay contains scarce any thing new. But few arguments are advanced in
it, except such as Mr. Edwards had made use of, and handled with more
appearance of reason. In examining Mr. Edwards, we have sufficiently replied to
the most material things in Mr. West. Mr. West, in denying original
righteousness, departs, indeed, from Mr. Edwards. Compare part I. sect. 1, 2.
of Mr. West's essay (particularly p. 53.) with Edwards p. 43.
There is also a verbal difference between these two gentlemen respecting the
agency of the Deity in sin. While Mr. Edwards denies (in words) a positive
divine influence or efficiency in moral evil, Mr. West expressly maintains it,
and argues (in his manner) for it, through a number of sections, in the second
part of his essay. This, however, is no more than Mr. Edwards's doctrine
amounts to, as has been shown. We purpose to resume this point after taking
notice of some other things in the essay before us, and some exceptions to our
former publication.

In the section on power, we conjecture that Mr. West has applied this word
improperly, as a philosopher and as a moralist. The word, as used in mechanics,
is never applied, by any philosopher we have had opportunity to read, in the
manner Mr. West applies it, to the body moved; but uniformly and constantly to
the mover. Compare p. 37, 38. of Mr. West's essay with Pemberton's view of Sir
Isaac Newton's philosophy, p. 31. 8, 9. p. 82. 51. Martin on mechanics, passim.
Ozanam's cursus mathematicus, vol. 4. part I. passim. Chambers in tit. Lever.
Were these philosophers utter strangers to the laws of nature. (Essay p. 40.)
From this arbitrary use of the word power, this philosophy falsely so called,
he proceeds to make his deduction, that the word, in its application to human
nature, imports only a capacity of being the subject of certain effects from
divine operation -- it is "a power to be wrought upon, not a power to operate."
(P. 43.)

Admitting his application of the word power to mechanics had been
philosophical, what is the inference? that moral agency and mechanism are the
same? So it seems. But this, we suppose, Mr. West would not be fond of
maintaining; because he appears to disapprove Lord Kaim's opinion recited p.
128. -- And because he [Mr. West] has attempted to show, that his own scheme
does not make mankind machines. Part I. sect. 7. Moreover, in this same section
on power, he informs us, that he is "far from apprehending" that his
beforementioned use of the word power is the only sense in which it may be used
with propriety, as applied to moral agents -- to men. It may doubtless be used
with propriety to indicate -- something wherein man is a moral agent, and on
account of which he is a fit subject of praise or blame, commendation or
censure. P. 42. The word power, then, as above applied to human nature, points
out no abilities properly in men -- nothing wherein they are moral agents.

P. 44. He attempts to illustrate that idea of power, which indicateth and
denotes some ability properly in men -- something wherein man is a moral
agent, and in which there is desert of praise or blame, etc. What is this power
or ability, which is essential to moral agency? We are told it is "voluntary
exertion." Whatever external action -- takes place upon our willing it, is in
our power. (P.46.) Whatever event or action does not follow the election of the
mind, is not in our power. -- Yet in the next paragraph, Mr. West says, Power,
in this "construction of it, is not essential to moral agency."

These things require no very critical animadversions. When the word power is
applied to human nature in Mr. West's first sense, it points out nothing
wherein men are moral agents. When it is used in his second sense, it is not
essential to moral agency. The consequence is plain, that men are not moral
agents, having no power or ability that indicateth moral agency. We are clear
with Mr. West, that power, in either of the senses he uses it, does not denote
moral agency. The mind may be free, and exert itself with great strength,
without any of the last-mentioned "power." And in the first-mentioned sense, it
indicateth nothing wherein man is a moral agent. A power or liberty with
reference to external actions only is allowed to human nature by some
gentlemen, who yet grant, that virtue and vice lie in the frame of the heart.
Liberty say they, is essential to moral agency. What liberty? External? no; for
an intelligent creature may be holy or sinful without such liberty. Internal?
no; for in respect to inward volitions and dispositions, they have not a power
to operate, but only a power to be wrought upon. (P.43.) We appeal to common
sense whether such a scheme leaves any room to ascribe liberty or agency to
mankind? Whether it does not wholly confound moral agency with mechanism? For
who ever attributed liberty or agency to the mere subject and instrument of a
foreign operation and action? As well might the saw, ax, or staff in the hands
of any man be called agents. Is this the result of a careful and strict
examination and explanation of the powers of human nature? Is it a little
peculiar, that in an essay professedly wrote on "moral agency," the subject
itself has been kept wholly out of sight?

The two first sections we have now published seem to supersede the occasion
for a particular reply to Mr. West's on moral agency and power. We refer him
there for further satisfaction. We only remark, that as there appears to us no
difference between supposing God to be the cause of sin by his action on the
creature after made, and supposing an intelligent being to be made sinful by
him at first; so, if we understand Mr. West, he means to make no difference,
but asserts both. Mr. Edwards rather chose to express himself in such manner as
leads the reader to conclude his opinion was, that God is the mediate cause of
sin; Mr. West maintains that he is the immediate cause of it. Indeed he
observes, "the whole and only difference" between an immediate and mediate
dependence is, that, in the one case, the cause -- operates through one or a
number of means -- in the other, its tendency and influence are immediately
seen, and it does not operate through any medium. It is quite unphilosophical
(not to say atheistical) to suffer any number of intervening media to obscure
the agency of that divine hand, which God is lifting up, and making visible in
all his works. P. 96.
We hence conclude, that Mr. West will not except to our reasoning, section
second, that it makes no material difference whether the Deity is supposed to
be the mediate or immediate cause of sin and moral turpitude. And when he shall
show, that God is the cause of every act of will in the creatures, should the
examiner be instrumental to continue the dispute, he would contradict his own
opinion, expressed p. 6. of the examination.

P. 140. Mr. West concedes, that what Mr. Edwards has said on the subject of
motives is liable to some of the exceptions which the examiner has taken
against it. Yet he is " humbly of opinion if" what he has offered in his own
essay were properly considered, we should not find the appearance of such
inconsistency and absurdity -- as the examiner would persuade the public -- may
be fastened upon Mr. Edwards. P. 72.
The examiner, with many others, would have been glad to have seen this
appearance of inconsistency removed. Notwithstanding the "carefulness" Mr. W.
has taken in examining and explaining the nature and influence of motives, Part
I. sect. 3.
the subject remains entangled. The word motive imports, says he, nothing
different from the real choice of the mind -- When motive is considered as
cause or antecedent, its correlative is outward action -- Motives are never to
have causal influence or efficiency attributed to them. There is also another
sense in which the word motive is used. Sometimes, says he, it is used,
neither for volition, nor the cause of volition; but merely for the external
object which does, or ought to, engage the affection, and terminate the choice.
-- Thus, the motives of the gospel mean the reasons exhibited in the gospel,
why men ought to forsake their sins, and turn unto God. Multitudes have these
reasons (motives) full in view; and yet utterly refuse and neglect to return.
As suppose motives of interest, honor, profit, extant in the mind's view at the
same time with the motives of the gospel; the former govern to the neglect and
refusal of the latter. The inferior perceived motive determines the mind's
choice to the rejection of the superior. For are motives "exhibited and full in
view," and yet not apparent to or perceived by the mind to which they are
exhibited, and in whose view they stand? If they are perceived, then how can it
be that the highest motive always determines volition? Are not those motives,
which ought to govern, highest, if full in the view? Yet multitudes utterly
neglect and refuse them. On the other hand, if they are not apparent or
perceived, then how are they exhibited to, and full in view of the mind? how
refused or neglected? Mr. West insists, that motives influence the mind only as
the mind is in actual motion in the perception of them. But if perception and
choice be the same, how then do motives influence volition? how have they a
tendency to it? Do they influence, have they a tendency, to that which is
actually effected? After volition has taken place, it is too late for their
influence and tendency. But perhaps what follows may clear up this difficulty:
Though no tendency of motives to volition is perceived and felt, otherwise than
in the actual taking place and exertion of choice; yet there is a foundation in
the nature of things, arising from some certain quality in objects, and from
the particular state, temper and complexion of the mind, for their being chosen
as soon as they shall come into the view of the mind. (The reader will remember
he had just been speaking of motives full in view, but utterly refused.) Apply
this to the evangelical motives to repentance. With respect to those whose
"state, temper and complexion of mind," antecedently correspond to these
motives, they have a tendency to lead to repentance: But with respect to those
in whom there is not this antecedent correspondence of temper, they have not
this tendency in the least. There is no foundation for a tendency in gospel
motives to engage men's choice, unless the state and temper of their minds
correspond to these motives, antecedent to the exhibition of them. Now will Mr.
West say, that there is this correspondence of temper in any unregenerate
person? We trust he will not. The consequence will then be, that that change,
which the gospel has a tendency and is designed to produce in men, must be
actually effected before it is motives are exhibited -- the end must be
accomplished before the means are applied -- sinners must forsake their sins
and turn to God, and then the gospel motives will have a tendency to lead them
to repentance; but not before. The gospel then is no tender to the
unregenerate. And if not to them, who are those "multitudes" to whom its
motives are exhibited, and who "utterly refuse and neglect" them, though "full
in their view?"

Such a notion of tendency and influence in motives is very singular. When did
any writer before Mr. West ever use the term motives in this sense? that the
thing motives are designed to engage to must be effected before the exibition
and perception of them? that motives obtain this appellation from the mind's
being in actual motion? that motives full in view are utterly neglected and
refused? We are quite content the public should judge, whether Mr. West's
attempt to reconcile Mr. Edwards with himself has removed the appearance of
inconsistency and absurdity, or has not rather confused and jumbled still more
the subject of the determination of the will by motives. In what sense the
influence of motives in moral volitions may be admitted, we have endeavored to
show Part III. sect. 2. of the examination, and section 2d. of the present
continuation thereof.

P. 24; 76, -- 79. Quotations are made in abundance from the examiner to prove
him grossly inconsistent with himself, and that he has given in ample
testimony to the truth of the doctrine he opposes. Had Mr. West properly
considered that at p. 92. he quotes the examiner as admitting, that every moral
event must have a cause, and saying, that moral agents are the causes of their
own actions, he would not, perhaps, have given himself the trouble to copy so
much from the examination. We do maintain that the subjects of moral volitions
are also the cause of their own volitions. This is a different thing from
saying, that volition is its own cause. The distinction between the terms
volition and agent is plain. Agents determine themselves; we say not that the
properties or actions of agents are self-determined -- that volition, which is
already become effect, is the cause of it is own existence. Mr. West had no
occasion to represent the examiner's doctrine in this light. And though he
supposes that an enquiry into the cause of volition belongs not to the subject
of moral agency, yet we presume enough has been said, particularly in the 5th
section, to show that it does. In the same part of Mr. West's essay, the
examiner is censured pretty severely for not allowing more weight to a
particular distinction of Mr. Edwards's, and treating it with contempt. "Upon a
review of the matter," Mr. West thinks the examiner himself will be convinced
that he has not herein done justice to Mr. Edwards.

The examiner has "reviewed the matter," and is "convinced" of no other
"injustice herein done" by him "to Mr. Edwards," than that he did not
sufficiently expose the weakness of the distinction refered to. While he asks
pardon for this omission, he hopes he has made some atonement for it by taking
the trouble to write an whole section professedly on the point. Herein he has
also answered to another exception of Mr. West's a few lines below on the same
page; (p. 83.) and in his turn must fault Mr. West for an unfair representation
of him. The reader by turning to the page in the examination, which Mr. West
refers to, will see the representation is partial.

In what Mr. West has offered, in diverse parts of his essay, in a critical
way, on the antecedent state of the mind and volition, he appears slow in
understanding the examiner, and does not represent him to such advantage as
might have been done consistently enough with sound criticism.

Part I. sect. 8. Mr. West has more professedly remarked on the examiner, and
accuses him as having injured both Mr. Edwards and the truth.

The first general accusation (for injury to Mr. Edwards) is divided into seven
distinct articles. The 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th, articles are sufficiently answered
by the six first sections the examiner has now published. For answer to the
6th article, the reader is refered to Mr. Edwards's book, possim; and to Mr.
West's essay, part I. sect. 2nd. more particularly p. 51, 52.

Art. 1st. and 7th. The examiner has condemned Mr. Edwards as being in
alliance with heathen philosophers and Atheists. Some things observed under the
former of these articles answered section VII. In this charge reference is had
to the examiner's appendix, which, it is alleged, was wrote with a design to
cast an odium on Mr. Edwards's sentiments and character -- and was an invidious
employment. The examiner is not conscious of writing from envy, or of any
design to cast an odium on the person or character of Mr. Edwards. He aimed to
treat this gentleman as a great and good man. After the expressions of esteem
for him, interspersed through the examination, the author little though it he should
be accused of writing against him from envy, or with a view to cast an odium on
his character. If a single sentence disrespectful to Mr. Edwards's person or
character is contained in the examination, upon it is being pointed out, the
examiner will retract it as inadvertently and undesignedly written. Mr. Edwards
has (not without a degree of severity) remarked on Dr. Watts's essay on
freedom. Both these gentlemen were "eminent Christian divines," the one in Old,
the other in New England. Mr. Edwards thought Dr. Watts was in an error; and so
far was he from thinking he needed an apology for writing against him, because
"he was a good divine in many respects," that he says, there is the more need,
on that account, of opposing his Arminian doctrine on freedom; as it will be
likely to have the more pernicious influence, for being taught by a divine of
his name and character. Preface p. 7.


The appendix was drawn up with a view to render certain fatalistical doctrines
odious. We observe Mr. West don't deny but the specimen of coincidence we have
exhibited in it is just. But admitting the agreement, he thinks it of no weight
to show that Mr. Edwards's doctrine is wrong; and intimates, that the examiner
should have answered and confuted the arguments both of Mr. Edwards and those [
fatalists, epicurians and atheists] with whom he coincided -- An encomium is
also passed on their "learning" -- but (prudently enough) not on their
religious character. It Is sufficient to observe, That the doctrine of the
writers with whom Mr. Edwards's sentiments were compared has, by the general
consent of Christians, been supposed false; and moreover, repeatedly confuted
by the advocates for revealed and natural religion. We did not think it worth
while, in our former publication, to enter on the enquiry, Whether the
principles of those fatalists, epicureans and atheists were the truth; but
ventured to take the opposite "principles upon trust." Mr. West may find by
looking into the preface, page 4, and part II. at the beginning, that we
proposed to consider the subject in a practical, rather than in a speculative,
metaphysical way -- that a number of principles were taken for granted. If he
really disputes any of those preliminary principles, or should directly appear
as an advocate for fatality and atheism, and there should be danger of
atheism's gaining ground in consequence of what he may publish; no doubt there
are those who will debate the subject of necessity with him, as it stands on
the footing of fatality or atheism -- or at least encourage a re-publication of
some of the irrefragable answers of those authors who have appeared in this
controversy with avowed fatalists and atheists. At present we are not willing
to think there is occasion to enter on a confutation of atheistical principles.
We should be sorry, if, in a Christian land, natural religion at least may not
be presupposed. We supposed we had to do with those who believe the bible, as
Mr. Edwards said he had. (P. 138.) If Mr. West should write another essay on
moral agency, we hope we should have no occasion to alter our opinion.

Mr. West, it seems, was sensible, that the principles extracted from those
writers, with whom we have compared. Mr. Edwards, were indeed "obnoxious and
unpopular," no less than the doctrine he himself has, advanced, or he would
not have intimated his concern, that the specimen of coincidence exhibited in
our appendix might prejudice the reader against Mr. Edwards, raise a popular
cry against him, and cast an odium on his sentiments. Mr. West remarks, what
the examiner himself had said, that he did not suppose the agreement of Mr.
Edwards's scheme with their opinion who dissented from the common belief, even
in the heathen world, proves it to be false. We were, indeed, far from
supposing that this alone proved it false. At the same time we knew, that the
doctrine of the old fatalists was as generally rejected among Christians, as
the principles of Bellarmine among protestants -- and supposed on as good
reasons. It was, therefore, thought it might be taken for granted, that Mr.
Edwards's foundation principle being shown to coincide with the fatality of the
heathen, would be sufficient with all Christians for it is being rejected: Nor
have we any scruple, but Mr. West's attempt to vindicate it will serve the good
purpose of bringing it into just abhorrence.

We are, upon the whole, by no means compelled to grant, that we have
misrepresented Mr. Edwards in any of the things laid to our charge. If we had
indeed mistook his meaning, the difficulty of apprehending him; his using words
(as he declares) out of their common acceptance; bewildering himself and his
readers with a multiplicity of refinements and subtle distinctions, and the
probability that in many places he had no determinate ideas, would be some
apology. It has not, however, been in any measure shown, that we have been
guilty of misrepresentation.

N. B. On Mr. West's admonition, (p. 152.) we have reviewed part IV. sect. 6.
of Mr. Edwards's enquiry, and find it no answer to the objection; but are
rather confirmed in the opinion, that he chose to "evade a direct answer."

The other part of the accusation against the examiner is, that he has injured
the truth.

Mr. West justly remarks, that Mr. Edwards's character is but of small
importance compared to that of the cause of truth. Preface, p. 8.
As the examiner hopes it does not appear that he has done any injustice to
the former, so he presumes he is clear in regard to the latter -- Though he
pretends not that he is wholly free from error, yet Mr. West has not convinced
him of publishing any thing injurious to truth. The main thing in which it is
alleged that he has injured the truth is, his asserting a power of
self-determination in moral agents. In what sense the examiner asserts such a
power, with the evidence in support of it, the reader may see, if he will take
the trouble to look over Part III. sect. 1. of the examination, and sect. I.
and II. of the present continuation of it.

Mr. West represents it as the examiner's real sentiment, -- that unregenerate
sinners have as full power, to all intents and purposes, to do every thing that
is really required of them -- as the regenerate have; or even the angels of God
in heaven. P. 162.
In proof of this, he has made two quotations from p. 116, of the examination,
leaving out some intermediate words, which, had he quoted, the reader would
have seen, that the abovementioned is as far from being the author's real
sentiment as the most obnoxious in Mr. West's essay. The first quotation is in
the following words: We deny that any are commanded, invited, exhorted, etc. to
exert powers and faculties they are not possessed of; to act from principles
they are not endowed with. Here the quotation stops. Justice to himself
obliges the examiner to re-publish what intervenes this and the other
quotation -- to use means out of their power. Such faculties, principles,
powers and affections as they are possessed of, such means as are within their
power, are the only ones they can be required to act from and improve:
Arguments laid before wicked men are adapted to operate on their reason and
moral discernment; on the principle of ingenuity and gratitude; on their hope,
fear, joy, sorrow, and the various movements of the mind. Had Mr. West produced
these intermediate words, his readers would have seen, that the terms "powers
and faculties" in his quotation mean "reason and moral discernment" -- that by
the word "principles" the examiner meant such principles as these ingenuity,
gratitude, hope, fear, joy, sorrow, etc. Now are not the unregenerate
"possessed" of the powers and faculties spoken of? Are not "reason and moral
discernment" essential to moral agency? Are those who are not possessed of such
powers and faculties commanded, invited, exhorted to exert them? And are not
the unregenerate "endowed with" the natural principles of affections "of
ingenuity, gratitude, hope, fear," etc? Or are those who are not endowed with
such principles and affectinos "commanded, invited, exhorted, etc. to act from"
them? Is the moral faculty necessary to moral agency? Does God "command, invite
or exhort" to natural impossibilities? -- that men use means they have not? The
answer to these questions will show whether the examiner has injured the
truth, or been injured by his remarker. Nothing could be farther from the
examiner's real sentiment or intention than to assert, that man's moral power
in unregeneracy is equal to all his necessities, or to his whole duty. Nothing
would be more contrary to, than what Mr. West represents to be in fact and
reality, his opinion, viz. that the unregenerate are not commanded, invited,
exhorted to exert or act from any other moral principles, affections and
dispositions than they are endowed with. He would further fasten this sentiment
on the examiner by his other quotation refered to above, and which immediately
follows the intervening sentences already quoted. This other quotation is a
dismembered part of a sentence in the words following. Nor can it be proposed
that the unregenerate should act from the highest spiritual principles -- here
Mr. West's quotation stops, which should have been continued, (instead of a
period, with a comma only, after the word principles) thus: but from such as
they are capable of being influenced by as reasonable beings, possessed of a
moral faculty, and subjects of moral government, etc. In some preceding pages,
the examiner had been speaking of the means of grace used with unregenerate men
in order to their conversion. Now to "propose" any thing as a medium of
conversion, which would imply that the thing itself has taken place, the
examiner supposed, and still believes, to be absurd. But to propose to the
unregenerate to act from, the highest spiritual principles, as a medium of
regeneracy, would be to suppose regeneracy had already taken place. Therefore,
in this view, it cannot be proposed that the unregenerate should act from the
highest spiritual principles. For by the very supposition, the intervention of
the proposed medium is superseded. The examiner cannot see wherein the argument
fails, or is injurious to truth. The whole paragraph, together with the
connection it stands in, clearly shows the examiner's design and meaning to
have been as now explained. That it is the duty of the unregenerate to forsake
their sins -- that they have no excuse for making any delay in turning to God
-- that they are obliged to love him with all their heart -- and consequently
to act from moral and spiritual principles they are not possessed of, or
endowed with, the examiner fully believes, nor has he ever denied. If it was
not with design, but wholly for want of understanding what the opinion and real
sentiment of the examiner is, that Mr. West has so grossly "misrepresented"
him, he can easily forgive this wrong: But it is not so easy to see how Mr.
West can forgive himself, if he has thus "perverted" the examiner's meaning,
and wrested his words from their plain and obvious import, designedly, by
forced and unnatural construction -- having no other end in view than to raise
the popular cry against him, and cast an odium upon his sentiments and
character. Preface p. 9. Essay p. 106; 130.
-- The examiner does not charge Mr. West with the last mentioned view and
design. He hopes better things. But as Mr. West himself is the best judge of
his own views and designs; so he cannot think it amiss that the examiner has
taken occasion to mention this thing, refering the decision of it to his own
mind -- For the examiner claims no warrant to judge another man's servant. He
thinks much injustice is done to his sentiments by Mr. West's representation of
them in various parts of his essay; but more especially P. 76, -- 79; 104; 160,
-- 167. He is willing to hope that this misrepresentation was not invidious.
Possibly the examiner did not express his sentiments clearly. He has now in
his first section touched the subject of means again, and, it may be, said some
things that may serve to elucidate his sentiments. Though as this point does
not directly fall within his design, he has not enlarged upon it. Perhaps Mr.
West's real sentiment is, that there is no medium of regeneration -- that the
gospel is not a means of illumination and conversion. For he has intimated that
gospel motives are no motives except to those whose temper and state of mind
correspond to them antecedent to the exhibition or perception of them: Which
sentiment, however, remains to be reconciled with his other assertion, that
gospel motives full in view are utterly neglected and refused by multitudes.
The examiner is willing, upon the whole, that what is offered on the subject of
means, p. 111, -- 116. of the examination should stand as it does. -- And the
rather as he has Mr. Edwards's concurrence with him in the principal things
meant to be there asserted. We shall insert in this place some pertinent
passages from Mr. Edwards's sermon on pressing into the Kingdom of God. What he
offers, in the following quotations, it will be observed, respects those who at
present are in a natural condition; who, he says, may have strong desires to
get out of it, and to get an interest in Christ -- To obtain salvation is
desired by them above all things in the world -- when they come to answer the
expression of pressing into the kingdom of God, this concern -- in a manner
engrosseth the care of the mind -- It further "denotes earnestness and firmness
of resolution -- as it was in the psalmist, One thing have I desired, and that
will I seek after. There must be a sense of the great importance and necessity
of the mercy to be sought, and there must also be a sense of opportunity to
obtain it, or the encouragement there is to seek it -- The firmness of
resolution lies in the fullness of the disposition of the heart to do what is
resolved to be done. Those that are pressing into the kingdom of God have a
disposition of heart to do every thing that is required, and that lies in their
power to do, and to continue in it -- it is the constant bent of the soul, if
possible, to obtain the kingdom of God. It signifies," moreover, "greatness of
endeavor. It Is expressed Eccl. 9.10. by doing with our might what our hand
finds to do -- Where there it strength of desire, and firmness of resolution,
there will be answerable endeavors: Persons thus engaged in their hearts will
strive to enter in at the strait gate, and will be violent for heaven; their
practice will be agreeable to the counsel of the wise man, in Prove. ii. at the
beginning. See P. 135, 136.

P. 137. Pressing. etc. denotes an engagedness and earnestness that is DIRECTLY
about that business of getting into the kingdom of God -- P. 138. Then are
persons in the most likely way to obtain the kingdom of heaven, when the intent
of their minds, and the engagedness of their spirits, is about their proper
work and business, and all the bent of their souls is to attend on God's means,
and to do what he commands and directs them to."

Further: "By pressing, etc. is denoted a breaking through opposition and
difficulties -- They that are pressing -- are so set for salvation that those
things by which others are discouraged, and stopped, and turned back, don't stop
them, but they press through them -- P. 139. Those things that, before he was
thoroughly roused from his security, he used to stick at, and was wont to have
long parlyings and disputings with his own conscience about, and set carnal
reason to work to invent arguments and pleas to excuse himself from, he now
sticks at no longer; he has done with this endless disputing and reasoning, and
presses violently through all difficulties; let what will be in the way, heaven
is what he must, and will obtain, not if he can without difficulty, but if it
be possible.

P 142. Such a manner of speaking is needful to prepare persons for the kingdom
of God -- the ordinary means God makes use of, to bring persons to an
acquaintance with themselves, to a sight of their own hearts, to a sense of
their own helplessness, and to a despair in their own strength and
righteousness."

P. 143. "Objection 1. Some may be ready to say, We cannot do this of
ourselves, etc.

Ans. 1. Though earnestness of mind be not immediately in your power; yet the
consideration of what has been said of the need of it, may be a means or
stiring you up to it. It Is true, persons never will be thoroughly engaged in
this business, unless it be by God's influence: but God influences persons by
means -- P. 144. It persons can but be made sensible of the necessity of
salvation, and also do fully consider the exceeding difficulty of it, and the
greatness of the opposition, and how short and uncertain the time is; but yet
are sensible that they have an opportunity, and that there is a possibility of
their obtaining, they will need no more in order to their being thoroughly
engaged and resolved in this matter.

P. 144. 2ly. Though strong desires and resolutions of mind be not in your
power, yet painfulness of endeavors is in your power. It Is in your power to
take pains in the use of means; yea, very great pains. You can be very painful
and diligent in watching your own heart, and striving against sin; though there
is all manner of corruption in the heart, that is continually ready to work,
yet you can very laboriously watch and strive against these corruptions; and
it is in your power, with great diligence to attend the matter of your duty
toward God, and toward your neighbor. It Is in your power to attend all
ordinances, and all public and private duties of religion, and to do it with
your might.

P. 145. Earnestness of mind, and diligence of endeavor, tend to promote each
other: He that has an heart earnestly engaged, will take pains; and he that is
diligent and painful in all duty, probably will not be so long, before he finds
the sensibleness of his heart, and earnestness of his spirit greatly increased."

How far these things comport with what Mr. Edwards has offered in his book on
the will, those may judge who will be at the trouble to make the comparison.
See particularly part III. sect. 5.




P. 140; 167. of the essay, and p. 8. of the preface, the reader will find that
Mr. West has allowed a small share of merit to the examiner's performance.
This would have been accepted with much thankfulness; but the examiner is
denied the satisfaction of receiving or acknowledging the favor, by what is
immediately added in those places -- and by his being charged elsewhere with
palpably mistaking Mr. Edwards -- (p. 146.) with disingenuity and unfairness,
injustice, want of candor -- no lover of truth, nor an "honest enquirer after
it" -- writing from "envy, to cast an odium, and raise a popular cry" --
condemned as a libertine, heretic, etc. P. 31; 83; 128. and section 8. part I.
These are heavy charges; such as the examiner would be sorry to deserve --
such as no man should allow himself to bring against another but or the
clearest evidence. The gospel of Christ instructs its professors, and
especially its ministers, in a more excellent way.

"To re-criminate is just." Mr. West has furnished abundant occasion. But the
examiner had rather the public would take this business on them, than perform
it himself.

Mr. West frequently faults the examiner for not particularly replying to some
peculiar arguments of Mr. Edwards's. The answer is, We do not think ourselves
obliged to follow a metaphysician close through all the mazes of error. We fear
the public will think that more than attention enough has been already given
to metaphysical subtilties. If the reader's patience has held out thus far, we
are very thankful, and are loath to trespass on it any further.

Mr. West has pretermitted many material difficulties the examiner had noticed
in Mr. Edwards's scheme. The whole first part of the examination is unnoticed,
and implicitly confirmed, by him. Nor is the least notice taken of section 3d.
part III. where the examiner attempts to show, that if Mr. Edwards's scheme be
true in speculation, it is not applicable to practice. But very few things in
the other parts of the examination are remarked upon, and most of those that
are, much misrepresented. If it would not be too touch vanity, the examiner
would construe Mr. West's pretermission of some things as a tacit approbation
of them. But he calls to mind, that a vindication of Mr. Edwards was not so
particularly in Mr. West's "view." And wherein he has misunderstood or
misrepresented the examiner, the latter might be so unhappy as not to express
his sentiments with precision and perspicuity. It was far from any slight of
the examiner's performance, that Mr. West omitted to remark on the greater and
principal part of it. He has admitted the examiner's chief objection to Mr.
Edwards's book, which is more generous than was even expected.

The objection refered to is, that Mr. Edwards's doctrine makes God the cause
of sin. This Mr. West admits, and sets himself to prove that there is no weight
in it. The examiner was fully persuaded that this was the clear consequence of
Mr. Edwards's doctrine, and imagined that whenever it was made to appear, the
advocates for the doctrine among Christians would immediately renounce it. He
little expected that the consequence would be adopted as a principle, and an
attempt made to defend it, by any one of Mr. Edwards's friends. He has the
satisfaction to find, that many worthy gentlemen, who have thought favorably
of Mr. Edwards's book, express much disapprobation of Mr. West's performance.
Nor is the examiner without hopes, that what Mr. West has wrote may answer the
good end of bringing into just discredit the doctrine for which he has
appeared as an advocate.

Moral and Christian writers hitherto have chosen to say, that God permits or
suffers moral evil. But, says Mr. West, in my humble opinion, these terms have
been improperly used. We have no occasion for these softening, lenient, gentle,
timid, insignificant terms, in order to relieve our imaginations -- it implying
no inconsistency to suppose, that God, either mediately or immediately, by his
CREATIVE will and agency causes the existence of sin. Hence he supposes that
the scripture expressions, I will harden Pharaoh's heart, The Lord hardened the
heart of Pharaoh, "represent God's ACTUALLY EFFECTING THIS HARDNESS, BY HIS OWN
POSITIVE AGENCY." So exceeding peremptory is he in this opinion, that to put
any other construction on these expressions, is to subtilize and perfectly
interpret them away -- God has the same right to MAKE some of mankind holy,
and others sinful, as the potter has power over the clay to form one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor. In any other way of "analyzing the word
of God," he thinks, we must forever despair of determining any doctrine by it
-- and tells us, that the apostle Paul is full in this doctrine of DIVINE
EFFICIENCY in moral evil -- which, however disgustful and unpopular in our day,
we hope, says he, the time will come when the scriptures shall be understood in
their true simplicity, beauty and perspicuity; and the spirit of God be so
plentifully poured out, that the passions and corruptions of men shall not be
irritated by plain evangelical truth. P. 241, -- 247.
In his "humble opinion," it is a matter clear and important, that "we are
compelled to resolve all" the moral evil that takes place in the world into the
constant divine agency and operation as CAUSE of the existence of moral evil as
its EFFECT -- the only thing that has PRODUCTIVE INFLUENCE and EFFICIENCY"
therein. P. 66; 131; 241.


Here the reader has a general view of Mr. West's scheme, and some specimen of
the spirit with which he wrote. Similar instances of positiveness, assurance
and uncharitablenss are interspersed through the whole of his essay, and may be
seen, by those who desire it, in the three first pages of his preface -- also
p. 31; 75; 88; 128; 140: 172; 217, 218; 253, and sundry other places. Here
those who cannot believe with him, that God is the efficient cause of all the
wickedness of men and devils, are represented as men of corrupt minds --
destitute of the spirit of God -- irritated with plain evangelical truth -- of
a proud and haughty spirit, spurning at the thought of a dependence on the
sovereign of the universe -- opposers of the free, sovereign and glorious grace
of God -- objecting to the most important doctrines of revelation -- devising
subtle methods to stifle the upbraidings of conscience -- having a design to
eradicate from their own minds, and those of others, all principles of
religion. This is to be challenged in a high tone; (p. 127.) and ill comports
with some professions of modesty and dissidence in the preface to his
performance -- with his frequently bespeaking the public candor to a "new and
obnoxious doctrine advanced" by him -- with the assurances (as an encouragement
to follow him in "an unbeaten path") that he would not be "positive" -- that
his "fears and apprehensions had been great least he should reproach" his maker
-- with his further requesting the public to be even lavish of their candor,
and not construe any air of peremptoriness as intended to express the
confidence he had in his own sentiments, but as meant to give the argument its
greatest advantage.

They who desire candor must be candid. Peremptoriness rather manifests a
writer's "confidence" than helps his "argument." It seldom fails to excite
disgust. It is especially offensive in "a young writer" -- Most of all when
writing against "the reigning sentiments" -- writing on a subject too, which
"has engaged the attention, and employed the pens, of the greatest geniuses,
in all ages," while yet none of them (among the friends of religion) ever had
the assurance to advance and defend this principle, that all the wickedness in
the world proceeds from the creating will and efficiency of God. Well might Mr.
West call his doctrine "new, disgustful and unpopular." And was no more respect
due to the public, whose candor was asked! No more to the republic of letters
in particular! No more to wise and good men of all denominations! Could he
expect, that his speaking of himself as "an inexperienced writer" would atone
for the aspersion cast on all who do not embrace this new and strange doctrine,
as enemies to the sovereignty and grace of God? -- destitute of religion and
conscience? If there be a God and moral governor, may we not take this one
"principle upon trust," that he is not the cause of sin?

The point in which all Mr. West's arguments meet -- which he takes for granted
through the first part of his essay, and sets himself to defend in the second,
is, the divine agency and efficiency in sin. Mr. Edwards would not admit this
was a consequence from his doctrine. And many may be ready to think, that, in
representing Mr. Edwards in this light, Mr. West has done greater injustice to
that (...) divine, than any he charge the examiner with. In truth, when Mr.
West saw that Mr. Edwards's scheme concluded in this, he ought at once to have
renounced a doctrine so reproachful to his maker. LET GOD BE TRUE, AND EVERY
MAN A LIAR. A direct denial of the God that is above would not be a greater
grief and offense to most intelligent and serious Christians, than this
doctrine of his causality in moral evil. They esteem the assertion blasphemous.
Mr. West, doubtless, views the matter in a very different light. But is it not
astonishing that any discerning, serious person should assert peremptorily, and
with great uncharitableness too toward those who differ from him, what is
asserted, and often repeated, in his essay! Had he been humble and modest,
would he not have been more fearful least he should publish things inconsistent
with divine moral rectitude? In the leading sentiment of his essay, we have no
other controversy with him than all the Christians in the world have -- no
other than all sober, consistent theists have.

The Christian's bible instructs him, that the new man is God's creation: But
he never learnt from it, that the old man, with his deeds, is so. It instructs
him, that the son of God was manifested to destroy the works of the devil; not
that he came to destroy the works of GOD -- or that the works of the devil are
the product of divine agency. It instructs him, that Jesus the son of God came
to save his people from their sins; not that his design was to save them from
the effects of the divine influence and operation upon them. His bible
instructs the Christian, that it is God who works in us to will and to do
that which is good; not that he works in us to will and to do that which is
sinful and contrary to his holy nature and law. The latter is expressly
ascribed to the spirit which is in the world, in contradistinction from the
spirit which is in good men. (The spirit that works in the children of
disobedience is not, however, the proper efficient of their wickedness, he only
solliciteth them to it. For every man is then tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed.) The Christian learns from his bible, that God
cannot be tempted with evil, and that he tempts no man; not that every act of
sin is to be resolved into his productive influence.

WE may suppose a reader of Mr. West's essay, to address him thus: I admit,
sir, your position of the divine agency or efficiency in sin. You have clearly
established it. But I deny that that being, whom you make the only cause of
moral evil, is holy, just and good. I demand a proof of his moral perfections,
on your principles. My bible, indeed, tells me, that God is holy, and commands
me to be holy for this reason. But I deny the principle laid down. It should
have been, I the Lord your God am unholy; and then the injunction would have
stood thus, Be ye also unholy. If I reason wrong, pray set me right -- and as
you have made me a proselyte to your hypothesis, show me, if possible, that God
is holy, notwithstanding his supposed efficiency in sin. The fatality of the
heathen is really less abhorrent than Mr. West's opinion of the divine
efficiency in moral evil. They "fancied that Jupiter, and all the gods, were
obliged to submit to fate, which was to be controuled by no power whatever. The
Stoics supposed that the untractableness of matter was the cause of evil; that
God would have made all things perfect, but an evil bias in matter, repugnant
to his benevolence," prevented, "whence arose all manner of evil." This has
some appearance of respect to the divine moral character: But Mr. West's
opinion robs the deity of this character, even in appearance, as well as in
reality. When such things are published as "plain, important, evangelical
truths," what shall we say? Does the publisher really desire to have the
foundations, even of natural religion, laid again? Were an avowed ATHEIST to
assert them, we should tell him he belied the perceptions and operations of his
own mind, as well as those of all mankind.

There appears the same "air of peremptoriness" in what Mr. West has wrote on
divine foreknowledge. The two first pages of his preface manifest this. We only
observe, that he represents those who profess to believe divine prescience and
human liberty, and still suppose that an human intellect cannot reconcile them
together, as maintaining that they are irreconcilable and inconsistent with
each other. Let an instance be produced in support of this. We know not a
single writer who maintains that prescience and liberty are inconsistent,
professing at the same time a full belief of both. There is a plain difference
between a person's saying that he cannot reconcile them, yea, that no human
understanding can; and saying, they are absolutely irreconcilable and
inconsistent. If Mr. West does not discern a difference, he may possibly find
that wiser men do, if he will be at the trouble to turn to the section on
foreknowledge -- to which we also refer him, together with the 4th. 5th. 8th.
and 9th. sections, for the necessary observations on the merits of his opinion
concerning the divine agency in moral evil.

P. 103, 104. he says, that the examiner's scheme "confessedly" involved this
difficulty, that prescience cannot be reconciled with liberty --
(distinguishing this word by a different type, as we have done.) If the
examiner has confessed this -- or if it can, by plain implication, be shown to
be contained in any thing he has published, he will immediately retract it, as
contrary to his own principles and common sense. Mr. West best knows whether he
designedly misunderstood or perverted the examiner's "meaning." But after
having represented him to the public as confessing what cannot be fixed upon
him by implication, Mr. West should not have taken occasion to triumph over him
as chargeable with the most palpable "impropriety," and incapable of being
impressed with a sense of it. This is somewhat extraordinary. Mr. West will
deserve pity, if this intimation does not make "a deeper impression on his
mind," than what he has wrote in the pages last refered to has made on the
examiner -- and an impression of a quite different kind. By turning to the
place, the reader may at once judge, whether the examiner's words contain the
confession ascribed to him.

In reply to Mr. West's hypothesis, part II. sect, 1, 2; 4. respecting the
desirableness of moral evil, and its being a necessary means of effecting the
greatest good, we refer him to the sixth section we have now published. He
will, perhaps, find it a difficult task to prove, that an holy God creates
vicious dispositions in multitudes, that they may be fit objects of eternal
punishment, as a means of manifesting his glorious name, in their perdition, to
a few vessels of mercy: In other words, that the wickedness and punishment of
infernals is what secures the holiness and happiness of saints and angels; and
that with this view God effects their wickedness, that he may inflict their
punishment. What warrant has Mr. West, or any man, to say, that* had not moral
evil existed, the governor of the world could not have exhibited his hatred of
sin, his love of holiness, his goodness and authority illustriously in other
ways? Has the authority and dominion of Jehovah its foundation or security in
sin?

Mr. West has undertaken to make a comparison between a system without sin,
and one with it. Can he then clearly discern what would have been, had sin
never entered the world? in a system in which universal holiness should prevail?
If he does not suppose he can, why does he make his comparison, when he had
just before acknowledged, that where the objects between which a comparison is
to be made are not both in view, we cannot judge of them by way of comparison?
(P. 173.) Are the things he has said on the preferableness and desireableness
of moral evil "certainly manifest and self-evident truths?" P. 195.
And must it argue "prejudice, sourness and bitterness" to reject them? How
came Mr. West by his decisive knowledge in these high matters! WHO is
prejudiced, sour, and bitter! Preface p. 6, 7.


The grand pillars of Mr. Edwards's doctrine stand firm and unshaken, in Mr.
West's opinions Pref. p. 8, 9.
notwithstanding what the examiner before published. If the doctrine really
terminates in the leading sentiment of Mr. West's essay, let the intelligent
judge whether its grand pillars stand strong. In truth, the examiner thinks,
that what Mr. West has wrote has shaken them more than his own examination of
the doctrine. It seems to be now conceded, that Mr. Edwards's scheme makes God
the efficient cause of sin. If this be his doctrine, few sensible, serious
persons will think there is occasion to proceed any further. It was the
foundation which was proposed to be examined. Let reason and religion say,
whether this be not subverted, if it has no other bottom than a supposed
divine causality in moral evil. If we may not be confident in the contrary
sentiment, we may not be of any thing. We cannot determine any doctrine by the
bible, on this hypothesis. For if God may be the cause of wickedness, he may
deceive us. How then can we have any dependence on his word?

Though Mr. West could not " justly expect" a particular "answer to" his own
"reasonings," P. 254.
considering the nature and spirit of his performance; yet he may possibly
find, either in the proceeding strictures, or in the continuation of the
examination, that most of the things he has offered in a way of argument have
had some attention paid them -- at least the most material. Personal things
have had very little notice: They ought not to have been introduced into the
debate. The examiner trusts the public will think he has sufficiently
vindicated himself from some exceptions and misrepresentations of Mr. West's;
and, if he has "in any thing corrected him," Pref. to essay, p. 9.
that it has been done without reviling: For he would not be found beating his
fellow servants. Many things, which appeared to be exceptionable, have been
passed unnoticed; since they all meet in one capital error.

But after boldly advancing this doctrine, that all manner of sin and blasphemy
is the effect of God's action on the creature, may we not well marvel to find
him (in testimony of his zeal and valor for the truth) bringing an accusation
against those who disbelieve it, as seting themselves against the doctrines of
Calvinism and of grace -- pluming himself on the supposition of his being an
advocate for these doctrines! Do Calvinists deny original righteousness? Do
they say, that the present impotency of mankind is not the penal consequence of
the fall as its source, and is only moral, not natural? Do Calvinists assert
the divine efficiency in sin? Let the intelligent judge whether Mr. West is a
Calvinist. The question, however, is not, what is Calvinism? but, what is
truth? What says the scripture? As to the doctrines of grace, protestant
divines have generally accounted them such as these -- The atonement of the
mediator; justification by faith in it; the efficacy of repentance to procure
pardon through the redemption in Christ Jesus; the promise of divine aids, of
peace with God, and of eternal life, through the same mediator. If by the
doctrines of grace Mr. West means any thing contrary to these, let him explain
himself.

We cannot conclude without renewed expressions of our astonishment, that a
gentleman who is set for the defense of the gospel, (and we presume really
believes it) should publish so glaring a perversion of it, (as many things
contained in the essay evidently are) instead of manifesting the truth as it is
in Jesus. It reminds us of St. Paul's address to the Galatians, Who has
bewitched you! If this be not to preach another gospel, it is difficult to say
what is. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: Which words,
while expessive of the duty of a gospel minister, are a caution to him to take
heed to his doctrine, that he be not instrumental in corrupting men's minds from
the simplicity that is in Christ -- To take heed, lest happily he be found TO
FIGHT AGAINST GOD. It Is a cheap sacrifice to give up any hypothesis to the
honor of THE TRUTH AS IT IS IN JESUS; But a dreadful thing to CORRUPT THE WORD
OF GOD.

Those who are employed to spread the savor of the REDEEMER'S name, and to
address mankind in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ; whose
incumbent Duty it is to use great plainness of speech; should account a
reputation for skill in metaphysical disquisitions unworthy their emulation.

Mr. West's scheme, on bare proposal, strikes an intelligent and devout mind
with horror. It carries its own refutation. It is a palpable reproach to God,
and repugnant to every just idea of religion. No supposeable consequences can
be more shocking than the naked doctrine itself; on the footing of which there
is no moral agency and accountableness, no moral governor, no righteous
judgment. He ought to be withstood to the face, as one who has spoken wickedly
for God -- (though we trust from prejudice and misapprehension, not from wilful
enmity to the truth.) We mean not to accuse him of any designed perversion of
the doctrines of revelation. We wish he may see his error, as we are persuaded
it is very great. Should he be convinced of it, we doubt not but he will be
ingenuous enough to acknowledge it, in honor both to himself and the truth.

When impious tenets are publicly advanced, a vindication of the divine
character forbids us to be unconcerned. If any things we have said toward the
close of these strictures should have the appearance of severity, that severity
has not the person, but the opinions of our author for its object -- opinions
to which too strong a dislike cannot be expressed -- We have, at the same time,
aimed to keep in mind the apostolic advice, In meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves.

We can heartily join in committing the cause to him who judges righteous
judgment.

CORRECTIONS.
Page line from read 7 1 top replete -- 3 top reduce 12 12 top them 34 15
bottom; [after things] 39 Margin 14 bottom object 43 Margin, last line,. [after
them] 51 8 bottom proceed 54 8 top consequence 57 5 top ever 66 24 top the
creature 69 ^5 bottom portion 75 7 top lies 77 7 bottom on this supposition 81
Margin 4 top, [after providence] 83 15 bottom peremptory -- 14 -- his
controversy 97 12 top could (...) 101 7 bottom those 103 Margin 2 bottom --
[after cause] 109 3 bottom [ dele Origin, after Clemens] 125 12 top effected
128 11 bottom -- [after with] -- 8 -- points 136 13 bottom possesses -- 10 --
[ dele the before human] 153 11 top affections 156 Margin 18 bottom seeking

Besides some lesser slips, especially in the pointing.


