COPY OF LETTERS Sent to Great Britain, by his Excellency Thomas Hutchinson,
the Hon. Andrew Oliver, and several other Persons, BORN AND EDUCATED AMONG US.

Which original Letters have been returned to America, and laid before the
honorble House of Representatives of this Province.

In which ( notwithstanding his Excellency's Declaration to the House, that the
Tendency and Design of them was not to subvert the Constitution, but rather to
preserve it entire) the judicious Reader will discover the fatal Source of the
Confusion and Bloodshed in which this Province especially has been involved,
and which threatened total Destruction to the Liberties of all America.

BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street; 1773.

Letters, etc.
Boston, 18 th June, 1768. SIR,
AS you allow me the honor of your correspondence, I may not omit acquainting
you with so remarkable an event as the withdraw of the commissioners of the
customs and most of the other officers under them from the town on board the
Romney, with an intent to remote from thence to the castle.

In the evening of the 10th a sloop belonging to Mr. Hancock, a representative
for Boston, and a wealthy merchant, of great influence over the populace, was
seized by the collector and comptroller for a very notorious breach of the acts
of trade, and, after seizure, taken into custody by the officer of the Romney
man of war, and removed under command of her guns. It is pretended that the
removal and not the seizure incensed the people. It seems not very material
which it was -- A mob was immediately raised, the officers insulted, bruised
and much hurt, and the windows of some of their houses broke; a boat belonging
to the collector burnt in triumph, and many threats uttered against the
commissioners and their officers: no notice being taken of their extravagance
in the time of it, nor any endeavors by any authority except the governor, the
next day to discover and punish the offenders; and there being a rumor of a
higher mob intended monday (the 13th) in the evening the commissioners, four of
them, thought themselves altogether unsafe, being destitute of protection, and
removed with their families to the Romney, and there remain and hold their
board, and next week intend to do the same, and also open the custom-house at
the castle. The governor pressed the council to assist him with their advice,
but they declined and evaded calling it a brush or small disturbance by boys
and negroes, not considering how much it must be resented in England that the
officers of the crown should think themselves obliged to quit the place of
their residence and go on board a King's ship for safety, and all the internal
authority of the province take no notice, of it -- The town of Boston have had
repeated meetings, and by their votes declared the commissioners and their
officers a great grievance, and yesterday instructed their representatives to
endeavor that enquiry should be made by the assembly whether any person by
writing or in any other way had encouraged the sending troops here, there being
some alarming reports that troops are expected, but have not taken any measures
to discountenance the promoters of the late proceedings; but on the contrary
appointed one or more of the actors or abettors on a committee appointed to
wait on the governor, and to desire him to order the man of war out of the
harbor.

Ignorant as they be, yet the heads of a Boston town-meeting influences all
public measures.

It is not possible this anarchy should last always. Mr. Hallowell who will be
the bearer of this tells me he has the honor of being personally known to you.
I beg leave to refer you to him for a more full account.

I am with great esteem, Sir, your most humble and obedient servant, THO.
HUTCHINSON.

Boston, August 1768. SIR,
IT is very necessary other information should be had in England of the present
state of the commissioners of the customs than what common fame will bring to
you or what you will receive from most of the letters which go from hence,
people in general being prejudiced by many false reports and misrepresentations
concerning them. Seven eighths of the people of the country suppose the board
itself to be unconstitutional and cannot be undeceived and brought to believe
that a board has existed in England all this century, and that the board
established here has no new powers given to it. Our incendiaries know it but
they industriously and very wickedly publish the contrary. As much pains has
been taken in prejudice the country against the persons of the commissioners
and their characters have been misrepresented and cruelly treated especially
since their confinement at the castle where they are not so likely to hear what
is said of them and are not so able to confute it.

It is now pretended they need not to have withdrawn, that Mr. Williams had
stood his ground without any injury although the mob beset his house, etc.
There never was that spirit raised against the under officers as against the
commissioners, I mean four of them. They had a public affront offered them, by
the town of Boston who refused to give the use of their hall for a public
dinner unless it was stipulated that the commissioners should not be invited.
An affront of the same nature at the motion of Mr. Hancock was offered by a
company of cadets. Soon after a vessel of Mr. Hancock's being seized the
officers were mobb'd and the commissioners were informed they were threatened. I
own I was in pain for them. I do not believe if the mob had seized them, there
was any authority able and willing to have rescued them. After they had
withdrawn the town signified to the governor by a message that it was expected
or desired they should not returp. It was then the general voice that it would
not be safe for them to return. After all this the sons of liberty say they
deserted or abdicated.

The other officers of the customs in general either did not leave the town or
soon returned to it. Some of them seem to be discontented with the
commissioners. Great pains have been taken to increase the discontent. Their
office by these means is rendered extremely burdensome. Every thing they do is
found fault with, and yet no particular illegality or even irregularity
mentioned. There is too much hauteur some of their officers say in the
treatment they receive. They say they treat their officers as the commissioners
treat their officers in England and require no greater deference. After all it
is not the persons but the office of the commissioners which has raised this
spirit, and the distinction made between the commissioners is because it has
been given out that four of them were in favor of the new establishment and the
fifth was not. If Mr. Hallowell arrived safe he can inform you many
circumstances relative to this distinction which I very willingly excuse myself
from mentioning.

I know of no burden brought upon the fair trader by the new establishment. The
illicit trader finds the risque greater than it used to be, especially in the
port where the board is constantly held. Another circumstance which increases
the prejudice is this; the new duties happened to take place just about the
time the commissioners arrived. People have absurdly connected the duties and
board of commissioners, and suppose we should have had no additional duties if
there had been no board to have the charge of collecting them. With all the aid
you can give to the officers of the crown they will have enough to do to
maintain the authority of government and to carry the laws into execution. If
they are discountenanced, neglected or fail of support from you, they must
submit to every thing the present opposers of government think fit to require
of them.

There is no office under greater discouragements than that of the
commissioners. Some of my friends recommended me to the ministry. I think
myself very happy that I am not one. Indeed it would have been incompatible
with my post as chief justice, and I must have declined it, and I should do it
although no greater salary had been affixed to the chief justices place than
the small pittance allowed by the province.

From my acquaintance with the commissioners I have received a personal esteem
for them, but my chief inducement to make this representation to you is a
regard to the public interest which I am sure will suffer if the opposition
carry their point against them.

I am with very great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble servant, THO.
HUTCHINSON.
August 10. Yesterstay at a meeting of the merchants it was agreed by all
present to give no more orders for goods from England, nor receive any on
commission until the late acts are repealed. And it is said all except sixteen
in the town have subscribed an engagement of that tenor. I hope the
subscription will he printed that I may transmit it to you.



Boston, 4 th October 1768. DEAR SIR,
I WAS absent upon one of our circuits when Mr. Byles arrived. Since my return
I have received from him your obliging letter of 31st July. I never dared to
think what the resentment of the nation would be upon Hallowell's arrival. It
is not strange that measures should be immediately taken to reduce the colonies
to their former state of government and order, but that the national funds
should be affected by it is to me a little mysterious and surprising.
Principles of government absurd enough spread through all the colonies; but I
cannot think that in any colony, people of any consideration have ever been so
mad as to think of a revolt. Many of the common people have been in a frenzy,
and talked of dying in defense of their liberties, and have spoke and printed
what is highly criminal, and too many of rank above the vulgar, and some in
public posts have countenanced and encouraged them until they increased so
much in their numbers and in their opinion of their importance as to submit to
government no further than they thought proper. The legislative powers have
been influenced by them, and the executive powers entirely lost their force.
There has been continual danger of mobs and insurrections, but they would have
spent all their force within ourselves, the officers of the Crown and some of
the few friends who dared to stand by them possibly might have been knocked in
the head, and some such fatal event would probably have brought the people to
their senses. For four or five weeks past the distemper has been growing, and I
confess I have not been without some apprehensions for myself, but my friends
have had more for me, and I have had repeated and frequent notices from them
from different quarters, one of the last I will enclose to you. See the
following Letter.
In this state of things there was no security but quitting my posts, which
nothing but the last extremity would justify. As chief justice for two years
after our first disorders I kept the grand juries tollerably well to their
duty. The last spring there had been several riots, and a most infamous libel
had been published in one of the papers, which I enlarged upon, and the grand
jury had determined to make presentiments, but the attorney general not
attending them the first day, Otis and his creatures who were alarmed and
frightened exerted themselves the next day and prevailed upon so many of the
jury to change their voices, that there was not a sufficient number left to
find a bill. They have been ever since more enraged against me than ever. At
the desire of the governor I committed to writing the charge while it lay in my
memory, and as I have no further use for it I will enclose it as it may give
you some idea of our judicatories.

Whilst we were in this state, news came of two regiments being ordered from
Halifax, and soon after two more from Ireland. The minds of people were more
and more agitated, broad hints were given that the troops should never land, a
barrel of tar was placed upon the bacon, in the night to be fired to bring in
the country when the troops appeared, and all the authority of the government
was not strong enough to remove it. The town of Boston met and passed a number
of weak but very criminal votes; and as the governor declined calling an
assembly they sent circular letters to all the towns and districts to send a
person each that there might be a general consultation at so extraordinary a
crisis. They met and spent a week, made themselves ridiculous, and then
dissolved themselves. after a message or two to the governor which he refused
to receive; a petition to the King which I dare say their agent will never be
allowed to present, and a result which they have published ill-natured and
impotent.

In this confusion the troops from Halifax arrived. I never was much afraid of
the people's taking arms, but I was apprehensive of violence from the mob, it
being their last chance before the troops could land. As the prospect of
revenge became more certain their courage abated in proportion. Two regiments
are landed, but a new grievance is now raised. The troops are by act of
parliament to be quartered no where else but in the barracks until they are
full. There are barracks enough at the castle to hold both regiments. It is
therefore against the act to bring any of them into town. This was started by
the council in their answer to the governor, which to make themselves popular,
they in an unprecedented way published and have alarmed all the province; for
although none but the most contracted minds could put such a construction upon
the act, yet after this declaration of the council nine tenths of the people
suppose it just. I wish the act had been better expressed, but it is absurd to
suppose the parliament intended to take from the King the direction of his
forces by confining them to a place where any of the colonies might think fit
to build, barracks. It is besides ungrateful, for it is known many that this
provision was brought into the bill after it had been framed without it, from
mere favor to the colonies. I hear the commander in chief has provided barracks
or quarters, but a doubt still remains with some of the council, whether they
are to furnish the articles required, unless the men are in the province
barracks, and they are to determine upon it to day.

The government has been so long in the hands of the populace that it must come
out of them by degrees, at least it will be a work of time to bring the people
back to just notions of the nature of government.

Mr. Pepperrell a young gentleman of good character, and grandson and principal
heir to the late Sir William Pepperrell being bound to London, I shall deliver
this letter to him, as it will be too bulky for postage, and desire him to wait
upon you with it.

I am with very great esteem, Sir, your most humble and most obedient servant,
THO. HUTCHINSON.

SIR, THE great esteem I have for you in every point of light, perhaps renders
my fears and doubts for the safety of your person greater than they ought to
be; however if that is an error, it certainly results from true friendship,
naturally jealous. Last night I was informed by a gentleman of my acquaintance,
who had his information from one intimate with and knowing to the infernal
purposes of the sons of liberty as they falsely style themselves, that he
verily believed, from the terrible threats and menaces by those catalines
against you, that your life is greatly in danger. This informant I know is
under obligations to you and is a man of veracity. He expressed himself with
concern for you, and the gentleman acquainting me with this horrid
circumstance, assured me he was very uneasy till you had notice. I should have
done myself the honor of waiting on you but am necessarily prevented. The duty
I owed to you as a friend and to the public as a member of society, would not
suffer me to rest till I had put your honor upon your guard; for though this may
be a false alarm, nothing would have given me greater pain, if any accident had
happened, and I had been silent. If possible I will see you to morrow, and let
you know further into this black affair.

And am with the sincerest friendship and respect, your honors most obedient,
and most humble servant, ROB. AUCHMUTY.
To the hon'ble Thomas Hutchinson,


Sept. 14. 1768.
DEAR SIR, Boston, 10 th December 1768.
I AM just now informed that a number of the council, perhaps 8 or 10, who live
in and bear this town, have met together and agreed upon a long address or
petition to parliament, and that it will be sent by this ship to Mr. Bollan to
be presented. Mr. Danforth who is president of the council told the governor
upon enquiry, that it was sent to him to sign, and he supposed the rest of the
council who had met together would sign after him in order, but he has since
found that they had wrote over his name by order of council, which makes it
appear to be an act of council. This may be a low piece of cunnihg in him, but
be it as it may, it is proper it should be known that the whole is no more than
the doings of a part of the council only, although even that is not very
material, since, if they had all been present without the governor's summons
the meeting would have been irregular and unconstitutional, and ought to be
discountenanced and censured. I suppose there is no instance of the privy
council's meeting and doing business without the king's presence or special
direction, except in committees upon such business as by his majesty's order
has been reserved to them by an act of council, and I have known no instance
here without the governor until within three or four months past.

I thought it very necessary the circumstances of this proceeding should be
known, though if there be no necessity for it. I think it would be best it should
not be known that the intelligence comes from me.

I am with very great regard. Sir, your most humble and most obedient servant.
THO. HUTCHINSON.

Boston, 20 th January 1769. DEAR SIR,
YOU have laid me under very great obligations by the very clear and full
account of proceedings in parliament, which I received from you by Capt. Scott.
You have also done much service to the people of the province. For a day or two
after the ship arrived, the enemies of government gave out that their friends
in parliament were increasing, and all things would be soon on the old footing;
in other words that all acts imposing duties would be repealed, the
commissioners board dissolved, the customs put on the old footing, and illicit
trade be carried on with little of no hazard. It was very fortunate that I had
it in my power to prevent such a false representation from spreading through
the province. I have been very cautious of using your name, but I have been
very free in publishing abroad the substance of your letter, and declaring that
I had my intelligence from the best authority, and have in a great measure
defeated the ill design in raising and attempting to spread so groundless a
report. What marks of resentment the parliament will show, whether they will be
upon the province in general or particular persons, is extremely uncertain, but
that they will be placed somewhere is most certain, and I add, because I think
it ought to be so, that those who have been most steady in preserving the
constitution and opposing the licentiousness of such as call themselves sons of
liberty will certainly meet with favor and encouragement.

This is most certainly a crisis. I really wish that there may not have been
the least degree of severity beyond what is absolutely necessary to ^^^^^tain,
I think I may say to you the dependence which a colony ought to have upon the
parent state; but if no measures shall have been taken to secure this
dependence, or nothing more than some declaratory acts or resolves, it is all
over with us. The friends of government will be utterly disheartened, and the
friends of anarchy will be afraid of nothing, be it ever so extravagant.

The last vessel from London had a quick passage. We expect to be in suspense
for the three or four next weeks and then to hear our fate. I never think of
the measures necessary for the peace and good order of the colonies without
pain. There must be an abridgment of what are called English liberties. I
relieve myself by considering that in a remove from the state of nature to the
most perfect state of government there must be a great restraint of natural
liberty. I doubt whether it is possible to project a system of government in
which a colony 3000 miles distant from the parent state shall enjoy all the
liberty of the parent state. I am certain I have never yet seen the projection.
I wish the good of the colony when I wish to see some further restraint of
liberty rather than the connection with the parent state should be broken; for I
am sure such a breach must prove the ruin of the colony. Pardon me this
excursion, it really proceeds from the state of mind into which our perplexed
affairs often throws me.

I have the honor to be with very great esteem, Sir, your most humble and most
obedient servant, THO. HUTCHINSON.

Boston, 20 th October, 1769. DEAR SIR,
I THANK you for your last favor of July 18th. I fancy in my last to you about
two months ago I have answered the greatest part of it.

My opinion upon the combination of the merchants, I gave you very fully. How
long they will be able to continue them if parliament should not interpose is
uncertain. In most articles they may another year, and you run the risque of
their substituting when they are put to their shifts something of their own in
the place of what they used to have from you, and which they will never return
to you for. But it is (...) possible that provision for dissolving these (...)
binations and subjecting all who do not (...) them to penalties adequate to the
offense (...) not be made the first week the parliament (...) Certainly all
parties will unite in so extraor^^^^^^ (...) case if they never do in any
other. So (...) has been said upon the repeal of the duties (...) by the last
act, that it will render it very (...) to keep people's minds quiet if that
(...) refused them. They deserve punishme^^ (...) will say, but laying or
continuing taxes (...) cannot be thought equal, seeing many (...) punished who
are not offenders, Penalties of another kind seem better adapted.

I have been tolerably treated since the governor's departure, no other charge
being made against me in our scandalous newspapers except my bad principles in
matters of government, and this charge has had little effect, and a great many
friends promise me support.

I must beg the favor of you to keep secret every thing I write, until we are
in a more settled (...), for the party here either by their agents, or by some
of the emissaries in London, have sent them every report or rumor of the
contents of letters wrote from hence. I hope we shall see better times both
here and in England.

I am with great esteem, Sir, your most obedient servant, THO. HUTCHINSON.

Boston, 7 th May 1767. SIR,
I AM indebted to you for the obliging manner in which you received my
recommendation of my good friend Mr. Paxton, as well as for the account you are
pleased to send me of the situation of affairs in the mother country.

I am very sorry that the colonies give you so much employment, and it is
impossible to say how long it will be before things settle into quiet among us.
We have some here who have been so busy in something the late disturbances,
that may now think it needful for their own security to keep up the spirit.
They have plumed themselves much upon the victory they have gamed, and the
spport they have since met with; (...) could my thing better show what they
would still be a^ than the manner in which by their own account published in
the newspapers last August (...) celebrated the 14th of that month, as the
first anniversary commemoration of what they had done at the tree of liberty on
that day the year before. Here a number of respectable gentlemen as they inform
us now met, and among other toasts drank general Paoli, and the spark of
liberty kindled in Spain, I am now speaking of a few individuals only, the body
of the people are well disposed, yet when you come to see the journal of the
house of representatives the last session, I fear you will think that the same
spirit has seized our public counsels. I can however fairly say thus much in
behalf of the government, that the last house was packed by means of a public
proscription just before the election, of the greatest part of those who had
appeared in the preceding session in the support of government: their names
were published in an inflammatory news-paper, and their constituents made to
believe they were about to sell them for slaves. Writs are now out for a new
assembly, but I cannot answer for the choice: I hope however that the people in
general are in a better temper; yet the moderate men have been so browbeaten in
the house, and found themselves so insignificant there the last year, that some
of them will voluntarily decline coming again. I think this looks too much like
a despair of the commonwealth, and cannot be justified on patriotic principles.

The election of counselors was carried the last year as might have been
expected from such an house. The officers of the crown and the judges of the
superior court were excluded. And I hear that it is the design of some who
expect to be returned members of the house this year to make sure work at the
ensuing election of counselors, by excluding, if they can, the gentlemen of
the council (who by charter remain such 'till others are chosen in their room)
from any share in the choice, though they have always had their voice in it
hitherto from the first arrival of the charter. If the house do this, they will
have it in their power to model the council as they please, and throw all the
powers of government into the hands of the people, unless the governor should
again exert his negative as he did the last year.

You have doubtless seen some of the curious messages from the late house to
the governor, and cannot but have observed with how little decency they have
attacked both the governor and the lieutenant governor. They have also in
effect forced the council to declare themselves parties in the quarrel they had
against the latter in a matter of mere indifference. In their message to the
governor of the 31st of January they have explicitly charged the lieutenant
governor (a gentleman to whom they are more indebted than to any one man in the
government) with "ambition and lust of power", merely for paying a compliment
to the governor agreeable to ancient usage, by attending him to court and being
present in the council chamber when he made his speech at the opening of the
session, at which time they go on to say, "none but the general court and their
servants are intended to be present", still holding out to the people the
servants, of the crown as objects of insignificance, ranking the secretary with
their doorkeeper, as servants of the assembly; for the secretary with his
clerks and the doorkeeper are the only persons present with the assembly on
these occasions.

The officers of the crown being thus lessened in the eyes of the people, takes
off their weight and influence, and the balance will of course turn in favor of
the people, and what makes them still more insignificant is their dependence on
the people for a necessary support: If something were left to the goodwill of
the people, yet nature should be sure of a support. The governor's salary has
for about 35 years past been pretty well understood to be a thousand pound a
year sterling. When this sum was first agreed to, it was very well; but an
increase of wealth since hat brought along with it an increase of luxury, so
that what was sufficient to keep up a proper distinction and support the
dignity of a governor then, may well be supposed to be insufficient for the
purpose now. The lieutenant governor has no appointments as such: the captaincy
of Castle-William which may be worth L. 120 sterling a year is looked upon
indeed as an appendage to his commission, and the late lieutenant governor
enjoyed no other appointment: he lived a retired life upon his own estate in
the country, and was easy. The present lieutenant governor indeed has other
appointments, but the people are quarrelling with him for it, and will not
suffer him to be easy unless he will retire also.

The secretary may have something (...) than L.200 a year sterling, (...) has
for the two last years been allowed L.^^ lawful money a year less than had been
usual for diverse years preceding, though he had convinced the house by their
committee that without this deduction he would have had no more than L.250
sterling per annum in fees, perquisites and salary altogether, which is not the
one half of his annual expense.

The crown did by charter reserve to itself the appointment of a governor,
lieutenant governor and secretary on the design of this was without doubt to
maintain some kind of balance between the powers of the crown and of the
people; but if officers are not in some measure independent of the people (for
it is difficult to serve two masters) they will sometimes have a hard struggle
between duty to the crown and a regard to self, which must be a very
disagreeable situation to them, as well as a weakening to the authority of
government. The officers of the crown are very few, and are therefore the more
easily provided for without burdening the people: and such provision I look
upon as necessary to the restoration and support of the King's authority.

But it may be said how can any new measures be taken without raising new
disturbances? The manufacturers in England will rise again and defeat the
measures of government. This game it is true has been (...), and succeeded, and
it has been asserted here, that it is in the power of the colonies at any time
to raise a rebellion in England by refusing to send for their manufactures. For
my own part I do not believe this. The (...) in England, and I don't know (...)
in London and Bristol only, might always govern in this matter and quiet the
manufacturer. The merchant's view is always to his own interest. As the trade
is now managed, the dealer here (...) to the merchant in England for his goods;
upon these goods the English merchant puts a profit of 10 or more probably of
15 per cent when he sends them to his employer in America. The merchant is so
jealous of foregoing this profit, that an American trader cannot well purchase
the goods he wants of the manufacturer; for should the merchant know that the
manufacturer had supplied an American, he would take off no more of his wares.
The merchants therefore having this profit in view will by one means or other
secure it. They know the goods which the American market demands, and may
therefore safely take them off from the manufacturer, though they should have no
orders for shipping them this year or perhaps the next; and I dare say, it
would not be longer before the Americans would clamor for a supply of goods
from England, for it is vain to think they can supply themselves. The merchant
might then put in advanced price upon his goods, and possibly be able to make
his own terms; or if it should be thought the goods would not bear an advanced
price to indemnify him* it might be worth while for the government to agree
with the merchants before hand to allow them a premium equivalent to the
advance of their stock, and then the game would be over.

I have wrote with freedom in confidence of my name's not being used on the
occasion* For though I have wrote nothing (...) what in my conscience I think
an American may upon just principles advance, and what a servant of the crown
ought upon all proper occasions to suggest, yet the many prejudices I have to
combat with may render it (...) it should be made, public

I communicated to governor Bernard what you mentioned (...) him, who desires
me to present you his compliments, and let you know that he is obliged to you
for the expressions of your regard for his injured character.

I am with great respect, Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant,
Andw. Oliver.
I ask your acceptance of a journal of the last session which is put up in a
box directed to the secretary of the board of trade.



Boston, 11 May, 1768. SIR,
I AM this moment favored with your very obliging letter by Capt. Jarvis of the
2d March, which I have but just time to acknowledge, as this is the day given
out for the ship to sail. I wrote you the end of February in reply to your
letter of the 28th December, that of the 12th February which you refer to in
this of the 2d of March is not yet come to hand. You lay me, sir, under the
greatest obligations as well for the interesting account of public affairs
which you are from time to time pleased to transmit me; as for your steady
attention to my (...) concerns. I shall always have the most grateful sense of
Mr. Grenville's intentions of favor also, whether I ever reap any benefit from
them or nor. Without a proper support afforded to the king's officers, the
respect due to government will of course fail; yet I cannot say whether under
the present circumstances, and considering the temper the people are now in, an
additional provision for me would be of real benefit to me personally or not.
It has been given out that no person who receives a stipend from the government
at home, shall live in the country. Government here wants some effectual
support: No sooner was it known that the lieut. governor had a provision of
L.200 a year made for him out of the revenue, than he was advised in the Boston
Gazette to resign all pretensions to a seat in council, either with or without
a voice. The temper of the people may be surely learnt from that infamous
paper; it is the very thing that forms their temper; for it they are not in the
temper of the writer at the time of the publication, yet it is looked upon as
the ORACLE, and they soon bring their temper to it. Some of the latest of them
are very expressive, I will not trouble you with sending them, as I imagine
they somehow or other find their way to you: But I cannot but apprehend from
these papers and from hints that are thrown out, that if the petition of the
House to his Majesty and their letters to diverse noble Lords should fail of
success, some people will be mad enough to go to extremities. The commissioners
of the customs have already been openly affronted, the governor's company of
Cadets have come to a resolution not to wait on him (as usual) on the day of
General Election the (...) instant if those gentlemen are of the company. And
the Town of Boston have passed a Vote that Faneuil-Hall (in which the governor
and his company usually dine on that day) shall not be opened to him if the
commissioners are invited to dine with him. A list of counselors has within a
few days past been printed and dispersed by way of sneer on Lord Shelburne's
letter, made up of king's officers; which list, the writer says, if adopted at
the next general election may take away all grounds of complaint, and may
possibly prove a healing and very salutarv measure. The lieutenant governor is
at the head of this list, they have done me the honor to put me next, the
commissioners of the customs are all in the list except Mr. Temple, and to
complete the list, they have added some of the waiters. I never thought 'till
very lately that they acted upon any settled plan, nor do I now think they have
'till of late; a few, a very few, among us have planned the present measures,
and the government has been too weak to subdue their turbulent spirits. Our
situation is not rightly known; but it is a matter worthy of the most serious
attention.

I am with the greatest respect, Sir, your most obedient and most humble
Servant, Andw. Oliver.
I shall take proper care to forward your Letter to Mr. Ingersol. He had
received your last.



Boston, 13 th February, 1769. SIR,
I HAVE your very obliging favor of the 4th of October. I find myself
constrained as well by this letter as by my son and daughter Spooner's letters
since, to render you my most sincere thanks for the very polite notice you have
taken of them; and I pray my most respectful compliments to the good lady your
mother, whose friendly reception of them at Non-such has, I find engaged their
warmest esteem and respect -- He has wrote us that he had a prospect of
succeeding in the business he went upon; but the last letter we had was from
her of the 23d of November, acquainting us that he had been very ill, but was
getting better. She writes as a person overcome with a sense of the kindness
they had met with, in a place where they were strangers, on this trying
occasion.

You have heard of the arrival of the King's troops, the quiet reception they
met with among us was not at all surprising to me. -- I am sorry there was any
occasion for sending them. From the address of the Gentlemen of the Council to
General Gage, it might be supposed there was none. I have seen a letter from
our friend Ingersoll with this paraphrase upon it -- "We hope that your
Excellency observing with your own eyes now the troops are among us our
peaceable and quiet behavior, will be convinced that that wicked G -- r B -- d
told a (...) in saying, We were not so before they came."

I have given you the sense of a stranger on a single paragraph of this
address, because I suspected my own opinion of it, 'till I found it thus
confirmed -- If you have the newspapers containing the address, your own good
sense will lead you to make some other remarks upon it, as well as to trace the
influence under which it seems to have been penned. The disturbers of our peace
take great advantage of such aids from people in office and power -- The
lieutenant governor has communicated to me your letter containing an account of
the debates in parliament on the first day of the session: We soon expect their
decision on American affairs, some I doubt not with fear and trembling -- Yet I
have very lately had occasion to know, that be the determination of parliament
what it will, it is the determination of some to agree to no terms that shall
remove us from our old foundation. This confirms me in an opinion that I have
taken up a long time since, that if there be no way to take off the original
incendiaries, they will continue to instill their poison into the minds of the
people through the vehicle of the BOSTON GAZETTE.

In your letter to the lieutenant governor you observe upon two defects in our
constitution, the popular election of the Council, and the return of Juries by
the Towns. The first of these arises from the Charter itself; the latter from
our provincial Laws. The method of appointing our Grand Juries lies open to
management. Whoever pleases, nominates them at our town-meetings; by this means
one who was supposed to be a principal in the Riots of the 10th of June last,
was upon that Jury whose business it was to inquire into them: But the
provincial legislature has made sufficient provision for the return of Petit
Juries by their act of 23d Geo. 2d, which requires the several towns to take
lists of all persons liable by law to serve, and forming them into two classes,
put their names written on separate papers into two different boxes, one for
the superior court and the other for the inferior: And when veniries are
issued, the number therein required are to be drawn out in open town-meeting,
no person to serve oftener than once in three years -- The method of appointing
Grand Juries appears indeed defective; but if the other is not (...) may be
imputed to the times rather than to the defect of the laws -- that neither the
Grand Juries nor the Petit Juries have of late answered the expectations of
government.

As to the appointment of the council, I am of opinion that neither the popular
elections in this province, nor their appointment in what are called the royal
governments by the King's mandamus, are free from exceptions, especially if the
council as a legislative body is intended to answer the idea of the house of
lords in the British legislature. There they are supposed to be a free and
independent body, and on their being such the strength and firmness of the
constitution does very much depend: whereas the election or appointment of the
councils in the manner before mentioned renders them altogether dependent on
their constituents. The King is the fountain of honor, and as such the peers
of the realm derive their honors from him; but then they hold them by a surer
tenure than the provincial counselors who are appointed by mandamus. On the
other hand, our popular elections very often expose them to contempt; for
nothing is more common, than for the representatives, when they find the
council a little untractable at the close of the year, to remind them that May
is at hand.

It may be accounted by the colonies as dangerous to admit of any alterations
in their charters, as it is by the governors in the church to make any in the
establishment; yet to make the resemblance as near as may be to the British
parliament, some alteration is necessary.

It is not requisite that I know of, that a counselor should be a freeholder;
his residence according to the charter is a sufficient qualification; for that
provides only, that he be an inhabitant of or proprietor of lands within the
district for which he is chosen: whereas the peers of the realm sit in the
house of lords, as I take it, in virtue of their baronies. If there should be a
reform of any of the colony charters with a view to keep up the resemblance of
the three estates in England, the legislative council should consist of men of
landed estates; but as our landed estates here are small at present, the yearly
value of L. 100 sterling per annum might in some of them at least be a
sufficient qualification. As our estates are partable after the decease of the
proprietor, the honor could not be continued in families as in England: It
might however be continued in the appointee quam diu been se gesserit, and
proof be required of some mal-practice before a suspension or removal.
Bankruptcy also might be another ground for removal. A small legislative
council might answer the purposes of government; but it might tend to weaken
that levelling principle, which is cherished by the present popular
constitution, to have an honorary order established, out of which the council
should be appointed. There is no way now to put a man of fortune above the
common level, and exempt him from being chosen by the people into the lower
offices, but his being appointed a justice of the peace; this is frequently
done when there is no kind of expectation of his undertaking the trust, and has
its inconveniences. For remedy hereof it might be expedient to have an order of
Patricians or Esquires instituted, to be all men of fortune or good landed
estates, and appointed by the governor with the advice of council, and enrolled
in the secretary's office, who should be exempted from the lower offices in
government as the justices now are; and to have the legislative council ( which
in the first instance might be nominated by the Crown) from time to time filled
up, as vacancies happen out of this order of men, who, if the order consisted
only of men of landed estates, might elect, as the Scottish peers do, only
reserving to the King's governor a negative on such choice. The King in this
case would be still acknowledged as the fountain of honor, as having in the
first instance the appointment of the persons enrolled, out of whom the council
are to be chosen, and finally having a negative on the choice. Or, the King
might have the immediate appointment by mandamus as at present in the royal
governments. As the gentlemen of the council would rank above the body from
which they are taken, they might bear a title one degree above that of esquire.
Besides this legislative council, a privy council might be established, to
consist of some or all of those persons who constitute the legislative council
and of other persons members of the house of representatives or otherwise of
note or distinction; which would extend the honors of government, and afford
opportunity of distinguishing men of character and reputation, the expectation
of which would make government more respectable.

I would not trouble you with these reveries of mine, were I not assured of
your readiness to forgive the communication, although you could apply it to no
good purpose.

Mr. Spooner sent me a pamphlet under a blank cover, entitled, " the state of
the nation". I run over it by myself before I had heard any one mention it, and
though it I could evidently mark the sentiments of some of my friends. By what I
have since heard and seen, it looks as if I was not mistaken. Your right
honorable friend I trust will not be offended if I call him mine -- I am sure
you will not when I term you such -- I have settled it for a long time in my
own mind that without a representation in the supreme legislature, there cannot
be that union between the head and the members as to produce a healthful
constitution of the whole body. I have doubted whether this union could be
perfected by the first experiment. The plan here exhibited seems to be formed
in generous and moderate principles, and bids the fairest of any I have yet
seen to be adopted. Such a great design may as in painting require frequent
touching before it becomes a piece highly finished; and after all may require
the miliorating hand of time to make it please universally. Thus the British
constitution considered as without the colonies attained it is glory. The book I
had sent me is in such request, that I have not been able to keep it long
enough by me, to consider it in all its parts. I wish to hear how it is
received in the house of commons. I find by the publications both of governor
Pownall and Mr. Bollan, that they each of them adopt the idea of an union and
representation, and I think it must more and more prevail. The argument against
it from local inconveniency, must as it appears to me be more than balanced by
greater inconveniences on the other side the question, the great difficulty
will be in the terms of union. -- I add no more, as I fear I have already
trespassed much on your time and patience, but that I am,

Sir, your obliged and most obedient humble Servant, Andw. Oliver.

New York, 12 th August, 1769. SIR,
I HAVE been in this city for some time past executing (with others) his
Majesty's commission for settling the boundary between this province and that
of New Jersey. I left Boston the 11th July, since which my advices from London
have come to me very imperfect: but as my friend Mr. Thompson writes me that he
had drawn up my case and with your approbation laid it before the D. of
Gra^^^n, I think it needful once more to mention this business to you.

There was a time when I thought the authority of government might have been
easily restored; but while it is friends and the officers of the crown are left
to an abject dependence on these very people who are undermining it is
authority; and while these are suffered not only to go unpunished, but on the
contrary meet with all kind of support and encouragement, it cannot be expected
that you will ever again recover that respect which the colonies had been wont
to pay to the parent state. Government at home will deceive itself, if it
imagines that the taking off the duty on glass, paper and painter's colors will
work a reconciliation, and nothing more than this, as I can learn, is proposed
in Ld. H's late circular letter. It is the principle that is now disputed; the
combination against importation extends to tea, although it comes cheaper than
ever, as well as to the other forementioned articles. In Virginia it is
extended lately to wines; and I have heard one of the first leaders in these
measures in Boston say, that we should never be upon a proper footing 'till all
the revenue acts from the 15th Charles 2d were repealed. Our assembly in the
Massachusetts may have been more illiberal than others in their public messages
and resolves; yet we have some people among us still who dare to speak in favor
of government: But here I do not find so much as one, unless it be some of the
King's servants* and yet my business here leads me to associate with the best.
They universally approve of the combination against importing of goods from
Great Britain, unless the revenue acts are repealed, which appears to me little
less than assuming a negative on all acts of parliament which they do not like!
They say expressly, we are bound by none made since our emigration, but such as
for our own convenience we choose to submit to; such for instance as that for
establishing a post office. The Bill of Rights and the Habeas Corpus Acts, they
say are only declaratory of the common law which we brought with us.

Under such circumstance as these, why should I wish to expose myself to
popular resentment? Were I to receive any thing out of the revenue. I must
expect to be abused for it. Nor do I find that our chief justice has received
the L.200 granted him for that service; and yet the assembly have this year
withheld his usual grant, most probably because he has such a warrant from the
crown.

With regard to my negociations with Mr. Rogers, I did in conformity to your
opinion make an apology to Mr. Secretary Pownall for mentioning it, and there
submitted it. I hear it has been since talked of; but unless I could be assured
in one shape or other of L.300 per annum, with the other office, I would not
choose to quit what I have. I have no ambition to be distinguished, if I am only
to be held up as a mark of popular envy or resentment. I was in hopes before
now through the intervention of your good offices to have received some mark of
favor from your good friend; but the time is not yet come to expect it through
that channel! I will however rely on your friendship, whenever you can with
propriety appear in forwarding my interest, or preventing any thing that may
prove injurious to it.

If Mr. R. has interest enough to obtain the secretary's place, I shall upon
receiving proper security think myself in honor bound to second his views,
though I have none at present from him but a conditional note he formerly wrote
me. If he is not like to succeed, and my son Daniel could have my place, I
would be content unless affairs take a different turn to resign in his favor,
whether administration should think proper to make any further provision for me
or not. And yet I never thought of withdrawing myself from the service, while
there appeared to me any prospect of my being able to promote it.

If I have wrote with freedom, I consider I am writing to a friend, and that I
am perfectly safe in opening myself to you.

I am, with great respect, Sir, your most obedient, humble servant, Andw.
Oliver.

DEAR SIR,
THE commissioners of the customs have met with every insult since their
arrived at Boston, and at last have been obliged to seek protection on board
his Majesty's ship Romney: -- Mr. Hallowell, the comptroller of the customs who
will have the honor to deliver you this Letter, will inform you of many
particulars; he is sent by the Board with their letters to Government. Unless
we have immediately two or three regiments, it is the opinion of all the friends
to government, that Boston will be in open rebellion.

I have the honor to be with the greatest respect and warmest regard,

Dear Sir, Your most faithful and obliged servant, CHAs. PAXTON.
On board his Majesty's Ship Romney, Boston Harbor, 20 th June, 68.



Boston, December. 12 th 1768. MY DEAR SIR,
I Wrote you a few days ago, and did not then think of troubling you upon any
private affair of mine, at least not so suddenly; but within this day or two, I
have had conversation with Mr. Oliver, secretary of the province, the design of
which was my succeeding to the post he holds from the crown, upon the idea,
that provision would be made for governor Bernard, and the lieutenant governor
would succeed to the chair, then the secretary is desirous of being lieutenant
governor, and if in any way, three hundred pounds a year could be annexed to
the appointment. You are sensible the appointment is in one department, and the
grant of money in another; now the present lieutenant governor has an
assignment of L. 200 a year upon the customs here; he has not received any
thing from it as yet, and is doubtful if he shall; he has no doubt of its lapse
to the crown, if he has the chair; if then by any interest that sum could be
assigned to Mr. Oliver as lieutenant governor, and if he should be allowed (as
has been usual for all lieutenant governors) to hold the command of the castle,
that would be another L100. This would complete the secretary's views; and he
thinks his public services, the injuries he has received in that service, and
the favorable sentiments entertained of him by government, may lead him to
these views, and he hopes for the interest of his friends. The place of
secretary is worth L.300 a year, but is a provincial grant at present, so that
it will not allow to be quartered on: And as I had view upon the place when I
was in England, and went so far as to converse with several men of interest
upon it, though I never had an opportunity to mention it to you after I recovered
my illness -- I hope you will allow me your influence, and by extending it at
the treasury, to facilitate the assignment of the L. 200 a year, it will be
serving the secretary, and it will very much oblige me. -- The secretary is
advanced in life, though much more so in health, which has been much impaired by
the injuries he received, and he wishes to quit the more active scenes; he
considers this as a kind of (...) cum dignitate, and from merits one may think
he has a claim to it. I will mention to you the gentlemen, who are acquainted
with my views and whose favorable approbation I have had. Governor Pownall,
Mr. John Pownall, and Dr. Franklin. -- My lord Hillsborough is not unacquainted
with it -- I have since I have been here, wrote Mr. Jackson upon the subject,
and have by this vessel wrote Mr. Mauduir. I think my character stands fair --
I have not been without application to public affairs, and have acquired some
knowledge of our provincial affairs, and notwithstanding our many free
conversations in England, I am considered here as on government side, for which
I have been often traduced both publicly and privately, and very lately have
had two or three slaps. The governor and lieutenant governor are fully
acquainted with the negotiation, and I meet their approbation; all is upon the
idea the governor is provided for, and there shall by any means be a vacancy of
the lieut. governor's place. I have gone so far, as to say to some of my
friends, that rather than not succeed I would agree to pay the secretary L.100
a year out of the office to make up L.300, provided he could obtain only the
assignment of L.200 -- but the other proposal would to be sure be most
eligible. I scarce know any apology to make for troubling you upon the subject;
the friendship you showed me in London, and the favorable expressions you made
use of to the lieut. governor in my behalf encourage me, besides a sort of
egotism, which inclines men to think what they wish to be real. I submit myself
to the enquiries of any of my countrymen in England, but I should wish the
matter may be secret 'till it is effected.

I am with very great respect and regard, my dear sir, Your most obedient, and
most humble servant, NATH. ROGERS.

ERRATA. P. 5, l. 8, f. influences, r. influenc^. In some of the copies p. 8,
l. 15, f. received, r. conceived.

Copy of a LETTER returned with those signed Thomas Hutchinson, Andrew Oliver,
etc. from England.
Narroganset, 22 d December 1767. SIR,
I AM now withdrawn to my little country villa, where, though I am more retired
from the busy world, yet I am still inveloped with uneasy reflections for a
turbulent, degenerate, ungrateful continent, and the opposition I have met with
in my indefatigable endeavors to secure our property in this colony, but
hitherto without success. -- The times are so corrupted and the conflict of
parties so predominant, that faction is blind, or shuts her eyes to the most
evident truths that cross her designs, and believes in any absurdities that
assists to accomplish her purposes under the prostitution and prostration of an
infatuated government. -- Judge then, my dear Sir, in what a critical situation
the fortunes of we poor Europeans must be among them.

We have not been able to recover our property for years past, how great sover
our exigencies may have been, unless we soothed them into a compliance: -- We
are unwilling to enter into a litiscontestation with them, because the
perversion of their iniquitous courts of justice are so great, that experience
has convinced us we had better loose half, to obtain the other quietly, than
pursue compulsary measures: -- We are also afraid to apply to a British
Parliament for relief, as none can be effectually administrated without a
change of government, and a better administration of justice introduced; and
was it known here, that we made such application home, not only our fortunes
would be in greater jeopardy, but our lives endangered by it before any
salutary regulations could take place. -- We are sensible of the goodness of
the King and Parliament, but how far, or in what space of time our grievance,
as a few individuals, might weigh against the influence of a charter
government, we are at a loss to determine.

In 1761, I arrived in America, which circumstance you probably remember well:
-- With great industry, caution and circumspection, I have not only reduced our
demands, and regulated our connections in some measure, but kept my head out of
a HALTER which you had the honor to grace. (Pray Doctor how did it feel? The
subject is stale, but I must be a little funny with you on the occasion.) Much
still remains to be done, and after all my best endeavors, my constituents,
from a moderate calculation, cannot loose less than L.50,000 sterling, by the
baneful constitution of this colony, and the corruption of their courts of
judicature. It is really a very afflicting and melancholy consideration.

Under a deep sense of the infirmities of their constitution; the innovations
which they have gradually interwoven among themselves; and stimulated by every
act of forbearance, lenity and patience, we have indulged our correspondents
until deluges of bankruptceys have ensued, insolvent acts liberated them from
our just demands, and finally, had our indisputable accounts refused admission
for our proportion of the small remains, until colony creditors were first
paid, and the whole absorbed. We have had vessels made over to us for the
satisfaction of debts, and after bills of sales were executed, carried off in
open violence and forced by Capt. Snip-snap of Mr. No-body's appointment, and
when we sued him for damages, recovered a louse. We have in our turn been sued
in our absence, and condemned ex part in large sums for imaginary damages, for
which we can neither obtain a trial, nor redress. They refuse us an appeal to
the King in Council; the money must be paid when their executions become
returnable; and were we to carry it home by way of complaint, it would cost us
two or three hundred pounds sterling, to prosecute, and after all, when his
Majesty's decrees comes over in our favor, and refunding the money can no
longer be evaded, I expect their effects will be secreted, their body's
released by the insolvent act, and our money, both principal, interest and
expenses irrecoverably gone. -- Is not our case grievous? -- We have in actions
founded upon notes of hand, been cast in their courts of judicature. -- We have
appealed to his Majesty in Council for redress, got their verdicts reversed,
and obtained the King's decrees for our money, but that is all; for although I
have had them by me above twelve months, and employed two eminent lawyers to
enforce them into execution conformable to the colony law, yet we have not been
able to recover a single shilling, though we have danced after their courts and
assembly's above THIRTY DAYS in vain to accomplish that purpose only: Consider
my dear Sir, what expense, vexation, and loss of time this must be to us, and
whether we have not just cause of complaint.

We have also in vain waited with great impatience for years past, in hopes his
Majesty would have nominated his Judges, and other executive officers in every
colony in America, which would in a great measure remove the cause of our
complaint. -- Nothing can be more necessary than a speedy regulation in this,
and constituting it a regal government; and nothing is of such important use to
a nation, as that men who excel in wisdom and virtue should be encouraged to
undertake the business of government: But the iniquitous course of their courts
of justice in this colony, deter such men from serving the public, or if they
do so, unless patronized at home, their wisdom and virtue are turned against
them with such malignity, that it is more safe to be infamous than renowned. --
The principal exception I have met with here, is James Helmes, Esquire who was
chosen Chief Justice by the General Assembly at last election. -- He accepted
his appointment, distinguishes himself by capacity and application, and seems
neither afraid nor ashamed to administer impartial justice to all, even to the
native and residing creditors of the mother country. -- I have known him grant
them temporary relief by writs of error, etc. when both he and they were
overruled by the partiality of the court; and in vain, though with great
candor and force, pleaded with the rest of the bench, that for the honor of
the colony, and their own reputation, they ought never to pay less regard to
the decrees of his Majesty in Council, because the property was determined in
Great Britain, than to their own. I have also heard him with resolution and
firmness, when he discovered the court to be immoderately partial, order his
name to be inroled, as dissenting from the verdict. -- For such honesty and
candor, I am persuaded he will be deposed at next election, unless they should
be still in hopes of making him a convert.

I wish it was in my power to prevent every American from suffering for the
cause of integrity, and their mother country; (...) in an especial manner,
should not only be protected and supported but appear among the first
promotions. -- Is there no gentleman of public spirit at home, that would he
pleased to be an instrument of elevating a man of his principals and probity?
Or is it become fashionable for vice to be countenanced with impunity, and
every trace of virtue past over unnoticed! God forbid.

The colonies have originally been wrong founded. -- They ought all to have
been regal governments, and every executive officer appointed by the King.
Until that is effected, and they are properly regulated, they will never be
beneficial to themselves, nor good subjects to Great Britain. -- You see with
what contempt they already treat the acts of Parliament for regulating their
trade, and enter into the most public, illegal, and affronting combinations to
obtain a repeal, by again imposing upon the British merchants and
manufacturers, and all under the cloak of retrenching their expenses, by
avoiding every unnecessary superfluity. Were that really the case, I am sure I
would, and also every other British subject, esteem them for it; but the fact
is, they obtained a repeal of the stamp act by mercantile influence, and they
are now endeavoring by the same artifice and finesse to repeal the acts of
trade, and obtain a total exemption from all taxation. -- Were it otherwise,
and they sincerely disposed to stop the importation of every unnecessary
superfluity, without affronting the British Legislation, by their public,
general, and illegal combinations, they might accomplish their purposes with
much more decency, and suppress it more effectually by the acts of their own
Legislation, imposing such duties upon their importation here, I mean foreign
growth, or fabrications; but if on British, it would be more pardonable in
their present system.
as might either occasion a total prohibition, or confine the consumption of
them to particular individuals that can afford to buy, by which measure, they
would also raise a considerable colony REVENUE and ease the poorer inhabitants
in the tax they now pay: -- but the temper of the country is exceedingly
factious, and prone to sedition; they are growing more imperious, haughty, nay
insolent every day, and in a short space, unless wholesome regulations take
place, the spirit they have kindled, and the conceptions of government they
have imbibed, will be more grievous to the mother country than ever the
ostracism was to the Athenians.

A bridle at present, may accomplish more than a rod hereafter; for the
malignant poison of the times, like a general pestilence, spreads beyond
conception; and if the British Parliament are too late in their regulations,
neglect measures seven years, which are essentially necessary now, should they
then be able to stifle their commotions, it would only be a temporary
extinction, consequently, every hour's indulgence will answer to no other
purpose than enable them in a more effectual manner to sow seeds of discension
to be rekindled whenever they are in a capacity to oppose the mother country
and render themselves independent of her.

Have they not already in the most public manner shown their opposition to the
measures of parliament in the affair of the late stamp act? Don't they now with
equal violence and audacity, in both public papers and conversation, declare
the parliamentary regulations in their acts of trade to be illegal and a mere
nullity? -- What further proofs do we wait for, of either their good or bad
disposition? Did you ever hear of any colonies, in their infant state, teach
the science of tyranny, reduced into rules, The Committee to the Sons of
Liberty, etc.
over every subject that discountenanced their measures in opposition to the
mother country, in a more imperious manner than they have done these four years
past? Have they not made use of every stroke of policy (in their way) to avail
themselves of the dark purposes of their independence, and suffered no
restraint of conscience, or fear, not even the guilt of threatening to excite a
civil war, and revolt, if not indulged with an unlimited trade, without
restraint; and British protection, without expense? For that is the English of
it. -- Is this their true, or mistaken portrait? SAY. -- If it is their true
one, ought not such pernicious maxims of policy? Such wicked discipline? Such
ingratitude? Such dissimulation? Such perfidy? Such violent, ruthless and
sanguinary councils, where a Cleon bears rule, and an Aristides cannot be
endured, to be crushed in embryo? If not, the alternative cannot avoid
producing such a government, as will ere long throw the whole kingdom into the
utmost confusion, endanger the life, liberty, and property of every good
subject, and again expose them to the merciless assassination of a rabble.

I am sensible that in all political disputes, especially in America, a man may
see some things to blame on both sides, and so much to fear, which ever faction
should conquer, as to be justified in not intermedling with either; but in
matters of such vast importance as the present, wherein we have suffered so
much, -- still deeply interested, and by which the peace and tranquillity of the
nation is at stake; it is difficult to conceal one's emotions from a friend,
and remain a tranquil spectator on a theater of such chicanery and collusion,
as will inevitably (if not checked, and may sooner happen than is imagined by
many) chill the blood of many a true Briton.

It may be true policy, in some cases, to tame the fiercest spirit of popular
liberty, not by blows or by chains, but by soothing her into a willing
obedience, and making her kiss the very hand that restrains her; but such
policy would be a very unsuitable potion to cure the malady of the present
times. They are too much corrupted; and already so intoxicated with their own
importance, as to make a wrong use of lenient measures, -- they construe them
into their own natural rights, and a timidity in the mother country. They
consider themselves a little bigger than the frog in the fable, and that Great
Britain can never long grapple with their huge territory of 15,000 mile
frontier, already populous, and increasing with such celerity, as to double
their number once in twenty-five years. -- This is not perfectly consonant with
my idea of the matter, though such calculation has been made; and admitting it
to be erroneous, yet, as they believe it, it has the same evil effect, and
possesses the imaginations of the people with such a degree of insanity and
enthusiasm, as there is hardly any thing more common than to hear them boast of
particular colonies that can raise on a short notice an hundred thousand
fighting men, to oppose the force of Great Britain; certain it is, they
increase in numbers by emigration, etc, very fast, and are become such a body
of people, with such extensive territory, as require every bud of their genius
and disposition to be narrowly watched, and pruned with great judgment,
otherways they may become not only troublesome to Great Britain, but enemies to
themselves. -- Now is the critical season. -- They are like some raw giddy
youth just emerging into the world in a corrupt degenerate age* A parent, or a
guardian* is therefore still necessary; and if well managed, they will soon
arrive to such maturity as to become obedient, dutiful children; but if
neglected long, the rod of chastisement will be so much longer necessary as to
become too burdensome, and must be dropped with the colonies -- They almost
consider themselves as a separate people from Great Britain already.

Last month while I was attending the General Assembly, the Governor sent a
written message to the lower house, importing his intentions of a resignation
at the next election, assigning for reasons the fumes in the colony and party
spirit were so high, and that bribery and corruption were so predominant, that
neither life, liberty nor property were safe, etc. etc. etc. Now Sir, whether
the Governor's intentions as exhibited in this open, public declaration, was
real, or feigned to answer political purposes; it still evinces their decrepid
state; the prostitution of government; and melancholy situation of every good
subject: For it cannot be supposed by any candid inquisitor, that a declaration
of that nature and form would, if not true, been delivered by a Governor to a
whole legislative body, in order to emancipate himself. If this truth is
granted, and this allowed to be their unhappy situation, how much is it the
duty of every good man, and what language is sufficient to paint in an
effectual manner, this internal imbecility of an English colony (in many other
respects favorably situated for trade and commerce, one of the safest,
largest, and most commodious harbors in all America, or perhaps in all Europe,
accessible at all seasons, situated in a fine climate, and abounding with
fertile soil) -- in the maternal bowels of compassion, in order that she may
seasonably, if she thinks it necessary to interpose, regulate, and wipe away
their pernicious CHARTER, rendered obnoxious by the abuse of it.

I am afraid I have tired your patience with a subject that must give pain to
every impartial friend to Great Britain and her colonies. -- When I took up my
pen, -- I only intended to have communicated the out-lines of such of my
perplexities (without diping so far into political matter) as I thought would
atone for, or excuse my-long silence, and excite your compassion and advice.

Our friend Robinson is gone to Boston to join the commissioners. My
compliments to Collector Stuart. -- May I ask the favor of you both to come
and eat a Christmas dinner with me at Batchelor's Hall, and celebrate the
festivity of the season with me to Narraganset woods. A covey of partridges, or
bevy of quails, will be entertainment for the Collector and me, while the pike
and perch ponds amuse you. Should business or pre-engagements prevent me that
pleasure, permit me to ask the favor of your earliest intelligence of the
proceedings of parliament; and of your opinion whether our case is not so great
as to excite their compassion and interposition were it known. This narration,
together with your own knowledge of many of the facts, and the disposition of
the colonies in general, will refresh your memory, and enable you to form a
judgment. Relief from home seems so tedious, especially to us who have suffered
so much, like to suffer more, and unacquainted with their reasons of delay,
that I am quite impatient.

About twelve months ago, I received from three gentlemen in London (in trust
for several others) exemplified accounts for a balance of above twenty six
thousand pounds sterling, mostly due from this colony, not fifty pounds of
which shall I ever be able to recover without compulsive measures, and what is
still worse, my lawyer advises me from all thoughts of prosecution, unless a
change of government ensues. I am therefore obliged to send them his opinion
(in justification of my own conduct) in lieu of money ten years due. Poor
satisfaction! Our consolation must be in a British Parliament. Every other
avenue is rendered impregnable by their subtilty, and degeneracy, and we can no
longer depend upon a people who are so unthankful for our indulgences, and the
lenity of their mother country I wish you the compliments of the approaching
season, and a succession of many happy new years.

I am, Sir, with much regard, Your most humble servant, G. ROME.

Copy of some LETTERS signed Thomas Moffat, lately returned from England.
SIR,
NOtwithstanding of my having written to you very often, and at much length of
late, and that I am upon the point of setting out for Boston with the first
weather fit for traveling, yet I cannot refrain from troubling you with a few
lines about the 8th and 9th letters of the Farmer, which I now enclose you.
They are oracular here and make rapid deep impressions, and who is there at
this time here, if capable, that may undertake to contradict or expose these
agreeable seasonable epistolary Sophisms? Relief, Support and Recompense so
long and so much expected, hoped and wished for, seems too tardy and slow paid
-- vigor and resolution seems to be exhausted in Great Britain, or bestowed
upon improper and more trivial objects, than the subjection or obedience of
America. Excuse these out-pourings of melancholy and despondency in a very
dreary day, when the weather alters and the sun shines abroad, perhaps I may
see through a brighter or more agreeable medium, but believe me the prospect is
now bad and unpromising, but however it may prove, I desire and pray you to be
assured that I am,

Sir, your most obedient and most humble Servant, THOMAS MOFFAT.
N. London, February 7, 1768. I will also trouble you from Boston.



SIR,
BY Mr. Byles I am favored with your most obliging letter of the second of
August last, for which together with your extraordinary civility to Mr. Byles I
truly thank you: I could not really think of such a person going from hence
without showing him to you, as a Parson or Minister of his way and turn of
thinking may be considered as of the comet kind here, which leads me to say
somewhat abruptly if not improperly to you, that it seems to me here as if the
Universities of Scotland had conspired to distinguish all the firebrand
incendiary preachers of this country with plumes of honorary degrees and
titles, which in truth are only so many mortifications to the friends of
Great Britain or lovers of letters, who cannot help being touched and chagrined
at the too frequent profusion of honor and titles conferred from Scotland upon
the leading preachers of sedition. I wish this affair of literary prostitution
from my native country may induce you to speak of it to some of that nation
with whom I know you are intimate, that may think of preventing it for the
future.

As to Boston, the great theater of action, I have been silent for some time
past only for want of certain intelligence, as every day generally produced new
rumors without any or much foundation in truth -- but since the arrival of the
two regiments with Col. Dalrymple all has been quiet there. I now flatter
myself that measures of vigor will be pursued and maintained here, and I
impatiently wish to hear that your friend is in power and confidence again, but
that is indeed a point I have much expectation, desire and faith in. As you
have expressed heretofore to me inclination of knowing the proceedings of the
Rhode Island Assembly respecting compensation to the sufferers in the riot of
Newport, I now trouble you with a copy of my letter of this day to the Lords of
the Treasury, which mutatis mutandis, is the same with that also to the Earl of
Hilsborough of the same date with a copy of the narrative and letter to Lord
Shelburne.

MY LORDS,

AGain I presume upon troubling your Lordships with as short an account as may
be written of what has very lately passed in the General Assembly of Rhode
Island colony, in reference to their granting of a compensation to the
sufferers from the riot of Newport 1765, as resolved on in the British
Parliament and very graciously recommended from His Majesty to the Governor and
Company of that colony by his principal Secretary of State.

Tired out and greatly mortified with a long course of frequent fruitless and a
very expensive attendance upon the General Assembly, I had resolved above a
year ago to solicit them no more: but at the intercession of my fellow sufferer
Mr. Howard, Chief Justice of North Carolina, I was again prevailed upon to go
to Newport in September last, where and when the Assembly then met and I had
sufficient influence to engage the Speaker of the House of Deputies to move
several times for reading a petition of Mr. Howard's, with an estimate of his
loss solemnly sworn to and authenticated by a Notary Public* with every
necessary prescribed form. The Speaker also urged upon the House because of my
attending from another colony upon that account only, but the Deputies would
neither consent to hear Mr. Howard's petition nor receive his estimate.

Immediately after this refusal a message was sent from the Upper House of
Magistrates requesting the Lower House to enter now upon the riot of Newport by
immediately impowering the High Sheriff to impannel a Jury of Inquisition to
ascertain and repair the loss of Dr. Moffat, Mr. Howard and Mr. Johnson, but
the House of Deputies could not listen nor agree to any part of this proposal
from the Upper House.

About the middle of last month I wrote a most respectful letter to the
Governor of Rhode Island and enclosed to his Honor the estimate of my loss in
the Newport riot sworn to before and attested by a Magistrate here requesting
the favor of the Governor to lay the same before the ensuing Assembly, The
Governor writes on the seventh of this month that at the last session of
Assembly he presented my estimate and read my letter in a great committee of
both Houses of Assembly but could not prevail to have it considered then; and
adds that he will endeavor to bring it in again next February.

Under the strongest impressions of assurance the General Assembly of Rhode
Island never will recompense the sufferers in the riot of Newport, may I again
presume to implore your Lordships interposition and influence to obtain a
recompense for the sufferers in Rhode Island from some more effectual and
certain channel than that of depending any longer upon the duty or justice of
the General Assembly in that colony. And my Lords may I yet rather presume in
writing to your Lordships to add that by endeavoring to restore in some
measure what I lost in that riot I am now sadly sensible that I have not
overvalued the same in my estimate, as also that if I am not compensated by the
interest, generosity and equity of your Lordships, I can never expect to be
possessed of half the value I then lost as the Office of a Comptroler here I
now hold, has but a very inconsiderable salary with small perquisites.

I am, my Lords, etc. etc. T. M.
N. London, Nov. 14 th, 1768.
In my last letter which I hope you have received, as I addressed it to the
care of your brother, I then touched upon Sir William Johnson's being here some
weeks in quest of health, and of the pleasure Mr. Stewart and I enjoyed with
him; as also that Lord Charles Grenville Montague was here on passant with his
Lady; and I also then intimated to you our happiness in Mr. Harrison the
Collector of Boston having accepted Mr. Stewart's warm invitation to come here
after the very flagrant riot at Boston, on which he had been so greatly
insulted, abused and hurt, who came here with his lady, son and daughter, and
staid a fortnight; when we planned and regulated all these colonies into a
system which I could wish to see effected. Since which Mr. Stewart has visited
Mr. Harrison at Boston at the time when Mrs. Harrison with their son and
daughter failed for London as a place of perfect safety and liberty. Mr.
Harrison's son is capable and promising, but was cruelly used by the mob of
Boston, which will I hope induce Mr. Harrison's friends or rather the friends
of government to provide suitably for so young a sufferer. I could not easily
within the compass of a letter to you say the pleasure I have felt in observing
the strict union and friendship that subsists and is now rivetted between Mr.
Harrison and Mr. Stewart upon principles of the truest honor and virtue both of
whom well understand and sincerely wish the true interest of Great Britain and
all her colonies, especially in the cardinal articles of legislation and
government, as also in the subaltern or lesser points of taxation and revenue
from which objects no attachments, connections or views will or ever can sway
the one or the other. As I have been accustomed to write to you with a
plainness and freedom which I flatter myself has not been disagreeable so
therefore I would further say of Mr. Stewart that he ^^rried in an opulent,
popular and commercial family, some of whom perhaps may be supposed to have
more oblique interest than may be consistent with regulation or a due
submission to the laws of Great-Britatn, so it is with a peculiar and very
sensible satisfaction that I can assure you his spirit, address and conduct in
so nice a situation deserves the greatest praise and commendations, as it has
perhaps been or may be very influential on some of the best among them, even to
a better way of thinking and acting. By the enclosed you will know that Mr.
Stewart now writes to Mr. Grenville, and mention somewhat of his application
for leave of absence from the Treasury Board, which I only wish him to succeed
in because I think Mr. Harrison and him really the most capable persons here to
throw light upon many transactions here which cannot be communicated in letters
or any written representation to satisfaction or proper advantage. If Mr.
Stewart obtains leave to return home I shall be unhappy enough by his absence.
Two years are now elapsed since I came here, a great part of which has been
spent in anxiously wishing for the Genius of Britain to awake and vindicate her
supreme jurisdiction and authority impiously questioned and denied in colonies
so very lately redeemed from hostile incursions and encroachments, but I
believe the time is now come, and I rejoice in its approach. I wish you every
felicity with the preferment and employment you like best, and am, Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servant, THOMAS MOFFAT.
N. London, Nov. 15, 1768.
SIR.
IN November last I wrote you from New London, and inserted in that letter a
copy of what I had written to the Lords of the Treasury and the Earl of
Hilsborough, relative to the compensation of the sufferers in the riot of
Newport 1765. I hope and very much wish that letter may have come to your hand,
because in it you will see how stricly and soon I follow your counsel in making
affidation to the estimate of my loss, which as I apprehended made not the
least impression nor could make upon the General Assembly of Rhode Island,
because there was not I believe a Member in either House that did not think and
believe my loss exceeded the estimate frequently laid before them to no
purpose. I thank you therefore for the kind and good advice which I instantly
followed, and which I think has finished this long and tedious transaction on
this side of the Atlantic, which has not only been ineffectual but attended
with much trouble and expense to me. How or in what light it may be now
considered by Administration or Parliament I cannot at this time and distance
judge, far less determine. Sometimes I flatter myself that a resolve of the
British Senate will not be allowed to be thus scorned and trampled upon; at
other times I despond and think the object too small for attention; and as
there were but three sufferers in Rhode Island colony, two of whom to my great
pleasure and triumph are now amply and very honorably provided for, I sometimes
imagine that compensation may drop and be forgot, and indeed if it was not for
the confidence which I have in you and some others in the House of Commons, I
should certainly despair of any recompense, and which upon recollection I must
acknowledge as criminal in a very great degree, because of its having been
resolved on in the Parliament of Great Britain that such sufferers should be
compensated: And I am not conscious that I have omitted, delayed or neglected
any part of my duty in the course of negotiating it here in America.

A few days ago I came here chiefly to see and enjoy my friend Collector
Harrison, that we might open bosoms to one another upon the great scene and
field of affairs in this country, the face of which is only altered apparently
here from the arrival of the King's troops and ships, which have indeed
restored a very certain security and tranquillity, and prevented if not put a
final period to their most pestilent town-meetings. There is nor can be no real
alteration in the sentiment or disposition of the prime disturbers -- This is
but an interval or truce procured from the dread of a Bayonet -- The specifical
and catholic remedy derived from and founded in an acknowledgment of the
British supremacy and legislation over America manifested under the exercise of
a more firm, regular and consistent plan of civil government, must come from
the decrets of the British Parliament, otherwise the country, and particularly
New England, will soon and forever be in perpetual anarchy and disobedience.
The anxiety and distress of the few here that are well affected to government
before the arrival of the troops and ships was very great, and in my opinion
will be greater if vigorous, salutary and proper measures are not adopted in
Parliament.

All here seem anxious and impatient to know the complexion and temper of the
British Parliament, and what is very unaccountable if not incredible, the sons
of liberty here so called are elevated with hope and assurance that their
claims and pretensions will be received and recognized as they affect to phrase
it, but if I err not, this presumption of hope may have arisen or been
cherished in a great measure by some visits of an officer of high military rank
from New York to some of the most popular and violent ringleaders here, and I
wish that I could say to you that the most mischievous here had not been
countenanced also by a person of another and very different station.

I and that in consequence of and under an apprehension of unsettled, unsafe
times here, Mr. Harrison has thought it best that Mrs. Harrison, his son and
daughter, should go to London, as a place of true liberty and safety, and as I
hope they will be arrived before this reaches you, and as I formerly mentioned
to you Mr. Harrison's son as a young sufferer very roughly handled upon the
10th of June, so if you incline to see and discourse him for intelligence or
any other motive, Mr. Hallowell of this town can easily bring him to you.

If any thing remarkable occurs here during my stay I shall not fail to write
to you again.

I am, Sir Your most obedient and most humble Servant, THOMAS MOFFAT.
Boston, December 15, 1768.

