THE CONVERSION OF A Mehometan, TO THE Christian Religion, Described in a
LETTER FROM GAIFER, in England, TO ALY-BEN-HAYTON, his Friend in Turkey.

We speak that we do know THE SIXTH EDITION.

LONDON: Printed. NEW LONDON: Reprinted and sold by T. GREEN. 1778.

A LETTER, etc.
GAIFER to ALY-BEN-HAYTON.
Dear HAYTON,
YOU cannot be ignorant that the imperfect, though awakening Information given me
of the the Christian Religion, by an English slave under captivity, to our
bigoted Mehometan neighbor, Abdala, put me upon a restless desire of a
farther knowledge therein. This, I was convinced, could not be obtained in my
present unhappy situation; being in a country, where it is death to give the
least suspicion of favoring the Christian profession; where every eye, and
every ear were dangerous watchers over all my behavior: Therefore it was, with
all the caution cecessary to so hazardous an attempt, I happily got on board
the Expedition, bound from Constantinople to London.

When I came to England, as soon as I had opportunity of making my
observations, I found that the Christian religion was in general professed
throughout this kingdom. But notwithstanding the purity it enjoins, it appeared
that the generality of its professors were very loose in their morals, profane
in their discourse, and debauched in their lives. I also found that the
professors of Christianity were divided into many religious sects, and, what is
much to be deplored, each carry their opposition, for the most part against the
other to that height of inveteracy, as if they worshipped not the same GOD.

This put me upon farther enquiry into the principles of the Christian
Religion; a task difficult enough for a stranger to undertake, who had then but
a small acquaintance with the English tongue. But that impediment was removed
in a shorter time than was expected, by the assistance of a humane, sober
Gentleman, whose profession was to teach the languages, and instruct his pupils
in the religion of his country. He took much pains in teaching me both; and
furnished me with such books as were necessary, particularly that which they
call the Bible, which is to Christians what the Alcoran is to the Mehometans.
This is their perfect rule of faith, and contains a full declaration of the
will of GOD, with a full account of future rewards and punishments for the good
and evil.

As I read these sacred pages with an unprejudiced mind, and a desire of
information, I soon found how mistaken I had been concerning the terms of man's
acceptance with GOD, and of his final salvation; namely, that it is not by
works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost; and
that by grace we are saved, through faith, and that not of ourselves, it [even
faith] is the gift of God. I clearly saw, according to this book, That to him
that could not work, previous to his justification, but believes on Jesus
Christ, his righteousness, being received by faith, is imputed to him for
justification. I saw also both the nature and extent of the moral Law; the fall
of man by the transgression of Adam, our general root and representative; that
the first covenant being broken, man was utterly unable to obtain salvation
thereby; and that Jesus Christ, the second Adam, came into the world to be the
savior and living head of all that believe in him: For them he fulfilled the
law; for them he satisfied divine justice; and that the only way to eternal
life, was, by receiving his righteousness, which is imputed to all them that
believe.

When I began to understand something of the differences amongst the various
professors of Christianity, I found them all remote from the tenor of
scripture; that all within the circle of my acquaintance, seemed totally to
neglect those doctrines the holy scriptures made absolutely necessary to
salvation, and warmly to contend for forms and modes, and whatever the Bible
was either quite silent about, or laid no stress upon. But what I wondered at
most of all was, that those who are called Clergymen, and are by the laws of
their country, separated from the rest of the people, to teach the principles
and practice of their holy religion, are, for the most part, the greatest
strangers to the essence of the Gospel. As for their lives, they are as vain,
trifling and irreligious as any others. They frequent all public theaters,
balls, and the vilest assemblies; in short, they are a common reproach, a
public scandal, and the very hindrance of others repentance, but still they
call themselves the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ;
and expect to be reverenced of all men, for being the followers of his
humility, his contempt of the world, and purity of life.

Upon the whole, I could form no other judgment of the divinity of the gospel
from the deportment of the bulk of its professors, and especially of their
teachers* than that it was a cunning fable, devised only to aggrandize a set of
men that call themselves the Clergy. Their public exhortations faintly
recommend a conduct of life, such as they themselves are mostly strangers to;
though it be no more than a little dry Heathen mo^a^ity: From all this I could
see them in no other light, than tho very enemies to the cross of Christ, the
greatest opposers of the true Christianity, and deceivers of the people.

Thus, my dear Hayton, instead of the real happiness I promised myself in the
society of Christians, and the glorious privileges of their religion, so
recommended and adorned by that poor exiled slave, I met with very little else
here in this Christian land (so called) but infidelity and profaness; which
sore disappointment hardened my heart against all religion whatever. What could
I then conclude, but that the Bible was a cheat, and their religion a craft?
And I had well nigh resolved to loose the reins of my passion, and follow the
multitude to do evil.

But one Sabbath evening (and let me not forget that day!) as I was taking a
solitary walk, musing on these things, I passed by a very crowded assembly of
people. Led, as I thought, by curiosity, I entered the place with no little
contempt in my heart. But, O my Hayton! how shall I describe the strange
emotions I felt, whilst joy sat upon the countenances of those about me. The
solemnity of the place, and the awful behavior of the assembly was such as I
had never seen before; and what struck me with wonder and deep attention, one
spirit seemed to animate the whole body; and what one man offered up in prayer,
the rest made their joint request to GOD for.

O what I felt when I heard the KING of Kings addressed in these words! Gird
thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty, and in thy majesty ride
prosperously upon the word of truth, meekness and righteousness -- Thine arrows
are very sharp in the heart of the King's enemies. I trembled; and though I
doubted if I had not better fly away, I could not. I dared not leave the awful
place. Prayer being ended, from the sacred oracles the man of GOD read these
words, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. He showed
both the holiness of that GOD with whom we have to do; the great design of
redemption by Jesus Christ; the depravity of our souls, and the nature of that
happiness which is set before us; the absolute necessity of being born again,
in order to obtain a present pardon, and persevere to future salvation. He not
only proved the necessity of our regeneration from these, and many other
substantial arguments, but there was something like a judgment seat set up in
my own conscience. I was by some power, more than human, indicted, arraigned,
proved guilty, and condemned. The (...) actions of my life were now laid open
before me; I was compelled to assent to what I never knew before, namely, that
all my sinful actions proceeded from a corrupt fountain* a nature universally
depraved and polluted. Each sentence he spoke, came with authority and
conviction to my heart; especially such as these; Every mouth must be stopped,
and all the world (even they that have not the written law) become guilty
before God No man can redeem his brother, nor give unto God a ransom for him.
He that believes on Jesus Christ, shall be saved; and he that believes not
shall be damned. Now it was that my heart failed within me! I groaned in
spirit. I cried, I am undone! My sins are gone over my head. The remembrance of
them is grievous, and the burden of them is intolerable.

When all was ended, I strove with all my might to conceal the confusion of my
mind from those happier souls I was surrounded with; but some of them perceived
my concern; and one said to me, with tears in his eyes, "The Savior of sinners
have mercy on thee, and reveal himself to thy soul! But, O, my load was great!
I returned with a heavy heart.

When I entered my closet, I threw myself prostaate on the ground, and
attempted to pray. But it was long before I could speak a word. At length,
under some heart meltings, and in broken accents, I cried out, O Lord GOD; the
maker of all things, and the governor of the world, unto thee all power
belongs; thou can kill, and make alive -- mercifully behold a poor, miserable
sinner -- ruined and undone -- I confess, O GOD, that I have justly deserved
eternal death; and it is alone of thy sparing hand that I am yet alive. -- Thou
can, in a moment, crush me to death, and in just vengeance destroy me forever
-- But, O my GOD, glorify thyself in the salvation even of such a wretch as I
am! -- O be merciful to me a sinner! -- For the sake of all thy goodness, and
all that whereby thou make it known! Turn me, even me, and save me forever
and ever!

After some time I rose from the ground; but in great distraction of mind.
Sometimes I had thoughts of going in search of the preacher, in hopes of
finding relief from him; but this seemed impracticable, it being now late in
the evening; and besides I knew not where to seek him. Then I condemned myself
for not having enquired where he lived, and looked upon this neglect as a bad
omen. It now darted into my mind, whether or no the minister I had heard was
really a man of like passions with others, or rather an angel sent from GOD. In
the multitude of my thoughts within me, I cast my eye upon my quite neglected
Bible, which I had before carelessly thrown aside, finding it so little regarded
by the generality of those called Christians. I read, and pondered, and read
on; but alas! every line seemed to militate against me; and instead of
ministering relief, to increase my torment. I closed the book, and paused, then
opened it again, and found these words. The sorrows of death compassed me, and
the pains of hell gat hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I
upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. This
scripture, for a moment, conveyed some light and comfort to me in my distress.
I saw my case was not, as I supposed, peculiar to myself. I said, surely this
man has been in like trouble of soul, and has felt the pains of hell too; and
yet the Lord graciously delivered him out of all.

But this small glimmering of light was soon extinguished: All that night I had
no rest. My slumberings were attended with astonishing terror -- Death,
judgment, and eternal destruction was all I could see, and all I could hear;
and a terrible sound it was. The preacher's text was continually ringing in my
ears, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of heaven. For some
time I confined myself to my room; hardly took so much sustenance as was
sufficient to preserve me alive. The comforts of this life were now blasted.
Hay under sharp convictions. The arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in me; they
drank up my spirits, whilst his hand pressed me sore: Then cried I, What must I
do to be saved? At other times I was more easy; then again under amazing horror
and dread, because I was so thoughtless and stupid, while my case was so
dreadful. I was often under violent temptations to destroy myself, and so put
an end to a wretched life; for I thought, surely the longer I live, the more
sin I commit; consequently my punishment must be greater in the end. Then was I
without hope of deliverance, and concluded, the sooner I put an end to my
misery the better. Now and then I had a small transient gleam of light darting
into my soul, which, for the time it lasted, gave me some hope of deliverance;
at least a peradventure that the Lord might have mercy on so vile a wretch as
me.

At this season I was led to discover more clearly the secret workings of
corruption in my heart. The Spirit of God convinced me, that my understanding
was by nature blind and ignorant, 'till God, who caused the light to shine out
of darkness, shines into the heart, to give the knowledge of his glory in the
face of Jesus Christ. I saw more than ever, that my will was stubborn and
perverse, even to an enmity against the law of GOD; also that my affections
were all disorderly, impure, sensual, and devilish; and what was even beyond
this, that I could not love the Lord Jesus Christ, who had done and suffered so
much on my account. I felt that all my designs wholly terminated in myself. I
was spiritually and rationally convinced, that for me to deny natural, moral,
and religious Self, and come to Christ as a poor, miserable, wretched, empty
creature to live upon his righteousness forever, as my Bible directed me, is as
supernatural and wonderful as to see the mountains and hills removed, and cast
into the depth of the sea. I now began to feel more than ever what I had before
read in the Bible, but could not comprehend -- that salvation was entirely of
grace -- that nothing less than sovereign grace could save my soul from the
guilt and dominion of sin, and make me a partaker of the glorious privileges of
the sons of GOD.

During this confinement, my courteous friend, who before had taken such pains
to instruct me in the manners and language of the country, made me a visit. He
was greatly surprised to see my countenance so fallen, and kindly enquired into
the cause. As he was called a Teacher in Israel, and one that I had often heard
animadvert warmly on the bad behavior of the generality of his brethren; I
simply related the trouble I was in, and what I apprehended was the cause of
it, and what I more than feared must be the fatal consequence. He looked
earnestly at me, and with concern in his countenance replied, I pity your
condition from my heart. Your disorder is a religious distraction of mind,
which we call enthusiasm, we have a great deal of this in England The person
you heard preach, and who was the cause of your trouble, is a grand Deceiver,
one whose constant employment is to turn the world upside down! Not being
content with the happy established form of religion, he has got some novel wild
chimeras in his head; and being fired with the irrational ideas of his own
brain, he frightens his poor deluded followers out of their senses; most of
whom are poor illiterate persons, the very filth and off scouring of the world.
My advice to you, Sir, said he, is never to go near them more by any means.
Attend the regular stated service of our excellent church: go abroad into
cheerful company; shake off that corosive melancholy, and resume your wonted
sprightliness. God is a merciful Being, and does not require so much strictness
at our hands. You may use the pleasures of this life, love the world, and go to
heaven too

I asked him the meaning of those words. Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. He said. You must be baptized, and lead a moral, sober
life; but not think to receive the Holy Spirit.

Now I saw what he was; and knew that if he was right the word of God was
wrong; if the word of God was truth, he must be in error and delusion. He left
me grievously oppressed and heavy laden with sin. I was under the clearest
conviction, both from what the preacher declared, and what I read in the Bible,
that no righteousness could serve to justify my person at the tribunal of a
just and holy God, but that which is altogether perfect, fully commensurate to
the utmost Demands of the moral Law. This I more than saw was altogether
impossible for me to perform In fine, I found my acquaintance was a physician
of no value, altogether a stranger to my disorder, and quite unacquainted with
the only sovereign remedy for perishing souls: just then came into my mind some
passages I had read in my Bible of false prophets, who cry Peace, peace, when
there is no peace; and the blessed (...) of Christianity's words. Beware of
false prophets, who are only blind leaders of the blind; I was enabled to take
these hints, and to beware of falling into the ditch with him.

I lo^^ed exceedingly for the return of the next Lord's Day; resolved to go,
(notwithstanding all the Doctor said) to the same place, where God had so
wonderfully wrought upon my soul before.

The blessed morning being come, I worshipped the God of heaven in fervent
prayer, committed my body, soul and concerns to him, and begged that this day
might be a feast of marrow and fat things to my soul; and soon hasted to the
assembly of saints. And as they began their worship sooner than most others, I
was again a little too late. The same minister was there, and my very heart
leaped at the sound of his voice. He was just taking these soul-reviving words
for the subject of his discourse -- Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. He told us, that this was the voice of
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, inviting weary, hungry, perishing souls, to a
feast of mercy and grace. And in order to prevail upon his hearers to accept
the invitation, he showed, 1 That the burden of sin is a heavy burden. 2. That
the Spirit of God always makes us feel that burden, and groan to be delivered,
before we find rest. 3. That Jesus Christ only can give rest to the weary soul.
4. That he will do it to all that come unto him; namely, to all that believe.
He insisted upon all these points, and was large in the inferences he drew from
them. Then concluded in prayer and praise.

During the whole time, the most devout affections were to be discerned in the
whole assembly. As for me, I found that every word was exactly levelled at my
heart. He could not have spoke more pertinently to my case, if I had told him
all the exercises of my distracted mind. I sometimes thought he had surely been
informed of all my griefs, and hence he directed his discourse only to me. He
opened all my disease, probed the wound to the bottom; and it was as though I
was shaken over the mouth of hell. Then he applied the precious balm of Gilead,
he preached Jesus Christ in all his offices, especially as the glorious
Physician, who heals the wounded conscience, for his own name's sake.

In the application of the whole, he showed the many hindrances which lie in
the way; and the perplexing doubts and slavish fears which possess the burdened
conscience at its first coming to Christ; and withal, how able and willing he
is to receive and give them rest. My soul failed within me. My spirits sunk
under the weight of a comfortable hope, that Jesus would have mercy on me, even
me!

Just as he drew to a conclusion, he raised his voice, and with great
earnestness quoted these words; I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions* for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, says the
Lord. The blessed Spirit applied them home to my soul, and wrote them, by the
finger of God, upon the Table of my heart; in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, the scales fell from my eyes! I beheld Jesus of Nazareth by the eye of
faith* as evidently crucified before me -- bearing my sins in his own body on
the accursed tree. The prison doors were thrown open; my soul, that was before
bound in misery and iron, and locked it in the prison of unbelief, was now set
at liberty, God helped me to come as a poor perishing, undone sinner, and cast
my soul upon Jesus Christ! O he graciously received me; and according to the
multitude of his mercies, and the faithfulness of his promise, he blotted out
all my sins! I received Christ into my heart, the hope of glory; and he put a
new song in my mouth even praises unto God for his discriminating grace!

-- He has loved me, I cried,
He has lived and has died
To redeem such a rebel as me!
O my dear Hayton, I cannot describe the thousandth part of that transport of
joy, that substantial bliss I then felt; and blessed be God, even now, while I
am writing. I yet feel it in my soul; I was in a moment translated from
darkness to light; from sickness to health; from pain to ease; from misery to
happiness; from bondage to liberty; from death to life: Yea, I may truly say,
from hell to heaven!

Had I but one wish left, it should be, that my dear friend, even while he
reads the language of my happy soul, might taste and see how good and gracious
the Lord is! might himself feel the sweetness, life and power of Christ!

Well, my soul is concerned for, and, I trust, I shall always remember thee. my
Hayton! and when I bow before the throne of Jesus, O let my prayers come up
before him, and be heard for you.

Now I begun to live. From this moment commenced my spiritual and eternal life,
which is hid with Christ in God. Jesus Christ is become to me a head of
influence, and I daily receive out of his fullness grace for grace The whole
body of sin is condemned in the flash, and has already received its mortal
wound. Jesus gave me to drink of the living water, and it slows, and ever will
flow unto eternal life. The sun of righteousness shines with a new light into
my understanding, sets a new bias to my will, and all the passions and
affections of my soul run in a new channel. In a word, the Holy Ghost has
wrought a real, thorough change in my heart; all old things are done away, and
all things are become NEW: for being now become dead to the law, and married to
Christ, I am enabled to bring forth fruits unto God

But O! when I view my interest in CHRIST, and consider what an inexhaustible
fund of grace, strength, and righteousness, is ledged for me in the Redeemer's
hands; this proves the sweetest and most powerful engagement to all evangelical
obedience, and the only spring of all true consolation.

May the dear IMMANUEL draw thy heart into union with his glorious person,
which is eternal life! Then, and not till then, you shall enjoy a kingdom of
heaven in your own breast, a very paradise in your soul, unspeakably better
than what the Alchoran deludes us with a false expectation of.

If it be so, my dear Hayton, as it really is, that all real Christians are
thus happy in a world of woe, and under the encumbrances of flesh and blood;
how transcendantly glorious, how unspeakably happy must they be, when these
impediments are removed! when the soul becomes at liberty to range the whole
paradise of GOD and taste the joys of infinite delights! -- And thus shall it
be done unto every man whom Jesus delights to honor.

I must farther relate to you, that when I had the happiness of being
acquainted with the Evangelist that first brought the glad tidings to my ears,
and by whose ministry the grace of GOD reached my heart, I related my
experience to him, and a few of his intimate friends. O how did they weep for
joy over me! They strengthened my faith in Christ, and gave glory to GOD, who
had added another lost sinner to his militant church. These knew how to
sympathize with me, when I lay under the wrath of God, the curses of the law,
and the terrors of conscience; for by comparing notes, our experiences exactly
tallied, as face answers face in a glass.

But here give me leave to make a few observations of another kind.

The Christian religion is. I presume, not only to be demonstrated by the
Spirit's secret operations in the soul, but it may be proved from rational
grounds, to be a system altogether agreeable to right reason, and the moral
fitness of things. For what so fit for, and suitable to a lost, ungodly,
helpless sinner, as an all sufficient SAVIOR! What so suitable to the weary,
as rest; to the hungry, as bread; to the thirsty, as water; to the naked, as a
garment; to the blind, as sight, etc. All these, and many more striking
metaphors, has the Holy Spirit most elegantly, borrowed from the creature, to
show how reasonable a thing it is that we should believe on the LORD JESUS
CHRIST unto eternal life.

No man can be forced to believe against his reason, or love against his will,
or desire against his inclination. Therefore the Spirit of GOD first enlightens
the understanding that it may discern; the will and offections then naturally
flow after. The soul is first drawn to JESUS as if it would not come; and then
it comes as if it were not drawn. He drew me with the cords of love, as with
the bands of a man. And this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance. (even of our enlightened age;) That Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners.

And I found that the greatest part of those, whom I have been speaking of,
could each say for himself, from the real experience of the heart, Jesus Christ
has loved me, and given himself for me. And the whole of their deportment and
conversation in the world, shows them to be persons full of genuine humility,
unaffected seriousness, being mild and gentle; free from all selfish design;
wholly devoted to JESUS CHRIST, and earnestly seeking the good of all their
fellow creatures; and yet (wonderful to relate!) these people are contemned by
almost all professors, both teachers and hearers; yea, they are persecuted, and
loaded with all the obloquy that inveterate malice can suggest; and all the
opposition that can be contrived to prevent the spreading of the glorious
gospel, and the increase of the genuine followers of the exalted Redeemer Nay,
these that disagree in all other religious points, yet are unanimous in this
that they will root one, if possible, their memorial from the face of the earth.

But notwithstanding all the opposition they meet with, the meekness, patience,
and perseverance of these Christians, both ministers and people (for I
understand there are many more of the same spirit) surmounts all difficulties,
and their numbers daily increase. And why not? seeing the wonderful conversions
that are among them, are surely enough to engage the greatest skeptic in
religion, to believe that the mighty power of GOD is with them!

O that our countrymen would but admit this true gospel of Christ amongst them!
Surely if it were preached by some of these despised messengers of the living
GOD, they would, I doubt not, through divine grace, embrace the truth as it is in
Jesus; and be a reproach to this nation, who resist the calls of God: And
though they are called by his name, will not have this man, this God man Christ
Jesus, to reign over them.

Oh! how fatally successful has the enemy of mankind been, by engaging in his
interest that very power, which by primitive gospel institution, was ordained
as a barrier between the people and his subtle inventions: Surely he has gained
his point, by bribing the watchmen with riches, power, and pleasure; so that
while they riot in luxurious ease, the poor souls under their mistaken care,
fall an easy, willing sacrifice to his rapacious power. Woe, woe to the
watchmen, and woe to the people! for the carelessness of those will not
extenuate the guilt of these. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall in
the ditch together. But every soul shall be required at the watchman's hand.

It appears to me, that this corrupt ministry is a greater enemy to their
nation than the most formidable powers about them; for those, at the worst, can
but annoy them in their temporal interest, but these wound them deeply in
temporal and eternal at the same time; inasmuch as if we practiced the gospel
of Jesus Christ, and lived by the faith of the Son of GOD, it could not fail of
engaging the arm of Omnipotence in the defense of both: Then, having our anchor
within the veil, we might justly triumph with those worthy heroes of old, who,
through faith, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword; out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned
to slight the army of the aliens. Whereas, on the contrary, a dissolute
debauched, prophase life, a land full of infidelity, must cause the divine
Majesty of heaven to rise up against them.

I should swell my letter to too great a length, should I pursue my inclination
on this subject: But what I have said, I hope, through the assistance of divine
grace, will excite your desires and diligence to become acquainted,
experimentally acquainted, with the doctrines of the gospel.

Oh Hayton! did you but know the joy of believing in JESUS CHRIST, and the
heaven I enjoy in communion with him, it would soon wean you from your
superstitious and fruitless pilgrimage to Mecca and Ara^ata in honor of a grand
Impostor; and engage you to come and see the salvation of God.

If it please the REDEEMER to breathe on these lines, this humble attempt to
inform your judgment, and awaken your conscience, so that they are brought with
conviction to your heart, I shall, (if the LORD please) send you another
letter, to give you a brief account of the doctrines, practice, and discipline;
the officers, members, glory and symetry of a church of CHRIST, according to
the Bible plan.

Farewell, my dear friend. May the contemned Nazarene bring thee to a knowledge
of thyself, and a knowledge of his pardoning love, which is eternal life!

Then you will not envy our great Sultan his glory, but be happy, unspeakably
happy, in your own breast.

As is

Your joyful, Self-exiled Friend, etc. GAIFER.




