AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON, PREACHED on WHITSUNDAY, 1769; Being the sequel to that
occasioned by the murder of MR. WILLIAM ALLEN The YOUNGER, On the BLOODY tenth
of May, 1768.

Common safety the cause and foundation of human society; or an examination of
the RIGHTS of individuals to personal SECURITY, and how far those rights may
extend to the altering, dissolving, or forsaking any GOVERNMENT, that shall
cherish MURDERERS.

AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON, Preached in the Parish Church of St. Mary,
Newington-Butts, in Surry; On WHITSUNDAY, 1769; Being the sequel to that
occasioned by the Murder of MR. WILLIAM ALLEN The YOUNGER, On the BLOODY 10th
of May, 1768; AND Published at the request of his friends as a remembrancer, to
prevent the consideration of POLITICAL MURDER.

BY JOHN FREE, D. D. Vicar of EAST COKER, in SOMERSETSHIRE; Sir JOHN LEMONS
Lecturer of St. MARY-HILL, LONDON; and Lecturer of NEWINGTON-BUTTS.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON: Reprinted for J. GREENLEAF, and sold at the NEW
PRINTING-OFFICE, in HANOVER-STREET, 1773.

AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON, For the tenth of MAY, 1769; against Political MURDER.
GENESIS, CHAP. iv. VERSE 14. Behold thou have driven me out this day from the
face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive
and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that
finds me, shall slay me.
YOU have in these words some account of the heavy sentence, and bitter agonies
of Cain, after the commission of a crime the most horrid upon reflection, and
most shocking to human nature, the destruction of a fellow creature -- the
image of God in one sense -- and, the wickedness of his disposition excepted,
in every other respect, the Nihilest unum uni tam simile, tam par quam omnes
inter nosmet ipsos sumus. -- Cicero. Perdendus mei similis. -- PUFFEND ORF.
image of himself.

WHAT adds something to the terror naturally conceived upon such an occasion,
was the novelty of the offense, it being the first transgression of the kind
that we read of in history; and, therefore, not only more affecting to the
murderer himself, but also to the beholders, who, from this first outrage upon
humanity, must begin to look upon the world as a cursed habitation, having such
a spectacle before their eyes as man destroying man -- creatures the first in
dignity in the visible creation, just recent, as it were, from the hands of
their Creator, and yet the one defeating the purpose of the other's being, and
extinguishing in his brother, and that brother's posterity, a then considerable
part of human race.

WAS the first state of nature then, a state of war? And men in single
settlements, and occupations, necessarily in a state of danger and enmity?
Could religion do nothing to prevent bloodshed? -- And was the only remedy to
be found for these evils the friendly succor of a community, and the
additional power derived from association, and a commonwealth?

THIS should seem, by what is here related, to have been the case; and that in
those very early times the instinct of nature, assisted by the dawnings of
reason, pointed out to men, that religion, unless it were genuine, could not of
itself be depended upon as an instrument of peace and quietness: But that the
chief, if not the only public security for their persons, or property, was to
be found in the wholesome laws of a good community, it appearing from this
history, that religion might be productive of divisions, and consequently of
disorders. For by what we can gather from hence, it seems in one family to have
been distinguished into two kinds, namely the religion of those, who called
themselves the sons of God, and the religion of those were styled the sons of
men; of one of which sects Abel was supposed to have been the head; and of the
other Cain; and their opinions in this respect most likely opposite: It being
very evident from the relation of the fact, that it was some matter of
religion, which had made the difference between the two brethern.

THE neutrals therefore (for such a party, there is reason from the context to
believe there was) observing, that though religion, when true and genuine, may
be a strong and natural obligation upon the wise and good, who see it is
foundations, yet as it may be sometimes false in itself, and then attended with
superstition, enthusiasm, and persecution; at other times, though good in it is
kind, yet assented to only in appearance, and then delusive and hypocritical,
not operating to good works, in which respect we find, that the religion of
Cain, notwithstanding his sacrifice, had been defective, they grew diffident of
such a precarious insurance for common honesty, choosing rather to secure
themselves by uniting in society, building cities, and establishing rules, and
ordinances for the defense of their persons, and properties, and lodging a
power in the hands of some public officers for upholding and maintaining the
laws, which were to protect them.

FROM the regulations of some of these well ordered societies, who by reason of
the growing barbarity, and insecurity of the times, might be very vigilant
against a fugitive, Cain seems to have had the greatest apprehension of danger
-- I shall be a fugitive, says he and a vagabond in the earth, and it shall
come to pass that every one, that finds me, shall slay me.

THIS forlorn and restless condition of a fugitive, driven from place to place
like a wild beast from the desert, and constantly denied reception, is no more
than the natural consequence of committing murder. The whole species are
alarmed at the approach of such a monster, they shun him as a lion, that spares
no man in his rage, arm themselves against him as a public enemy, that can
neither be trusted nor reclaimed; and if they slay him, think that they are
doing God service, by removing the common disturber of the peace of mankind.

CAIN, therefore, to avoid the dangers, which surrounded him in the parts
already inhabited, went and dwelt in the land of Nod, perhaps a desert, so
called from his wanderings, whose situation at this present time is hard to be
exactly determined. All that we are told of it is, that it lay to the east of
Eden, and served him for an hiding place, till by time and recollection he
could extricate himself from his present difficulties.

IN order to which, he forms an alliance by marriage, and, as the only place of
security, builds a city of his own, and gathers his discendants into a
community, after the example of the more regular part of the species, who, as
they are described in this chapter to have already put themselves into a
posture of defense, seem to have been beforehand with him in this invention.

THUS much then being premised concerning the natural history of mankind from
their very origin: I shall take occasion, from a view of the polities of these
early ages to prove.

First. THAT (according to the laws of nature) the only cause or motive for
forming societies was in order to procure, by mutual assistance, and
friendship, a greater degree of comfort, security, and peace, than could be
obtained in a solitary, disunited state.

Secondly. THAT murderers being guilty of opposing and defeating these ends of
society, declare themselves ipso facto to be public enemies; and consequently,
that every one, who finds them has a right to slay them.

Thirdly. THAT a chief magistate, or Governor, refusing to execute that right
for the subject, and opposing him at the same time in the use of it, does
thereby dissolve the original compact of the state; loses all title to the
obedience of his people; and leaves them, as once, again in a state of nature,
to take their own measures, and shift for themselves.

BUT first, I am to prove, that the only cause or motive for forming societies,
was in order to procure, by mutual assistance and friendship, a greater degree
of comfort, security and peace, than could be obtained in a solitary disunited
state.

AND here, as almost all our appetites, pursuits, and faculties, speak some
dependence on our fellow creatures, or attachment to them, it might be taken
for granted, that man must want much of the natural happiness, which God
intented for him, and his own being requires, when he is excluded from society.

'MORE things are necessary,' says an excellent Philosopher, to sustain life,
or at least to make it in any degree pleasant and desirable, than any one man
can make or provide for himself, merely from his own labor and ingenuity.
Meat, drink, clothing and house, and that frugal furniture which is absolutely
requisite, with a little necessary physic, suppose many arts and trades, many
heads and many hands. If he could make a shift in time of health, to live as a
wild man under the covering of trees and rocks, feeding upon such fruits, herbs
and roots, and other things, as the earth should afford in return for his
labor, or happen spontaneously to present him; yet what could he do in
sickness and old age, when he would not be able to stir abroad, to collect the
gifts of nature and enjoy her beneficence?

THIS lonely and helpless condition, plainly showing, that an union with his
fellow creatures is extremely necessary to the convenience and comfort of every
human creature; I shall lay down two maxims, which may serve as principles to
regulate that union, and render it subservient to human happiness.

THE first is, that society without benevolence can never preserve this union.

THE second, that society without benevolence will make men more unhappy, than
if they had never been at all united.

THE first observation is true. For it is not the forming themselves into a
body, that can keep men united. A collected number may be called a community,
and while they remain together, they have the appearance of such: But if their
be wanting an union of hearts and affections, they want the essence of society.
Like the particles in a thread of sand, though they appear to be together, they
are really separate, and but one remove from dissolution.

FOR men must come together either upon good designs to each other, or upon
bad: The former not being here supposed, the latter must take their place; and
as bad designs can have nothing for their object but hurt or destruction, with
either of these society cannot subsist.

FOR if the first formers of human society when herded with savages, removed
from amongst them with a view to security and better treatment, and missed of
their aim, finding no better accommodation than they left, does not the cause
still subsist, why they should remove again? The same savage principles
remaining, of unbounded self-interest, and rapine, will produce the same savage
actions; defeat the end of the new society, and drive them for ever to other
settlements, but never preserve them in any.

BECAUSE such principles must occasion continual struggles and convulsions, and
fill the world with acts of violence and injustice, the strong still oppressing
and devouring the weak. The consequence of which must be broils, and bloodshed
in particular rencounters; or a general civil war; or else a lingering
declension of the state, the weakest members decaying first.

NOT that the disease will stop, with the loss of these; the few, who survived
the pillage and destruction of their fellow creatures, through dread and
jealousy of each other, must be forced to separate, securing themselves, as
they can, against the attacks of that uncharitable cruel temper, which lessened
their number at the first.

UPON this state of misery and confusion which must necessarily ensue when a
community is broken up, by the unnatural conduct of it is members in not
pursuing the welfare of the whole, but their private animosities, and private
interests, I cannot but make my second observation, in effect to this purpose.

II. THAT the unfortunate people, who were led to compose such a society, are
made more unhappy by their conjunction, than if they had never been united.

FOR the real end of society being mutual help and assistance, people who come
into it, possessed with such a fond and honest notion, are apt to require
something more to their subsistence, than a clothing of skins, and the roots,
and herbs, of an hermit: Being now consorted, as they think, with reasonable
creatures, and not amongst the beasts of the field, they naturally expect more
from them, than from savages, and have made their happiness depend, in great
measure, as in societies it necessarily must, upon the good offices they are to
receive from others; but the want of charity, stops all interchange of
kindness, and reduces them to a worse state than that of the hermit, who being
bred to misery, never expected any one's assistance, while these in a just hope
of help from their fellow creatures are lamentably lost, like the Mariner, who
perishes in the sight of shore, within the assistance of his friends.

IT is this disappointment of expected help that doubles the sorrowful sighing
of the prisoners, that provokes afresh the widow's tears, and orphan's cries,
that deepens the groans of the miserable, and adds a more piercing accent to
all their complaints.

IN these, and such like circumstances, when people find all hopes of succor
from mankind eluded, and withal receive grievous injuries from others, which
they could never have received from themselves; it is no wonder that they grew
weary of their own species, and prefer solitude to society.

IT is upon these occasions that we read in history of the separation of
particular persons, and sometimes of the secession of an whole multitude.

THUS, for instance, Timon, the honest Athenian, whose love of justice and
plain dealing had led him into many a snare in his intercourse with a corrupt,
deceitful, rotten-hearted people, and whose resentment upon that account
acquired him the name of the man-hater, after he had been long credulous and
benevolent to his own hurt, retired at length from the generation of vipers,
and left them to sting each other.

AND thus, in the first period of the Roman commonwealth, the commons,
oppressed and wounded to the heart by injuries, came to a determination to
break up the state, and to leave the city; which revolution would certainly
have taken place, had they not been soothed by the temper and sagacity of
Agrippa, and lured by the promises of better usage.

SUCH passages as these are recorded in history, and where that has been
silent, the dens and caves of the earth, the monuments of inhumanity in savage
countries, are a testimony to the world, that people look upon a state of
solitude, however contrary to the proper state of human nature, to be yet a
better condition than they can expect to find in a bad society.

AND yet it has been observed before, from the situation and pursuits of men,
that he is a social creature: Of consequence, without some union and
intercourse with his fellow creatures, his life must be very destitute and very
miserable. The sum of the matter then is this, that if you take away affection
from mankind, let them live how they will, they must live in misery.

II. But what I have hitherto advanced is only a step toward the proof of my
second proposition, touching the legality of killing murderers:

FOR if society cannot subsist without common friendship; how much less can it
subsist, if it harbor in it common enemies?

THE matters urged in proof of my first proposition plainly show, that the end
and design of forming societies, was for the sake of procuring a greater degree
of comfort, security, and peace:

BUT murderers, being guilty of opposing and defeating all these ends, declare
themselves ipso facto, or by the very deed, to be public enemies: Therefore, as
every member of a community is interested in the public peace, his own being
bound up, and included in that of the public, it follows, that every member of
a community has a right to slay a murderer.

AND that the ancient practice supported people in this right, may be plainly
gathered from the conversation of Cain, and GOD's reply to it, as a thing
established -- 'therefore,' says he, (i. e.) because the thing is so, as you
represent it; that, by common custom of the world, every one may kill you, that
meets you, I will interpose my authority; and, by punishing you in my own way,
that is, by setting as a mark, my curse upon you, I will take the execution of
vengeance upon myself. The vengeance you see was due, and in the common course
of things would certainly have been executed in the usual manner, but for the
interposition of divine authority.

FOR by the law of nature, no human lawgiver or ruler can remit the earthly or
temporal punishment due to murder, unless so empowered by an act of the whole
community; or screen an offender of that sort, if any one individual demand his
punishment, for the reasons before produced. Because a murderer is a public
enemy, that is, an enemy to every individual, as well as to the community. To
demonstrate this more particularly -- It appears from what has been said, that
the end and design of society is to procure to mankind, by mutual assistance
and friendship, a greater degree of security, peace and comfort, than in a
solitary state they could expect to possess.

WHOSOEVER, therefore, by his actions shall declare himself an enemy to those
ends, does at the same time declare himself a public enemy: For he is an enemy
to the public tranquillity.

THIS character may be justly fixed upon a man, not only when he disturbs a
multitude at once; but even when he makes an attack upon a single person; if
that attack be such as deprives a person of his being, or even of his
well-being. For it makes society no longer a place of security; and therefore
it puts every individual into the same state of danger; though real destruction
may as yet have affected but few. In this general alarm, then, or appearance of
danger, every man has a right to put himself into a state of defense; and as
his own security is included in that of the public; to oppose and destroy that
object, which puts his own security to the hazard by disturbing the public
peace.

HE has a right therefore, to destroy a murderder for destroying the public
security: Because an attempt of that sort in destroying his own security, as a
private man, the case is alarming to every individual, as well as of the body
politic: And therefore, beside the power of acting in conjunction with the
community, as in other cases, against a public enemy; he has a right in this
case, to oppose the public enemy, as a single man; which is a privilege, which
he enjoys by the right of self defense.

To deny, that a man is possessed of such a power as this, is only the doctrine
of tyrants and traitors, whose crime no punishment can equal, and who ought to
be exterminated from the face of the earth.

IT is to assert, says an excellent writer upon the religion of nature,
contrary to truth, that a man either has not the faculties and powers, which he
actually has, for his defense, or that the author of nature has given them to
him in vain. For to what end does he possess them, if he may not use them? And
how may he use them, if not to his own preservation, when he is attacked, and
abused, and perhaps in danger of being destroyed?

IF a man has no right to defend himself against insults, pain, and death; it
must be because the aggressor has a right to assail him, and to usurp a power
over him, and what is his; but this pretension, where a man is not an offender,
is prevented by the notion of property; every man has something, which is truly
his -- His life and limbs for instance, and let us for the present only
suppose, that there may be more. And as men in a state of nature, are allowed
by all Civilians to have been born equal, no man has a right to hurt another's
property, or interrupt his happiness; but if a man may not defend himself, it
supposes that the other has that right, which includes a great absurdity,
namely, a license to commence an injury, or begin a violence, which is in
nature a more unreasonable demand, than only a license to repel it.

FOR he who begins is the true cause of all that follows, and whatever falls
upon him from the opposition made by the defending party, is but the effect of
his own act: Or the violence, of which he is the author, reflected back upon
himself.

AND with regard to society, since he who begins to violate the happiness of
another does what is wrong; we may be sure, that he who endeavors to obviate
or put a stop to that violence, in that respect does what is right; -- right, I
say, with respect to the community.

FOR with regard to himself, since every man is obliged to consult his own
happiness, there can be no doubt but that he not only may, but even ought to
defend it.

OTHERWISE he will fail in his duty to himself, and deny that his happiness is
his happiness, or which is the same thing, suffer what should be his happiness,
by the malice of others, to become his misery.

THIS right of self-defence then may always be exerted upon the apprehension of
danger, and therefore the appearance of danger will always give a man just
cause to exert it.

I AM not to stay, says an excellent Civilian, till a man shall actually begin
to make an attack upon my person; or betray my own safety so far, as to suffer
him by my negligence to take such advantages, as may effect my own ruin.

WE do not know how soon, a person, who has done a thing once, may do it again,
he has declared himself to be a dangerous creature, an enemy to man, by killing
a man. It is enough then that he awakens our suspicions, in such a manner, as
to put us in fear of our lives. When this fear commences, the time of action
commences against an adversary. And therefore, when it is reported, that a
murderer infests society, we may immediately proceed to act against him, if he
come in our way.

BECAUSE his is a character, that always raises a suspicion of our being hurt:
We are by no means certain, but that he may immediately give fresh proofs of
his wicked temper, by effecting our own destruction; and therefore, at the very
moment, that these fears arise, and his approach to our persons makes him
dangerous, that very moment, as he has forfeited all protection from civil
society, and is as little to be trusted, as a person possessed by canine
madness -- that very moment he may be destroyed.

AND whenever the laws of any particular country are deficient in this respect
and come not in to the aid of the law of nature, in matters of such importance
as the immediate danger of losing a life, that country is not fit to be any
longer our place of residence; since the laws are not able to protect the
subject in the article of personal safety, and self-defence, and, therefore, no
longer worthy of his subjection or regard.

III. Having thus clearly demonstrated from principles and maxims undeniably
true, that every man has by the law of nature an unalienable right to slay a
murderer, because a murderer is a public enemy, dangerous to the peace and
safety of the community, and therefore to his own peace; my last observation
touching the concurrence of the laws upon such an occasion will lead me to the
third thing proposed, which was to consider more minutely, what aid an
individual may expect from the public in support of such a right; where I
believe it will appear;

"THAT a Chief-magistrate or Governor refusing to exercise that right, for the
subject, and at the same time denying him the privilege of using it for
himself, does thereby dissolve the original compact of the state; loses all
title to the obedience of his people; and leaves them, as once, again in a
state of nature, to take their own measures, and to shift for themselves."

FOR though, upon entering into society men may, for convenience, (and
convenience we see is the end of coming into society) lodge or deposit this
right in the hands of others, yet it is occasionally resumable, and only
deposited in trust.

"A man (says my Author) may part with some of his natural rights, and put
himself under the government of laws, and of those (people) who in their
several stations are entrusted with the execution of them, in order to gain
their protection, and the privileges of a regular society: -- But if the
question be asked -- what natural rights a man may part with, or how far he may
part with them? The general answer, I think, may be this: Some things are
essential to our being -- (and therefore not to be parted with) -- and some it
is in our power to part with. -- From such as these then we may recede, as far
as is consistent with the end, for which we do it -- and not further." -- For
instance, suppose our end be safety, we cannot then convey away the means of
safety so far as to lose that end. For this would be a contradiction.

EVERY member of a community has a right to safety: He enters into society,
with the view to secure that right, and the stipulations and engagements on the
part of the magistracy, to fulfill the laws and compacts of the country, are
always understood, by the very nature of civil compacts, to be a security for
the same.

EVERY civil government, therefore, to a subject, who is not a criminal, is
supposed to be an Asylum, or place of safety: For otherwise it contradicts the
very end and design of civil government. That is, it is a contradiction to
itself.

BUT no nation can be a place of safety, where the government avowedly harbors
murderers; and in defiance of law and justice persists in the act: Because in
this case they are persisting in that, which must destroy all safety. Since
murder and safety are directly opposites, the one implying the security of a
man, the other his destruction; and, therefore, they mutually expel each other.

SUCH a government then acts contrary to the ends and purposes of society: And,
therefore, if such a government cannot be altered or dissolved it must destroy
society: To avoid which consequence, society has a right, -- 1 st, to alter
that government -- and if that cannot be effected by fair means -- then 2 dly,
to dissolve it -- and lastly, if that be not in their power -- the members have
then a right to forsake such a society, and shift for themselves. --

OF these in their order --

AND 1 st. Upon supposition, that a government should act contrary to the ends
and purposes of society, as in the aforesaid case of murder, individuals have a
right to alter that government.

FOR they have been deceived in the execution of the compact. They entered into
society in order to have their several properties ascertained, and to be quiet
in the possession of them; especially in the possession of that, which is the
greatest of all, and the foundation of all other properties, the property which
they have in their own lives.

THEY may remonstrate then against a deception of this high nature and
consequence, as a breach of contract, and demand an alteration in the measures
of the state.

IF the parties, who form the government refuse to comply with the demand, and
persist in the denial, they bring on the second case; and by turning the power
of the government against the individual, which should have been for his
protection, they give the individual a right to destroy that government.

AND this upon the same principle of self-defence, that authorizes him to
destroy a single man.

FOR if a man cannot part with his right of self-defence against a single
murderer, he cannot ( a fortiori) part with his right of self-defence against a
combination of murderers; but a government combining with murderers is a
combination of murderers; therefore a greater nuisance, an object far more
dangerous, as consisting of a greater number, and for that reason, it he can
compass it, the more worthy to be destroyed.

"THIS reason is decisive, says professor Barbeyrac, and sufficient to refute
the opinion of those, who pretend, as does Grotius for one, (in his Jure Belli
et Pacis Lib. II. Cap. 1. 9.) that the right of a just defense of one's-self
ceases, when the unjust aggressor is a prince, or some other person invested
with authority in civil society. So far from it, that the moment a magistrate,
or a superior, let him be what he will, carries himself maliciously, and from
deliberate choice, to such an excess of madness, he puts himself in a state of
war with those, which he thus attacks: The bonds of subjection are broken, and
the subject or inferior, who never pretended, and who never could engage to
carry his obedience to this excessive length, reenters from thenceforth into
his natural rights, or the rights of a state of nature."

So that we see, when a man, who is in danger from a bad government, can
neither alter it, nor dissolve it, the defect of means to obtain one or the
other of these ends, introduces the third and last mentioned case of necessity,
and gives him a right, where a government acts contrary to the purposes and
institution of society, to forsake that government, and to shift for himself.

FOR, where there is no protection, there is no obligation to stay: And, where
there is danger, as there must be danger from a combination of murderers, there
is great reason to depart. Self-preservation, the primary law of nature, as
well as the cement of society, will, in this case, oblige him to abandon his
present situation, and seek a place of refuge for himself.

THIS matter is briefly stated, and determined in this manner, in the religion
of nature delineated, Sect. vii. proposition ix.

"IN respect of those things, (says the Author) which the laws of the place
take no cognizance of, or if they do take cognizance of them, yet if the
benefit of those laws cannot be had, he who is a member of society, in other
respects retains his natural liberty -- and must endeavor to act according to
truth and his best prudence -- For in the first case, where there is no
cognizance taken, there is nothing to limit him. And in the other, it is the
same as nothing; since in effect there is no law, where no effect or benefit
from it is to be had,"

How much greater then, will I add, must be his danger, and in proportion how
much more precipitant his flight? If the magistrate should not only neglect him
in danger, but even become his pursuer, and appear as a murderer, at the head
of murderers, directing them to do their office.

IN this situation the person stopping or hindering his escape is guilty of the
same wrong, as those who pursue him to his destruction; and, therefore, may be
treated in just the same manner. For he that would turn me back upon an
adversary, that pursues me with an armed force to destroy me, is acting the
same part as that adversary: And, therefore, for the same reason, may be
destroyed.

UPON this principle is founded the legality of sudden emigrations from a
disordered state, which the government, when violence has been committed, have
no right to withstand, or withstand at their own peril, it being an unjust
detention. For, in circumstances pressing and dangerous, long and formal
declarations may hazard the lives or defeat the design of the emigrants.
Besides, the rulers of a state have no right at that juncture to expect a
remonstrance. Where the compact is dissolved, the government is from that time
nothing but mere tyranny: And, therefore, in such a case the departure itself
is a legal, though tacit renunciation of all connection; as the arrival and
settlement in a strange land are presumed to be a real, though tacit,
subjection to another country.

THIS is generally the expedient where the refugees are dispersed, and in
number not sufficient to make a settlement of their own: But if they can
collect themselves and form themselves into a colony, that colony has a right
to depart. We have examples of this sort in the secessions of the old Romans,
which the senate did not attempt to withstand: But what is nearest our
purposes, our own ancestors have left us a remarkable precedent upon a like
occasion. In the time of Charles I. when disputes ran high between the subject
and the Prince, when the public money was squandered, and replaced by force
when their liberties were gone, and their persons visibly in danger, when no
one could speak a favorable word of the government but those who shared, or
expected to share the plunder of the public, by being placemen and pensioners
to the court: They preferred a wilderness to a country which was so soon to be
the scene of distraction and bloodshed, and sought an asylum in America. To
their new settlement, as a mark of their descent, and the best means of
preserving their memorial and existence as a people; they gave it their
national name, and called it NEW ENGLAND, since the name of the old was now to
give way to that of Great Britain, and be lost in oblivion for ever. The bad
government at home, alarmed by this revolt and foreseeing their own decay in
the removal of the subjects, ( The want of people is the destruction of the
Prince. Proverbs xiv, 28.) prevailed upon the King to issue a a proclamation
debarring them access even to those inhospitable deserts. Eight (...) lying in
the Thames, and ready to (...), were detained by order of the council, in which
were embarked Sir Arthur Hazelrig, John Hampden, and Oliver Cromwell, who,
contrary to the law of nature, as well as their own inclinations, were forced
back again to a land divided and unsettled, to share in the perils of a civil
war, in the beginning of which the great Mr. Hampden was slain, but Cromwell
survived to be afterward of the number of those, who took vengeance upon the
person of the unfortunate King; for having suffered his servants, in this and
other instances, to make so bad an use of his power.

THESE are the subjects, which, considering the increasing danger of the times,
as well as the original melancholy occasion of these discourses, the
conscientious discharge of my duty would not permit me to pass over in silence.
I am required by the law of nature, and by the precepts of that religion, which
is here by law established, by the obligations of civil society, (and which
come nearer to the heart of man) by the sympathetic feelings of humanity, to
cry aloud and spare not, till the arm of the destroyer shall be withheld.

FOR, notwithstanding the mighty offense, which some people affected to take at
the doctrine of my first sermon, tending to show the supreme and indispensable
authority of the laws of God, and the impiety and fatal consequences of
screening and abetting murder -- the practice has been still continued -- out
of an high regard, no doubt, to the constitution and the support of
magistrates, who, when acting against law, ought not to be supported at all;
and when acting according to law -- must be very strangely supported! By hiring
ruffians to murder the people assembled to choose their representatives; yet
even this, you are told, was to keep the peace.

BUT if their peace be death; you have the more reason, to be all alarmed upon
the occasion, and to find, or make immediately, some better provision for your
defense, than the present cobwebs of your broken laws. Consider, that murderers
are public enemies, equally dangerous to the whole community, as sudden and
insidious in their attacks as Lions and Tigers -- that such monsters combined
are more to be dreaded than when alone -- and then most dreadful when they
receive authority, or indulgence from the servants of a state.

To be so surrounded is to be all your lifetime, through fear of death, in
perpetual bondage. Rouse, therefore, and concur with your neighbors in seeking
the means of your deliverance; and then beg the blessing of GOD upon the use of
the means -- that so the soul and infernal spirit of tyranny and bloodshed,
which has occasioned these disorders, may be speedily driven from this land,
and flee before the presence of the Lord of hosts.

FINIS.

