SOVEREIGN GRACE DISPLAYED IN THE CONVERSION AND SALVATION OF A PENITENT
SINNER, SET FORTH IN A SERMON Preached before the Execution of SOLOMON GOODWIN,
Who was Executed at FALMOUTH, November 12, 1772, FOR THE MURDER Of DAVID
WILSON, on the 25th of May last. Published at the DESIRE of many who heard it.

BY EPHRAIM CLARK, Of Cape-Elizabeth, and Pastor of the CHURCH there.

-- By Grace are ye saved, through Faith: and not of yourselves: it is the Gift
of GOD.

ST. PAUL. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOYLES in Marlborough-Street MDCCLXXIII.

ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
Kind Reader,
THE following Sermon was not committed to writing until after it was delivered.

Therefore if the reader, who was also a hearer, should meet with any
expressions in this Discourse, which he does not remember to have heard when it
was publicly delivered, will not think it strange.

I don't pretend that what is here published from the Press, is verbatim, with
what was delivered at the Time of preaching: yet I believe that the reader, who
was also an attentive hearer, will find it the same in substance.

This Discourse would have made its public appearance much sooner, had it not
been, that the author was taken sick, before it was ready for the Press.

If the following Sermon should be blessed to any, for their spiritual
edification, let GOD have all the praise.

A SERMON Preached before the Execution of Solomon Goodwin.
LUKE XXIII.42, 43. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come
into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, To day
shall thou be with me in paradise.


THE conversion and salvation of a lost sinner, may justly be reckoned among
the wonderful works of God to the children of men. And sometimes such
circumstances attend the work, which greatly serve to increase the wonder. Such
an instance we have presented to view in the text before us.

Here is a wretched sinner come to the brink of the grave, and the eternal
world; in the broad way to hell.

That this was his case, is evident from what St. Matthew and Mark relate of
him. Matthew says, that when the chief priests, mocking him, with the scribes
and elders, said, he saved others himself he cannot save: it he be the King of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He
trusted in God: let him deliver him now if he will have him: for he said, I am
the Son of God. The thieves also (not one only, but both) which were crucified
with him, cast the same in his teeth. Mat. 27.41, 42, 43, 44.
They joined with those who mocked the Son of God in the agonies of death. Mark
says, and they that were crucified with him reviled him. Mark 15.32.
And in as much as revilers shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10.
we may safely conclude, that he was still in the way to destruction.

But, behold! all on a sudden, he is apprehended by sovereign and all-powerful
grace! he is convinced, and humbled* believes and repents. He prays, and in
answer to his prayer, receives a gracious promise from Christ, of a sudden
transition to the paradise of God!

With respect to this thief, the following particulars are observable.

I. His conviction and humiliation. However proof he might heretofore have been
against convictions, now, at the very last period of his wretched life, the
arrows of God penetrate his stoney heart; the law of God is set home upon his
conscience; with a convincing power and light, his eyes are opened to see his
sins, and the wrath of God to which his sins had rendered him obnoxious; his
conscience is thoroughly awakened, and he is in the utmost distress, to know,
what he must do to be saved from that wrath, which he now sees just ready to
fall on his guilty soul. -- And his eyes are opened, not only to see the awful
state that his sins had brought him into, but also, that his present
sufferings, and whatever he might hereafter suffer, are but a just reward of
his sins: which discovery is absolutely necessary in order to true humiliation.
For unless the sinner sees the justness of his punishment, he never will be
humble under it.

And that this was the case with this malefactor, is evident from what the
evangelist Luke relates of him in the chapter before us. For we read, that when
the other malefactor, railed against Christ, this penitent thief rebuked him,
saying, do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation; and
we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man
(that is Christ) has done nothing amiss. Context* ver. 40, 41.
-- He fully confesses his own sin and guilt, and that the sentence of death he
was now under, was just. He also asserts the innocence of the suffering Savior
of the world: which are convincing proofs that his conviction and humiliation
were genuine, and that he was a sit object of divine compassion.

II. His faith and repentance.

He believes him whom he now saw in the agonies of a shameful death, to be the
Lord of life. That he was a King, and had a kingdom: That crowns and kingdoms
were at his dipose: -- That he was able to save him from eternal death. To
suppose the contrary, would be to make his prayer a piece of downright
idolatry, and not an act of religious worship.

And if we consider the state and condition that Christ was in, at that time
when he believed; his faith will appear the more wonderful. The Son of
righteousness now suffered a very great eclipse, the glory of his Godhead was
greatly obscured by his sufferings: he was in the very depth of his
humiliation; he was now under an unjust sentence of death, and is numbered with
transgressors, to undergo the pains of a shameful death, and was now in the
very agonies of it: now it was that his Father hid his face from him, and put
the bitter cup of his wrath into his hand, which he must needs drink up.

The sufferings of Christ at this time were such, that the faith of his
disciples was greatly staggered: One had betrayed him, another had denied him;
and all had forsook him, and fled. -- But notwithstanding all these
disadvantages, this penitent thief, by faith saw him to be the only Savior of
perishing sinners, that he was able to save him in particular, and that there
was no other shelter to which he could fly, and be safe from the storm of God's
anger. -- And by faith, he laid hold on him, as the only hope set before him;
and through faith in the suffering Savior, he obtained the forgiveness of all
his sins, and an inheritance among the saints; as is evident from Christ's
gracious promise to him. To day shall thou be with me in paradise.

And he not only believes on Christ, but also repents; his repentance was not
merely legal, but evangelical. However strongly he heretofore had been attached
to sin, he now sees the infinite moral evil of it, and loathing it in his
heart, turns from it to God with self abhorrence.

III. His prayer.

An unconverted man may pray; but a converted man will pray. Prayer is the
breath of the newborn soul. Soon after Saul the persecutor was converted; it
was said of him, behold he prays. Acts 9.11.


This thief is no sooner converted, but he instantly falls to prayer. Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, q. d. When thou art enthroned at
the right hand of thy Father; and partakest of the glory, which thou had with
him, before the world was; when thou art in full possession of thy mediatorial
kingdom, for the carrying on the work of sinful man's redemption; then remember
me. Let me have a part in thy intercession with the Father in behalf of
perishing sinners: let thy precious blood, be sprinkled upon my guilty and
polluted soul, that thereby I may be absolved from my guilt, and thoroughly
washed from my filth. That when I leave this world, which I must instantly do,
and enter upon eternity, I may come to thee, and dwell forever with thee in thy
kingdom of glory.

IV. The gracious promise which he received from Christ in answer to his
prayer: To day shall thou be with me in paradise.

Although it is impossible that sinners should merit any thing from God by
their prayers; yet, by his institution, it is a means of grace, for them to be
in the use of, for the obtaining of those favors which he most freely bestows
upon perishing sinners.

This penitent sinner prayed to Christ to remember him when he came into his
kingdom; and Christ makes a promise to him, of the greatest good he was capable
of receiving To be forever with Christ in his kingdom, and to be glorified
together with him, is the greatest honor, and the greatest happiness our nature
is capable of receiving.

If we would see the exceeding preciousness of the promise, made to this
condemned malefactor, we must consider, (1.) The time when it was made: it was,
when he was instantly to leave the world, and enter upon eternity; where his
state must be fixed, and remain unalterable forever. (2.) When all the sins of
his past vicious life stared him in the face, and he saw himself justly exposed
to everlasting punishment. Oh! what a support and comfort must this gracious
promise be to his distressed soul: the seasonableness of the promise adds to
its sweetness. (3.) That it was speedily to be fulfilled; his faith, hope, and
patience, were not to be long exercised in waiting for the accomplishment of
it. The promise was made and fulfilled the same day: Today shall thou be with
me in paradise. A blessed change indeed, to go from earth to heaven, from the
company of mortal men, to be in company with Christ, holy angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect; from the pains of death, to inherit eternal
life; from the shame of an accursed death, to wear a crown of glory that fades
not away.

The APPLICATION.
And 1. A word by way of caution. Let none be encouraged from the example of
this thief's finding mercy at the very last, to put off their repentance, and
turning to God, until they come to die. The extraordinary and miraculous
conversion of the thief on the cross, is not left on record, that we should
make such an improvement of it. For, as we received all from God, it is highly
reasonable, that all our time and strength should be employed in his service:
we have no time to throw away in the service of the world, the flesh, and the
devil.

God calls upon sinners to remember him in the days of their youth: and there
is a promise, that those that seek him early shall find him. Christ enjoins it
as a duty incumbent upon all, to seek first the kingdom of heaven and the
righteousness thereof: and therefore it highly concerns every sinner speedily
to forsake his sins, and turn to God. He that puts off his repentance for the
present, is in great danger of loosing his soul. For now is the time that God
calls upon sinners to repent, and offers them his holy Spirit to assist them in
the difficult work: nor have sinners any assurance that they shall ever have
another offer of grace, or an opportunity to turn to God. Behold now is the
accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2
To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. Heb 3 7


Moreover, the longer sinners continue in sin, the more hardened their hearts
are through the deceitfulness of it. The longer the work of conversion is put
off, the greater will the difficulties be that will attend it.

Nor let any despair of the mercy of God while they have life.

Although God might justly say to every sinner that puts off his repentance
until he is in agonies of death, and upon the very brink of hell, and then in
his distress cries for mercy: I have called, and ye have refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. I also will laugh at your calamity,
I will mock when your fear comes. Pro. 1.24, 26.
Yet such are the bowels of his compassion toward perishing sinners, who in
their distress call upon him for mercy; that sometimes he bestows his mercy upon
them at the very last: such an instance we have in the text. -- Therefore let
none despair of mercy, while they have breath to call upon God for it.

An English expositor makes the following judicious observation upon this text.
Says he, "The spirit of God foreseeing what an ill use some would make of this
instance, leaves one example upon record, that none might despair; and but one,
that none might presume." Mr. Burkit.


2. See the sovereignty of God, in bestowing his grace upon this condemned
malefactor. Whenever God shows mercy to sinners, he acts as a sovereign, but
his sovereignty does more conspicously appear in the salvation of some, than it
does in the salvation of others; and perhaps in none more than in this wretched
sinner. -- He had spent his whole life in rebellion against God, and is now
brought to the public place of execution, to die by the hand of justice, having
by his sin forfeited his life: and although he is now as it were in the very
suburbs of hell; can join with those that mocked and reviled the Son of God in
his dying agonies. Surely none appears less quallified to receive mercy than
he, or less deserving of it. -- But while he is in this state, he is
apprehended by sovereign grace, and mercy triumphs in his salvation. -- And
what shall we say to these things? Surely he will have mercy on whom he will.

3. See the efficacious power of divine grace. It is not all the thunder from
Mount-Sinai, or the greatest degrees of legal terror a sinner is capable of
suffering, that will change his heart. All the law can do, is to convince the
sinner of his sins, to awaken his conscience, alarm his fears, and show him his
need of Christ.

But that which the law cannot do, grace can. Oh! what a mavelous change was
instantly wrought in this malefactor by the energy of grace! Perhaps the same
hour in which he reviled Christ, he becomes a true penitent; freely confessing
his sins, acknowledging that he suffered justly, and that Christ suffered
unjustly. He now sorrows for sin with a godly sorrow; his sorrow worked
repentance to salvation, not to be repented of. He is now become a new
creature: old things are past away; behold, all things are become new. 2 Cor.
5.17.
-- Sanctifying grace, in a gracious measure, had purified his heart from sin,
and he is able to perform the acts of believing, repenting, and turning to God;
which are proper to the new creature only* nor is it possible that such an
effect should proceed from any other cause. It is grace only, that subdues the
corruptions of the heart, and restores the moral image of God to the souls of
men. Therefore, what great reason have the sinful children of men to be
thankful to God, that he should ever condescend to bestow his grace upon any.

4. That if sinners would be partakers of the grace of God, they must seek to
him for it through a crucified Savior.

For, although God acts most freely (...) bestows his grace upon sinners; (...)
by all that they can do, to lay him under the least obligation: yet he has
appointed the means of grace for sinners to make use of, for the obtaining of
grace, which he bestows most freely.

This is agreeable to the plan of the Gospel, and therefore sinners may not
neglect the means of grace, because they cannot merit by the use of them. It is
evident from the scriptures, that God ordinarily bestows his grace upon sinners
when they are using the means prescribed in the gospel for the obtaining of it.
Faith comes by hearing. Romans 1. ^


The thief on the cross, as soon as his eyes were opened to see his exposedness
to the wrath of God, and that there was no way for him to escape but to fly to
the mercy of God in Christ; he instantly betook himself to prayer: Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. It was the only means he could
then make use of; the time was past with him for other duties: and he does not
neglect that; he poured out his soul in strong cries to Christ, whom he
believed was able to save him from eternal death; and he obtained that which he
sought after; a promise of resting with Christ after he left the world.

I come now to address myself to the prisoner of death, who stands here before
us.

Ah! unhappy man! You are now come almost to the very close of a miserable
life. -- Of late your time has been reckoned by weeks; and since that by days:
now it is no longer days but hours: and soon, Oh! very soon, it will be no
longer hours, but minutes, you will have to live in this world; then you must die
and enter upon eternity*

This day God requires your soul of you: You are summoned this day to make your
appearance before the judgment seat of Christ, to give an account of all the
deeds done in the body. Oh therefore now consider before it is too late, what
an awful thing it is to appear before the tribunal of the great God: when all
the sins of your past life will be set in order before your eyes with all the
aggravations that have attended them: That if you are found an impenitent
sinner, destitute of faith in Christ, and repentance toward God, you must hear
the dreadful sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.

St. Paul durst not entertain the least thought of appearing at the bar of God,
in any other righteousness than the surety-ship righteousness of Christ;
accordingly he expressed his most vehement desire, that he might be found in
him, Not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Phil.
3.5.
Nor is there any other refuge to which you can flee and be safe. And
notwithstanding your sins are of a scarlet color, and of a crimson dye, his
blood is sufficient to make atonement for all your sins, and to wash away your
filth. God has set him forth to be a propitiatory sacrifice for sin, that
through faith in his blood, the vilest sinners might have forgiveness.

Oh! how great is the mercy of God to perishing sinners, manifested in his
appointing his own Son to be a Mediator between himself and them: through whom
there is a new and living way of access opened to the Father* in which the
greatest sinner (being a true penitent) may come to him for mercy; and through
him God bestows his grace on them most freely. What a wonderful declaration is
that which the apostle makes, -- For he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.^^
In Christ there is an infinite fullness of wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. And whosoever believes on him shall partake of
all his benefits.

Having pointed out a city of refuge to which you may flee and be safe from the
storm of God's wrath: In his name I now call upon you to make your escape unto
it.

And may I not with propriety, address you in the language of the angel to Lot,
-- Escape for thy life. (...)
Not for the life of thy body; that thou may not do, that thou can not
do: but for the life of thy precious soul. Although your body is under a
sentence of death not to be revoked, which must be speedily executed: yet there
is hope concerning the life of your precious soul. If with a broken heart and a
contrite spirit, you confess your sins to God, and lay hold on Christ by faith,
(as many and as great as your sins are) you shall find mercy: He will absolve
you from all your sins, and justify you freely, by imputing the righteousness
of Christ to you: He will receive you to his favor, and give you a place among
the blessed. Oh therefore be persuaded instantly to cast yourself upon Christ
by faith.

And as motives to excite and stir you up to comply with the exhortation,
consider (I.) That you have no time to delay: You are within a few moments of
death and eternity. What is done by way of preparation, must be done quickly:
your probationary state will very soon be at an end* For there is no wisdom nor
knowledge in the grave whither thou go: As death leaves you, the judgment
will find you. (2.) The willingness of Christ to receive you upon your coming
to him for mercy. He says, Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.
John 6.37.
Therefore let your last breath be spent in calling upon him for mercy: Say
with the penitent thief. Lord, remember me now thou art in thy kingdom; which
if you do in faith, you will be intitl'd to the same promise he was. (3.) The
great ability of Christ to save you: he is not only willing but able also, to
save to the utmost, all that come to him. It is said of him by the prophet
Isaiah, That he is mighty to save! Isa. 68.1.
-- He has paid the full price of man's redemption. By his active and passive
obedience, the law of God is magnified and made honorable, his justice fully
satisfied, and the honor of his moral government secured: so that God can be
just in justifying the greatest sinner who believes in Christ. Oh! the
infinite efficacy of the blood of Christ! It is an all-sufficient sacrifice of
atonement for sin. And there are some of the very chief of sinners, such as
Manassah, Mary Magdalene, and a persecuting Saul, who now shine in the kingdom
of glory: these and a great multitude besides, which no man can number, were
all redeemed to God by that precious blood. Let the consideration of these
things encourage you instantly to make your flight to Christ by faith. (4.)
Consider what an awful thing it will be for you to appear before the
judgment seat of Christ in an unprepared state. Here you stand a condemned
malefactor, filled with all the horrors of a shameful and painful death. Oh!
sad state indeed! But your present distress, however great, is nothing,
compared with the horror that your poor soul will be filled with instantly
after it leaves the body, if you are found in an unconverted state. -- You must
be born again, and become a new creature. Pray earnestly to God to give you a
heart to repent of all your sins, and that for Christ's sake he would forgive
you; that your tongue may sing aloud of his righteousness: that he would
circumcise your heart, to fear his great name, and to love him supremely: that
he would give grace to enable you to be of a Christ-like temper and disposition
toward all men. O take care you do not leave the world, cherishing enmity in
your heart against any man; but forgive all men who have trespassed against
you, or you cannot expect forgiveness from God. If you depart this life
destitute of these qualifications, you will fall into the hands of an angry God;
who will bring you to his bar to receive the dreadful sentence, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Oh! and
can you bear the thoughts of an everlasting separation from God? To suffer the
fierceness of his anger. And as there is none that can save you from the wrath
to come but Christ, and he is both able and willing to do it; let me persuade
you by the terror of the Lord, to accept of him upon the terms of the gospel.
(5.) As a further motive to persuade you to believe, repent, and turn to God in
Christ, consider that your repentance will be matter of joy to the angels of
God: There is joy in heaven over a repenting sinner: yea, Christ himself will
rejoice over you. O what a glorious change will be instantly made in your
present unhappy condition! You are now filled with shame, confusion covers you:
but notwithstanding, if like the penitent thief on the cross, you betake
yourself to Christ; as soon as your soul is separated from the body by death,
guardian angels will take charge of it, and convey it safe to heaven; and
Christ himself will bid you welcome, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. A
glorious change indeed! To be with Christ in his kingdom, and eternally
swallowed up in the raptures of redeeming love! May God of his infinite mercy
grant that this may be your happy portion for Christ's sake.

I now come to address myself to this very great congregation.

Here is a vast number of people met together this day, and God and your own
consciences know best what ends you have in view in coming; whether to satisfy
your curiosity, or that you might reap some good to yourselves from the
heart-affecting scene, that now is presented to your light.

Sure I am, that unless you are much wanting in your duty to God, and your own
souls, you may learn various useful lessons from this melancholy providence.

And 1. See how much you are indebted to God for the restraints of his grace,
that hitherto have been upon you, whereby you have been kept back from those
outrageous acts of violence, that have brought others to an untimely death.

I may address you in the language of St. Paul to the Corinthians, -- For who
makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not
receive? 1 Cor 4 ^
Yea, who makes thee to differ from this prisoner of death? Surely, it is the
restraining grace of God bestowed upon you, that makes the difference. For had
you been left to yourselves, to the government of your irregular passions, you
would before this time, have plunged yourselves into the greatest misery. What
reason then have you to adore the riches of God's goodness to you, and say, Why
me, Lord! Why have I been kept from ruining myself, while others have been left
to do it! -- And consider, that it is not sufficient in order to your eternal
happiness, that you have restraining grace. By restraint a man may be kept back
from sinning: but it is sanctifying grace alone that is sufficient to subdue
the corruptions of the heart, and to bring the sinner from under the dominion
of sin. O therefore pray earnestly to God for regenerating grace. Say with the
psalmist, -- Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion
over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression. Psalm. 19.12, 13.


2. Consider that it is your duty to take warning by this malefactor: In him
you may see in some measure what sin is; that the wages of sin is death. O
therefore flee from it, as the greatest of all evils. In particular, let me
warn you against those sins which have a natural tendency to lead on the sin of
murder.

Be ye therefore warned against the sin of drunkenness. Drunkenness is a sin
that awfully abounds in our land at this day. This is a very heinous sin in
itself, and it is the more so, as it oftentimes leads on to many other sins,
and sometimes to the sin of murder. For when men are intoxicated with strong
drink, many of them are easily provoked to anger, and being almost as void of
reason as the brute beasts, they are easily prevailed upon by the devil, and
their own corruptions, to shed innocent blood. O therefore let every drunkard
who hears me this day, be persuaded to lay aside the practice of this
abominable sin, lest it should bring him to an untimely end.

Be ye also warned against rash anger. When men indulge themselves in giving
way to their passions, their anger oftentimes arises to an undue height, and
then they are apt to use threatening language, and from abusive language to
proceed to blows, which sometimes prove fatal. Therefore guard against this
sin: beg of God to give you grace to overcome all sinful anger; that you may
learn of him who is meek and lowly in heart; Mat. 11.^9.
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not
but committed himself to him that judges righteously 1 Pet. 2.23.


I would also warn you against an inordinate love of the world. When men's
hearts are sinfully in love with filthy lucre, they are in great danger of
being tempted to covet other men's goods; which covetous desires sometimes
hurry them on to commit the horrid sins of theft, robbery, and murder. And as
those vices awfully prevail in the land, I would the more earnestly exhort you
to guard against the snares of the devil. Let your conversation be without
covetousness* and be content with such things as ye have. Heb. 13.5.


Once more. Let me warn you against fornication; a sin that greatly abounds
among us, to the reproach of christianity. There is a propriety in my
cautioning you against this sin, upon this occasion, because it sometimes leads
on to the sin of murder; and there have been but too many instances of it in
this land; especially among the female sex: For when they have been prevailed
upon to give up their chastity, and to commit the obscene act, and shame begins
to beset them, then they lie open to the temptations of him who was the first
murderer; lay aside the bowels of a mother, and lay violent hands on their
tender offspring, with a view to hide their shame. Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea,
they may forget. Isa. 49.15.
O therefore beg of God to keep you from this soul sin when you are tempted to
it. Say with Joseph, -- How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against
God?

To conclude. Let me ask your prayers in behalf of the poor malefactor, who
must this day, before the sun sets, launch into the eternal world.

I hope that in this vast assembly there are many praying souls, who have an
interest at the throne of grace. You cannot but behold him as an object of your
pity! Nor is there any way open in which you can so effectually bestow your
charity upon him, as by unitedly pouring out your souls in strong cries to God
for him; that he would show him mercy now at the very last. And the
consideration of the great things which God has done, in answer to the united
prayers of his people, are sufficient motives to excite you to the performance
of this duty. -- May God of his infinite mercy, for Christ's sake, receive his
departing spirit. AMEN.

AS it is expected that the Public will be desirous of knowing some particulars
respecting the said SOLOMON GOODWIN'S committing the Murder, (for which he was
executed on the 12th of November, 1772) the following are here annexed, as
related by himself just before his execution.
ALL the difference that ever happened between David Wilson and myself was on
the 25th of May, 1772, and to the best of my judgment between eight and nine
o'clock in the afternoon, but being a dark and rainy day I cannot so very well
tell the exact time -- In the forepart of the day I happened to fall in
company with said Wilson and one Stephen Goodwin, at Capt. William Swanton's in
Georgetown, and we was all homeward bound; said Wilson had a canoe and I had
none, I asked Mr. Wilson for a passage, he told me I should be welcome if I
would work for it, and then we all set out very loving together. -- Wilson took
the paddle to steer with, and I took the after oar. -- We rowed off in the
river and went on board a sloop that was bound up said river; the master of the
sloop received us kindly, and gave each of us a glass of rum, which we received
kindly, and we went up in the sloop three miles and an half, where the sloop
came to anchor, and then we was going along, but the master of the vessel told
us if we would stop till they had made up their sails, he would give us a drink
of toddy; he made half a gallon, and six of us drank it, and then we set out in
the canoe as loving as before, and went about a mile and an half up the river,
to Mr* Joseph Macey's, and went on shore to get some fish, this same house was
a tavern, and Mr. Macey asked if I would take a drink of flip, I told him I did
not care if I did, accordingly he made a mug and five of us drank it, and then
Wilson asked for a mug, and we also drank it, and then I said it was time to go
home, -- Stephen Goodwin said he had drank of our liquor, and he would have his
mug, I told him it was not worth while, for if he had, I would drink none of
it, but he got it made, and went out of the house, and I suppose they did drink
it, and then we went away as loving as before, and Wilson took his paddle, and
I took the after oar, and I set down on the seat facing Wilson, and which was
about four feet distance from where Wilson set on the stern of the canoe, and
we rowed along about a mile and an half, and had no difference at that time --
then Mr. Wilson asked me when I intended to get out the lumber for Capt.
Swanton, I told him as soon as I had done my planting, damn it says Wilson, I
will not wait for that, I told him he had no need to, he might go to work and
the more he did the more he would have to receive, but he seemed to be mad, and
made use of bad language, and I said nothing to him about that again, but asked
him to set me ashore on the sands, near to my house, no damn you he says, I
wont, not till I get up to Esquire Prebble's landing. I told him I should not
be able to get home, he told me I might stay at a tavern all night, I told him
I had no money, damn you he said, I will lend you money to pay for your supper
and lodging, and made a laugh at it, for he knew he had none, and so he kept
his course toward Abegadusett river -- then I asked him if he did not intend
to put me on shore, no damn you, he said, I wont till I get you up to the
'squire's l^^ding, or up to Stephen Goodwin's, I told him I had done as much
for him before now, he asked me what I ever did for him, I told him he knew
well enough, he told me I told a lie he did not, and insisted my telling him, I
told him in letting him have things to support his family two years ago, and I
had not got my pay yet, he said that was a damned lie, I told him he knew it
was true, he then told me I was a damned liar, I told him I could not bear with
such abuse, he told me he would use me worse, and he offered to push at me with
his paddle, and I offered to catch hold of it, and then Stephen Goodwin took
away my oar, and Wilson struck me twice with his paddle, and as he was
endeavoring to strike me the third time, I caught hold of his paddle and
pulled him off the stern of the canoe, and then Stephen Goodwin took the paddle
away from us, and I don't know but that I might strike him with my hand, but am
not certain, for I held one of his hands with one of mine, and he told me to
let him go, I told him I would if he would be easy, which he promised, he then
got on the stern of the canoe again, and asked for his paddle, which Stephen
Goodwin gave him upon said Wilson's promising to be peaceable; Stephen Goodwin
likewise gave me my oar, which was about six feet and an half long; and when we
had rowed about the space of twenty or thirty rods, Wilson began his abusive
language again, and said I was a damned liar, and I spoke a solemn word and
said, that by the name of the living GOD, if he told me so again, I would
strike him with my oar if I should strike him overboard, he said you do tell a
damned lie, and if you offer to strike me I will run my paddle through your
heart, and lifted his paddle against me, and being warned, I lifted my oar, not
meaning to kill, nor to strike any certain place, but the chief aim I had was
to save my own life, but unhappily the oar and paddle met, and the oar came
down upon his head, and was the fatal blow, though GOD knows I had no design of
murder in my heart; with the blow and the heeling of the canoe, Wilson fell
overboard, immediately I said to Stephen Goodwin, Wilson is overboard, for
God's sake back astern the canoe, but he was incapable of being much help,
though we backed the canoe as well as we could, but all in vain, for in less
than two minutes I saw Wilson rise on the top of the water about three rods
off, and he sunk again, and we made all the search we could, but in vain, we
could see no more of him -- I asked Stephen Goodwin if he knew who gave the
first blow, he said he could not tell. -- This is as true an account as I can
give, as I know I must answer it at the bar of God. -- And now let me exhort
all people to abstain from drinking to excess, and from giving way to violent
passion, which two vices were the principal reason of the death of Mr. David
Wilson, and of my ignominious death by the hands of justice.

SOLOMON GOODWIN.

The two following LETTERS are genuine.
A LETTER to his Wife, Children and Friends.
THIS to my true and loving wife, my children and my friend, I leave you these
few lines to look upon when I am dead and gone; mourn for me, not as a
murderer, for as I am in the presence of God begging for mercy and hope to
obtain, my conscience is clear of that sin, and I have hopes through the blood
of Christ, that Almighty God will cleanse me from all other sins, who you must
all apply to for salvation, by earnest prayer and supplication: And I beg in
Christ's name, that you will all be in earnest, lest the day of your death come
unawares and finds you unprepared, and then without dispute you will be
eternally miserable; and for the Lord's sake, and your immortal soul's sake,
old and young of you, I beg you will keep out of wicked company, for that is
what has brought me to this unhappy fate, therefore take warning by this. Dear
wife, if you put out any of your children, put them to good people, and so I
must leave you to God, and beg you will take care and not be ensnared by a
wicked world, and pray that God will bless you with all spiritual blessings,
and the good things of this life; be contented with such necessaries as God
gives you, and don't think hard of any crosses you meet with in this life, but
say as David says, David said it is good for me that I have been afflicted, and
beg of God to sanctify them to you for good. -- So I bid adieu to the world,
and the Lord have mercy upon us. -- This by Solomon Goodwin, the day before his
execution. --

In Falmouth Goal, Nov. 11, 1772.
A LETTER to his only Daughter.
Falmouth Goal, Nov. 8, 1772. My dear beloved Child and only Daughter,
I beg that you would endeavor to live in the fear of God and beg of God to
keep you out of bad company, and to give you early grace, and that you may make
a right improvement of all the time that God gives you, and be constant in
prayer to Almighty God through the prevailing name of Jesus Christ, that God
would be your staff and stay in this life, and guide you through the dark
shadow of death to eternal happiness in the world to come, which is a world of
spirits made perfect. This from your loving compassionate father now under
sentence of death, and who has but three days longer to live, according to
sentence of law. Consider the shortness of time and the lack of paper. God
through the merits of Jesus Christ, grant grace to Abigail Goodwin, my only
daughter. -- From her dying and compassionate father,

SOLOMON GOODWIN.

Just Published, And to be Sold by JOHN BOYLES, at his Printing-Office next
Door to the Three Doves in Marlborough-Street, BOSTON.

A SERMON, Preached at the Execution of MOSES PAUL, an Indian, who was executed
at New Haven, on the 2d of September, 1772, for the Murder of Mr. MOSES COOK.
Preached at the desire of said PAUL, By SAMSON OCCOM, Minister of the Gospel,
and Missionary to the INDIANS.


