A LETTER TO A CLERGYMAN, RELATING TO HIS SERMON ON THE 30th OF JANUARY:

Being a complete ANSWER to all the SERMONS that ever have been, or ever shall
be, preached, in the like Strain, on that Anniversary. -- And giving, also, a
very particular History of that unfortunate Prince, CHARLES I.

BY G. COADE, Jun. MERCHANT at EXETER.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

NEW YORK: PRINTED by HODGE AND SHOBER, FOR DANIEL GOLDSMITH.

M,DCC,LXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, BENJAMIN; LORD-BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.
MY LORD,
WILLIAM GLANVILLE, Esquire; one of the chief clerks of the Treasury left your
Lordship a legacy, in his last will; and a few hours before his death, was
pleased to assign the following reasons for it.

As to the legacy I have given to the Lord-Bishop of Bangor, I declare the same
to be in testimony of the respect I bear him, in defending the liberty of his
country; and for his love to mankind; and for his endeavoring to free religion
from superstition and tyranny, (which worldly interest and ambition have
blended with it) and to restore it to that simplicity and usefulness which was
the design of its blessed Author: For which his labor of love, he has justly
merited the esteem and regard of all good men, instead of that load of infamy
and scandal, which the passions of designing men have so maliciously and
uncharitably thrown upon him.

"WILLIAM GLANVILLE."

Here your Lordship and the world see the real sentiments of a Gentleman of
great honor, sense, and virtue, at a time of the strictest sincerity. And I
beg leave publicly to declare, that I have no other reason in the world for
affixing your great and venerable name to the following papers, than those
assigned by the worthy Gentleman beforementioned: Being utterly unbiassed by
any such motives as usually produce Dedications to great men. And I persuade
myself, it cannot be unacceptable to your Lordship, to be the patron of a book,
the only design of which is, to serve and vindicate the civil and religious
liberties of mankind.

And here, according to the usual style and purpose of dedications, it may be
expected I should launch out into a panegyric on your great and excellent
qualities: And, indeed, being a layman, and having not the least dependence on
your Lordship, I might, in that case, be presumed to speak to you, and of you,
with the freedom of an indifferent man, and without risking that censure which
is so generally incurred by Dedicators. -- But the exhibiting your Lordship's
amiable character, requires an abler pen: It is a subject too nice and delicate
for me to attempt: Besides, it can receive no advantage from any private man;
as it stands immoveably fixed, beyond the reach of party or of saction, on
records that will remain until time shall be no more.

Your Lordship, at your first setting out in the world, was pleased to lay
aside the unintelligible jargon of the schools, in matters of religion, and to
declare openly and freely in favor of the New Testament and common sense.

And as to matters of Government, you ever appeared a strenuous asserter of
those noble principles; whereby the Revolution was brought about, under the
late King William, whose memory will be always dear to every Briton, that has
the least regard for honesty, reason, or justice. Those religious and political
principles, your Lordship was pleased to defend and maintain, by arguments
founded on truth, and superior to all the wicked sophistry of your adversaries.

When mercenary scribblers are employed by a party, to vent their malice, it
may be fit to leave them to the course of common justice; but here the trumper
(...) sounded in Zion, the pulpit gave the alarm: those (...) professed
themselves Ambassadors of peace, breathed nothing but war; they attacked you
with unappeasible sury, but covered their outrage with the specious names of
Loyalty, Religion, and the Church; where by the deluded populace were drawn to
inlist under their banners, in contradiction to their own most valuable rights,
both as men and Christians.

This, my Lord, was the case with respect to you, and to those truly rational
and even divine principles you so bravely defended; when the high court of
Parliament thought it necessary to interpose in favor of your Lordship; whom,
with surprise and astonishment, they saw thus iniquitously persecuted by many
Reverend Doctors and Dignitaries, and for no other reason than for your open
and hearty attachment to our Religion, Laws, and Government.

This illustrious Assembly determined, by a public act, to testify to the
Sovereign, and to the whole nation, their resentment of your ill usage, and the
sense they had of your extraordinary merit. For this purpose, a motion was made
by the ingenious Anthony Henly, Esquire; and, after a short debate, the House came
to the following resolution:

That the Rev. Mr. Benjamin Hoadly, Rector of St. Peter's Poor, London, for
having strenuously justified the principles on which her Majesty and the nation
proceeded, in the late happy revolution, had justly merited the favor of this
house; and that an humble Address be presented to her Majesty, that she would
be graciously pleased to bestow some dignity in the Church, on the said Mr.
Hoadly, for his eminent services in the Church and State. The Queen's answer
was:

I will take a proper opportunity to comply with your request. A greater
honor, your Lordship could never have received; as it was the approbation of
your country, declared by its representatives, one of the most august
Assemblies upon earth, and which will remain, in the records thereof, an
eternal monument to your renown: A monument, more glorious and lasting, than
pillars of (...), or triumphal arches!

For some time after this your Lordship had a respite from your ecclesiastical
adversaries. It seemed as if they were thunderstruck by this noble resolution.
However, it was not long, before these disturbers of our peace, these sworn
enemies of British liberty, received a fresh provocation, in a sermon preached
before the King, at St. James's, and published by his special command,
entitled, THE NATURE OF THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST. Herein you had proved, beyond
all reasonable contradiction, that Christ's kingdom was not of this world: A
doctrine new and surprising, even to the greatest part of the clergy. -- What
now could your Lordship expect but judgment without mercy! -- It was a crime of
such a nature, as never to be forgiven. To be told that Christ's kingdom did
not consist in mitres, lordships, deanaries, vestments, ceremonies, spiritual
courts, absolutions, persecutions, etc. -- It was next to the sin against the
Holy Ghost, and for which your adversaries will never forgive you, either in
this world or the next.

Here your enemies lost all patience; and, instead of reason and argument,
discharged against you their whole artillery of affronts and indignities:
Notwithstanding the greatest and best men in the kingdom acknowledged that your
Lordship's principles, both civil and religious, were for the benefit of human
society, agreeable to the natural rights of mankind, and perfectly consistent
with the New Testament, the Reformation, and the church of England.

Your Lordship's enemies did not intend things should stop here. -- The lower
house of Convocation appointed a committee, consisting of Dr. Moss, Dr.
Sherlock, Dr. Friend, Dr. Spratt, Dr. Cannan, and Dr. Byse, to draw up a
representation, to be laid before the upper house, concerning several dangerous
positions advanced by your Lordship, at that time Bishop of Bangor; which
representation was approved of by the lower house, and was voted to be entered
on their books, nem. con. -- The attention of the public was again engaged, and
persons of the highest rank were extremely solicitous for your protection.

And here, also, your Lordship had the honor to here one of the best, the
wisest, and bravest men that ever (...) world produced, appear in your behalf;
I mean the (...) KING GEORGE, who was graciously pleased, by his royal writ to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to prorogue the Convocation; whereby the designs
of your enemies were at once defeated. A noble instance of Royal justice and
paternal affection to his subjects! A strange phenomenon in the political
world! A Monarch exerting himself in defense of his subjects liberties, which
multitudes of themselves were eager to betray! An example highly deserving the
imitation of every Sovereign, but hardly to be paralleled. His generous soul
was influenced by all those sentiments of humanity and compassion, with which
Christianity never fails to inspire its real votaries. He could not forbear,
voluntarily and unasked, to interpose in behalf of an innocent and abused
subject. This single instance of his Royal virtue will ever be recorded in the
British annals, to his immortal honor; for which generations to come will call
him blessed.

I cannot conclude without taking some notice of a late honest performance The
Plain Account.
of your Lordship's, which has again drawn upon you the unjust attacks of the
bigots of all parties. Your Lordship could expect nothing less: -- Its natural
design and tendency being to beat down mystery, bigotry, superstition and
nonsense; which have been for so many ages, the grand support of the sacerdotal
empire. What wonder, then, if your Lordship sustained a fresh torrent of abuse
on this occasion. I have read many of the answers to this valuable treatise;
but have found none of them meriting your Lordship's observation. In opposition
to all these exertions of scurrility; I could produce, if it were necessary,
the sentiments of the best and greatest men that the present age has produced
in favor of your Lordship's character and principles. But I shall content
myself with what the learned and pious Dr. Tennison was pleased to advance, in
his protest against the report of the Convocation, in the case of your
Lordship. I have read it often, and never without a secret pleasure. It
breathes forth nothing but piety, charity, and New Testament religion:

Being persuaded in my own mind, that the word of God is the only sufficient
foundation, upon which a true Protestant can build his religion, and that the
doctrines contained in the Bishop's sermon, preached before his Majesty on
Sunday the 31st of March, 1717, and published by his Majesty's special command,
are true Protestant doctrines, and so perfectly agreeable to the word of God,
revealed to us in the Bible, that there seems no just cause for the complaints
made against them -- which complaints probably would never have been thought
of, had not some men, whilst they were making open professions of their loyal
intentions, secretly designed to cast a blot and contempt on the regal
authority; and, under a plausible pretense of doing service to the church, laid
hold of an opportunity of showing their personal hatred and resentment against
the Bishop.

Subscribed 14 Feb. 1717-18. "EDWARD TENNISON."

Our blessed Savior, when upon earth, foresaw the various persecutions that
would befall his saints and followers; and for their support and encouragement
he pronounces them blessed. -- Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness sake; for their's is the kingdom of heaven. -- And again, Rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted
they the prophets that were before you, Mat. v. 10, 12. But I shall say no
more; only, with the utmost submission let me entreat your Lordship not to be
dismayed, but to go on with that important work in which you have been engaged,
and for which you are so admirably qualified. Consider, Sir, it is the glory of
God, the honor and support of his Son's interest and religion upon earth, that
you have so zealously defended.

And now, of Almighty God I earnestly beg, that he would never leave you, but
constantly vouchsafe you large and ample communications of the gifts and graces
of his most holy Spirit; and when you shall have done with mortal things, and
shall stand on the brink of the grave, just ready to step into eternity, may
you then enjoy a noble firmness and serenity of mind; may all be quiet and
harmonious within -- may you then experimentally know what it is, to enjoy that
peace of God that passe^h all understanding. This, my Lord, is the sincere
desire and prayer of

Your LORDSHIP' s Most humble and obedient Servant.

A LETTER TO A CLERGYMAN, etc.
REVEREND SIR!
IT is not of vanity, lucre or party, that I now sit down to make some remarks
on your late very extraordinary sermon. I must confess I have read some other
notable ones, and heard many more, on this occasion; but none so deserving or
public contempt and censure. Your whole performance could be calculated with no
other view, than to revive old heats and animosities, and to raise that spirit
of strife and discord, which, as a Minister of the Gospel of peace, it is your
peculiar province to suppress.

I know of nothing more repugnant to the spirit of Christianity, than for one,
professing to preach it, to set up for the champion of a party; since parties
are for the most part influenced by motives mean and brutal, inconsistent with
that unalterable regard to truth and justice, to which all men and all parties
have an inviolable claim.

I hope you will not be offended, if, in this address, I speak my sentiments
plainly. And though I shall not fail of doing so, yet, notwithstanding the
provocation you have given, my intention is to treat you with the civility due
to your function, without passion, or personal reproach. And if you are not
very much prejudiced by a blind and serious ze^l, I persuade myself, I shall in
some degree enlighten your understanding and awaken your conscience; not by
falsehood and disguises, but by facts; facts that are incontestable, and that
will argue for themselves.

I would take up too much of my time to enter upon all the particular
falsities, absurdities, and fallacious reasonings, of which your sermon was
made up. I shall only offer the following general remarks to your
consideration; entreating you to peruse them calmly, without any partyspirit,
divested of all prejudice and partiality, with a temper and disposition of mind
becoming a Gentleman and a scholar, always determined to submit to the force of
truth and evidence: And then your own conscience will presently suggest to you,
that your whole sermon was a manifest contradiction to the religion, laws,
government, and true history of your country.

The exalted character you was pleased to give of King Charles I. made a very
considerable part of your discourse. I must acknowledge, it was speciously
drawn, and delivered with an engaging elocution and emphasis; but it had this
unlucky circumstance attending it, that the picture had no affinity with the
original: Light and darkness, heaven and hell, could not possibly be more
opposite to each other, than your portrait was to the real character of that
unhappy Prince. Therefore, permit me, Sir, in my turn, to give you his true and
genuine character; which, at this distance of time can only be done, by an
impartial recital of the most considerable and important actions of his life.

During the minority of this Prince he was looked on, by all that knew him, to
be of a most obstinate disposition. His mother greatly lamented his unhappy
turn of mind, and was heard to say of him in public, that she feared he would
live to be the ruin of himself, and occasion the loss of his three kingdoms by
his obstinacy. Soon after he came to the throne, he married a French Papist, by
a dispensation from the Pope, and according to the ceremonies of the church of
Rome. She was not only a Papist, but in a remarkable manner attached to all the
fopperies and most absurd practices of that church. By the articles of this
marriage, many liberties were granted to the Papists. A chapel was permitted to
be built at Sommerset-house, where there was likewise established a convent of
Capuchin-Friars, wh^ together with a great number of Priests and Jesuits,
walked the streets in their habits, in such a manner as had never been allowed
since the Reformation. The King wrote to the Pope with the title of Most Holy
Father.

All the honest and wise part of the nation was greatly alarmed at this match;
fearing it would again bring us back to the slavery and bondage of Rome. King
Charles I. was a staunch bigot, and consequently the darling of the Clergy; and
having no great reach of his own, was governed by his Priests, who have always
been unfortunate when they meddle in politics. His whole reign was one
continued series of follies, or infringement of the rights of his subjects. He
lived in the constant and open violation of the fundamental laws of the realm;
and conducted every thing to the dishonor and reproach of the English nation.
But to descend to particulars.

He agreed with the Marquis D'Effiat, the French Minister, for a squadron of
men of war, to join the French fleet at Dieppe, which was fitting out against
the Protestants at Rochelle: Thereby to destroy at once all the remaining
strength of the Reformed in that kingdom. The command of this squadron was
given to Captain Pennington, whom he strictly enjoined, that in case his ships
should refuse to join the French, in this vile expedition, he should use all
forcible means to compel them, even to the sinking them, if they continued
o^stinate: That was, to destroy the English his own people, if they would not
destroy the French Protestants.

This conduct appears by far the more wicked and astonishing, as the King a
little before had wrote two letters, signed Charles Rex, to the Peers,
Burghers, and inhabitants of the city of Rochelle, engaging to assist them to
the utmost. In the first letter he says, My fleet shall perish rather than you
shall not be relieved. In the second; Be assured I will never abandon you, and
that I will employ all the force of my kingdom for your deliverance.

When the Parliament came afterward to examine Pen^ing^on's papers, they found
a letter from the King, signed Charles Rex, Requiring him to dispose of those
ships as he should be directed by the French King, and to sink or fire such as
should refuse to obey those orders.

On this proceeding, General Ludlow has this plain remark, By this horrible
treachery the strong town of Rochelle, wherein the security of the Protestants
of France chiefly consisted, was delivered up to the Papists; and those of the
Reformed religion in all parts of the kingdom exposed to the rage of their
cruel and bloody enemies Memoirs, vol. I. page 5.
Again: King James was strongly bent to render himself absolute; yet he chose
rather to carry on that design by fraud than violence; but King Charles
immediately after his accession to the throne, pulled of the mask and openly
discovered his intention to make the crown absolute and independent; and the
Queen, on her part, pressed him on all occasions, to p^rsue the design of
enlarging his power, and to mould the church of England to a nearer compliance
to the Sea of Rome. At the same time, this Prince sent a declaration to the
Lord Keeper, for granting full liberty and toleration to all Papists,
notwithstanding the extreme rigor of the then laws against them. Upon some of
the Privy Council advising him against this illegal step, he openly replied,
That it was his will those laws should stand discharged.

Thus, almost in the first month of his reign, he set up a despotic power
against the constitution. He granted a general pard^^^ to all Papists, under
prosecution; not only as Papists, but as criminals. He released twenty Priests
from goal. And it now evidently appeared, that he intended to rule and govern
all by absolute will and pleasure.

The Parliament began to be greatly alarmed by these measures, and protested in
form against them. They remonstrated.

1. His protecting a seditious, virulent and ignorant Priest, Richard Montague,
in opposition to the sense of the Parliament.

2. The great increase and countenancing of Popery, by dispensing with all the
laws against it, in an arbitrary manner.

3. The war against Spain, without a declaration; and the sending to destroy
the Protestants of Rochelle.

4. The total mis-employment of three subsidies, and three fifteenths. With
many other enormities, too tedious to relate.

This Montague wrote a book, entitled, Apello Coesarem, wherein he advanced the
following positions:

1. That the church of Rome is, and ever was a true church.

2. That images might be used to excite devotion.

3. That saints have patronage, custody, protection, and power, over certain
persons and things, as the angels have.

This book gave great offense unto all true Protestants. The Parliament
condemned it, and summoned Montague to attend at their bar; and voted his book
to be contrary to the articles established by Parliament, to tend to the King's
dishonor, and the disturbance of the church; and obliged him to enter into a
bond of 2000 l. to appear again on the next summons.

However, notwithstanding this book was so publicly condemned by the
Parliament, as well as by the general voice and suffrage of the kingdom, yet at
Court it met with applause and high encomiums; and the Author was rewarded
instantly with the Bishopric of Chichester, and soon after was translated to
Norwich: Whereby the King again openly declared his encouragement of Popery;
and that whoever, in contempt of the Parliament and constitution of England,
would assert a despoti^ power in church and state, might expect to be rewarded.

Thus, in the beginning of his reign, he lost the hearts and affections of a
great part of his subjects. What contributed to increase the general murmuring
and discontent, was his illegal and arbitrary treatment of a great number of
leading men of both Houses of Parliament. Sir John Elliot, a famous Speaker in
the House of Commons, was committed close prisoner to the Gate House, with many
others. The pretense was, for undutiful speech. The Commons p^ssed a vote to
vindicate all their members at once; declaring there had been no undutiful
speech in that House, from the beginning of the Parliament to that day. Sir
Dudly Diggs, another top speaker in the House of Commons, was hurried away to
the Tower, under the pretense also of undutiful speech, at a late public
conference with the Lords. This Gentleman protested with the utmost solemnity,
that he never spoke the words he was charged with, and that no such words ever
came into his thoughts; and what is more, (merely out of regard to common
justice) thirty-six of the Lords, who stood close by him at the time of the
said conference, entered into a voluntary protestation, subscribing their names
to it, viz. That the said Sir Dudly Diggs did not speak those words, nor any
words that did or might trench on the King's honor: Some of the Lords who
protested were Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Cleveland, Earl of Westmoreland, Earl
of Bollingbrook, Earl of Clare, Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Lincoln, Earl of
Essex, Earl of Cambridge, Earl of Devon, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Northampton,
Earl of Bridgewater, Earl of Montgomery, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Hereford
Rushworth, p. 361.
.


Notwithstanding this public attestation of his innocence by To many Peers, to
the Tower he must go, right or wrong. Innocence in those days was no security.

All this was done contrary to the opinion of the Judges, who declared, That
such a violent restraint on so many members, was a public arrest on the whole
body of Parliament.

The King, by a message to the Earls of Bristol and Arundell, forbad them to
attend the House of Lords; and soon after committed the latter to the Tower.
This made a mighty ferment. All the Peers began now to look on their persons
and estates to be in great danger. They petitioned his Majesty in a submissive
manner, humbly beseeching, That the Earl of Arundell, a Member of their House,
might be restored to them again; and that the same regard might he had to the
rights and privileges of the Peers as had ever been.

The King gave a rough answer, and would not discharge him. This produced a
long and well-penned remonstrance. The Lords exerted themselves on this
occasion with a becoming spirit; they petitioned the King again and again, five
different times, and came to the following remarkable resolution, nemine
contradicent^, "That no Lord of Parliament, the Parliament sitting, or within
the usual time of the privilege of Parliament, is to be imprisoned or
restrained, without sentence or order of the House; unless it be for treason or
felony, or for refusing to give security for the peace; and that, una voce,
this is the undoubted right of the Peers Rushworth, p. 365.
."

Things continued for a considerable time in this situation; the King committed
many of the House of Commons, and daily breaking in upon those rights and
privileges of the House of Lords, which for a long time had been held sacred
and inviolable, till at last he grew tired with frequent petitions and
remonstrances of both Houses, in vindication of their just and legal rights:
Wherefore, the better to establish his absolute power and dominion over the
lives and properties of his subjects, he determined to have no Parliament at
all; and sent a message to the House of Lords, signifying his intention to
dissolve the Parliament, then sitting, instantly.

This alarmed both Houses, more than any thing that had yet happened; and they
were under terrible apprehensions of the consequences that might ensue such a
peremptory and sudden dissolution, at so critical a juncture.

The Lords, the same morning, sent a petition to the King, affirming, That they
were really and truly his most faithful and loyal subjects; and that as they
were also his Majesty's hereditary council of the kingdom, they were obliged by
the duty they owed to God, his Majesty, and their country, humbly to offer
their advice, that the Parliament may be continued for some time longer,
whereby great and apparent dangers may be prevented, and his Majesty made happy
in the duty and love of his people. This honest and memorable petition was
delivered by the Lord Viscount Mandeville, the Earl of Manchester,
Lord-President of his Majesty's Council, the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of
Carlisle, and the Earl of Holland. The King returned for answer, That he would
hear no motion, but would dissolve the Parliament, and immediately cause a
commission to pass the Great Seal for that purpose Ib. p. 398.
.

But the King would not stop here; for, the day following, warrants were
directed from the privy council to apprehend several members of Parliament, as
Denzil Hollis, Esquire; Sir Miles Hobert, Sir Peter Hayman; John Seldom, Esquire;
Corrington, Long, Stroud, Valentine, and some others; all leading men in the
House of Commons. Most of them were apprehended and committed close prisoners
to the Tower.

Having in so unprecedented a way dissolved this Parliament, and calling no
other during the twelve following years, he in that long period governed as
arbitrarily as the Grand Seignior, and in a manner subversive of all the laws
and constitution of this realm. In the first seven years of this time, he
published no less than one hundred and forty-six proclamations: The chief
design of which was to raise money without consent or authority of Parliament,
under the denomination of conduct-money, tunnage, poundage, ship money, etc.etc.

Great numbers amongst the nobility and principal gentry, who had hitherto
adhered to the King, began daily to fall off, and to desert the Court. Nothing
was heard of but grievances and remonstrances; and persons of great note began
publicly to declare, that the government was illegal and arbitrary, and that
the constitution was actually destroyed. Many about the King had the honesty
and courage to point out to him the unavoidable consequences of those wicked
and violent measures. Sir Robert Cotton repeatedly told him in council, That
whatever reasons may be given for it, the nation would not hear the levying
money without consent of Parliament; and that every tax not authorized thereby,
was breaking in upon the constitution, and esteemed by the people of England as
an act of tyr^nny, and imposing of servitude.

This wise and prudent advice did not suit the temper of King Charles. He had
nothing in his head or heart, but absolute rule and government.

I may here remark, that the mischiefs and misery of this reign, must, in some
measure, be imputed to that haughty ecclesiastic Archbishop Laud, and his
creatures. They dissuaded the King from all moderate measures; and pretended,
that by their authority and influence they would greatly promote his design of
plundering his subjects, (which is certainly done, when their money is taken by
force, without law and consent of Parliament) and, to do them justice, they
labored at it heartily.

One Manwaring undertook to prove out of the Scripture, That Kings might impose
taxes without consent of Parliament, and that the people were bound in
conscience to obey their will and pleasure. Laud sent another pa asitical
priest (one Sibthorp) to preach an assiz^ sermon at Northampton, wherein he
asserted, That the King is not bound to observe the laws of the realm
concerning the subjects rights and liberties, and that his Royal will in
imposing taxes without consent of Parliament, binds his subjects on pain of
damnation; and that those who refuse to pay the loans offend God, and become
guilty of disloyalty and rebellion. This wretched sycophant, instead of being
punished for this wicked and and impious doctrine, was rewarded with a
bishopric. All the sermons now at Court were to the same purpose. -- Ludlow
tells us, this was the only work of which the clergy was judg^d capable; and
therefore, diverse of them entered the list as champions of the prerogative,
asserting, that the possessions and estates of the subject d^d of right belong
to the King; and that he might dispose of them at his pleasure: Thereby
annulling, as much as in them lay, all the laws of England that secure property
to the people Vol. I. p. 5^
.

But the King soon found that the Clergy might continue their preaching to
eternity, without bringing any money into the Exchequer, and therefore more
violent methods were taken. He began with imprisoning a great number of the
first rank and quality, as well as many eminent merchants and traders in London
and elsewhere, for refusing to pay those illegal taxes.

Sir Thomas Grantham, Sir John Strangeways, Sir William Armin, Sir William
Wilmore, Sir Robert Poyntz, Sir William Massan, Sir Erasmus Dr^iton, Sir Nath.
Barnarbiston, Sir Oliver Luke, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Sir William Constable, Sir
John Pickering, Sir William Chancey, Sir Morris Berkley,


I could mention many other Knights, as well as Esquires, Gentlemen, and a
multitude of the most eminent merchants and traders of the city of London, who
were committed prisoners to the Fleet, the Gate House, the Marshalsea, and the
New-Prison; many of them to the entire ruin of themselves and families, for no
other reason but their refusing the loan, as it was absurdly called; for, with
what propriety could it be so termed, when penalties were inflicted on those
who would not pay it Vide Rushworth's collection, p. 473.
?

Bishop Burnet speaking of King Charles I. says, -- That, by his illegal
administration ^e had brought himself into great distress, but had not the
dexte^ity to extricate himself out of it; and that he loved high and rough
methods, but had neither skill or genius to conduct them; he hated all that
offered prudent and moderate counsels; and in his outward deportment never took
any pains to oblige any one Hist. of his own times, Vol. I.
. -- A true picture! Acherly, the famous lawyer, tells us, The King's ministers
gave themselves over to licentiousness and wanton acts of power, thinking
themselves now freed from. Parliamentary inquisitions, and above the reach of
ordinary justice; Proclamation supplied the defects of law; tonnage and
poundage, and other impositions, were collected by order of council; freedom of
speech was in a manner extinguished. Sir John (...) was condemned and fined
2000l. Denzil Hollis 1000 merks, Valentine 500, (all leading men in the House
of Commons) and were imprisoned till they should pay the fines: Which
imprisonment was accompanied with some arbitrary severities; for those
Gentlemen were denied not only pen, ink, and paper, but in their sicknesses
their wives were denied admittance, in so much that John Elliot, after many
years imprisonment, sunk and died under the oppression. But those prosecutions
and condemnations, being a ^ound to the two estates of the Lords and Commons,
in their tenderest privilege, and having raised great discontents, were, in the
reign of King Charles II. reversed, and unanimously declared illegal. In which
reversal, those prosecutions and imprisonments, and the power of the Ministers,
by which the privileges of Parliament, and all the Commons of England, were
trampled under foot, appear to this day in colors administering a detestation
of such proceedings Page 360.
.

Were it necessary, I could mention a hundred flagrant instances more, to prove
that the Government of King Charles I. for many years was illegal, arbitrary,
and tyrannical, and that the constitution was actually subverted and destroyed.

The King began now to look upon himself as secure, and to imagine that by this
barbarous usage of so many, persons of rank and quality, all others would be
deterred from appearing openly for their religion, laws and liberties.

The prerogative, (says Ludlow) was now wound up to a great height in England,
and the affairs of the church tending to a conjunction with the Sea of Rome.
But before any further progress was made, it was thought expedient, that the
pulse of Scotland should be felt. To this end, a form of public prayer was sent
them, more nearly approaching the Roman office than that used in England. The
Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, were discontented with the book itself, as well
as the manner of imposing it. The Clergy of England, who had been the chief
advisers and promoters of this violence, prevailed on the King to cause all the
Scots to be declared traitors; and they were not wanting to promoting the new
levies against the Scots, contributing largely thereunto: which was but
reasonable; it being manifest to all, that the Clergy were the principal
authors and fomenters of those troubles Ludlow, vol. I. page 6, 7, 8.
.

This war with the Scots was looked upon by the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty of England, as the most imprudent that could be. And indeed the King
himself soon found it to be so the very officers and soldiers of the army
treating it with contempt and ridicule; insomuch that he was quickly obliged to
come to an agreement with the Scots, upon terms no way to his honor or
advantage.

The most profitable preferments in the English church were now given to those
of the Clergy who were most forward to promote the new ceremonies and
superstitions. An oath was enjoined with an etc. Several holidays were
introduced, and required to be observed by by the people with all possible
solemnity; pat^nts and monopolies of almost every thing were granted to private
men, to the great damage of the public; Knighthood, coat and conduct money, and
many other illegal mothods were revived, and put in execution to rob the
people, in order to support the profusion of the Court Ludlow, vol. I. page 5.
.

Things went on for a considerable time pretty favorably to the Court. By
their violence and tyranny they carried all before them, and seemed to bid fair
to obtain a complete victory over all the laws of the kingdom, as well as over
the lives and properties of the subjects. But fresh troubles began now to
arise. The city of London grew more and more disgusted at the granting
monopolies and patents; and at the unparliamentary raising, as well as the
violent methods daily practiced in collecting several illegal taxes; insomuch,
that a very great number of citizens, of rank and figure, at once refused to
pay several of the loans; at the same time declaring, they would pay no taxes
at all, without the consent and authority of Parliament.

This was a dreadful shock to the Court; they gave it the name of rebellion,
and determined to put an end to it at once. An order was issued, to take away
the sword from the Lord Mayor, and most of the chief officers of the city were
instantly imprisoned. Hereupon the people rose, and beset the house of Laud,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was supposed to put the King on those violent
courses; they demolished his Grace's windows, but he made his escape for that
time by water. Most of the counties in England began now to send up to the
Privy Council petitions and remonstrances, complaining of the illegal taxes,
and the violent methods of collecting them which gave birth to many
troublesome and vexatio^^ lawsuits: And notwithstanding in those suits the
subject^ frequently got the better of the Crown, yet it many times ended in
their ruin.

The Court now found it necessary to tamper with most of the great Lawyers.
Some of the Judges and Lawyers took the bait, and for the sake of some
temporary preferment became open and public traitors to their country, by
declaring in Westminster Hall, for law, that the King might impose taxes upon
the people, and that he might imprison and distrain in case of refusal.

But to do justice to the Lawyers, I must acknowledge, that the far greater
part of them were, in reality, friends to the constitution. They discovered a
true English spirit, and gladly embraced every opportunity to support the
rights and liberties of the subjects; to the great mortification of the King
and Laud.

This firm behavior of the Lawyers, put the Court on making another dreadful
attack on the lives and properties of the subject. For finding they could not
corrupt the common Courts of justice to that degree they aimed at, they created
or revived arbitrary Courts, as the Star Chamber and High Commission Courts,
wherein monstrous cruelties were daily committed, even on persons of high rank,
quality, and learning.

The practice of those Courts was much akin to that of the inquisitions in
Spain and Portugal at this day. Laud presided in both of them. His power and
influence were so great, that every thing done there was esteemed as his
particular act and deed. The other members were, as Bishop Burnet observes,
little more than mere machines, to move and act as this godly Prelate directed.
And truly they judged right, in putting an Ecclesiastic at the head of those
Courts; as nothing was intended but fines, imprisonments, cutting off ears,
slitting up noses, and other such bloody work: Witness the horrid barbarity
practiced on the learned William Prynne, Esquire; Dr. Leighton, Dr. Bastick, Dr.
Burton, and a multitude of others, by those inhuman arbitrary judicatories.

Prynne was an eminent Lawyer of Lincoln's Inn; a Gentleman of high reputation
for learning and piety; he wrote a book against the obscenity of the stage, and
the lewd practices of the actors, who were arrived to such a height as to give
great offense to all the sober part of the nation. Laud pretended this was a
reflection on the Queen, who was a mighty favourer of the women Actors, she
having herself also acted a pastoral at Somerset House; so without any shadow
of law, reason, or justice, he prosecutes Prynne in his beloved Star Chamber;
and pronounces this execrable sentence upon him: To pay the King five thousand
pounds; to stand twice in the pillory; to have both his ears cut off, one at
each time; to be afterward imprisoned during life without the use of pen, ink,
or paper; and to be stigmatized on both checks, with S. L. denoting thereby a
seditious libeller.

At the same time Laud prosecuted Dr. Bastick and Burton; the former an eminent
Physician, the latter a Divine.

They were both condemned to pay five thousand pounds to the King; to stand in
the pillory; to have both ears cut off; and to be imprisoned during life: All
which was executed with the utmost severity; and they, together with Mr.
Prynne, were banished to the remote Islands of Scilly, Guernsey, and Jersey,
where they were incarcerated; neither their wives nor any of their friends
being permitted to see them.

John Lilburn, a young Gentleman of considerable family and fortune, lived at
this time with Mr. Prynne; and, having a great regard for a person of his
extraordinary abilities and integrity, could not forbear writing something in
his vindication. This soon came to Laud's ears. The Prelate hereupon
immediately ordered him to be brought before him in the Court of Star Chamber,
where he sat in triumph, and condemned this unfortunate youth to be whipped
from the Fleet-Prison to Westminster Hall, to receive five hundred lashes, with
a treble cord having knots upon it, and afterward to stand in the pillory. He
was whipped so bloodily, that every heart bled for him; yet he bore it with a
courage, that was amazing. While he was in the pillory, in this most deplorable
condition, he expressed some indignatio^^ at the injustice that was done him;
this was immediately carried to Laud, who sent the executioner an order ^^gag
him; which was instantly done. The spectators were all struck with horror and
amazement.

Three years afterward, a Gentleman of the House of Commons exclaimed with
great force and eloquence against the diabolical practices of this Court; and
taking notice of this Mr. Lilburn's sufferings, concludes with the following
words: By imprisonment he was made a dead trunk, by whipping a rogue, by
pillorying a cheat, by gaging a beast; they had better have hanged him
outright. Rushworth says, When once the Star began to swell big, and was
delighted with blood (which was not till Laud's time, who (...) spring out of
the ears, noses, and shoulders of the punished) and nothing would satisfy some
Clergymen, but cropt'ears, slit noses, whipped backs, gaged mouth^, and withal
to be thrown into dungeons, and some to be banished from their native countries
to remote Islands, and by order of this Court to be separated from their wives
and children; then began the English nation to lay to heart the slavish
condition they were like to come into, if this Court continued. The learned
Lawyer Acherly says, The cruelty of those corporal punishments, which were
arbitrary, and imposed for no offense against the laws, bound down all the
Gentlemen of England under a servile fear of the like treatment. The people of
England had a general abhorrence of these acts of tyranny, which one can
neither write nor read of without trembling.

The Parliament, some years afterward, voted the prosecution of those four
Gentlemen to be illegal and tyrannical, and obliged these unrighteous judges to
make them reparation. After the Parliament ordered them to had he set at
liberty, they came to London, and were received with loud acclamations; they
were met near the city by a hundred coaches filled with Gentlemen of rank and
figure. At the same time, one of the members of the city of London presented to
the Parliament a Petition, signed by more than fifteen thousand hands mostly
persons of note, complaining of the wicked and tyrannical Government of Laud
and the other Prelates, who had treated some of the best men in England, more
like slaves at Morocco, than like Christians, Protestants, or Englishmen.

I cannot dwell on this barbarous scene; so will give you but one instance more
of the horrid cruelty of this most impious Court. The Rev. and learned
Alexander Leighton, Doctor of Divinity in the two Universities of St. Andrew's
and Leyden, was arrested by two russians belonging to the Court of
Star Chamber, who dragged him with force and violence to Laud's house, where
they told him he was to be examined, Laud being then at home; but, instead of
that, they carried him through a ^^^terraneous passage to a place not opened
since Queen ^^^^y's bloody reign; from whence having fettered him ^^ere with
heavy bolts, they hurried him to Newgate, where in the entry his wife was
almost killed; he was there cast into a nasty dog-hole full of rats and mice,
with no light but from the uncovered roof, with no meat from Tuesday night
'till Thursday noon. In this doleful place and plight they kept him fifteen
days, suffering none to come at him, not even his wife, in all that time. Four
days after his commitment, Laud's officers, or rather russians, came to Dr.
Leighton's house in Black Friars, under a pretense of searching for books. Here
they laid violent hands on his poor distressed wife, and used her with so much
inhumanity as is a shame to express. They rifled every one in the house, and
held a cocked pistol to a boy's breast, not above five years old, threatening to
kill him if he would not discover where the books were; at which the poor child
was so frightened, that he never recovered afterward. At last they carried off
all the Doctor's books, household goods, furniture and wearing-apparel. During
his confinement, he almost pined away, and was so ill, that an Attorney and
four Physicians certified his case to be desperate All this is taken from the
representation of his case, afterward laid before the Parliament.
. Yet, absent and sick, he was sentenced to undergo the dreadful punishment of
which we have an account as follows in his own petition to the Parliament: This
horrid sentence was to be inflicted with knife, fire and whip, at and upon the
pillory, with ten thousand pounds fine; which some of the Lords of the Court
conceived could never be inflicted, only that it was imposed on a dying man, to
terrify others. But Laud and his creatures caused the said sentence to be
executed, on the 29th of November following with a witness. For the hangman was
animated with strong drink all the night before, in the prison, and with
threatening words, to do it cruelly. Your petitioner's hands being tied to a
stake, besides all other torments, he received 36 stripes with a treble cord;
after which he stood almost two hours in the pillory, in cold, frost and snow;
and then suffered the rest, as cutting off the ear, firing the face, slitting
up the nose. Here the clerk of the House of Commons, when the petition was
reading, was ordered to stop; and when he was going on again, he was ordered to
stop a second time, till the auditors recovered themselves a little; for the
House was melted down with tears, tenderness and compassion. The petitioner
proceeded: He was made a theater of misery to men and angels; and being so
broken with his sufferings, that he was not able to go, the warden of the Fleet
would not suffer him to be carried in a coach, but hurried him away by water,
to the further endangering of his life. And on that day se'nnight, the sores
upon his back, ears, nose, and face not being cured, he was again whipped at
the pillory in Cheapside, and there had the remainder of the sentence executed
by cutting off the other ear, slitting up the other side of the nose, and
branding the other cheek. My hand trembles, my heart bleeds, I can go no
farther. The Parliament, nemine contradicente, voted Dr. Leighton six thousand
pounds, and made him warden of that prison where he so long lived in loathsome
confinement.

This hellish cruelty, which the Parliament could not bear the hearing of
without being moved with tears and compassion, does Bishop Laud, in his closet,
write down at large in his diary with delight. Yet this is that very Bishop of
whom that zealot Archdeacon Eachard says, No man in the world was so fit to
make a Chancellor of the University of Oxford, considering his religion and
charity. When this sort of men speak of religion and charity, the words must be
taken in a sense directly opposite to their meaning in the New Testament.

Dr. Juxon, a haughty Ecclesiastic, of mean abilities, had been very assisting
to Laud in his wicked doings, who in return, got him advanced to the Bishopric
of London; and soon after prevailed on the weak and infatuated King, to make
him Lord High-Treasurer of England, which gave great disgust to all the Gentry
and Nobility; or, as Clarendon expresses it, set them in a flame.

When any one was brought into the Star Chamber, they had always one general
charge brought against them, viz. That they were enemies to the church. Thus
branded, without any regard to age, rank, or quality, they were treated with
the utmost rudeness. Laud would make a speech of half an hour long, in favor
of the divine right of Archbishops, and Bishops, Deans, Chancellors,
Archdeacons, mitres, copes, etc. which he would call the true primitive
constitution; and would generally conclude with some silly and ill-natured
ignorant reflections on all the foreign Protestants, particularly the churches
of Amsterdam and Geneva. By such mis-representations he prevailed on the King
to shut up the Dutch and Walloon Churches in London, contrary to the law of
God, and the law of nations, and against the interest of ours in particular;
great numbers of sober industrious persons being thereby driven out of the
kingdom.

Laud's speeches, what influence soever they had on his own tools and
instruments, had no other effect on his auditors in general than to expose
himself; for thereby he discovered his utter ignorance of all history, both
sacred and profane.

Things again, for some little time, went on pretty calmly. The Court carried
all before them. The cruelty of the Star Chamber (as Acherly expresses it)
bound down all the Gentlemen in England under a slavish fear. The King openly
avowed a despotic absolute government, by declaring that he would be
accountable for his conduct to none but God. Nothing can be more foolish and
ridiculous: Is not every Prince upon earth accountable for his actions to
reason and justice? Sure I am, a King of England is in a particular manner
accountable to the laws and constitutions of the realm. In one of his speeches
to the Parliament, he has this very remarkable expression, As it is blasphemy
to dispute what God may do, so it is sedition in subjects to dispute what a
King may do. In the height of his power (Burnet says) he was so possessed of
the divine right of Kings, that he could not bear that even an elective and
limited King should be called in question by his subjects.

The ty^annical power exercised by the Crown began now to grow daily more and
more grievous; insomuch, that a multitude of people began to take refuge in our
foreign plantations; and numbers of families actually transported themselves,
from different parts of the kingdom. The Government at length took umbrage at
it, and published a proclamation, to restrain his Majesty's subjects from
transporting themselves to the plantations in America, without a royal license.
The Court at the same time was greatly alarmed, by an information from the
Customhouse, that eight large ships were then in the river Thames, taking in
passengers for New England; which immediately produced the following order of
council: That the Lord Treasurer of England should take a speedy and effectual
care for the stopping of eight large ships now in the River Thames, bound to
New England; and should likewise give orders for the putting on land all the
passengers and provisions intended for the voyage.

The providence of God appears very conspicuously in this order of Council; for
the famous Mr. Hampden, Sir Matthew Poynton, Sir William Constable, Sir Arthur
Hasleridge, with many others of the same stamp, and, above all, Oliver
Cromwell, were actually embarked, and would have sailed the next day, had they
not been prevented by this order. When liberty is lost, let slaves and cowards
stay. True Englishmen could not bear the doleful sight. Religion, laws and
liberty were then no more!

The murmurings and discontent of the people increased daily. The King was at
last prevailed on to call a Parliament; and accordingly a Parliament was
summoned to meet on the 13th of April, 1640, after twelve years intermission.
The Commons presently began to talk of redressing grievances. Whereupon, to the
surprise and concern of the whole nation, the King suddenly dissolved them,
after a session of three weeks. And, to make the matter still worse, he at the
same time continued the convocation by a special warrant; who, in complaisance
passed a canon, wherein the divine right of Kings, and unlimited obedience to
them, were most strongly asserted.

By this preposterous conduct, the King soon found himself reduced to greater
straits and difficulties than before. He was obliged to summon another
Parliament, to meet on the 3d of November following. In this Parliament he may
be truly said to have reversed his former arbitrary proceedings, (though without
any such intention) by a more unaccountable step than any he had yet taken; and
to have degraded his authority beneath every thing even his adversaries could
have hoped for: I mean, by his passing a bill, whereby he divested himself of
the power of dissolving, or so much as proroguing them, without their own
consent. Thus he subverted the constitution of his country, to his own
prejudice; as he had before violated it in numerous instances, to the detriment
of his subjects.

The English constitution is originally free. We do not owe our liberty to the
concessions of our Kings; as some ecclesiastical writers have labored to
prove. No, Sir. In England there has ever been a constitution; that is, a
system of laws, institutions and customs, according to which the King is
obliged to govern, and the subject to obey. The King, in his coronation oath,
as much swears to the people, as the people swear to the King. When the Prince
acts in conformity to the laws, he ought not, he must not be resisted, under
any pretense whatever; but if he violates the fundamental laws of the realm,
and actually subverts the constitution, he virtually unkings himself, and may
then not only be resisted, but even deposed, by his injured people. Lineal
succession, and hereditary right, have no foundation in nature; and to say they
are appointed by God, is so groundless and ridiculous a position, as to merit
no reply. There is no form of Government in the world of divine appointment:
Every nation and kingdom under heaven is left to settle that form of Government
which is most agreeable to their genius, and most conducive to the sole end of
all Government, the happiness of the community. Even where kingly Government
prevailed, hereditary fight was first introduced by communities, to prevent
strife and confusion. In England this right is acknowledged and stands firm, at
this day; but subject to certain restrictions: that is, there have ever existed
in the community certain laws founded on reason, tending to the public
tranquillity and welfare: these laws are the rule of the Governor's
administration, as well as of the peoples' obedience; these laws are the
constitution of the realm; and whenever it happens that a Prince endeavors to
subvert that constitution, and substitutes an arbitrary power in its room, then
it becomes just, reasonable, and necessary, not only to resist, but even to
depose such a Governor. And if the circumstances of his descendants are such as
will not comport with the interest of the nation, the lineal succession may be
altered, or the Crown transferred from one branch of the family to another; or
to a new family, when the supreme law, the safety of the people, calls for it.
By a statute as far back as the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, it was made
high treason for any one to affirm, that the reigning Prince, with the
authority of Parliament, is not able to limit and bind the Crown, and the
descent and inheritance thereof. This plainly shows the Legislature's opinion
of hereditary right in those days.

The design of this letter, Sir, is to convince you, and all into whose hands
it may fall, that King Charles was the very person who did deliberately and
strenuously endeavor to subvert and destroy the constitution of this kingdom,
and to substitute in its room a wicked, lawless and tyrannical power over the
lives and properties of his subjects; and consequently, that the opposition, of
his subjects, or the attempts of the people to depose him, cannot, with any
color of reason or justice, be called (...) rebellion. No, Sir; it was a
necessary opposition, founded on the justest principles: It was an opposition
perfectly consistent with our holy religion, with the common sense of mankind,
as well as entirely agreeable to the particular laws and constitution of this
realm.

Government, I will allow, is a sacred thing, as you so often repeated; and to
resist Government is certainly unlawful, and may be reckoned among the most
heinous crimes: But Tyranny is not Government. And as, in case there were no
civil polity, men would not, however, be destitute of a natural right to defend
their lives and properties, but might personally resist, or, if they found it
necessary, destroy the invaders; so, as the nature of things does not allow of
any established umpire to determine between a Prince and his people, the
community has a like natural right of defending itself against an arbitrary or
cruel administration. Nor is the exertion of this right liable to so much
objection as is that of private men, for the matters in dispute between those
are often of such a nature, as makes it very difficult to judge of the
aggressor: The offense is oftentimes secret; or, immediately affect the
aggrieved. Self-love may magnify it beyond its due measure, or prompt to
revenge, when prudence or goodnature may dictate otherwise in vain: Moreover,
in certain cases one may serve a present interest, by claiming redress where no
real injury has been offered. But a constitution can be no secret, nor can the
violations of it be concealed. Self-love can never influence the society to
resist legal Government; for the society can consider that as no other than its
own security and support, and will be ever ready, for its own sake, to maintain
and defend it. In short, as those in authority have greater inducements to
become tyrants, than subjects can have to resist or revolt; so, in fact, while
it has been the almost constant aim of all governments to make themselves
absolute, and the generality of Princes proceed by no other rule than their own
caprice, with no other view but that of gratifying their lust of power, some,
or pleasure; no people, on the other hand, as a ^^^ion, ever revolted, 'til
their oppression became intolerable; nor have their been many (hardly any)
lesser insurrections, or rebellions of a few, that have not been warrantable in
point of equity, though not of prudence.

Again, private men in society, however injured and abused, must not be their
own judges; but must seek relief from the equitable and impartial laws of the
land. But King Charles had deprived them of that resource; laws and appeals
were no more; he had a hundred times broken his coronation oath. In the very
nature of Government is implied public safety and protection; King Charles's
Government was public destruction and calamity. He had taken from his subjects
every thing that was dear and valuable: Their peace, their rights and
possessions; all which he had publicly sworn, at his coronation, to defend and
maintain: Their properties he had unrighteously invaded, their liberties
infringed. All this he did by means the most arbitrary and tyrannical; by
repeated acts of horrid cruelty and barbarity, even on the best and wisest of
his subjects.

What was now left for the people to do? He was now no Prince of theirs; he had
forfeited their allegiance. Liberty and laws were a jest; he treated their very
name with contempt. Mr. Lock says, That in a state of nature every man has a
right to vindicate himself; and when society is dissolved, the same right
returns. Men can never be deprived of public safety and private defense.

The people of England had no quarrel with King Charles, who had taken an oath
to rule and govern by the laws and constitution of the realm; but when this
King, by a conduct of many years, had discovered in spite of oaths and laws,
that he would rule by violence, and abide by no law, he was degenerated into a
tyrant, and become a different person; then it became necessary for the people
to repel force by force. They saw nothing but chains and fetters on one side,
and arms on the other; and they wisely flew to their arms; which is what the
people of England have ever done, and ever will do, in such direful
circumstances. King Charles had no more right to what the law did not give him,
than the Grand Turk had; and therefore they did not oppose an English Governor,
but an invader and a tyrant: For, as Mr. Lock justly observes, Wheresoever law
ends, tyranny begins. Had King Charles conquered his subjects, what would he
have gained, but the detestable glory of a triumphant oppresso, and the horrid
satisfaction of seeing his kingdom reduced to poverty and servitude! Do but
look into the kingdoms of France and Spain, naturally the finest in Europe, and
see the mighty difference between their inhabitants and ours! And, pray what
makes that difference? Nothing but their submitting to have all their laws
reduced into one short one, that of Royal will and pleasure.

Would Princes live and die in peace and security, let them rule by the fixed
and prescribed laws of their respective countries, and not grasp at more than
is given to them. If Princes will never encroach, subjects will never rebel.
How much more desirable, how much more safe and easy is the condition of a
Prince, who lives and rules by law over a free people, by their own consent?
The laws are their mutual defense and guard. Sir William Temple, in his
admirable Essay of Government says, The safety or firmness of any frame of
Government depends on the breadth of its bottom; the broader the bottom, the
less liable to be shaken or overthrown. The ground upon which all Government in
England now does or ever will stand, is the consent, the interest, and the
affection of the people; therefore a monarchy, where a Prince governs by the
affections, and according to the opinions of the people, makes of all others
the safest and firmest Government. It is a poor and contemptible ambition in a
Prince, that of swelling his prerogative, and perpetually catching at
advantages over his subjects; it discovers a mean spirit. A Prince of a
generous turn of mind will not look on his subjects as his property, and as
slaves; but considers them under the amiable and endearing title of his
children, and himself as their father and protector, and will ever cheerfully
consent they shall hold their lives, liberties, and estates, by certain fixed
and prescribed laws, and not by the mere will and pleasure of any single man.
The universal experience of all ages, kingdoms, and nations, directs, that no
mere man ought ever to be entrusted with absolute power and dominion.

Power of itself, without a proper check and control, naturally makes men
wanton, cruel and restless; it intoxicates the mind: In short, it has something
in its very nature too great for the human soul to bear; it is fit for none but
God, who is infinitely wise, just and benevolent.

I apprehend the facts already recited are abundantly sufficient to prove that
King Charles did actually subvert and destroy the constitution: However, to put
this grand point out of a possibility of being ever more disputed, I will
mention two or three more.

He published a book of sports, requiring it to be read in all churches,
thereby to promote and encourage a horrid profanation of the Sabbath.

But before I enter upon the particulars of this act, and the wicked design of
the Court by it, I would say a word or two relating to the ends of the original
institution of the Sabbath; from whence it will appear to be still obligatory
upon all Christians.

The belief of a God is the foundation of all religion. It is necessary we
should know whom we are to worship, and in what manner. It is likewise
necessary that some portion of time be allotted for the instruction of mankind
in the knowledge of their duty: Hence there is and ever will remain an eternal
reason for the fourth commandment having a place among the unalterable precepts
of the moral law. Indeed, the preserving serious religion would be almost
impossible without such an institution. On the other hand, the setting apart
some periodical seasons for the more public and solemn worship of God, when
mankind may be instructed in all those duties that are required of them, in
order to their present and eternal happiness, has a tendency to exalt the soul,
to purify the heart, to qualify us for the purposes of this life as well as of
a better; in a word, to promote our temporal as well as our eternal felicity.
The Sabbath was instituted, that men might continually commemorate the works of
creation, might offer up their grateful acknowledgements to God, of all his
mercies and goodness vouchsafed toward them, and might openly declare
themselves the worshippe^s of the one true God, the Author and Lord of the
universe, in opposition to the infidelity of Atheists, and the impure and
ridiculous rites of idolatrous nations. The worship paid to God in heaven is
thus represented in Scripture: The whole multitude of the heavenly host fell
down before him that sat on the throne, saying. Worthy art thou O Lord, to
receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are, and were created. This is the employment of saints and
angels in the eternal Sabbath in heaven; and the original foundation of the
institution of a Sabbath on earth was, the celebration of the praises of God.
And that this solemn and public worship should be performed in an acceptable
manner, it is requisite it should be done when the mind is most calm and
serene, abstracted from the noise and hurry of the busy world: Therefore it
was, that when God at first sanctified the seventh day, or appointed it for a
day of worship, he prohibited all manner of work thereon. Genesis ii. 1, 2, 3.
Exodus xx. 8, etc. But the business of the Sabbath is not confined to public
worship alone; there are various other duties to be performed, thereon; it is
then a proper time for reading the Scriptures, and endeavoring to understand
their true meaning; for those that are masters of families to be assisting and
instructing their children and servants in the knowledge and practice of their
duty: In short, it is to be spent in whatever tends to the honor of God, and
the true interest and advancement of religion, virtue and sobriety in the
world. Besides it ought to be considered that the circumstance of a great part
of mankind, particularly those in the lower class of life are of such a nature,
that they have no other time for improving themselves in the knowledge of God,
and in the practice of true religion and (...).

I am sensible that this is a digression from my main design; but really, Sir,
I could not enter upon the recital of a (...), whereby it will appear, how the
Sabbath was, by the express command of King Charles I. and the wicked
compliance of a corrupt and worldly-minded Clergy, profaned throughout this
kingdom, in a most notorious manner, without saying something of the morality
of its institution, and the unspeakable advantages arising to societies, as
well as private persons, by a religious observation thereof; and consequently
of the obligation incumbent on all men to sanctify it. To proceed then,

The Court being now determined to be restrained by no laws, either human or
divine, and wanting to render the common and lower class of people more
ignorant and profane, that they might suc^^ed the more easily in their
favorite design of moulding our church to a nearer compliance with that of
Rome, (a^ Ludlow expresses it) they published a book of Sports and Pastimes, to
be practiced on Sunday; and all Ministers, who refused to read this impious
book, were imprisoned and suspended. Besides this, they published a particular
declaration, encouraging dancing, leaping, vaulting, shooting, May-games,
Whitsunals, Maurice-dances, May-poles, all on Sabbath Days. It is sad to
recount, says Doctor Fuller, what grief and distraction was occasioned by this
declaration in the hearts of all honest men. For, this Sabbath-breaking gave
great offense to the people in general, and was a vast increase to the Puritan
party, who cried out against it as a national sin. Some time after was
published a second book of Sports, with many enlargements, commanding
wrestling, and cudgel-playing, etc. etc. on Sundays. The good, the pious, the
most religious King Charles was so intent on this second publication, that to
hasten it, he wrote the following order or warrant to Laud.

CHARLES REX.

Canterbury, See that our declaration concerning recreations on the Lord's day,
after evening service, be printed

This was afterward produced by Laud in his defense. Dr. Fuller again
observes, Many moderate men were of opinion, that this abuse of the Lord's day
was a principal procurer of God's anger, afterward poured out on this land in
a long and dreadful civil war.

Soon after this second publication of the book of Sports, Lord Chief Justice
Richardson went the Western Circu^^; and at the assizes in Somersetshire, the
Gentlemen in that county complained to his Lordship, that an inundation of
wickedness, profaneness, and impiety, had lately seized the common people; that
it was wholly occasioned by the Sunday's revels; and that the enormity was so
great, that in many parishes, on Sunday evenings, nothing was to be seen but
drunke^ness, lewdness, and riot, which frequently ended in fighting and
bloodshed, with such other scenes of wickedness, and deb uchery, as is a shame
to express. Yea, they go farther, and say, That many persons had been indicted
for murdering bastards, begotten at these revels, and for other grand disorders
committed at ^^ose intemperate meetings.

The Lord Chief Justice Richardson (thinking probably that the people were now
become more vicious than their Governors intended they should be) made an order
hereupon to restrain in some measure this horrid abuse of the Sabbath. Upon
hearing this news, Laud ran immediately to the King and complained, that Judge
Richardson, in his Circuit, had endeavored to hinder the prosanation of the
Sabbath. Richardson, on his return was immediately summoned to appear before
the Council; where his Majesty, in person, commanded him to reverse the (...),
at the next Assize, as he would answer the (...) at his peril. Lord Chief
Justice Richardson (...) from his next Western Circuit, was again (...) before
the King and Council, for not revoking (...) Sunday's revels; where he was so
(...) Archbishop, that when he came from the (...), (...) Earl of Dorset
meeting him, with tears in his eyes, and asking him how he did, the Judge
replied, Very (...) my Lord; for, I am like to be choked with (...) ^^eeves.

This (...) began to be much talked of. Laud, to justice (...) the King, showed
about at Court a letter wro^^ (...) him by Dr. Pierse, the then Bishop of Bath
(...) Wells, signed by seventy able Clergymen, in favor of Sunday's revels;
signifying that they were in themselves innocent and laudable; (than which
nothing could be more untrue;) and that they were grateful to the ^^ergy;
(which very probably was true:) But they were (...) wicked as to go further,
and say, they were also acceptable to the Gentry of that county; which was
absolutely false. A copy of this famous letter was sent (...) Somersetshire, at
which all the Gentry were greatly ^^raged; or, to use Rushworth's own words,
were highly (...), and immediately sent up a position, praying that the order
of Lord Chief Justice (...) might be continued. This address was signed by John
Lord Pawlet, Sir William Portman, Sir John Starell, Sir Francis Popham, Sir
Ralph Hopton, Sir Edward Radney, Sir Francis Dodding^^^^ Sir John Horner,
Edward Pawlet, Esquire. George Speak, Esquire.
What will the reader now think of Archbishop Laud, of Bishop Pierse, and his
seventy able Clergymen? I shall forbear to make any reflections of my own on
such a behavior of men, assuming the sacred character: But give me leave to
recite the plain, the honest remark of the great Mr. Lock, relating to their
conduct on a like important occasion: Speaking of the act of uniformity, and
the wonderful compliance of the Clergy with it, he says, So great was the zeal
in carrying on this Church-affair, and so blind was the obedience required,
that if we compute the time allotted for the Clergy to subscribe the book of
Common Prayer, we shall plainly find it could not be printed and distributed,
so as one man in forty could have seen and read the book they did so perfectly
assent and consent to. The Clergy readlly complied with it; for they are a sort
of men taught rather to obey than understand; and to use what learning they
have to justify and not to examine what their superiors command. It is
reported, that the late Sir Joseph Jekyll concluded his speech in favor of the
mortmain act, with the following words: It has ever been a great unhappiness,
that the Clergy of our established church have been no better acquainted with
the religion, laws, government, and true history of their country.

I could produce a cloud of witnesses, to vouch in this manner, for the
honesty, prudence, and piety of the Clergy, in past times: Or in other words,
to show, what goodly tools of lawless power they have been, and how thoroughly
qualified they are for such an office. But the testimonies of two such eminent
persons, as the foregoing, are equivalent to those of a multitude: Mr. Lock,
most illustrious for learning and virtue; Sir Joseph, a man of (...),
inflexible integrity, and impartial justice.

(...) this time Laud had also a quarrel with Mr. (...) Mayor of London, for
his shutting up (...), and brandy shops, on the Sabbath.

I am now come to the period of this wicked Ecclesistic's carreer; for, in the
year 1644, he was brought to the bar of the House of Commons, and, after a fair
and (...) trial for his life, the House came to the following resolution, (with
but one dissenting voice) viz. That he had traitorously endeavored to subvert
the religion, laws, rights, and liberties of this kingdom; that he had usurped
an arbitrary and tyrannical power; and that for the same he should suffer
death, as in cases of high treason, To be drawn, hanged and quartered. They
afterward sent him up to the Lords, who voted him guilty of the treason,
without one dissenting voice. The manner of his death was changed from what the
sentence denounced, as it usually is in the case of persons of quality; and he
was beheaded on Tower Hill, the 10th of January, 1644 -- 5.

This is but a small part of what I might have said of the violent and impious
proceedings of this Archbishop. What can one then think of such historians as
Clarendon (...) Eachard, who are so lavish in the praises of this great
er^^^inal.

I ^ow come to that horrid and lamentable scene, The Ma^^cre of the Protestants
in Ireland, in 1641. The (...) first rose in the province of Munster. A
particular account of their barbarities would be too long and (...) shocking.
Cutting of throats, hanging and drown^^^ were the mildest treatment the
Protestants met with. ^any had their eyes plucked out, and were then burnt or
buried alive. Mothers were hanged on the gallows, with their children about
their necks. There was no regard to women great with child, nor to insants. One
Protestant Lady was delivered while in the hands of the tormentor, who flung
the newborn infant to be eaten by a hog. These insernal monsters carried their
inhumanity so far, as to oblige fathers and mothers to murder their own
children, husbands their wives, and wives their husbands. There was such an
excess of Popish cruelty, that my nature shrinks and recoils; I can repent
(...) more of it. It was allowed on all hands, that (...) one hundred and fifty
thousand persons were butchered and murdered in this inhuman manner.

I am sensible, I tread here on slippery ground; so shall make use of the words
of others, as much as possible. General Ludlow, vol. I. p. 17. writes, The King
(...) in Scotland, when the news of this Irish rebellion was brought to him;
and, as I have heard from persons of undoubted credit, it was not displeasing
to him. Shocking! shocking beyond expression is it, to be told, (if true) that
this dreadful and bloody massacre should not be displeasing to the King, when
one can scarce ^^^d it without trembling, even at the distance of more than a
hundred years. Pray, dear Sir, don't be angry with my military historian. Give
me leave to tell you, he was a Gentleman of quality, learning, experience, and
conduct: he commanded armies, fought battles, and governed the kingdom of
Ireland. He was a University scholar, a man of sense, and ever esteemed to have
an inflexible regard to truth and justice. He was a man of better family and
fortune than Clarendon, and was Knight of the shire for the county of Wilts,
when the other was only a member for Wotton Basset, a small borough in the same
county. It Is true, indeed, Ludlow was forced into exile, and driven as it were
from place to place, to avoid assassination, or falling into the hands of
an^apostate party, while the other was advanced to office, estate, and title;
but it must be said to his real honor, that he never betrayed the
constitution, or deserted the interest of his country.

The news of this dreadful massacre alarmed all the people in England to a
great degree; and the more so, because those bloody Papists confidently ^^irmed
they were abetted by the King, and had a commission under the the Great Seal
for what they had done. Ludlow tells us Vol. I. page 19.
. A great number of Protestants flying from the bloody hands of the Irish
rebels, arrived in England, filling all places with sad complaints of their
cruelties to the Protestants of that kingdom; whereupon the Parliament
earnes^ly pressed the King to proclaim, them rebels, by a proclamation, but
could not (...) it till after many weeks; and then but forty of these
proclamations were printed, and not above half of them published.

The backwardness of the King, to declare the Irish (...) be rebels and
traitors, by a proclamation under the (...) Seal, made a mighty noise in the
House of Commons; and it was there observed by many, that those concerned in
the late tumult in Scotland, about a prayer book, were forthwith declared
rebels, in every parish church in the kingdom of England.

The proclamation published in Ireland, by Sir Phelim Oncal, at the head of
those bloody traitors, began with the following words: Be it known to all our
friends and countrymen, that the King's most excellent Majesty, for many great
and urgent causes him thereunto moving, and reposing confidence in our
fidelity, has signified to us by commission under the Great Seal of Scotland,
bearing date the first of this instant October. Then follows the Commission
itself, To arrest and seize the goods, estates, and persons of all the English
Protestants.

As the rebels pretended the King's authority and commission, in so public and
open a manner, it gave great offense to the Parliament, that they were not
declared rebels and traitors by proclamation. At last, to satisfy them, it was
promised, that on the first of January a proclamation should be published,
declaring the Irish Papists in arms to be rebels and traitors. But before this
time came, Sir Edward Nicholas, one of the Secretaries of State sent a special
warrant to the Printer's, directing that only forty copies should be printed,
and those not published till ^is Majesty's further pleasure was signified. This
gave a just foundation for all the jealousies and suspicions that were
afterward entertained on that affair. Dr. Calamy, in his life of Baxter, page
43. says, The Irish declared they had the King's commission for what they did;
and many even at that time, weighing all circumstances, believed as much; while
others represented it as an unjust and scandalous aspersion on his Majesty.
But, as Providence ordered it, a certain memorable particularity helped to set
this matter in (...) light: The Marquis of Antrim, who was a noted man amongst
the Irish rebels, having had his estate sequ^stred, thought fit, upon the
restoration of King Charles the Second, to sue for the restitution (...) it.
The Duke of Ormond and the Council judged against him, as being one of the
rebels; whereupon he (...) his cause over to the King, and as^i^med, that what
he did was by his Father's consent and authority; and the King referred it to
some worthy members of the Privy Council, to examine what he had to show: And
upon examination, they reported, That they found he had the King's consent, or
letter of instruction for what he did; which amazed many. Hereup a King Charles
wrote a letter to the Duke of Ormond, and the Council, to restore his estates;
because it appeared to those appointed to examine it, that what he did was by
his father's order and consent. The Lord Mazarine, and others in Ireland, not
fully satisfied with this, thought fit so far to prosecute the matter, as that
the M^rquis of Antrim was forced to produce in the House of Commons a letter of
King Charles the First, by which he gave him an order for the taking up arms;
which being read in the House, produced a long silence. The whole account of
it, with a great many surprising particulars, was published in a pamphlet,
entitled, Murder will out. Thus far Calamy.

Let us now see what Bishop Burnet says of this bloody business, History of his
own Times, page 58, etc. I will relate some particulars, concerning the Earl of
Antrim; I had in my hands several of his letters to the King, writ in a very
confident style. Upon the Restoration, in the year 1660, Lord Antrim was
thought guilty of so much bloodshed, that it was taken for granted, he could
not be included in the act of Indemnity, that was to pass in Ireland. Upon
which he came over to London, and was lodged at Somerset House. He petitioned
the King, to order a committee of Council, to examine the warrants he had acted
by. As it seemed but just to see what he had to say for himself, so a committee
was nam^d, of which the Earl of Northumberland was chief. He produced to them
some of the King's letters, but they did not come up to a full proof. In one of
them the King wrote, he had not then leisure; but referred himself to the
Queen's letter, and said, That was all one as if he wrote himself. Upon this
foundation, Antrim produced a series of letters, written by himself to the
Queen; in which he gave her an account of every one of those particulars that
were laid to his charge, and showed the grounds he went on, and desired her
directions; to every one of these he had answers, ordering him to do as he did.
So a report was prepared, to be signed by the committee, setting forth, That he
had fully justified himself in every thing that had been objected to him, and
that he ought not to be excepted out of the Indemnity. This was brought first
to the Earl of Northumberland, to be signed by him; but he refused it, and
said, he was sorry Antrim had produced such warrants, but he did not think they
could serve his turn; for he did not believe any warrant from a King or Queen
could justify so much bloodshed, in so many black instances as were laid
against him. Upon his refusal, the rest of the Committee did not think fit to
sign the report; so it was let fall; and the King was prevailed on to write to
the Duke of Ormond, telling him, that Antrim had so vindicated himself, that he
must endeavor to get him included in the indemnity: That was done, and was no
small reproach to the King.

Neither Burnet nor Calamy takes notice of the date of this famous letter of
King Charles the Second, to the Duke of Ormond, but it was dated at Whitehall,
the 10th of January, 1663.

Upon my word, Sir, this bears hard upon the memory of your holy martyr. Had I
time, I could produce a variety of other instances to convince you, that you
are guilty of a most notorious mistake, when you so repeatedly affirmed, he
suffered martyrdom for the Protestant religion. I do not believe, indeed, King
Charles the First gave the Irish Papists a commission to cut throats, to rip up
women with child in cold blood, and other such horrid cruelties; but from a
strict and impartial enquiry into the best histories of those days, there is
really too (...) ground to believe he did countenance and give a commission to
the Papists to take up arms against the Protestants; and if a horrid and bloody
massacre was the consequence of this commission, was not the King then (...)
least a^^essory to it? And in the business of murder, I apprehend our common
law, as well as common sen^^^ knows no difference between the accessory and the
principal, but deems them both equal in guilt and punishment.

During the King's stay in Scotland, he endeavored to prevail on that people
to invade England, but without effect. On his return to England he was observed
to grow daily more violent and tyrannical. He countenanced a company of loose
dissolute fellows, frequenters of alehouses, taverns and gaming houses, and
kept a table for them in his own palace at Whitehall; and at the head of this
rude mob, all armed, he entered the House of Commons, sat down in the Speaker's
chair, and demanded the delivery of five of the most eminent members, Pym,
Hampden, Hollis, Stroud and Hasleridge: Names that I cannot mention without a
peculiar reverence; their memories will be always dear to every honest Briton,
for that noble stand, that brave defense they made, in favor of the religion,
laws, and liberties of their country. Ludlow says, page 21. The King encouraged
a great number of loose and debauched fellows about the town, to repair to
Whitehall, where a constant table was provided for their entertainment. And
again, page 24. The King went in person to the House of Commons, attended not
only with his ordinary guards of pensioners but also with those desperadoes,
which for some time he had entertained at Whitehall, to the number of three or
four hundred, armed with partisans, swords* and pistols. The King not finding
any of the five members there, left the house; many members cried out
Privilege, Privilege, and were pleased to call it an outrageous act against all
the peoples' rights and privileges; and, after a short debate, they unanimously
voted, That the King's entering their House was in a warlike manner. And
therefore they, in great fear, trouble and confusion, adjourned to the
Guildhall, in the city, for their better security. The same evening the King
went into the city; but his coach was attended by multitudes, crying out,
Privilege of Parliament. This happened on the 4th of January, 1641* and from
this day we must date the beginning of the civil war. The King doubled his
guards at White^^^^, collected a great quantity of firearms, and gunpowder,
sent several persons into the country, to raise officers, and soldiers, and
dispatched his Papist Queen to Holland, who carried with her privately the
Crown jewels of England, which she pawned to Mr. Webster, a noted Banker of
Amsterdam, for a great sum, and laid it out in arms, to enable his Majesty to
make war against his own subjects.

By all accounts, and in all shapes, the King himself was the beginner of this
dreadful civil war.

The pretension of both parties being submitted to the decision of the sword,
the only dispute now was, Whether the people of England should again recover
their laws and liberties, or be governed by the absolute will and caprice of a
single person? Whitlock, speaking of the Parliament forces, says: Most of them
were freeholders, and freeholders sons, who upon matter of conscience engaged
in the quarrel; and then being armed within by the satisfaction of their own
conscience, and without with good iron arms, they would as one man stand
firmly, and charge desperately. Ludlow says Vol. I. page 41, 42.
, Things being brought to this extremity, the nation was driven to a necessity
of arming, in defense of the laws, openly and frequently violated by the King,
who now resolved to do that by force of arms, which he could not do by the
strength of argument. I thought it my duty, as an Englishman, to enter into the
service of my country, in the army commanded by the Earl of Essex, under the
authority of the Parliament. A true English spirit! O how far different this
from Clarendon and Eachard!

At last, after a dreadful civil war of many years, religion, laws and liberty
prevailed, as they ever will do in England, sooner or later. The King, by the
fate of war, was taken, and afterward made a prisoner at NewPort, in the isle
of Wight. Here he entered into a treaty with the Parliament, commissioners
being appointed for that purpose by both parties. The King entirely despairing
doing any thing more by force, made a great many concessions, viz.

(1.) To indemnify the Parliament for all that (...) been done by them during
the late war, which the King acknowledged they were necessitated to do in their
just and lawful defense.

(2.) He agreed, that Archbishops should be abolished, and that the Bishops who
remained, provisionally, should not exercise authority, jurisdiction, or
ordination, but with the advice and assistance of their Presbyters, that the
Presbyterian Government should be established for three years, at the end of
which the Assembly of Divines, his Majesty naming but twenty more, should
determine the form of Church Government for the future; and that the Common
Prayer should be taken away out of all churches and chapels.

I mention these particulars to show the ignorance and presumption of those who
annually affirm, the King was a Martyr for the church.

During this treaty the Parliament received letters from Colonel Jones in
Ireland, giving an account of the arrival of the Marquis of Ormond in that
kingdom, with a commission to conclude a peace with the rebels, at the very
time when the King was treating with the Parliament to carry on the war against
them. Jones also intercepted a letter of Ormond's to the chief of the (...)
Massacrers; it was signed Ormond, and directed To our loving friend Sir Richard
Black, Chairman of the Assembly of the confederate Catholics at Kilkenny. Lilly
speaking of the veracity of King Charles I. says of him: He had so much of
self-end in all he did, it was a most difficult thing to hold him close to his
word or promise; so that some foreign Princes bestowed on him the character of
a most false Prince, and one that never kept his word except for his own
advantage. Again, though in time of Parliament he often promised to redress
grievances; yet the best friend he has cannot produce one act of good he ever
did his subjects in the vacancy of Parliament. Does this agree with the King's
strict justice, piety, and devotion, that Clarandon speaks of? This discovery
put an end to the treaty at once.

The King's death was a thing now resolved on, by (...) in the army who had
power to put it in execution. (...) ^^ey obliged the Commons to concur in the
design, placed a guard at the door of the Parliament House, to prevent any of
those members going in from whom they apprehended any opposition. The number of
the excluded was about one hundred and forty: Only some of these were
voluntarily Seceders, in disgust for the force put upon their brethren. The
secluded members immediately published a solemn declaration, signifying, that
all the votes and ordinances of Parliament since their exclusion, and during
the continuance of the army's influence upon the House, were null and void, and
no ways obligatory. The sitting members, on the other hand, (...) this
declaration to be scandalous and seditious.

Cromwell and a few more of the army had now the majority in Parliament, and
court was made to them accordingly. They abused that power they found they had,
both in the army and the House of Commons, to execute the base design they had
formed against the King's life. I have no reserves; I love a fair and open
representation of things. I can see wickedness, tyranny, and a flagrant breach
of trust on both sides. I will readily grant that the King had hard and cruel
usage; that he was murdered; that he was destroyed by a faction! The
constitution was now again trampled upon, the laws were violated; tyranny and a
wicked military force usurped their room! But still let us trace this
lamentable state of things to its first cause. It began from the Court and
(...). It was the Monarch who created a disgust to (...). It was the insolence
of churchmen that made the church odious. You detest the murder of the King; so
do I altogether as much. But I likewise detest the murder of the constitution,
in which he and his wicked C^^^sellors were principals, and which for many
years (...) been effecting. You mentioned the murder of (...) and the abolition
of the Monarchy as the most wonderful events that ever the world produced. But,
Sir, give me leave to tell you, that there was nothing wonderful or surprising
therein. Any one that had been (...) all acquainted with the History of
kingdoms or states (...) easily have foreseen them. Cromwell, Ireton, and (...)
others of the army, had by invincible courage subdued (...) the enemies of the
constitution; and this they performed by troops not only hardy and brave, but
the most sober also, and best disciplined, that this or any other nation had
ever seen. What wonder is it, if the leaders of such as these, if they had an
inclination to subvert the laws of their count^y, to set up for themselves, and
erect a new tyranny in their own persons, in the place of that from which they
had just delivered her; I say, what wonder is it, if a set of men thus
qualified accomplish their purposes. It was the best of the Roman troops that
were the instruments of Caesar's usurpation. Soldiers are inured to implicit
obedience. Whatever their officers command they seldom scruple. It is their
profession to dispute by force, and the sword. Cromwell, Ireton, and a few more
of the army, having succeeded in that bold and impious attempt, of secluding by
force one hundred and forty members, or purging the house, as it was termed,
found themselves, by accursed experience, able to overbalance and control the
civil authority. They lost no time, they exerted their strength, destroyed the
King, and seized the sovereign power at once. Men naturally desire dominion,
and riches; and it is ridiculous to presume they will not endeavor to attain
them, when they have opportunity and power. I could mention many parts of
Europe, that have been enslaved by their own troops. This has been and ever
will be the case of all countries, that subsist by standing armies. When those
have conquered the enemies of their country, they will subdue their country for
themselves. Instances of this are too numerous, to allow ours to be wondered at.

You was all along grossly mistaken, in presuming the death of the King to be a
national act. It was merely the act of the army. Ireton was the person who
drove on the King's trial and death. Cromwell was a long time in suspense about
it. Ireton (says Burnet) had the principles and temper of a Cassius in him, he
stuck at nothing that could have turned England to a (...) and he found out
Cook, and Bradslaw, two bold (...), as proper instruments for managing it.

(...) likewise sadly conso^n^^^ the proceedings of the (...) with as (...) as
the very (...) of the King's (...)

I could say a good deal in vindication of the Long Parliament, from the first
session to the last moment of their existence; which was when the army by force
secluded above one hundred and forty members, as aforesaid.

They were after that no Parliament; nor could they in any shape be deemed the
representative body of the nation. No, certainly. They were then under the
terror, awe, and influence of a wicked military power, which would admit of no
check or control. I choose here to make use of the words of others. Wellwood,
in his Memoirs says, No age ever produced greater men than those who sat in
that Parliament. They had sufficient abilities and inclinations, to render the
King and their country happy. They set down a scene of grievances under which
the nation had long groaned; the many cruelties and illegal practices of the
Star Chamber and High Commission Courts were now laid open; and it was insisted
on, that those two arbitrary tribunals should be thrown down.

The intentions of this Parliament were certainly just and noble, and tended to
the equal advantage of King and people. But the King urged on his own ruin,
step by step, and at last came to an open rupture with the Parliament, which
made the gap too wide to be again closed. I am sensible, Clarendon and Eachard
every where treat this Parliament as a parcel of rebels and scoundrels, and
represent their proceedings in a base and injurious manner. But I have a
greater authority than that of any private man, to support and vindicate their
proceedings: That very convention that brought in King Charles II. though ready
to run mad with loyalty, would not suffer any reflection on the conduct of
those illustrious patriots, except only in the article of beheading the King.
Mr. William Lenthal, who had been Speaker of the Long Parliament, and was a
member of the restoring one, happened to drop this expression in the debate
about the general pardon, He who first drew his sword (...) the late King,
committed as great an offense as he (...) cut off his head. For which
expression the Ho^^ (...) Commons ordered him to be seized instantly by (...)
Sergeant, and directed Sir Harbottle Grimstone, (...) Speaker, to reprimand him
in the following manner*

Sir, the House has taken great offense at some words you have let fall in
this debate, which in their judgment contain as high a reflection on the
justice and proceedings of the Lords and Commons of the late Parliament, in
their actings before 1648, as could be expressed. They apprehend there is much
poison in the said words, and that they were spoken out of a design to inflame,
and to render those who drew the sword to bring delinquents to punishe^t, and
to assert their just liberties, equally culpable with those who cut off the
King's head.

Do not Clarendon and Eachard stand unanswerably condemned in the most solemn
manner by this declaration of the House of Commons, pronounced by their
Speaker? after which all future Critics on them would be superfluous.

I now come to that part of your sermon, wherein, according to the usual
custom, you laid the trial and death of the King at the door of the
Presbyterians. Most true it is, on the contrary, that of all our different
parties, none had the honesty and courage to appear openly for the King but the
Presbyterians. They exerted themselves in public and private, and omitted no
one thing that was possible to be done, to prevent the execrable fact of
putting his Majesty to death. No sooner was he taken and confined as a
prisoner, but Mr. Calamy, Mr. Marish^^* Mr. Ash, Mr. Whiteaker, Mr. Sedwick,
and many other Presbyterian Ministers waited on the Lord General Fairfax,
testifying their dislike of making the King a prisoner. A few days after, above
forty of the Presbyterian Ministers joined in a letter to the General, and
officers in the army, freely declaring against their seizing and imprisoning
the person of the King. This was about the latter end of December, 1648. About
the middle of January it began to appear, that the death of the King was a
matter fixed and determined by the army. On the 18th of January there was
another meeting, of more than sixty of the principal Presbyterian Ministers in
and about London, wherein it was instantly agreed, that, in behalf of
themselves and their respective congregations, they should by some public act
declare, before God, angels, and men, their abhorrence of the seizing and
imprisoning the person of the King, and their detestation of putting him to
death; which they apprehended would be the issue of the trial then depending.
In consequence of this resolution, the following representation was immediately
printed and published, in the form of a letter, directed to the General and
Council of war:

"That they appeared at first for the Parliament, on the propositions and
orders of the Lords and Commons, June 10th, 1642, for bringing in of money and
plate, wherein they were assured it should be no otherwise employed, than to
maintain the Protestant religion, the King's authority, his person in his Royal
dignity, the free course of justice, the laws of the land, the peace of the
kingdom, and the privilege of Parliament, against any force that should oppose
them. That they were wholly unsatisfied with the proceedings since the
exclusion and imprisonment of the Members of the House of Commons, and held
themselves bound in duty to God and religion, the King, the Parliament, and
kingdom, to profess before God, angels, and men, that they verily believed, the
taking away the life of the King, in the way of trial then depending, was not
only not agreeable to the word of God, the principles of the Protestant
religion, (never yet stained with the least drop of the blood of a King) or the
fundamental constitution of the kingdom, but contrary to them; as also to the
oath of allegiance, the protestation of the 5th May, 1641, and the solemn
League and Covenant: From all which, or any of which engagements, they knew not
any power on earth, able to absolve them or others. They warned and exhorted in
the name of the great God, all that belong to their charge and ministry, to
keep close to the ways of God, the rules of religion, the fundamental
constitution and government of the kingdom; not suffering themselves to be
seduced from it, by being drawn to subscribe the late models or agreement of
the people, which directly tended to subvert the fundamental government; and to
mourn bitterly for the sins of all degrees of men, and beg of God that he would
restrain the violence of (...) that they might not dare to draw upon themselves
and the kingdom the blood of their Sovereign." This was subscribed by Cornelius
Burgess, D. D. William Gauge, D. D. Edmond Stanton, D. D. Thomas Temple, D. D.
George Walker, Edmond Calamy, B. D. Jeremy Whitaker, Daniel Cawdrey, William
Spurstow, D. D. Lazarus Seaman, D. D. Simeon Ash, Thomas Case, Nicholas
Porosset, Thomas Thorowgood, Edward Corbet, Henry Roborough, John Downham,
Arthur Jackson, James Nalton, Thomas Cawton, Charles Offspring, Samuel Clark,
Joseph Wall, Francis Robert, Matthew Haviland, Samuel Bolton, John Sheffield,
William Harrison, William Jenkyn, John Viner, Elidad Blackwell, John Cross,
John Fuller, William Tailor, Peter Witham, Francis Peck, Christopher Love, John
Wallis, D. D. Thomas Watson, William Wickins, Thomas Manton, D. D. Thomas
Gouge, William Blackmore, Robert Mercer, Ralph Robinson, John Wells, Jacob
Tice, Paul Russell, John Glascock, Benjamin Needler, John Stileman, Joshua
Kirby, Thomas Whately, Nathaniel Staniforth, Josias Bull, Arthur Barham,
Jonathan Lloyd, Steven Watkins, John Devereux. Calamy's life of Baxter, vol. I.
p. 61.

Some of the subscribers delivered it to the General, and Council of war;
which, as Calamy observes, was running a great hazard, as things then stood;
and may be justly reckoned as an evidence of the great integrity and honesty of
the persons who subscribed it. Yea, the day the King was beheaded, Mr. Calamy,
and some others applied to General Fairfax, and persuaded him to rescue the
King; but he was full of regret and uneasiness, and saw that he had been
tricked and overpowered by his under officers, so that soon after he laid down
his commission, and never had to do with the army more, whereby Cromwell became
head of all.

What sort of mortals must those vicars, curates, doctors and dignitaries be,
that pass sentence of damnation, every 30th of January, on those Ministers and
their brethren, for killing this very King, whom, with so much boldness, truth
and courage, they labored to save? Strange and surprising infatuation,
egregious ignorance and baseness, which no age or history can parallel!

And here, Sir, you did not only seem to expatiate on the faults of the dead,
with a bitter and malicious pleasure; but was pleased to cast many severe and
indecent reflections on the present generation of Presbyterians; and did call
on them aloud, to repent and mourn, in sackcloth and ashes; to weep and fast,
with the utmost contrition and self-abasement; that so they might not bear the
abominable iniquities of their forefathers; but by their extraordinary
humiliation and sorrow might avert the just indignation and wrath of Almighty
God.

Considering all this, I was quite astonished at what you advanced on this head
In truth, it was not only contrary to reason and justice; but directly opposite
to all divine revelation. It is from thence incontestably plain, that every man
shall stand upon his own bottom, shall be condemned or acquitted hereafter,
agreeable to his own conduct and behavior; or as the New Testament expresses
it, shall be judged according to the actions done in the body, whether they be
good or evil. It is no where said, that any shall be judged according to the
actions done or performed by their great-grandfathers, sixty or seventy years
before they were born. No, the very suspicion of it carries an injurious
reflection on the justice and goodness of the Deity. And it can never enter
into my held to conceive, that I can be properly punishable for the sins of my
parents. Of my own sins I ought to repent, and to be filled with shame and
indignation at the remembrance of them; and I am certainly liable to punishment
in proportion to the degree of my guilt; But of my grandfather's or
great-grandfather's sins I can no more repent, than I can of the sins of my
grandchildren yet unborn. It is impossible for me to prevent what shall be done
after I am dead, so it was equally impossible for me to help what was acted
before I was born.

You also hinted at the political principles of the present dissenters. I take
the liberty to say, they are not ashamed of them. They are the same now as in
the days of their forefathers. Upon their principles the late glorious
revolution was founded. Their principles have been confirmed by many and
repeated Acts of Parliament, and have often had the suffrage and sanction of
the most august assemblies upon earth. Upon the^r principles Sir, stands the
parliamentary succession of the Crown of these realms, in the present reigning
family; and God Almighty grant it may there ever stand. Yea, I could tell you a
time when the clergy themselves were glad to borrow their principles.

I cannot finish my remarks on your sermon, without taking notice of what you
was pleased to advance in the close of it, relating to the title King Charles
had to the Crown of England, which you called an absolute, indeseasible,
hereditary right, and consequently not liable to cavil or dispute, by party or
faction. This is what I think should never he said in pulpits, as it seems to
imply a distrust of the validity of the parliamentary establishment.

I told you in the beginning of my remarks, that as far back as the thirteenth
year of Queen Elizabeth, it was made high treason, for any one to affi^m, that
the reigning Prince, with the authority of Parliament, is not able to limit or
bind the Crown. I doubt not but you imbibed this principle of hereditary right
at Oxford, forty years ago; and having never suffered yourself impartially to
examine its foundation, it is become to you as a demonstrated truth. But the
present age is given to reasoning; they do not so implicitly submit to
absurdities, though they have the sanction of a convocational decree.

You was pleased to dress up the principles of the presbyterians in a frightful
shape; but let me tell you, Sir, in my turn, that the principles of your party
have been burnt, not by a rude and lawless, rabble, but by the common h^ngman,
in broad daylight, before the Royal Exchange in London, and by authority of
Parliament. Perhaps you never have heard of this contemptuous treatment of the
Oxford principles, and therefore I will give it you from the Parliamentary
records. Anno Domini 1710. The House of Lords taking into consideration the
judgment and decree of the University of Oxford, passed in their convocation,
21st July, 1683. It was resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament assembled, that the said judgment and decree shall be burnt by the
hands of the common hangman, before the Royal Exchange in London, between the
hours of twelve and one, on Monday the 17th instant of March, in the presence
of the Lord Mayor of the city of London, and the two Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex.

In this decree were strongly asserted the doctrine of passive obedience, the
absolute, indefeasible, and hereditary right of succession to the Crown; and
Revolution principles were called damnable. Bishop Burnet, speaking of this
detestable decree, says, The University of Oxford asserted the King's
prerogative in the highest strain of the most abject flattery possible, both in
their addresses, and in their wild decree; in which they laid together a set of
such highflown maxims, as must establish an unaccountable tyranny..

I will readily grant, it is an action worthy a Minister of the Church of
England, to discover a proper zeal for the supremacy and prerogative of his
Prince; but then, Sir, it should be with such limitations, and restrictions, as
are consistent with our known and established laws, and agreeable to the
settlement of the Imperial Crown of these realms. Under this head you might
have testified some love to your country, some little attachment to the
liberties of your fellow subjects. But the advancing or the bare hinting that
impious doctrine, of an absolute, indefeasible, hereditary right, is not only
weak and foolish, but may be attended with dangerous consequences; as it may so
unsettle the minds of some of his Majesty's subjects, as to make them suspect
the validity of his Parliamentary title: A title by far the best and most
glorious, and will be found by experience to be the most durable. An absolute
Prince is of all others the most insecure; as he proceeds by no rule of law, he
can have no rule of safety. He acts by violence; and violence is the only
safeguard against him. It was the advancing this slavish doctrine from the
pulpit, in the latter part of Queen Anne's reign, that greatly contributed to
the rebellion which broke out on the accession of the late King, to the throne
of this kingdom. This, with great propriety might be called the Grand
Rebellion. It was a rebellion, the most wicked and diabolical, that ever the
world produced; a rebellion against King, Lords and Commons; against religion,
laws, and liberty; in favor of chains, fetters, slavery, blackness and
darkness both of body and mind. An event that will leave an eternal mark of
infamy and disgrace on the British nation, as many of the nobility, gentry, and
commonalty, were either openly engaged therein, or secretly favored it. I have
often wished, for the honor of the nation, that an hundred of the most
considerable of the rebels had been confined in Bedlam, during their respective
lives, that after-ages might have concluded, none but fools and madmen were
engaged in that most wicked and impious attempt.

And here I cannot omit taking notice, not only to the everlasting honor of
the Presbyterians, but of all the different denominations of Dissenters, that
there was scarce a single man of them to be found, at that critical period, but
what openly declared for the Parliamentary succession of the Crown in the House
of Hanover; and were preparing to venture their lives and fortunes in its
de^ence.

The invader, you know, Sir, claimed under the notion of an absolute,
indefeasible, hereditary right. Whether he was, or was not, the son of King
James, is quite out of the question; it is of no consequence at all to any one
man in England, Scotland or Ireland, who was his father, or who was his mother;
he is a person attainted by law, and therefore cannot reign; and all his
aiders, and abbettors, or whoever holds any correspondence or intelligence with
him, are deemed and judged guilty of high treason See the Act of the 14th of
King William, entitled, An Act of attainder of the pretended Prince of Wales of
High Treason.
.

I assure you, Sir, was I in possession of the mines of Mexico and Peru,
together with all the other riches of those vast and mighty empires, I would
most cheerfully sacrifice all, to the very last shilling, to preserve and
transmit to posterity, the present Parliamentary succession of the Crown, with
which are connected religion, laws, liberty, and independency; and should, in
my most calm and serious moments, esteem my conduct to be just and prudent. And
I persuade myself, I here speak the language of every true Briton. Most
surprising then it is that any one who has bound himself by the strongest
engagements religion can lay men under, and has tied down his soul by an oath,
to defend and maintain the present settlement of the Crown in the illustrious
House of Hanover, should be so wicked and profane, as to hint any thing in
favor of an absolute hereditary right.

Thanks be to Heaven for this Parliamentary settlement of the imperial Crown of
Great Britain: A settlement, which our religion, our country, our liberty, and
our property, oblige us to maintain: Yea, without the solemnity of an oath, we
are bound to defend this establishment, by every motive that can influence the
mind of men; honor, conscience, and the love of our country, constrains us to
it.

We should certainly have been chained down, in the most abject condition of
servitude, in the reign of the late King James, had not the Almighty, in mercy,
given us that glorious instrument of his Providence, the late and memorable
King William; by whose seasonable interposition we are now in a condition of
enjoying life, liberty, religion and property.

I shall not content myself with remarks only from the different historians of
those days; but let us see the calm and deliberate resolutions of the Lords and
Commons, the representative body of the whole nation: In the first year of King
William and Queen Mary, an Act of Parliament was made, entitled, An ACT
declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and settling the succession
of the Crown: It begins thus, 'Whereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in Parliament assembled at Westminst^r, lawfully, fully and freely
representing all the estates of the people of this realm, did upon the
thirteenth of February, in the year of our Lord 1688, present unto their
Majesty's, then called and known by the names and style of William and Mary,
Prince and Princess of Orange, being present in their proper persons, a certain
declaration in writing, made by the said Lords and Commons in the following
words, "Whereas the late King James II. by the assistance of diverse evil
Counselors, Judges and Ministers employed by him, did endeavor to subvert and
extirpate the Protestant religion, and the laws and liberties of this kingdom,
by assuming and exercising a power of dispensing with, and suspending of laws,
and the execution of laws, without the consent of Parliament, etc. All which
are utterly and directly contrary to the known laws, statutes, and freedom of
this realm: And the said late King, having abdicated the Government, and the
Throne thereby being vacant, they the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, assembled at Westminster, do resolve, That William and Mary, Prince
and Princess of Orange, be, and be declared King and Queen of England, France
and Ireland, and all the dominions thereunto belonging, etc. etc." Then they
enjoin the following oath to be taken, "I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear,
that I will be faithful, and bear true allegiance to Their Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary: So help me God."

In the declaration presented by the Lords and Commons to King William and
Queen Mary, on their acceptance of the Crown, after having ascertained the
rights and liberties of the people in the strongest terms, we have the
following words: "And it is hereby-declared and enacted, that all and singular
the rights and liberties, asserted and claimed in the said declaration, are the
true, ancient, and indubit^ble rights and liberties of the people of this
kingdom; and so shall be esteemed, allowed, and adjudged, deemed, and taken to
be, and that all and every the particulars aforesaid shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as they are expressed in the said declaration."

Let us now step into Scotland, and see what was transacted there at this
important juncture, in a grand and solemn convention of their Lords and
Commons, they declare, "That whereas King James VII. by the advice of wicked
Counselors, did invade the fundamental constitutions of Scotland, and altered
it from a legal, limited monarchy, to an arbitrary and despotic power, and
exerted that power to the subversion of the Protestant religion, and to the
violation of the laws and liberties of the kingdom, etc. etc. All which
miscarriages of King James were utterly and directly contrary to the known
laws, freedom, and statutes of the kingdom of Scotland. Upon these grounds and
reasons the estates of the kingdom of Scotland did find and declare, that the
said King James had forfeited the Crown, and the throne was become vacant, and
the estates of the kingdom of Scotland had resolved, that William and Mary,
King and Queen of England, be declared King and Queen of Scotland, etc."

In these Acts of Parliament the causes and reasons of the late revolution are
fully set forth.

The people of England and Scotland, when they had gone so far, plainly saw the
work was but half done. They had only delivered one generation from Popery and
Slavery, and knew that in case King William, and Queen Mary, and the Princess
of Denmark, left no issue, some Popish Prince or other, under pretense of being
next in descent, might set up a claim to the Crown. This consideration gave
birth to another Act of Parliament, made in the thirteenth year of King
William, entitled, "An Act for the further limitation of the Crown, and for the
better securing the rights and liberties of the subject." By this act "the most
illustrious Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the
heirs of her body being Protestants, were declared the next in succession in
the Protestant line, to the Crown of England, etc. etc. after the late King
William and the Princess Anne of Denmark, and their respective issue; and it is
enacted, that the Crown should be, remain, and continue to the said Princess
Sophia, and the heirs of her body being Protestants; and there unto the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in the name of all the people of this
realm, did most humbly and faithfully submit themselves, their heirs, and
posterities, etc.

About this time a little Popish Jacobite party began to peep up; upon which
another Act of Parliament was framed, entitled, "An Act of attainder of the
present pretended Prince of Wales of high treason." This Jacobite faction still
subsisting, our Great Deliverer, and his glorious Parliament, having a dread
upon their minds, of that Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power, from which they
had been so lately delivered, were now resolved to do the work effectually; and
for that purpose they passed another Act for extinguishing the hopes of the
present pretended Prince of Wales, and all other pretenders whatsoever, and
their open and secret abettors. And, to clinch the nail and make thorough work
of it, they framed the Adjuration Oath, and thereby tied down the people, body,
soul, and estates, to maintain and defend the settlement of the Crown in the
House of Hanover.

By these means our glorious Deliverer completed his work, and handed down to
us the most pure religion and the best constitution in the universe; guarded,
and fenced about by oaths, and laws, as unalterable as human affairs can be.

When I consider how we stand as to the Pretender, that we have all personally
abjured him in public courts of justice, and have in the presence of God,
angels, and men, declared the same to be without any equivocation, or mental
reservation; really, when I consider and reflect on these many solemn ties of
laws and oaths of religion and conscience, of duty, interest, and inclination,
methinks all fear vanishes in a moment, and an invasion in favor of the
Pretender, appears to be a most wild and romantic chimera, unless supported by
a wicked restless faction within our own bowels; he may otherwise with equal
reason, and probability of success, attempt to invade the moon, as to invade
and conquer the kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland This was written
before the French had taken Offend, or any part of Flanders, or the breaking
out of the late rebellion.
. His present Majesty, and the next successor to the crown, we know full well,
will always rule agreeable to the laws and constitutions of the kingdom; and
God Almighty grant, their successors may ever follow their glorious example:
and then they will stand, eternally stand, on Sir William Temple's broad
bottom, viz. The affection, interest, and inclination of the people, against
which the united powers of France and Spain, Hell and Rome, will never prevail.

I have often wished that the sundry Acts of Parliament, for limiting and
setting the succession of the Crown, were more universally known and
understood; and that the most significant clauses of them were engraved on
monuments of brass or marble, erected for that purpose in every parish church
in England; that so the most wicked and impious of all doctrines, that of an
absolute, indefeasible, hereditary right, might stand publicly and perpetually
condemned.

I have only one remark more, and then shall have done with your famous sermon.
You was pleased largely to insist on the obligation all men are under, to pay a
due and proper regard to the national religion, and national faith; and
endeavored to prove, that the legislature is at all times truly and properly
invested with a power, not only to support the national faith and religion, but
to enforce it, and even its different modes and ceremonies, by civil penalties.

I would not be understood here, to be running down all establishments, and
particularly that of the Church of England; but the establishing a national
faith and religion, and enforcing the same by civil penalties, does not appear
to be reasonable and just, or quite consistent with the nature and end of civil
society. Religion, I mean true and real religion, in its own nature is
incapable of being established by any law. It is not subject to human
inspection, nor can it be controuled by any human authority. It consists in the
reverence and love of God, in constant submission to his divine will, and in a
regular and devout obedience to his Laws. This is truly religion; but it cannot
be infused into the mind by any other means than by argument and persuasion.
Therefore I submit it to the consideration of the public, if it be just or
reasonable for the Magistrate to enforce the national religion and faith by
civil penalties. The different modes and ceremonies of worship indeed may be
established by the magistrate, but this is not the establishment of religion;
these modes and ceremonies are, at best, only forms of godliness, and are often
destitute of real devotion, reverence and love of God. Mahometanism is
certainly an imposture, and its di^erent modes and ceremonies of worship are
foolish and ridiculous; the establishment of them does not alter their nature,
or make them a jot more reasonable and just. Upon the whole, there is something
in the nature of true and real religion inconsistent with any civil
establishment whatsoever. But the contending for, and establishing a national
faith, is still more unaccountable. With respect to faith, every man must
believe according to the evidence that is exhibited to him; he cannot help it.
Such is the frame of the human mind, that it cannot withhold its assent or
belief from any proposition that shall appear to be true or probable. I
evidently perceive, two and three make five; was I to gain the world, I cannot
think otherwise. I have never been at Jamaica, yet I believe there is such a
place; and that it lies in or near the particular latitude described in our
maps: The testimonies I have received of it are so strong, as force the belief
of it, whether I will or not* Transubstantiation, the Athanasian creed, and
many other things I could mention, are truly mysterious and unintelligible, and
therefore cannot be properly the objects of the assent of any reasonable man.
Was I to be threatened with the severest tortures, if I did not believe these
doctrines, yet the fear of those severe punishments could not force me to the
belief of them; it would be impossible for me to consider them any otherwise
than as absurd falsehoods. The dread of pain might induce me outwardly, to
acknowledge them a^ true; but this would be no other than a wilful deliberate
act of hypocrisy, for which I should stand condemned in my own conscience.

I will grant, the belief of a God is the foundation of all religion; there is
no man who makes any use of his reason; but will conclude, that from eternity
there must have existed some one, unchangeable, independent, necessary,
self-existent Being, from whom all other beings, and all other things, that
are, or ever were, have received their original. It is demonstrably true, that
all things could not have risen out of nothing; nor can they have derived from
one another in an endless chain or succession. Whatever exists must have a
cause, a reason, a ground of its existence; therefore, it is one of the most
evident truths in the world, that something must have existed eternally and
independently: That is, (as Dr. Clarke very justly observes) to exist by an
absolute necessity, originally in the nature of the thing. This is the most
natural idea of the Supreme Being; therefore I am forced to believe, that there
is One only living and true God, a most pure, glorious spirit, necessarily
possessing all possible perfections, eternal, immense, immutable, almighty,
omniscient, independent, infinitely holy, just and good.

Thus far the light of nature, unassisted by revelation, points out and
directs; and the more we consider and contemplate this subject, the stronger we
shall find it impressed in our minds: yea this truth is so evident and
demonstrable, that it comes with an irresistible power; so that our assent to
it is necessary and unavoidable.

Let us now examine the pretensions of revelation, and we shall find the case
exactly the same.

It is undeniably true, and we have all the proof and evidence that any
reasonable man can desire, that there really was such a person as Jesus Christ,
and that he appeared in the world about 1700 years ago; that he was Jesus the
Messiah; and was sent out from God, and acted by the authority of God; that he
came into the world to establish a pure, spiritual and undefiled religion* in
its nature simple and perfect, freed from superstition and idolatry, not loaded
with sacrifices or ceremonies, but every way adapted to make mankind wiser and
^etter. The sublimity of its doctrines, the purity of its precepts, the spirit
of love, charity, and universal benevolence, that runs through the whole
Christian system, obliges me to believe it has God for its author. Besides, the
mi^^^les our Savior wrought, in confirmation of his doctrine, were many, and
uncontestable; performed in open daylight, in presence of many hundred people;
so that there could not be the least suspicion of any fraud or juggle.

I am very sensible, it is natural for all men, to have a^ over-bearing opinion
and esteem of that particular religion they were born and bred up in; but
Christianity will bear the strictest enquiry, and stand firm, when the mind is
freed from all the b^ass and prejudice of education. It calls on all its
votaries to prove and examine it; and it has this particular distinction from
all other religions whatsoever; that the more it is inspected into, the more
its purity, rationality, and divine authority will appear: So that I am
obliged, whether I will or not, to acknowledge the truth of our Savior's
mission, and the divinity of his doctrine: The proofs are so incontestable and
conclusive, that it is not in my power to withhold my belief or assent; so that
this faith also, like all others, is in its own nature necessary and
unavoidable. These premises make it extremely difficult for me to conceive,
that any one can be properly punished or rewarded, either here or hereafter,
merely for believing or not believing; and abundantly demonstrate, that the
power claimed by the civil magistrate, to establish a national faith, is
indefensible on rational principles, and not agreeable with the nature and ends
of civil society.

With regard to Christianity, it is purely a practical thing, not a speculative
one. The Scriptures declare, that faith without works is dead. It avails not.
It signifies nothing. Let a man believe by the lump, let him swallow creeds by
dozens, let him believe all the orthodox established notions, or all the
orthodox opinions of the other different parties, yet, if he is an immortal
man, he is worse than an infidel. A good life infers good principles. Living
well is the best evidence we can give that we believe well. Certainly, an
honest, sober, virtuous Heathen, must be more in the favor of God, than a
wicked Christian. A Pagan who observes the laws of truth and peace, is
infinitely more religious, than a profane, turbulent, ava^itious Christian
Priest. Cornelius was a Heathen; yet, observe, it is declared of him in
Scripture, That he was a devout man, and one that feared God, with all his
house; who gave much a^ms to the people, and prayed to God Almighty.

I have now done with your sermon, and shall conclude, with repeating a few of
my favorite lines: For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight,
He cannot be wrong whose life is in the right:
In faith and hope the world will disagree,
But all mankind's concern is charity:
All must be false that thwart this one great end,
And all of God that bless mankind, or mend.
POPE' s Essay on Man.

I beg leave to entertain the reader with an admirable Poem, very well adapted
to the present subject.

An EPITAPH on BIGOTRY, translated from the Latin, which was written by the
late pious and ingenious Mr. JOHN REYNOLDS, and inserted in the Occasional
Paper, Vol. III. No. 6.
I.
HERE lies (and may it here for ever lie!)
The carcass of dead piety,
Shadow of grace, substantial sin,
Religion's mask and gaudy dress,
The form and foe of holiness,
The image and the plague of zeal divine.
Its dwelling was the church; in double shape,
Half was a murdering wolf, and half a mimic ape.
II.
A monster horrid to the fight,
Hideous, deformed, and void of light;
'Twas born at ancient Rome,
By the modern nursed
In the dark cloisters of the Vatican;
Its lungs inspired with heaving lies,
Its bulk well fatten'd to prodigious size*
With gunpowder and blood of man.
III.
Ancient inhabitant of Spain,
And long in France a welcome guest,
Over the continent and main,
Over the old world and the new,
Mankind and money to pursue,
On dragon's wings the harpy flew,
And gave its feet no rest.
IV.
All languages the fury spoke,
And did of either sex partake:
Flaming enlightner of the mind,
And headlong leader of the blind,
Often has it dragged the doubtful tongue to speak,
While the pained conscience left the truth behind.
By gibbet, sword and fire,
It made whole tribes of men expire;
And to the skies their groaning ghosts it hurled,
A swift converter of the world.
Dextrous in all the arts of blood;
Skilled to contrive or counterfeit
Mysterious mischief, plots of state:
Those murderous engines to destroy the good.
The Muse here tiring, begs the leader's leave to release herself from the
bonds and labors of rhyme and meter, by a mere imitation of the next thirty
lines in prose.

V.
Under the name and habit of the church,
Under the countenance and clothing of a sheep,
It became the most savage and rampant
Plunderer and waster of human society,
Made fearful inroads on all civil commerce,
And left religious liberty expiring.
VI.
A warrior well furnished
With all arts politic and polite,
With the knotty embarrassments of criticism,
The hampering chains and subtilties of logic,
And the javelins of pen and tongue,
With the roaring ordinance of councils and canons,
And all the artillery of the schools and gown.
VII.
Fury, hatred and mischief,
Love of this world, pride and disdain,
With perjuries, falsehoods, and pious frauds,
And raging party zeal,
Were its necessary and everlasting attendants;
High encomiums and endless applause
Of guides infallible and faith implicit,
Of hereditary and divine right,
Of unlimited power and passive obedience
To tyrant priests and kings,
With the immortal praise and merit
Of stupid ignorance, and blind submission,
Were heralds to prepare its way.
VIII.
Trifles, tricks, and solemn fooleries,
Legends and silly tales,
Old almanacks, and moldy, musty relics,
Sweepings of ancient tombs,
Vows, pilgrimages, charms and consecretions,
Rites obsolete, and novel ceremonies
Both decent and indecent.
Monkish and superstitious austerities,
With words of sacerdotal absolution,
And sacerdotal vengeance,
Squibs, crackers, excommunications, curses,
Roaring bulls and vain thunders,
Mixed with priestly choler, bitter and black,
Were its delicious food.
[Now meter and rhyme proceed.]
IX.
A purple prelate, chosen to preside
Over the whole Ignatian drove,
And all the clergy tribes beside,
All but the sacred few that mix their zeal with love,
In every different sect 'twas known,
It made the cassock and the cowl its own,
Now stalked in formal cloak, now fluttered in the gown.
X.
At what dark hour so ever
The cursed Divan at Rome were met,
Catholic faith to propagate,
This monster filled the chair.
The conclave dressed in bonnets red,
With three crowned tyrant at their head,
Made it their privy Councellor.
The inquisition Court (a bloody crew*
Artful to set the solemn trap
That lets no heretic escape)
Owns it her president and founder too.
XI.
Often as the church in east and western lands,
Rising against herself in arms,
In her own blood imbrued her hands,
This chief led on the unnatural war,
Or did the bloody standards bear,
Or sound the fierce alarms;
Victorious still: And what can more be said
Of all the living warriors, or the heroes dead!
XII.
Britain, a land well stored with every good,
That nature, law, religion gives,
A land where sacred freedom thrives;
Blessed isle! If her own weal she understood!
Her sons immured with guardian ocean's sleep
And castles floating in the deep;
Fenced from all foreign foes, O shame! O sin!
Her sons had let this baleful mischief in;
This hellish fury, who with flattering breath,
Did first divide and then devour,
And made wild waste where ever she spread her power*
Behold, she meets her fatal hour
And lies enchain'd in death.
XIII.
Shout at the grave, O traveller;
Triumphant joys that reach the skies
Are here the justest obsequies:
Shout thrice; then flee afar
The poisonous steams and stenches of the sepulcher:
Go turn thy face to heaven, and pray,
That such a hateful monster never may
Obtain a resurrection day.
CONCLUSION.
I Must here stand still, -- make a pau^e -- and reflect a little on the vast
and surprising difference between us and our forefathers, both as Protestants
and D^^^ie^ters; especially during the reign of that weak and arbitrary family,
the Stuarts. And, really the consideration is very affecting. I cannot forbear
crying out* To thee, O my God, are due my eternal praises, to thee will I offer
my humblest acknowledgements of gratitude and thankfulness! Blessed, blessed be
thy name for ever, that thou have appointed me to act my part in Great Britain,
at a period of time when my person, my estate, my conscience, my religion, are
all my own. I am governed, it is true; but willingly governed, because governed
by law, and not by the a^bitrary dictates of insolent and lawless power. The
fruits of my labors are my certain property. My children, those dear pledges
of conjugal affection, I educate for myself, in such a manner, as my own
prudence and circumstances may direct, without the distressing fear of seeing
them torn from me, by the bigotry and superstition of crafty and tyrannical
Priests Memento the Schism Bill.
. Thanks be to Heaven, that the days of tyranny and darkness are now at an end,
and that the men of the greatest fortunes and abilities, of the present and
rising generation, seem to be inspired with an ardent love of liberty, and to
have been brought up in an abhorrence, of those bitter and slavish principles,
whereby wicked and designing Ecclesiastics have formerly invaded, and, at last,
impiously destroyed the noblest privileges of their country. The infinite
importance of liberty When I speak of civil liberty, I desire always to be
understood, as meaning nothing more than being governed by laws of our own
making.
is now universally understood; and it is impossible for any nation to be too
jealous of every attempt that may have a tendency to infringe or destroy it. In
short, it is one of the noblest gifts of God to mankind, and the only source
and foundation of happiness, both in public and private life. And what a
satisfaction must it now afford, to every wise and honest man, to see the
exorbitant claims of some Clergymen in our day and time, universally treated
with scorn and contempt, even when advanced by a person of high rank, and,
confessedly, great, abilities. I hope to live long enough to see the bulky
performance of that Gentleman meet with the same treatment as the famous Oxford
Decree of 1683, long since worthily burnt by the hands of the common hangman.

Should any one say, that no such claims or pretensions are now asserted, I beg
leave to refer him to the following quotations from the work I have just
referred to: The magistrates ought not to interfere with the Clergy, in the
exercise of their power; but ought on all occasions to be assisting to them,
when their aid is required. The Clergy ought to be permitted to make such
constitutions, from time to time, as shall appear to them conducive to the ends
of their divine commission; and the power of interpreting those constitutions
and of carrying them into execution, ought to be invested in the clergy alone,
or in those only to whom they shall delegate it.

Again, every Bishop may claim authority by the word of God, for the correction
and punishing of such a^ are unquiet, disobedient, and criminous; that is, for
the exercise of all manner of spiritual discipline within his diocese. No
administration that is properly spiritual, can come into any other hands
whatsoever, otherwise than by the voluntary choice and express direction of the
Bishop.

I could quote several other passages, all endeavoring to prove that the
Bishops and Clergy, by a Divine right, stand invested with the sole power for
the correction of manners, and punishment of vice; and that his authority is to
be exercised by visitations, synods, and rural chapters. Truly the tyranny of
the Grand Turk is not so detestable. Who would not rather be a slave to a
Monarch than a monk? The experience of all ages confirms this truth, that the
oppression or cruelty of temporal tyrants never was, norever can be, so great
as that of Priests has been; were those claims pe^^itted and allowed, the
sacerdotal empire would soon draw all power to itself, and render the civil
magistrate its slave and dependant. From the recognition and acknowledgement of
this divine right sprang the Papal supremacy; and should the Clergy of England
ever possess a power or right of jurisdiction, underived from the civil
magistrate, it would lead us to a state and condition worse than being slaves
to Rome; we should then become slaves and vassals to a Popery at our own door.
Those Priestly claims and pretensions are in themselves not only absurd, and
dreadfully mischievous; but also directly opposite to all the known laws and
constitutions of the realm. At the time of the Reformation our forefathers were
not content to abolish the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, but went to the
root of this accursed evil, and declared, that all jurisdiction, as well
ecclesiastical, as civil, is vested in, and exercised by authority from the
Crown.

3 Henry 8. His Royal Majesty is declared to be su- 1. C. 17. preme head of the
church of England, and has full power to punish, and repress all manner of
errors, vices and sins, growing within the same.

26 Henry 8. The King, his heirs and successors, Chap. 1. shall be taken and
reputed the only supreme head on earth of the church of England, and have full
power to correct, reform, and amend all errors and enormities within the same.

1 Edward 6. It is declared, and enacted, that all spi-Ch. 2. 3. ritual,
jurisdiction and authority is derived from the King's Majesty, as supreme head
of the churches in England and Ireland.

1 Elizabeth, Be it enacted, that all jurisdiction spi-Ch. 1. 17. ritual, and
ecclesiastical, be exercised by her Majesty, and that she has full power and
authority for the visitation of the ecclesiastical state, and persons, and for
the reformation, order, and correction of the same; and, further, that all
manner of ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction is in the Crown, and is
exercised by authority derived from thence.

I could cite many other acts of Parliament, wherein it is most fully and
peremptorily declared, that Archbishops, Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical
persons whatsoever, have no manner of jurisdiction, or authority, but by,
under, and from the King, from whom alone all ecclesiastical power is derived.
Therefore, the Clergy setting up for an independency, or pretending to exercise
any spiritual or temporal jurisdiction, by virtue of a divine right, is
directly contrary to all our known and established laws, as well as
inconsistent with all the principles of the reformation; which abundantly
declare, that all spiritual power and jurisdiction is derived solely from the
civil magistrate. This principle has ever been esteemed the groundwork of the
reformation. Whoever has a mind to see the weakness and pernicious tendency of
those priestly claims learnedly and judiciously refuted, may consult that
admirable treatise, entitled, An examination of the Codex, by that great Lawyer
and true Englishman the late Now the honorable Mr. Justice Foster, one of the
judges of the King's Bench.
recorder of Bristol. And lest any one should think I bear too hard on those
Reverend Gentlemen, I beg leave to conclude with a quotation from this
invaluable performance, Page 2. After having proved, beyond all contradiction,
that Christ's kingdom was not of this world, but that it was an empire of truth
and righteousness, founded in the hearts of his faithful subjects, he goes on,
For it is notorious; that a certain set of men (meaning the Bishops and Clergy
of ancient times) most impudently assuming to themselves the sole
interpretation of the laws of this kingdom, and pretending to an extraordinary
zeal for the honor of its founder, did set up, and for many ages did maintain,
a kingdom of their own over the greatest part of the Christian world; the most
impious and oppressive tyranny that ever exercised the patience of God or men;
an empire founded in craft, supported by blood, rapine, breach of faith, and
every other engine of fraud and oppression.

I have now gone through what I first intended, and to speak the truth, what
was at first wrote for my own private amusement and without any design of its
seeing the light; but when I considered what dreadful havoc bigotry and
superstition had made in the Christian world, I concluded, the publication
might be of some use, and not unseasonable. My Lord Bacon's observation is
certainly justly, that the danger of superstition is even greater than that of
Atheism: for, says he, Atheism leaves men to sense, to philosophy, to laws, to
reputation, all which may be guides to moral virtue, though religion were not;
but superstition dismounts all these; and erects an absolute monarchy in the
minds of men; Therefore, Atheism did never perturb states; but superstition
has been the confusion of many. The causes of superstition are pleasing and
sensual rites and ceremonies, excess of pharisaical and outside holiness,
reverence to tradition, and the stratagems of prelates for their own ambition
and lucre.

Probably, I may have incurred the displeasure of some persons, by advancing
things contrary to the commonly received opinions: But I beg leave solemnly to
declare, that my intention is perfectly innocent and just. I design nothing but
the defense and support of the best religion, the best laws, and the best
government in the world. I submit all to the candor and goodnature of the
r^ader, and do hope he will forgive what was honestly meant, although it should
be found to be weakly executed. Should any one object, that I have taken too
great liberties with the names and characters of the dead; I reply, that I am
fully sensible of the reasonableness and justice of that ancient maxim, De
mortuis nil nisi bonum: However, this must not extend to history, wherein for a
just recital of facts, the true and full characters of the principal agents are
often requisite; and the historian should be under no manner of restraint, but
that only of keeping within the bounds of truth and decency.

THE END.

