A TREATISE ON CHURCH GOVERNMENT, In Three PARTS: BEING, I. A NARRATIVE of the
late Troubles and Transactions in the CHURCH in Bolton, in the Massachusetts.
II. Some REMARKS on Mr. Adams's SERMON, preached there August 26, 1772. With an
Appendix, being some Remarks on an Account in the BOSTON EVENING-POST, December
28, 1772, of the Dismission of a Minister at Grafton. III. On COUNCILS, their
Business, Authority and Use. With an ESSAY on Ministers negativing the VOTES of
the CHURCH, and showing where the KEYS of the Church are.


By a NEIGHBOR.

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw
him, he had Compassion on him. And went to him, and bound up his Wounds,
pouring in Oil and Wine.

LUKE X. 33.34. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOYLES in Marlborough-Street.
MDCCLXXIII.

A TREATISE ON CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
AS I was on a Journey I lit on a Book entitled, Mr. Adams's Sermon on
Christian Unity. As this was a subject I take great Satisfaction in, I read it,
when I came toward the Close of the Sermon, I found he told there were some
great Things going forward in the Town where he delivered his Sermon, as though
it threatened the whole Christian Order and Constitution; this made me curious
to know, where those Terrible Things were going forward; which he intimated
were so threatening. By turning to the Title Page, I found he said, it was
preached in BOLTON in NEW ENGLAND: but this did not determine whether it was
BOLTON in CONNECTICUT, or in the MASSACHUSETTS: However, by Report it appeared
that it was Bolton in the Massachusetts. Whereupon I enquired into the State of
that Town, and what the Controversy was, which Mr. Adams said was risen to so
great height; and according to the best information I could get, it was in
brief as follows. -- There had for some Time prevailed a Report, it. Town and
out, that the Minister of that Town, had in sundry Instances appeared as if he
were overcome with Spirituous Liquor; and some appearances in Time of public
Worship were such, as gave a general Suspicion to the Congregation, that this
was the Case; and particularly in the Afternoon, Sacrament-Day. Upon which the
Church though it they could no longer neglect treating with him upon it, which when
they did, he declared that he never had drank to that degree, so as in any Way
to affect or hurt his Reason, Speech or Limbs. The Church being disposed to put
the most charaitable and favorable Construction possible upon his Conduct,
voted to accept of this Declaration for a Settlement of the Affair, upon
Condition he would read it off publicly to the Congregation the next Lord's
Day; and lodge a Copy of it with the eldest Deacon. But instead of reading it
distinctly, as was expected; he read it intermixed with his Sermon, so that
many of the Congregation, did not understand that he had read it at all; and
enquired why he had not done as he had promised. Hence the Difficulty continued
and revived, and other Instances of Intemperance complained of, beside that on
Sacrament-Day, till they called in a Council; before whom he for a while,
continued his Declaration of Innocence, till at length on a sudden, out comes a
full Confession, of having been guilty of Intemperance in sundry Instances.
When this was proposed to the Church for their Acceptance, they said they could
not put this and his former Declaration together; and therefore could not
accept of it as satisfactory.

However, after some Discourse it obtained a Vote of the Majority of the
Brethren. But how it obtained I never could conceive, only as the People were
very candid, tender of him, and disposed to take up with any thing rather than
to continue a Difficulty; for the main Thing, that I understand was urged to
reconcile those two Things, was that this Confession, was no more than he had
done before, the Brethren not having said old Declaration at that time to
compare.

However, some remaining dissatisfied: said old Declaration was afterward had
and compared. Whereupon the dissatisfaction was continued and increased; for
now, not only did it appear that they were far from agreeing: but it was
complained, that said old Declaration as it was left with the Deacon was a
false Copy. And Mr. Goss said he knew it was a false one, when he left it, that
he told the Deacon so. The Deacon denied that he did tell him so; or that he in
the least mistrusted it, from any thing he said. The Deacon was an old Man, and
not mistrusting any thing, never read it. These Difficulties were agreed to be
referred to a Committee mutually chosen of the Brethren of the Church. After
the Aggrieved had finished their Evidence and Pleas, Mr. Goss says he has some
Allegations to lay in against the Complainants, viz. That they were guilty of
Blasphemy, or Things bordering upon it. He was asked whether he had taken the
previous Christian steps with them? He said he had. He was then asked why he
had not brought it forward before? He answered, because he knew not of them
till Today, and chiefly this Afternoon.

This broke up the proposed Settlement by said Committee. Hence another Council
was called, and said Matter of Grievance said before them. At which also new
Matters of Grievance appeared, viz. a Charge against Mr. Goss of showing a
Paper to the former Council, which he had promised he would not, and that said
Paper as he had shown it was erroneous. This Complaint, the present Council
utterly refused to take under Consideration, notwithstanding repeated
Importunity. Hence the Result of this Council was not accepted by the Church.
It was motioned and urged by some of the Brethren to endeavor an accommodation
in the Church. Mr. Goss for some time neglected to call a Church-Meeting for
that Purpose. At length he called a Meeting to see if they would accept the
Result of the last Council; at which the Affair of said Paper was called in
Question. The Complainant said it was not settled; nor was he prepared for a
Hearing, viz. because Mr. Goss had promised him a Copy of said Paper; but had
not yet done it. Mr. Goss was asked why he had not fulfilled said Promise? He
denied that he had so promised. The Complainant immediately in the presence of
the Church proved that Mr. Goss had so promised. Then Mr. Goss said he had
altered his Purpose. He was asked if he had a dispensing Power with his
Promises? He answered he had. Some discourse intervened to this Puropose, that
a good man though he had promised to his Hurt would perform. And then the
Question was again put, Let me understand you Mr. Goss, is that really your
Principle, that you have a Right to dispense with your Promises so made to a
Brother? He answered, it was. Upon some very great dissatisfaction at this,
appearing in one especially that had always stood for him, and some further
Discourse, Mr. Goss said he did not mean, practice, nor teach so, it was
Inadvertance, and renewedly promised to give said Copy, and agreed to be tried
by the Church as to the Matters of Grievance against him. The Meeting was
adjourned, said Copy was given. At the Adjournment a number of Aggrievances
were brought in against Mr. Goss, as appears by an attested Copy under Mr.
Goss's Hand. He tried first whether they would consider the first Complaint?
Passed affirmatively, but objected against by the Pastor. Secondly, Whether the
Church judged the first Article proved? Answered affirmatively, but objected
against by the Pastor. Here it is worthy to be observed, That he had at a
former Meeting agreed, that these Aggrievances should be tried by the Church.
Now he negatives them upon the same Head, and goes on directly to trying that
which he had negatived, and according to his own Notion had made void. At
several Adjournments some of said Articles were acted upon by the Church. At
length, before they had gone through the Business, Mr. Goss dissolved the
Church Meeting pro arbitrio, contrary to the Mind of the Church. Soon after a
Number of the Brethren apply to him to call a Church Meeting in order to send
out for a Council. Mr. Goss refuses, unless they would be bound to abide by the
Result. Upon which they send to three Neighboring Churches to come and assist
them. Two of which came by their Delegates. They advised Mr. Goss to join in
calling in a Council in common Form. But he refused. And then brought out that
he had negatived all the Votes of the Church, relative to that Affair. Upon
which some of the Brethren apply to him for a Copy of the Votes of said
Meetings. When they came to have said Copy, they find sundry Votes there
attested to be passed and negatived by the Pastor, which never were passed by
the Church; as appeared, not only by the Memory of the Church; but by Minutes
kept-by several in the Time of the Meetings.

They then sent out for a Council of five Churches, who came; by whose
Persuasion, Mr. Goss agreed to send out for a mutual Council according to
common Form. Who were accordingly sent for, and come June 11, 1771. This Result
is very lengthy: but there seems to be no Light held forth in it. And indeed it
seems the Council had no Light in themselves; for in near or quite every
Article, they say it don't appear, or is not supported, notwithstanding it is
affirmed, that to many or most of those Articles there were sundry substantial
Witnesses testified to them before the Council. And in some Articles it is
asserted that the Council openly and absolutely refused to admit Evidence
presented to them by Members of the Church and Inhabitants of the Town, under a
Notion of their being Parties in the Case. The most favorable Construction I
can think of, to put upon such Conduct, is to compare it with Children, whom I
have seen some Times at their Play, shut their Eyes fast, and say they cannot
see each other, when they are plain before them in Day Light. But I shall in
the third Part of this Work show that it is something worse than Children's
Play. The Church say they cannot act like rational Creatures: much less like
Christians to accept of it. The Church having for some time considered Mr. Goss
as having abdicated his Office, viz. ever since he dissolved the Church
Meeting, and refused to call one again upon the Request of a number of the
Brethren. They desired two of the Brethren to warn every Brother of the Church
to meet at the Meeting House 22d of July, 1771. Which they, the said Brethren
accordingly did, and the Meeting was attended; when they chose a Moderator and
Clerk, and made the following Proposal to Mr. Goss, viz. Considering the
Difficulties subsisting, notwithstanding all the Endeavors they had used for an
Accommodation; they proposed, that if he would take a Dismission, they would
(with the Concurrance of the Town) leave the Matter of his Conduct, respecting
his Support, to the General Sessions of the Peace, to determine whether any
Part or the Whole of said Contract should be paid him; all to be done without
any Cost to him. But he refused to comply with said Proposal. Then they desired
him to make some Proposal to them. And then the Meeting was adjourned to the
5th Day of August then next ensuing. But he made no Proposal to them. When they
met again they proposed to proceed to consider and act upon his Dismission; or
consider what was best to be done on the next Thursday, to which Time they
adjourned, and informed him that if he see sit, he might attend. At which Time
they again met, and after a Preamble seting forth the State of Affairs among
them, they by Vote declare, that he is discharged from his Offices as Pastor
and Teacher in that Church, and all the Power by them committed to him entirely
reversed. The same was also concurred by the Town in a legal Town-Meeting
assembled for that Purpose. Since which the neighboring Ministers have stood
aloof from said People, endeavored to prevent their having the Gospel preached
to them; or enjoying common Communion Privileges Abroad; and refuse to take any
Christian or Constitutional Measures to convince them of any error. And Mr.
Adams's Sermon appeared to be designed to carry on the same Scheme; to which
therefore I now proceed.

I come now to make some Remarks on Mr. Adams's Sermon; which indeed by the
general run of it, one would be led to suppose, was delivered to the Body of
the People in the Town; or at least, if it was to a Minor Part of the People,
to persuade them to reunite with the Body; for every one knows, that for Minor
Parties to set up by themselves, in Separation from the Body, is the direct Way
to crumble Bodies to Pieces, which certainly is directly contrary not only to
Christian Unity; but to all social Existence. But it seems, not only by common
Report: but by his own Words, that it was to a small Party of the Town, vid.
Page 42. "Your Numbers not very large." And the drift of it is, to have them
continue and persist in their Separation. I shall not make all the Remarks upon
his Sermon, which appear to me might be made; lest I should tire the Reader
with prolixity. I shall therefore omit making any particular Remarks till I
come to the 30th Page; where he tells about Constituted Judges between
Ministers and People. The People are not suitable, he says, because they are a
Party concerned. This to me founds very much of the Prudence and ingenuity of
his Holiness; who as I have understood, rose to his present Pitch of
Infalibility; by first very speciously proposing that the People were not fit
to be Judges; who were proper for Bishops; that it would be more safe to be in
the Hands of the Clergy, etc. But it seems he had wholly lost Sight of our
Constitution; which according to Scripture, Platform, and many other Writers,
makes the Church the sole Judicature in all Ecclesiastical Causes; which I
shall take occasion further to consider in the last Part of this Work. But it
seems he had not only lost Sight of the Constitution; but even of common Sense.
The Church in trying and judging such Causes, as are properly Ecclesiastical;
are not judging their own Cause: but the Cause of Christ. If any Brother in the
Church should be drunk every Day, commit Fornication, Swear, profane the
Sabbath, or any other such Immoralities that may be enumerated; it does not
affect my Person or Property; i. e. it does not wound my Flesh, or good Name,
nor take one Farthing from my Estate: neither in my judging of him in the
Church; and condemning him as guilty; and giving my Voice or Vote in his
Censure; put one Penny into my own Pocket. If the Church were to lay a Fine
upon an offending Brother for his Faults, and that Fine were to go into the
Church Treasury, to defray necessary Charges; then they would be interested
Persons, in their Ecclesiastical Causes: Hence common Sense shows, that what
constitutes interested Persons, in any Cause, is their winning or loosing
something in their Persons or Property, by the issue of the Cause. But a Church
cannot be supposed to save one Penny by finding any Brother, and especially a
Minister, guilty; for though by their finding him so grossly guilty, as that
they can no longer retain him, as their Pastor; yet this does not save them the
Cost of supporting the Gospel: but rather increases their Charge, on that
Account; so that really, if any Way, they are interested to judge in the
Minister's Favor. But it seems Mr. Adams not only lost Sight of the
Constitution and common Sense, but by turning over a Leaf, forgot himself. For
after he had in the 30th and 31st Pages, been very abundant, in saying that the
People were unfit to be Judges; that there must be some constituted; and that
these must be an Ecclesiastical Council, to judge and determine. Turn over to
the 32d Page, and there he says that Ecclesiastical Councils are only advisory;
and that they can be nothing else. But he says it does not hence follow as some
would have it, -- that we are at liberty to admit or discard them, according as
they agree or disagree with our own corrupt Wills and Tempers.

Who it is (as he tells of) that would have it, that they are at liberty, to
act according to their own corrupt Wills and Tempers, against Advice or
according to Advice, or even if they had no Advice in the Case, I must confess
my self at a Loss; unless he spoke for himself, what he would have. The People
he would be thought to aim at, I am persuaded would not one of them, pretend or
allow, that they would have any such thing, as that they had any Liberty to act
according to their own corrupt Wills and Tempers, in any Case, or under any
Circumstances whatever. The same might be observed, on what he says in the
next, viz. 33d Page, about the best Advice, and the most consentaneous to
Reason and Scripture, and the Result of Councils ever so Rational, being
disregarded and rejected; I presume none of those he aimed at, will allow that
they hold to any such Thing. And therefore he must take it to himself, since he
has ventured to affirm there are such Opinions held to. In the beginning of the
next, viz. 34th Page, Mr. Adams undetakes to quote something out of the
Platform, but he had the unhappiness, to miss an essential Part of the Sect. he
pretended to transcribe, viz. Chap. XVI. Sect. 5. I need not transcribe the
whole Sect.; every one ought to have the Platform, to turn to; I shall observe,
that the sense of that Sect. as it stands in the Platform is, that the
principal Ground of the Reverence and Submission, due to the Results of
Councils, is their agreeing with the Word of God; without which they bind not
at all. Now this of their not binding at all, without that Agreement, is
omitted in Mr. Adams's Sermon; hence then according to the Section Mr. Adams
himself, has pretended to quote; if a Result of a Council, don't appear to
agree with the Word of God, there is no binding Force in it at all, and
therefore, the People he is endeavoring to fling so much Blame upon, are
entirely exculpated, for their not going according to the Result of the
Council, whose Conduct in their Reasons for not accepting the Result, they
declare to be above their Comprehension; and that they have Reason to believe
the Council falible. Hence the Result did not appear to be according to the
Word of God, and therefore had no binding Force at all in it. I need not say
any more upon this Page, having shown that his Premises are False; his
Conclusion is no doubt False too. In the beginning of the next, viz. 35th Page;
he has another clause out of the Platform which he takes from Chap. X. Sect. 6.
In this quotation, though he has transcribed the Words right; yet I apprehend
he has wrested the meaning of them, in what he says upon them; for where the
Platform speaks of the Church having Power, according to Order, to remove an
offending Elder from Office: This Word Order he improves, as if it were to
mean, a Mandate from the Council; as some Authority Superior to the Church; for
he says, this Order must be the Council of other Churches where it may be had
directing thereto. But as Mr. Adams himself anon says, in all Writings, one
Passage must be explained by another; and the latter must always control,
interpret and determine, the meaning of the former: So this must be determined
by that Section, we have above considered; which is several Chapters after
this, viz. the XVIth, and this but the Xth; and especially, that ought to
control the meaning of this Pasface, as to what is said about Councils; since
that Chapter is (...), upon the Head of Councils or Synods: and (...) whole
Scheme of the Platform appears to be very contrary to the setting up Councils,
as having any mandatory Authority over Churches; yea, and Mr. Adams himself as
before hinted; says that Councils are, and can be nothing else only advisory;
hence then according to the Platform, and Mr. Adams's own declared Opinion, he
has made a wrong Construction upon this Passage in the Xth Chap. And I rather
think that what was meant, by the Church having Power according to Order, to
dismiss from Office, was to keep up the same Idea or Notion, that is expressed
in Chap. VIII. Sect. 7; saying, that if the Church have Power to choose their
Officers and Ministers; then in case of manifest unworthiness and delinquency,
they have Power also to depose them; for to open and shut, to choose and refuse
etc. are Acts belonging to the same Power, which shows that their Notion of
Order was a Fitness, Propriety, and Consistency in any thing to be done. So
when they had expressed their Sense or Notion of Order or Fitness, as in the
above quoted Sect. VIIIth Chapter, and again to the same Effect in this Xth
Chapter, saying, that it being natural to all Bodies, and so unto a Church
Body, to be furnished with sufficient Power for its own Preservation: And as
they had said in the Vth Chapter, that even the Power of Office is in the
Church, in that they design the Persons unto Office. -- When they had expressed
all these Things of Order, or the Nature of a Church; when they come to mention
the Affair of removing an Officer from his Office; they say, that according to
Order, they that had Power to call to Office, have Power to remove him from his
Office; and this Order or Fitness, they had repeatedly and abundantly expressed
in these foregoing Passages I have mentioned; and instead of repeating all
these Principles over again in this Place, they sum them up in this one general
Term Order; and say according to that the Church has such a Power; as is very
common with some now a days, to say according to the Nature of Things; meaning
do doubt, the same Things as the Compilers of the Platform did by saying
according to Order, as they do in this Place. And it appears to me as great a
Violence to Words, to construe them as Mr. Adams does in this Place; as if one
should say, that every Creature has a Power of Self-Preservation, and that a
Man according to this Principle has Power, when he is informed of an Enemy, to
use Means to secure himself: And Mr. Adams should argue thus upon it, that the
Man's Power so to preserve himself, consisted in his being informed or directed
to take Care of himself. But if I see an Enemy and nobody else sees; must I
therefore stand still and be killed, and not exercise this Power of
Self-Preservation? Why no says Mr. Adams; if you do run at all, it must be
according to Order: You must have Orders from some of your Neighbors to run,
before you stir, or it will be no Escape at all. Indeed if there be no body to
tell me to Escape, then he allows that I have a Power to Escape without this
Order or Mandate, as he seems to consider it. The Question is, Where the (...),
and in the Case before us, where the (...) from Office lies; and that,
according (...), if there be any meaning to Words, is in the (...); as
abundantly appears from what has been said; and what might farther be said if
there was need of it; and especially if we only consider, that the Platform
holds forth, that the Power of Office is in the Church; that the Power of
Self-Preservation is natural or essential to the Being of Churches: And in
another Place, that Councils or Synods are not absolutely necessary to the
Being of Churches. This shows that the Platform has no Notion of the Results of
Councils putting a validity upon the Acts of the Church: but on the contrary,
that the Platform shows that the Acts of the Church may put a validity upon the
Results of Councils; as is very plain to be seen in sundry Places; and indeed
seems to be the whole drift of the Platform, wherever Councils or Synods are
mentioned. -- As to what Mr. Adams says in the remainder of this 35th Page
about a People dismissing a Minister contrary to the repeated Advice of
Councils, where it cannot be pretended that he offends incorrigibly, enquiring
what we shall think of a People that do so, etc.? I am content he should think
of it as he pleases, since it is well known, it is nothing to the Case of
Bolton, which he set himself to animadvert upon; for it is very manifest, that
they abundantly pretend, that their Elder offended incorrigibly, as appears by
the foregoing Narrative. -- In the next, viz. 36th Page, Mr. Adams undertakes
farther to illustrate and confirm what he has said against the Power of People
to dismiss their Minister without the Advice of Council, by referring to the
last Section of the Xth Chapter, where the Platform speaks of an organic Church
and right Administration, that no Church Act can be consummated or perfected
without the Consent of both. Now how this can prove or argue any thing for what
he has said about Councils, appears to me mysterious; for according to his
Construction of this Passage, if they had ever so many Councils, and advised to
the dismission of the Minister; yet if he should please not to consent to it,
it would all be to no Purpose. But his Construction of this Section appears to
be a very great Violence to the general Sense of the Platform: for every one
that has at all acquainted himself with that Book, must know, that the Notion
of an organic Church, according to that, is one that has ruling Elders,
distinct from the Minister; and all along in this same Chapter speaks of the
Church as having a plurality of Elders. But Mr. Adams says this Both spoken of
in the Platform, is Ministers and People; when it is plain to any one that will
read it, that the Platform means Elders and Brotherhood. For fear of being too
lengthy, I shall omit saying all upon this Place, that I think it might
deserve; yet I cannot pass it over without remarking one Thing more. In this
Place Mr. Adams says, with a wonderful Air of Assurance, How absurd is it to
pretend that the Compilers of this Book meant to give the People a Power to
disiniss their Pastors, when it expressly says, that no Church Act can be valid
or perfect without the Consent of both, that is, Minister and People. And in
the preceding Page he had said, that if a Church was troubled with an
incorrigibly offending Elder, and they could procure no Council to judge upon
the Matter; whether by his refusing to join with them, or otherwise the
Platform and common Sense will justify them in dismissing him: but now unless
he joins with them the Platform cannot justify them in any Act they shall
pretend to do. How absurd then, has he in this Page called what he said in the
preceding Page! This is the second Time we have found Mr. Adams forgetting
himself, or loosing Sight of his own Words by turning over a Leaf. I proceed to
make some Remarks upon what he says in the 37th Page, where he speaks of the
Churches pretending to dismiss their Elders, contrary to what he had been
holding forth, as a new and upstart Practice, which he says is such an one, as
justly alarms, especially as the Authors of it endeavor to make other Churches
put a Sanction on their Conduct, etc. How other Churches voting Charity with a
certain Church, is a putting a Sanction upon what they have done; is not
perhaps very easy for every one to see; neither do I see any need that one
Church has to put a Sanction upon the Acts of another, I know there is need of
Churches putting a Sanction upon the Results of Councils, to make them of any
avail, viz. Platform Chapter XV. Section 2; and no doubt the Messengers of
Churches whenever they have been to any Council, ought to make return of what
they have done to their Churches that sent them, in Order for their
Approbation; and it ought not to be considered as the Advice of those. Sister
Churches, till the respective Churches have approved of it; and if the
respective Churches do not approve of the Result, the Church which it most
especially concerns, cannot with any Propriety be considered as going contrary
to her Sister Churches, or breaking Fellowship with them in any Sense or
Degree, till those Sister Churches have approved of what that particular Church
has rejected; and this, viz. the keeping up and maintaing the Communion and
Fellowship of Churches appears to be one great and special Thing in view, in
the having the Advice of Sister Churches, viz. Platform Chapter VIII. Section
8. But more of the End, Design, and Consequence of Councils in the last Part of
this Work. To return to what I was upon, Mr. Adams seems in this Place greatly
to blame Bolton, for applying to Sister Churches to know whether they were in
Charity with them, and this appears the same, as to blame them for not turning
absolute Independents. I suppose that Bolton Church never would have had it
come into their Thoughts, to have gone to try the Vote of neighbor Churches in
that Affair, if the Ministers had not set up an Independency with that Church,
and had entered into a written Combination to that Purpose, as was generally
reported: and some of Bolton Church upon Application to them for the common
Privilege of the Communion of Churches were absolutely refused, which confirmed
the Scheme of Independency among the Ministers. Bolton People that were so
rejected by the neighboring Ministers, defired them to deal with them in the
3d Way of Communion, but they would not do that. What should Bolton Church do,
the Ministers round had become absolute Independents, they would neither admit
Bolton Church to Privileges; nor use any Christian or Constitutional Measures
to endeavor to convince or reclaim them, as an offending Church: It appears it
was high Time for Bolton Church to find out whether the neighboring Churches
were as much at odds with them, or as determinate Independents, as their
Ministers. It certainly could not be to any good Purpose, for Bolton People to
try to mend or alter any thing among themselves, in order to be in fellowship
with their Sister Churches; when they knew nothing but they still continued in
Fellowship with them; and by altering, they might fling themselves out of
Fellowship, and especially so long as they were not conscious themselves of
being in an Error. If they had done any thing that was offensive, or grevious
to their Sister Churches they ought to know it; and what Way should they come
at this knowledge, but by trying whether the other Churches were in Charity
with them, so long as no one undertook to convince them of any thing bad? But
only the Ministers stood aloof from them, and treated them as if thy were not
only not Christians; but even in some Sense not human Creatures, viz. by
endeavoring all they could to prevent their having the Gospel preached to
them. So that what so greatly alarms Mr. Adams is, that Bolton People don't
turn Independents, but use Measures contrary to such a Scheme. But let it be
that Bolton Church have endeavored to get other Churches to put a Sanction
(...) What terrible Iniquity is there in (...) which (...) so offensive to Mr.
Adams (...) their Minister without the (...), or his asking of it: is not he
willing (...) should be on equal Footing with the Ministers. I knew a Minister
once, who after he had been settled a few Years, began a Dispute or Uneasiness
with his People, for more Salary, and as I was told, without a Council, or
asking a Dismission of his People, at once preached a farewell Sermon to them,
so dismissing himself; or rather abdicated his Office: and then got other
Ministers to put a Sanction upon his Conduct, by putting a Recommendation of
him into the public Prints. And why should a Church be thought so bad, for
endeavoring to have their Neighbors put a Sanction upon their conduct; when
to to be sure they no more than imitated that Minister in his Conduct; which
Conduct, the Ministers themselves put a Sanction upon; and especially, when I
presume Mr. Adams cannot find in all the Platform any Thing to countenance the
Conduct of that Minister; so much as he acknowledges in his 34th Page, he finds
in the Platform to countenance or justify the People in dismissing their
Minister.

Mr. Adams proceeds to say in the 37th Page, -- If Things thus go on, what will
become of the Constitution of the Congregational Churches? He answers, It will
soon be wholly subverted, etc. and Ministers will have nothing to depend upon
but the fickle and inconstant Breath of Mankind! And pray what have they now;
or what did they use to have? Why truly Councils! according to Mr. Adams: He
has all along been insisting upon this; for nothing is more plain and
notorious, than that it is this new and upstart Practice, which don't pay so
much Deference to Councils as he would have; is what he says will bring it to
that, that Ministers will have nothing to depend upon but the inconstant Breath
of Mankind. What does he make of Councils! Are not they Mankind? This is
out-doing his Holiness himself; he never, as I know of, pretended that he was
not of Mankind; though he pretends to be infallible. But it seems by what Mr.
Adams has advanced, he would have it be thought, that Councils are something
superior to Mankind! or else why is this mighty exclamation, of having nothing
to depend upon but Mankind, by Councils being neglected, unless Councils are
something superior to Mankind? Mr. Adams plainly makes a God of Councils, and
he cries very much in the Language of Micah, -- Yca have taken away my Gods,
and what have I more? So Mr. Adams, -- Ye have set at naught Councils, and now
I have nothing to depend upon but the fickle Breath of Mankind. I cannot depend
upon that God who has the Hearts of all Men in his Hand, and turns them
whithersoever he pleases. -- Who (says Mr. Adams) that has common Sense and
common Prudence, will ever go into the Ministry on these Terms? To have but a
pitiful Subsistence while the Relation continues, and be dissolved at the
Pleasure of the People? Perhaps it may reflect Light upon this Passage, if we
turn Tables and say, What People that have common Sense and common Prudence,
will ever settle a Minister upon these Terms? To have but pitiful preaching
while the Relation continues; and to have the Ministers soon after they have
got their Settlement, go to contending about their Contract, or run into some
scandalous Conduct, and however, go off when they please; for in Balance to
the one Instance Mr. Adams is so alarmed at, I can bring a Cloud of Instances
on the other Side, where People have lost the whole Settlement they have given,
for a very few Years (likely) pitiful preaching; either by the arbitrary,
covetous, or corrupt Wills and Tempers of the Ministers. -- The Instance I have
mentioned above, where the Minister went off so abruptly, was no doubt at least
Arbitrary. -- Hear another Instance, where the Minister having a handsome
Settlement, and after he had been settled three or four Years, the People had
been very generous to him, and he had got in a handsome Way to live; he began
to contend with them about giving of him more, and said they had not fulfilled
their original Contract, withal threatening to leave them. The People, as I
understand, offered to leave it to Men with him; having the Arbitration consist
of half Ministers. But no; he would have a Council to put a Sanction upon his
Conduct, which he obtained, that answered his desires as I understand, and the
Parish are in great danger of being ruined by it. Hear another Instance
something similar to the former, the Minister indeed had been settled some
longer, he complained that they had not fulfilled their Contract, they joined
with him (as I understand) in calling a Council, who judged they had fulfilled
their Contract: But still he was uneasy, and left his People in Opposition to
the Result of Council, as you may see, which is one Thing that Mr. Adams
complains of in the People as being so heinous and alarming. But the Ministers
don't scruple to put a Sanction upon his Conduct, by setting him to preaching,
and that people also, as I understand are almost ruined by it. But hear another
Instance. A Minister was settled with a handsome Settlement, and he was a very
popular Preacher, but he traded and traslicked in Horses and Land, making
considerable Adventures in new Towns, and the like, by which he lost
considerable, till by the Time he had been settled about six or seven Years, he
was so involved that he was cast into Prison for Debt; where he continued some
Months; till he took the Benefit of the Bankrupt Act then in Being. The People
to help him to live, and continue as their Minister, troposed to purchase a
small Farm near the Meeting House, and let him live on it as a Parsonage;
together with some very handsome Subscriptions to help set him up again: But
no, he would not accept of the Farm they proposed as a Parsonage unless they
would give it him as his own. It was thought he had a Notion that he could get
a new Settlement in some other Place if he was dismissed from them: but the
People moved nothing about his Dismission, till he preached a very odd Sermon,
as was thought on Purpose to start the People; the Subject and Scheme of his
Sermon (as I understand) was to set forth that the Godly are hereafter to dwell
with devouring Fire, and everlasting Burnings. Upon which the People were very
ready to dismiss him. And he obtained a Council to put a Sanction upon his
Conduct, so that he stood well recommended still for the Ministry. And I verily
think Councils are too apt to put a Sanction on the Conduct of Ministers. One I
knew who was complained of for Things very much bordering upon Sodomy, and so
much proved, that he was dismissed; and yet the Council did not scruple so far
to put a Sanction on his Conduct, that he still preaches as I understand. And
if things go on so, what shall we think of Councils? Will any People of common
Sense, Prudence or Christianity, ever pretend to send for any? And what will
become of the Apostle's Direction, 1 Timothy III.? A Bishop must be blameless,
sober, of good Behavior, etc. In short, he must have a good Report of them
which are without, etc. Almost numberless are the Instances, too many to
enumerate, wherein Ministers by gross Immorality, such as Fornication, Adultry,
lacivious Carriage, Intemperance, Falsehood, and such like, evidently proved,
within the Compass of ten or twelve Years after their settling, whereby the
People have lost all the Cost of settling. Some Towns or Parishes, near or
quite ruined, discouraged, scattered, divided, torn and left (as we may say)
half dead, or if not thus brought to the brink of Ruin; yet have all the Cost
and Trouble of settling over again. And are not all these Things as alarming as
the one Instance Mr. Adams tells of? if that was as really unconstitutional as
he would have it be thought. And shall we therefore, as Mr. Adams on the
Minister's Part, concludes that no one of common Sense or common Prudence, will
enter into the Ministry: Shall we (I say) on the People's Part, conclude we
will have no more Ministers? because Things go on so. By no means; this never
will do to neglect a Duty because bad Men make a had use of good Things. This
World is a World of Trial; and we must guard against the Evils of it as well as
we can; and wherein we see, that we ourselves or others have missed, endeavor
to mend in the best Manner we can. Let Ministers and People understand one
another, how they settle, and how they must part, if ever it should come to
that extremity. Let Ministers have a fair Chance for living in the World,
according to the Place they are in; and let the People have a fair Chance in
their Contract as well as the Minister; let them know before they settle, how
they are to understand the Constitution; and let not the People be affrighted
for fear they shall not be able to find Ministers to settle according to the
Constitution. Notwithstanding all Mr. Adams's exclamations, there is not half
the risque on the Minister's Side, that there is on the People's Side; as
Ministers generally settle in this Country. People are not apt to be fond of
advancing a Thousand or Ffteen Hundred Pounds, O. T. to settle a Minister any
oftener than they cannot help; they will bear with a great deal before they will
turn away a Minister, and bring the Cost and Trouble of settling another upon
themselves; and when they have been at all that Cost, they no doubt ought to
enjoy the Benefit of it so long as they can enjoy it; and when they can no
longer enjoy it, what Reason can there be assigned, why they should be saddled
with a Burden by a Council or any set of Men whatever? Not that I would be
understood to suggest, that when a Minister is past his Labor, through
Infirmity or Old Age, that the People should then set him at naught; but still
to esteem him highly in Love for his Work Sake, that he has done among them;
and to continue him some handsome Allowance, as they shall agree. But when his
Conduct has been such toward them, that they can no longer have confidence in
him as their Pastor; and so they can no longor enjoy him as such; I see no
Reason why they should still be incumbered with him. To serve one another in
Love, as Mr. Adams has it in his Title Page, is the whole Essence of all
Society, Civil and Religious; and when this Service ceases through Default, the
Nerves of the social Body are cut, and the Dissolution begins; and if these
Nerves cannot be healed, a Dissolution must necessarily ensue. And I am
persuaded Mr. Adams cannot with all his Ingenuity, make out that in the Affair
he has said so much about, that the Minister served the People in Love, when he
negatived their Acts as he did, dissolved the Church Meeting, dispensed with
his own Promises, and many other Things as we have it in the Narrative. And it
avails nothing for him to allege that these Things were not made out to the
Council; they were so to the People, who by Nature and by Constitution are the
judges of these Things, notwithstanding all he has said. There seem to be
several Things more that deserve Remark: but perhaps they may be sufficiently
exposed by the few Hints already made, with some Hints refering to Mr. Adams's
Piece, which will necessarily fall in, in the remaining Part of the Work. I
shall therefore dwell no longer on this Part of the Work.

JUST as I had finished the above Remarks; before I had entered upon the
remaining Part; I lie on a very pompous Account in the Boston Evening Post, of
December 28, 1772, of the Dismission of a Minister at Grafton. As to the vain
show there appeared in it, I could freely have let all pass with Neglect, if it
had not carried with it, such a glaring Insult upon the Town; as if he was
dismissed by a Council, and a small Part of the Church; in Opposition to the
Mind of the Town. I should have offered something to the Public through the
same Channel; but as it would have been so long after, that it would seem to
have been out of Date; and as it appeared to be so exactly of the Nature of
what I am here opposing; I thought it would not be (...), to take some Notice
of it here, and might well stand, for one among the Instances, where Ministers
have gone off with their Settlement, to the Damage of the Town. How long
indeed, that Gentleman had been settled I cannot say: be that as it will, it is
notorious by what is published, that he is an Expectant of further employ in
the Service; for the Piece is plainly an Advertisement of him, for an
honorable Acceptance and Employ, considering he had such an Honorable
Dismission. However I cannot look upon such a Dismission very honorable. It
does not appear, that it was done by a Major Vote, even of the Church.

The Advertiser says it was by a Major Vote of the Brethren of the Church
present. Not that there was any Church Meeting notified for that Purpose; or
indeed any Church Meeting at all. And whether a Quarter of the Church were
present does not appear; and by the Town's not concurring, it is most probable
the generality of the People did not like what was going forward; and therefore
would not honor them with their Presence; and so perhaps there might, for
Instance 7 of the Church come out of Curiosity, to see the Proceedings of the
Council; and 4 of them Vote this Honorable Dismission, which with strong
Reasons pressed, and with (...) struggles, at length he obtained, Whereupon his
pastoral (...) to be dissolved, in the presence of the (...) he Council might
put a Sanction upon it; at least it is spoken, of with that Air, as though
their Presence put a Sanction that would abide, maugre the Dissent of the Town.
This is of the same Scheme, Mr. Adams is so strenuously contending for; (...)
if Towns and Churches were all Non Compos Mentis, and must have Councils for
their Guardians, to make, (...), or dissolve Contracts for them. Here is a
plain Pretense of a Council's dissolving the Contract of Grafton Innabitants,
even against their Wills. Which can be upon no other Principle, than that the
Town are Non Compos Mentis, and the Council forsooth are their Guardians.

This is a more glaring Insult upon the Common Rights of Mankind, than the
Stamp Act it self, or all the Duty Acts, so much complained of; for any set of
Men, to pretend to dissolve a Contract, between Man and Man, without the
Consent of the Parties; and thus to bring on the Town a Bill of Cost, so great
as the Settlement of another Minister. It appears to me that such a Dismission
can no Way be reconciled, to the common Rights of Mankind; nor the Minister
said to be so dismissed, look upon himself, discharged from his Contract with
that Town; unless he lend to the Town Money for a sufficient Settlement of
another, to remain with them for that Use, so long as he is able to discharge
the Work of the Ministry; or the Town is willing to release him of his
Contract. And I should think the Town had a good Right in Law for an Action of
Damages against him for that Purpose. But here, lest my Antagonists should say
that if a Minister cannot dismiss himself, when he pleases, without violating
the Rights of Mankind, unless the other Party of the Contract agree to dissolve
it; then how can the Church and Town dissolve it, unless the Minister agree to
it? To this it may be answered. It is easy to see, that the Case is widely
different between the Town and the Minister, in this Affair. For the Minister
in going off, while he is able to carry on the Work, puts Money into his own
Pocket. But the Town by dismissing of him, bring on themselves a Bill of Cost,
in the settling of another. So that the Case is altogether different, the one
judging Money into one's own Pocket, the other judging of it out.

Hence the Constitution, by the Plat. as we have considered, very wisely fixed
the Dismission of a Minister with the People; who not only were to enjoy their
Service: but with whom there was so great a Balance, against judging rashly
for a dissolution of the Relation. Yea if there were no Settlement to pay, as
is the Case in Places where there is an adequate Parsonage; yet the Risque.
Trouble and Division, which it generally exposes a Town or Parish to, to settle
a new Minister, is a very great Balance against their rashly or suddenly
dissolving the Relation.

But the Constitution fixing it in the Power and Rights of the People, to
dismiss upon Delinquency; makes it that they are not to be considered, as one
Side dissolving the Contract, since he who settles upon the Constitution, such
a Dismission is implied in the Contract, and this makes an Agreement upon his
Side, that the Contract shall so be dissolved. But then, here is to be observed
a distinction between dismissing for Delinquency, and for Infirmity; for if a
Minister by Infirmity, Old Age, or otherwise, should become unable to fulfill
his Office; and the People should be so unreasonable, as to dismiss him in
order to get rid of a Burden; this would by no means be reasonable or
constitutional, for this would be expressly judging Money into their own
Pocket; and there might justly be a doubt, whether such Dismission were valid,
the Constitution making no Provision for dismissing upon Infirmity: But if they
conclude it to be a valid Dismission; yet by the Circumstances, they so judging
Money into their own Purse; they ought in Justice to leave it to indifferent
Men, what Allowance they should still make him; for it would be unjust, when a
Minister had spent all his Strength, with a People in their Service, to set him
at naught when he was past Labor, and afford him no Help when he most needed
it. But it appears most according to Reason and the Constitution in such a
Case, not to pretend to dismiss him: but for them to come to an amicable
Agreement, to allow him some handsome Consideration during Life. And this I
think has been the Practice so far as I have been acquainted. But in all these
Things, all Rashness should be avoided, and Ministers and People both, should
treat each other with Candor and Moderation. People should not dismiss their
Ministers suddenly, whether it be with or without a Council; nor Ministers
think to run off, when they please; or even if they have the Advice of a
Council. For if Councils (where the leading Part are generally Ministers) may
dismiss a Minister when they please; and all be looked upon well or honorable,
as it is in the Advertisement; they have the greatest Temptation of secular
Interest to do such an honorable Jobb one for another. And this leads into all
Manner of Confusion and Injustice: from which may appear, how far Councils (as
they are generally managed) are from being proper Judges; as Mr. Adams tells
of. Not that I am for throwing them away: But would have them keep within their
own Sphere. Which I shall now proceed to consider what it is.

I come now to speak something especially as to COUNCILS; their Business,
Authority and Use, as they stand in Relation to CHURCHES and the Power of
Churches, in all Ecclesiastical Affairs. COUNCILS, as Things are got to in this
Country among Congregational Churches, may be divided into three Sorts. viz.
Party-Councils, Mutual-Councils, and Ecclesiastical-Councils. I know they all
affect the Name of Ecclesiastical; but I conceive, it is only to take away
their Reproach; for after all, they reckon their Right or Authority according
as they are either Party or Mutual. But I am ready to guess, that these Notions
of Party and Mutual Councils are new and upstart Practices (as Mr. Adams speaks
of Bolton Affair, P. 37) which our forefathers he speaks of, had no Idea or
Notion of. I have read several ancient Books upon these Things, and I don't now
recollect reading of any such thing in any ancient Writer; to be sure I think
there is no mention made of them in the Scripture or Platform, on which in
Conjunction, Mr. Adams himself, says we have founded the Order and Discipline
of the Congregational Churches. I shall therefore take it for granted, that
Party and Mutual-Councils are upstart Things, which our Constitution knows
nothing about; and therefore we are not to seek after their Authority or
Business; and indeed if we were to enquire into what they generally assume
(according to what Opportunity I have had) we should find it as much unknown to
those two Fundamental Books as their Names. Ecclesiastical Councils then are
the only Sort we have to enquire about. Which to define or describe, is when a
Church sends out to Sister Churches for their Advice or Assistance in any
Weighty or Important Affair. I suppose the certainest Way to find what a proper
Ecclesiastical Council is, is to look into the Scriptures and to examine the
original Pattern which we find in the XVth of Acts; there it appears, the
Church at Antioch sent to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalam about the
Question of circumcising the Gentiles; and by their sending to the Apostles and
Elders, it was communicated to the whole Church, who had a Voice in the
Council, vid. 22d 23d Verses, so that an Ecclesiastical Council, is a
Collection of Churches met together, to consult about religious Affairs, and to
advise any particular Church or Churches in general, what they ought to do in
in certain Cases. But it is not so material how these Churches come together,
if they do but keep within their own proper Sphere; and do the Business of an
Ecclesiastical Council, when they are met; only this general Rule, that all
things should be done decently and in in order. The special Thing to enquire
after is, what is their Business, Use and extent. The Business of a Council is
in my Apprehension, very justly delineated in Platform, Chapter XVI, Section 4,
which I need not repeat: It being in short to clear from the Word of God,
Points of Faith, Conscience, Worship and Discipline, and to bear Witness
against Maladministration and Corruption in Doctrine or Manners in any
Church, and to point out the Way to reform them: thus far the positive Part of
that Section: which to me appears very agreeable to the original Pattern in
Acts. The Business of Councils, namely, is to clear up and set Light before the
Churches, and then Councils have no further that they ought to do: hence the
negative Part of the foregoing Section. They are not to exercise Church
Censures in any Way of Discipline, nor any other act of Church Authority or
Jurisdiction. Here it is easy to see, how repugnant to the Platform Mr. Adams's
Notion of judiciary Authority in Councils is, and also how repugnant to the
Platform it is, for Councils to set up, as though they were some superior Court
of Judicature; that they will not receive Testimonies from the Church, because
forsooth they say the Church are Witnesses in their own Case. The Church are
the Judges, according to the Constitution; and Councils only Advisers according
to Mr. Adams himself. And I could produce a Cloud of Authorities for this, if
there were any need of it: but this will appear quite needless since the
Champion himself has asserted it. Hence this is not the Business of the
Council, to have Facts proved to them as a Court. The Council in Acts, did not
stand rumaging Evidence, about the certainty of their having been judaizing
Teachers at Antioch; nor frump Paul, Barnabas, and the others, that they were
Witnesses in their own Case; and so draw up their Result, that it was not
proved, that any had been teaching of them, that they must be circumcized, etc.
and so with a mighty solemn Air tell what Pleasure they had to find, that there
was no Division or Dissension of Opinion in the Church at Antioch, and so
advise Paul, Barnabas and the others, to go and be quiet, and be careful not to
take up such Surmizes and Jealousies. If the Council at Jerusalem had done so;
in my Opinion the Result at Bolton, 11th of June, 1771, would have had an ample
Pattern. But far from this. The Council at Jerusalem, took the Account as they
had it of the Messengers, that came from Antioch; and advised what to do in
such a Case, as was laid before them. What was it to them, whether the Facts
were proved against the Parties: they were not about to lay under Censure
either Part; but to advise what was right to be done in the Case, as the Church
had sent it to them. The Church at Antioch, nor any other Church, ever wanted
to ask a Council as to Facts, whether there are such and such Facts, as the
Church themselves are personally knowing to. Thus the Church at Antioch did not
want to ask the Council at Jerusalem, whether there had been judaizing Teachers
at Antioch; neither did the Church at Bolton want to ask the Council, whether
Mr. Goss had done certain Things, which the Church themselves were Eye and Ear
Witnesses to. It would be a most shocking Affront to common Sense; to set about
any such Thing. To make this Matter familiar. Suppose I have a Piece of Ground,
that has been tilled a long Time, and is become very weedy, and dog Grass has
got in, that will not die, do almost what you will to it; and I should have a mind
to ask the Advice of my Neighbors, what I had best to do with it; whether I
had not better throw it down. And my Neighbors should tell me, you are a
Witness in your own Case, and therefore it don't appear, or is not proved that
you have such a Piece of Ground, and so we advise you to go, and improve your
Ground as usual, and seek Profit from it, etc. with all that Gravity and
solemnity which we find in the June Result. Would it not be worse than
ridiculous? I did not want to have my Neighbors to come, to tell whether I had
such a Piece of Ground, but to advise what was best to do, with such kind of
Ground. And so a Church don't want a Council to tell them whether they see one
of their Brethren drunk, or hear him use profane Language, or tell Things that
be not true; tell one Story one Time, a contrary one another Time, promises
Things and never fulfills his Promise. When they see or hear these Things, they
know them better than a Council can tell them: but if they must have a Council
to tell them these Facts, before they can properly know them to act upon; then
they must have another Council, to certify them that the first Council told
them so; and a third for the second; and so on, ad infinitum. And indeed this
is very much the Way that Things are managed now a Days; one Council leads on
to another; anothor to a third; a third to a fourth; and there is no End, till
the People are either destroyed, or scattered, or worried out, and give up to
let every Thing go as it will; or resolutely take up their Rights and a done
with Councils. By what is laid down, of the necessary Lead and Consequence, of
Councils pretending to enter into the Trial of Matters of Fact, and act as
Judicatories upon Facts, and by what appears in Fact, as Councils are generally
managed, every one must see, what an endless and fruitless Labyrinth it leads
into. From all which appears, that the Pattern laid down in Acts, is exactly
consistent with Reason; that the Councils Business, is to advise the Church
what they had best to do upon the Case; as the Church states the Facts before
them. Hence another Thing to be observed, which is not so well attended to now
a Days as it ought; and that is, that all Matters should have a Hearing in the
Church, before they can be proper to be laid before a Council; or the Church
cannot state the Facts to be advised upon; as the Church at Antioch disputed
the Matters at Home, before they sent them to the Council at Jerusalem.

Having considered what the Business of Councils is, and what is not, I now
come to consider what their Authority is, or wherein it consists: For which
again we may see the aforesaid XVIth Chapter of the Platform, Section 5; which
shows that it consists, in their Results being agreeable to the Word of God;
without which they bind not at all. Here we have the Authority or binding Force
set forth negatively and pofitively: From which, it is plain to see that their
Authority or binding Force, does not consist in their being a Council, or in
their being Mutual as it is called. Mr. Adams and many others, lay great stress
upon what they call Mutual Councils, as though there were some special
Authority at least in them; let them result almost what they will. Many Things
might be said, to show the absurdity and childishness of such a Notion: but for
fear I shall be too lengthy, and considering the Scripture and Platform place
the Authority and binding Force of Councils, in another Quarter, I shall take
that as sufficient to stand in Opposition to Mr. Adams's Notion; and proceed to
consider wherein the Authority or binding Force of Councils consists according
to Scripture. For which Purpose, we must confider what they did, and especially
their Result, which the Platform says must be agreeable to the Word of God, or
it binds not at all. Hence see the Result of the Jerusalem Council, Acts XV,
which begins thus, Verse 28. IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST, and to us; i. e.
according to the Word of God, and human Reason; for the Word of God is indicted
by the Holy Ghost. Hence such Results as are evidently consonant with the Word
of God, SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST. All Results that don't stand with that
Authority at their Head, are of no Authority or Obligation to be regarded; even
as any Civil Instrument that is not in his Majesty's Name, is of no Force.
Councils have no more Right to go according to their corrupt Wills and Tempers,
than the People. Hence it will not mend the Matter, for Councils to presume to
preface their Results so, unless they clear up, and make it appear, that what
they say is agreeable to the Word of God, and to human Reason. Thus the
Jerusalem Council show how it appeared, that IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST,
to lay no such Burden as Circumcision upon the Gentiles. For first, in the 8th
Ver. Peter declares how God bare Witness to the Gentiles, giving them the Holy
Ghost, even as he did to the Circumcision. Then in the 12th Verse, All the
Multitude attended to the Relation of like Facts, by Barnabas and Paul,
declaring what Miracles God had wrought among the Gentiles, that they were
knowing to. After they had related these Things, then James in the 14th Ver.
and onward, begins to argue upon these Accounts, and compares them with the
Scriptures of the Prophets; showing that the Holy Ghost thus attending the
Gentiles, was agreeable to what the Holy Ghost had long before promised, by the
Mouth of the Prophets. Then the Argument stood thus. The Holy Ghost having
formerly promised to attend the Gentiles or the uncircumcised, and having now,
as appears in several Instances in Fact attended them, or fallen upon them:
Therefore the Holy Ghost requires no such Burden as Circumcision upon them; for
if it seemed good to the Holy Ghost to light upon, or attend them in
Uncircumcision; then it seemed good to the Holy Ghost not to lay that Burden
upon them. Hence comes out the Authority of the Result, IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE
HOLY GHOST, which all Results must have (i. e. appear exactly consonant with
the Word of God, which is the same Thing as to seem good to the Holy Ghost) or
they bind not at all. For as Mr. Adams himself says, they are only Advisory:
every one knows that Advice has no binding Force any farther, or in any other
Sense than it is enlightening and convincing to the Understanding; and in
religious Affairs, (which we are upon) showing what is the Mind and Will of
God, opening of it to the Understanding, from his Word and Works; as the
Jerusalem Council did, till it appears what SEEMS GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST, and
when a Council are influenced by the Spirit the Jerusalem Council were, when
they have found what seems good to the Holy Ghost, the same will also please
and seem good to them, perfectly consistent with Reason. And when it is thus
enlightening and convincing to the Understanding, that it is agreeable to the
Mind of God, and to human Reason; it will have all binding Force in it that
could be wished.

The USE of COUNCILS.
From what has been said above; it appears that the principal USE of them, is
to investigate, find out, and demonstrate what is the Mind and Will of God; and
to convince such Churches as may be at a Loss, what their Duty is. -- This
appears not only by the Pattern we have in the Jerusalem Council: but also
according to the Platform, Chapter XV. Sect. 2, also XVI. Sect. 2 and 4.

Another thing wherein we may reckon the USE of Councils, is to keep up and
maintain Correspondence, Fellowship, Communion and good Understanding between
Churches. Thus the Church at Antioch sending their Messengers to Jerusalem, and
then the Council sending some of their own Members to Antioch, made a
Correspond and Fellowship between them; as well as afforded Help and Light to
them. And this argues to the Sense of the Platform, Chap. VIII. Sect. 8; also
Chap. X. Sect. 6. Hence in all important Affairs, especially such as the
settling in Office, and removing from Office; even though there should be no
great doubt, if any, what is right, or agreeable to the Mind of God in the
Affair; yet it serves to keep up a Correspond and Fellowship between Churches,
to call in Sister Churches, to assist and own them, in those important
Transactions; and especially in the settling a Minister, who by his Office to
that particu-Church, becomes an Officer in general, in some special Sense among
all the Churches. And Reason teaches that a Man should in general go out at the
same Door he comes in at. But in either of these Cases, if a Church can get no
Help or Light from Sister Churches; and especially in dismissing, Mr. Adams
himself says, the Platform and common Sense will justify the People in
dismissing of him. Therefore, when a People have made repeated Trials to obtain
Light and Assistance from their Sister Churches, and can obtain none; as was
expressly the Case at Bolton, as appears by their Remarks on the Result; then
according to Mr. Adams's own Doctrine, they had a good right to dismiss him.
And indeed, though in general for the keeping up Fellowship and Correspond of
Churches; it is convenient to have a Council at the Dismission of a Minister;
yet the Instances are frequent where they have been dismissed entirely without
a Council. Therefore, when Sister Churches have been repeatedly consulted with,
it serves the Purpose of Correspondence of Churches; even though they cannot
obtain any Light from them. Therefore, the Way is abundantly clear for a Church
to proceed to dismiss him. Thus consider the Nature and Use of Councils every
Way, Bolton People had come to the whole Nature and Design of them, according
to Scripture, Platform, and Mr. Adams. Therefore he has no Cause to complain of
them, or to inveigh against them.

But even upon the Supposition that Councils were to be considered as
Judicatories of Matters of Fact; yet to pretend to exclude the Church, or any
Members of it from being Witnesses; or to set at naught their Testimony, as it
is said the Bolton June Council did, under a Notion of their being Witnesses in
their own Case; is turning all Law human and Divine, and all common Sense and
Reason out of Doors. It may be plain to every one, that will give himself the
Trouble to think of it, that in all such Cases as are purely Ecclesiastical,
they are King's Cases; Christ is King and Head of the Church; and no farther
than a Crime is against him as King, have Churches or Councils any Business to
try them. And it is plain, Christ himself so considers them, in his Direction,
Mat. 18, where he says, if thy Brother trespass ought against thee; -- take
with thee one or two, that in the Mouth of two or three, etc. It is plain that
the Original Complainant is considered by Christ as a Witness. The Reason is
plain, that in such Causes as belong to the Church to try, the Complainant
don't get one Farthing to himself by its going against the Person complained
of. Who made me a Judge and a Divider, said Christ himself, and if he would not
be Judge about secular Interest or Property, he never set his Body here to be
Judge about them Things. But the Causes to be tried by the Church are the King
Christ Jesus's Causes; and every one (I should think) knows that in King's
Cases, the Person or Persons immediately injured are good Evidences.

But again, supposing it were allowed, that Councils were a Court of
Judicature; and to try Actions of Right and Wrong, as to Civil Interest or
Property; yet the Conduct of that Council in rejecting the Church, as it is
said they did, can no Way be reconciled to human Law, nor the Word of God. I
suppose a general Rule in Law, for admitting Witnesses, is when the Deponent
don't win or loose by the issue of the Action. And I suppose it to be as
general a Rule, that when one who is Party, or considered as Party in the Case,
deposes any Thing, or freely gives in any Thing, which in the issue of the
Cause, (...) him to Less; that his own Confession shall be taken in the
strictest Sense against himself; and it is plain enough, that in the Dismission
of a Minister; that for the Cause to issue in his Dismission, subjects the
People to a Loss of their Property; Since they must be at the Cost and Trouble
of settling another. Hence their Testimony in such Case is the strongest
possible.

But then again, supposing it were so that they were Gainers by his Dismission;
yet neither by the Law of God, Civil Proceedings, or common Sense, could their
Evidence be so rejected. For I take it, that where the Nature of the Case is
such, that no other Evidence ordinarily can be had, that of the Parties is to
be admitted, as in Book Debts, Actions of Trespass, etc. where both the
Plaintiff and Defendant (if I mistake not) are admitted as Witnesses in their
own Case, in the strictest Sense; so as directly to swear Money into their own
Pockets: and this agrees to the Law of God. Exodus XXII. 11. Then shall an Oath
of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put his Hand to his
Neighbors Goods: and the Owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not
make it good. There we see the Man was to give Evidence in his own Case, in the
strictest Sense; swearing Money into his own Pocket, or at least which is the
same thing, saving of it; it being where other Evidence could not be had. So
also in Wills, the Law is that no one to whom a Legacy is made may be a
Witness; and yet where a Legacy is made to a Town or Church, it has (if I
mistake not) very lately been resolved by the principal Men in this Government,
Gentlemen of the Law, that in such Case, Members of the Church or Inhabitants
of the Town, where the Legacy is given, must be allowed as Witnesses to the
Will; because other Witnesses ordinarily cannot be had. Now Church Causes are
such, as ordinarily other Evidence than those of the Church are not to be
expected; so that they properly come under this Rule. Therefore take it every
Way; and the rejecting the Church, as it is said that Council did, was
repugnant to the Law of God, common Sense, and human Laws. And then it is no
Wonder the People said if was above their Comprehension, as in their Remarks on
the Result.

I come now to say something of the Minister having a right to NEGATIVE THE
VOTES OF THE CHURCH. This Notion held to by the Ministers, has caused much
difficulty in many Churches. Indeed where a Minister has never assumed it in
his Practice, and the People have never felt the inconveniency of it, the
People will even themselves argue in favor of it. And truly where a Man holds
to any thing that is not right, so long as he don't Practice upon it to do any
hurt with it, it is I suppose not worth while to begin a Contention with him
for his Notions or Opinions. But in as much as it has been the Bone of
Contention in many Places, and is what has been of the Instruments used in
wounding of Bolton, and Mr. Adams has brandished it in his Sermon like a
Warrior his Sword; it seems highly necessary in this neighbourly undertaking I
am upon, to pour in some healing Oil into the Wounds that have been made by
that deadly Instrument. Mr. Adams and others who hold to this Negative Power in
the Minister, all pretend to take it from that Clause in the Platform. Chap. X.
Section 11. I don't find as Mr. Adams, nor did I ever know of any one else, the
most strenuous Advocate for it, ever produce one single Lisp of Scripture for
it; or pretend to go to that sacred Book for it is Vindication: hence then take
it just as they would have it, it is an upstart Practice which the Scripture
knows nothing about. And it is well worthy to be observed, that this is almost
the only Section in the Platform that has no Quotation from Scripture to
support it; so that it appears, the Compilers of the Platform themselves, did
not pretend to any Scripture, to support the Notion therein advanced. However
we may observe 2dly, That it must be notorious to every one that reads the
Platform, that it all goes upon the Notion or Supposition of a plurality of
Elders in each Church. There they find a whole long Chap. upon Ruling Elders,
and every where interspersed about Elders of the Church; and especially and
abundantly so in this Xth Chapter, the 3d Section speaks of the Presbytery of
the Church, and of the Government of the Church in respect to them, resembling
an Aristocracy, both which Terms every one knows (who has had tolerable
understanding of Words) carry in them the Notion of Elders or Rulers to one
Body, for if it were but only one Elder, he might properly be called a
Presbyter, but not a Presbytery. And so as to the other Term, if the Government
were carried on only by one Ruler, it could not be called an Aristocracy, but a
Monarchy: it is so repeated, abundant and notorious that the Platform, and
especially this Chapter is built upon this Notion, viz. of a plurality of
Elders, or ruling Officers to each Church, that it is needless to say any thing
more to make it most certain to every one that reads the Platform. Hence the
saying in this 11 Sect. That in an organick Church and right Administration it
requires the Consent of both to consummate or perfect a Church-Act, cannot give
the least shadow or Color of Right to what is pretended, about a single
Presbyter's negativing the Vote of the Church, for this would make the
Government of the Church, in respect to its Minister a Monarchy, which is a new
and upstart Practice unknown to the Platform, which owns no Monarchal Power or
Ruler in the Church, but Christ himself. So that all we have in the Platform
which gives the least Color for what is pretended about negativing; is where
there is a Presbytery, who at first Glance, would be thought to have a Negative
upon the Church by the Plat. But I rather think that there is a Mistake even in
this, and that no such negativing Power, as is generally supposed belongs to
the Presbytery by the Platform. But before I proceed it may be proper a little
to explain what we are to understand by the Minister or Presbytery negativing
the Vote of the Church. It seems to be considered as resembling the Legislative
Body of the Nation or Province, where there are three Branches; any one of
which not concurring with the other two, makes void whatever the other two may
have voted; and so it becomes no Act of Parliament or Assembly. And so in the
Church, especially when it has a Presbytery, it is supposed to consist of two
Branches; either of which not concurring, makes void the Vote of the other
Branch, so as that it becomes no Act of the Church. But this is evidently a
false Notion, and contrary to both Scripture and Platform, to consider or
compare the Church to a Legislative Body; for the Platform owns no Legislative
Power belonging to the Church, but what is in Jesus Christ the Head. vid. this
Xth Chapter, Section 1 and 4, with other Places to the same Purpose. Hence the
Church are not by Scripture or Platform considered as a Legislative, but an
Executive Body; as in the 18th of Matthew, and many other Places; and so in the
Platform in numberless Places, and abundantly in this Xth Chapter, and
especially in this so much boasted Section, Church Acts are called
Administration, not Legislation, and it is plain to see, that to suppose or
allow any such Thing as Legislation in the Church, and especially to have the
Minister with a Negative Power at the Head of it, leads directly up to his
Holiness himself. So that according to Scripture, Platform and Experience; the
Church cannot be considered, as a Legislative Body: but an Executive one. Hence
it appears that it is inconsistent and impracticable, to consider the Church in
two Branches, one Branch having a Negative upon the other. In a Legislative
Body one Branch may propose a Thing, and Vote it, and if the other Branch or
Branches do not concur with it, the Thing may cease there, and no special
Inconveniences accrue, and perhaps may be better than if the Law had passed.
But it is far different in an Executive Court, when any Cause is before them
there must be an Issue to the Cause, it must be acted upon, it will not do to have
two Branches in such a Sense having a Negative one upon the other, as that they
can never come together, and so the Case dropped out of Court because the Court
cannot agree. This would make horrid Work, Persons could never have the the
Benefit of Law and justice. So in our Executive Courts, though there seems in
some Sense two Branches, viz. the Judges and the Jury, the Case I take it, must
issue finally as the Jury bring in, and the Judges must give Sentence and
Execution accordingly; however it may be different from their Minds, though
they have indeed right to send out a Jury once and again; yet it must finally
issue as the Jury give Verdict. So in the Church, it is absolutely
impracticable to pretend to consider them as two Branches, but as they are an
Executive Body: If we compare them with our Executive Courts, it will very well
agree with the Platform. There the Church are plainly made the Jury as in this
same Section, The Power of Judgment in Matters of Censure. And the Presbytery
resemble the Bench of Judges in the same Section, The ordinary Power of
Government belonging to the Elders: as in a Civil Court, the Rule, Government
and Presidency of the Court belongs to the Bench. And if the Elders or even a
single Elder when he thought the Church made a wrong Judgment should propose to
suspend the Affairs for farther Light and Consideration some reasonable Time,
in imitation of the Civil Courts sending out the Jury; it is not likely any
Church would be against it. But then after all, judgment must pass as the
Church finally bring in; for Power of judgment lies with them, as in this
boasted negativing Section it self; and the Officers in pronouncing Sentence,
they must do it with the Consent of the Church, as in the 9th Section. So it is
the judgment of the Church or Brotherhood, and the Sentence of the Officers,
according to the judgment of the Brotherhood, and so it comes out to that, that
in the consummating and perfecting the Cause, each one must do his Part, the
Brotherhood theirs, and the Officers theirs; and so it is in a Court of Civil
Justice, each one must do his Part, the Jury theirs, and the Bench theirs, in
order to consummate, issue or finish the Cause: what then? no body as I know
of, ever thought the Bench had therefore a Negative Verdicts of the Jury. It
has been before shown, that such a Notion of Negative Branches in Executive
Courts, or the Administration of Law, is repugnant and impracticable. So also
it requires the Office-Act of the Minister, or some Justice of the Peace to
consummate or perfect a Marriage; do the Rev. Clergy therefore conclude, that
they have a Negative upon all the Matches that are made in their Towns or
Parishes? They may easily see that this would Negative the Fees out of their
Pockets. So also it requires the Office-Act of a Justice of the Peace to
consummate or perfect a Deed, for the Conveyance of Land. Have the Justices
therefore a Negative upon all the Sale of Land within their Counties? So also
it requires the Office-Act of the Judge of Probate to consummate or perfect
Wills. Has the Judge of Probate therefore a Negative on all the Wills in the
County? Must not the Ministers in Marriages, the Justices in Deeds, the Probate
in Wills Consent to all those Transactions that they act their Office-Part in?
The Minister may think, that a Couple presented to him for Marriage, had better
not Marry. A Justice may think that Men have made a foolish Bargain in a Deed
brought to him to acknowledge. A Judge may think that a Man has made a very
foolish unjust Will brought to him for Probating. What then? That is not their
Business. Their acting their Office-Part, and thus consenting, allowing of,
yielding to, or ratifying these supposed foolish or unjust Marriages, Bargains
or Wills; don't make those Officers foolish or unjust. They don't make the
Marriages, Bargains or Wills. They only Act their Office-Part in consummating
or perfecting those Marriages, etc. The Folly or Injustice, if there is any,
lies at the Door of those that made the Matches, etc. So in the Church: it
belonging to the Brotherhood to judge, etc. If they should chance to make an
erroneous Judgment; the Minister or Presbytery in doing their Office-Part, in
consummating or perfecting those Votes, don't make themselves erroneous. It
being the Right and Business of the Brotherhood to judge both by Scripture and
Platform, makes it that it is no more necessarily the Act or Judgment of the
Minister or Presbytery in their acting their Office-Part, in consummating or
perfecting the Votes of the Brotherhood; than the Verdict, etc. spoken of
above, are the Verdict, etc. of the Judges, etc. by their acting their Office
Part, in consummating or perfecting what is done in those respective Cases. But
it is entirely different in Legislative Bodies consisting of several Branches,
where, by every Branch concurring, it becomes the Special Act of Law of every
Branch. But should Mr. Adams here say, that by Consent is some times meant,
Accord or Agreement in any Thing: So that Consent in this Place must mean the
Agreement of the several Branches in Legislature. Yet he himself has said,
speaking of the Platform, that in all Writings, whether Wills, Charters, or any
Thing else of the like Kind, loose and general Passages are to be explained by
those that are more definite. So that if there should happen to be dropped a
loose ambiguous Word; yet it must be explained, and controuled, by those more
definite and certain. And the Platform is full and abundant enough, that no
such Thing as Legislation belongs to the Church; as has been before hinted. The
Laws belonging to that, being all made by Jesus Christ. But much is said about
Conscience in Church Affairs; and that a Minister cannot Act contrary to his
Conscience, and therefore must have a Negative. Then let it be considered, that
the Minister no more necessarily goes contrary to his Conscience, in acting his
Office-Part in consummating or perfecting the Votes of the Church which are
contrary to his Judgment; than the Minor Part of the Church necessarily go
contrary to their Conscience, in communing with the Major Part, who have made a
Judgment contrary to theirs. If thus standing in their Lot, acting their Part
with the Body, as they stand in Relation to it, either in the Minister or Minor
Part, is going contrary to their Conscience, what shall they do? Shall they
therefore leave the Body? Or shall the Major Part give up their Judgment to the
Minor? would not that in deed be going contrary to their Conscience? Shall the
Major Part leave the Body? or rather shall they give up their Existence? For
they are the Body. I should think every one by this Time must see, that the
Doctrine or Notion that a Minister cannot act his Office-Part in perfecting or
consummating the Votes or Judgment of the Church, when contrary to his
Judgment; is a Notion which in its very Nature and Consequences is absolutely
inconsistent with the very Being of Society, and must necessarily root up and
destroy all Church State; it generally does prove so in Fact, wherever
Ministers pretend to assume or usurp it. And will People persuade themselves
that the Body of Christ of all others necessarily and inherently has that
mortal BANE in it self, which must unavoidably issue in its own destruction! No
doubt the Body of Christ is most free of any from such a Bane. The Laws are all
made belonging to it. And therefore there is no need, nor possibility of
admitting any Negative Branches in the Acts proper to his Body, which is his
Church.

And that the Right or Power of receiving in judging, censuring, casting out,
and restoring called the KEYS of the Church, so much contended about; that
these by the Laws of Christ, are committed to the Church or Brotherhood might
be made abundantly manifest from a multitude of Places of Scripture; as well as
the Platform. A few of which may be hinted. First, what Christ says in the
XVIIIth of Matthew, Tell it to the Church: If he neglect to hear the Church.
And in the next Verse saying, Whatsoever ye shall hind on Earth, etc. This Ye
meant the same Thing as if he had said whatsoever the Church shall bind on
Earth; for they were the Church that were then gathered. So that here we see,
Christ plainly fixes the Right and Authority of judging and censuring, in the
Church; for if he neglect to hear the Church expressly determines that it is
their Mind which is to be spoken and heard; and his putting a Sanction upon
their Binding and Loosing is expressly giving them the KEYS. The same might
also be fairly argued from what Christ says of the KEYS in XVIth of Matthew.
For although perhaps it may not appear so plain at the first Glance, that the
KEYS were in that Place given to the Church; yet many Things might be said
showing that, that this is the meaning of it: But what may be sufficient to my
present Purpose, may be to observe, that Mr. Adams himself says, that two
Passages relating to the same Thing; the latter must always control, interpret
and determine the former: that this is certainly the Way of settling real or
apparent Contradictions: that we are bound in all Reason to interpret the
former in Consistency with the latter, vid. p. 36. So that according to him we
are certainly bound in all Reason, to interpret that in the XVIth of Matthew,
in consistency with this in the XVIIIth.

Accordingly we find the Apostles, in all their Transactions, always treating
the Matter thus: Especially in their Epistles. So we find Paul to the Romans,
Chap. I. Ver. 7. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called Saints. So then
whatever he says in all the Epistle directing about Church Discipline, it is to
those he had thus addressed, which was certainly all the Brotherhood,
professing Believers. Accordingly he says, Chap. XVI. Ver. 17. Now I beseech
you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions, etc. The same might also be
observed of what he says to the Corinthians in both Epistles to them. The IId
and IIId Chapters of the Revelations are also upon the Plan of the KEYS, Right
and Authority of judging, censuring, etc. being in the Church. And we read of
but one (that I remember) in all the New Testament that pretended to assume the
Pre-eminence, and to use the KEYS, refusing to take into the Church and casting
out of the Church; whose Deeds John speaks of as evil and malicious, IIId
Epistle, 9th and 10th Verses. John says, he himself wrote to the Church: but
this Diotrephes treated Things in a different Manner, and it is no uncommon
Thing for Diotrephan Bishops to prate maliciously against the true Apostles,
Ministers or Disciples of Christ, who allow the Church their Rights: Even as
that old Diotrephes did against John and the other Apostles who wrote to the
Church. I hope by this Time it sufficiently appears, that the KEYS were by
Christ committed to the Church, which are considered as his Body. And therefore
for any Man or set of Men, Minister or Councils, to presume to wrest them out
of their Hands; i. e. to pretend to impose Members upon any Church; or to take
them away as if they could dismiss them; or remove their Relation; or to put on
Censures, or to take them off; or to Negative the Church in these Acts; has all
the Appearance of the worst of sacrilege. What can be worse robbing than to
wrest the KEYS of a Treasure from the right Owner? Or consider the Church as
his Body, it has all the Symptoms of worse than crucifying Christ afresh. To me
the attempting or pretending to impose Members on any Church which they judge
unworthy, very much resembles the putting on Christ a Crown of Thorns; or of
giving him Gaul and Vinegar to drink. The pretending to take away or remove, or
Censure Members contrary to the Church; is dislocating or breaking the Members
of Christ's Body; which is worse than the crucifiers of Christ did to him; for
a Bone of him was not to be broken. And may the Lord forgive all such as have
any Hand in such Things, not knowing what they do: But the Soul that does ought
presumptuously, shall be cut off from among his People.

Having thus far shown that no such negativing Power is or can belong to the
Minister or Presbytery, as is so much claimed or pretended: That the KEYS by
Christ were committed to the Church: That the Church cannot be considered as a
Legislative Body; I hope it may be seen, that there is no need of all the Noise
and Plea that some make about Conscience, and that the Minister cannot go
contrary to his Conscience in acting his Office-Part, respecting the Votes of
the Church. For when it is Matter of Judgment, it cannot be Matter of
Conscience. But if the Church are to make Laws and Statutes; they might make
some contrary to his Conscience, and he no doubt ought to have right to
negative them; or some Way found out, for him to be freed from being subject to
the Laws he in no Sense consented to. But as the Case now stands, and the Power
and Business of the Church is no other than Executive, or to administer upon
Laws already made, there is no need nor possibility of his having a Negative
upon the Judgments or Votes of the Church; nor any Control or Embarrasments
upon his Conscience; and it is no doubt with me, that it is the entertaining
this mistaken Notion, of the Church being or acting as a Legislative Body,
which is the Cause of many of the Contentions, and much of the Confusion there
is in our Churches.

I had many Things more in my Mind, which I thought to have wrote: But I must
leave my Patient with the Host, and pass on my Journey; when I return, if I
find any Thing more to pay, I determine to make Disburstments according to my
Ability.

Appendix.
HAVING perused the preceding Narrative of the late Troubles and Transactions
in Bolton, before it went to the Press, wrote by a Neighbor unknown; and being
well acquainted with all the Circumstances, I hope the Author will not take it
amiss, if I rectify one Mistake in said Narrative, and also add a few Lines to
set some Things in a clearer Light.

In said Narrative it is said, that the said Minister declared that he had
never drank to that degree so as in any Way to affect or hurt his Reason,
Speech or Limbs; and the Church voted to accept of said Declaration as a
Settlement of said Affair, (which Declaration was made and repeated at other
Times) but the following Declaration was what the Church settled with him upon
at that Time, viz.

"WHEREAS many have manifested an uneasiness with me, respecting supposed
Intemperance on the Lord's Day, on which was our last Communion; on which I
say, I do not pretend there is no Foundation of Suspicion; but rather think it
was mainly and principally owing to some other Cause or Causes. But let it be
from what it will I desire to take a suitable Notice of it, and be duly humbled
under the Frown of Providence, and engage by divine Help, to shun all
reasonable Grounds of Jealousy for the Time to come."

And when it was repeatedly urged that he should make some further Confession,
he declared that he could not, nor would not, and that he should do Violence to
his own Conscience if he did: till at length, either by the Persuasion of the
Council, or some other means, he acknowledges, that conscious of his own
faultiness, he freely and frankly confesses his Sin and Faults, in the
excessive Use of Spirituous Liquors in several Instances: and humbly asks
forgiveness of God and his People, etc. Which last Confession he always refused
to read to the Congregation. The first Declaration and the last Confession were
so different, that the Church could never reconcile them together; but Mr. Goss
always insisted upon it, that the first was equal to the last.

JOHN WHETCOMB.
Bolton, Feb. 20, 1773.
To Col. JOHN WHETCOMB, and Capt. ASA WHETCOMB.
Gentlemen,
I Herewith send you a small TREATISE on Church Government, which I doubt not
you will peruse, knowing you both to be Friends to LIBERTY, both Civil and
Religious, and also Sufferers under the growing Power of the Clergy.

You have liberty to print it if you think proper. It comes to you from an
Inhabitant of Boston, a Friend to true Gospel Churches, and

Your unknown Servant,
Boston, Feb. 16, 1773.
Lately Published,
[Price only 3 s. and 4 d. neatly Bound and Lettered. Those that purchase six
will be allowed a seventh gratis.]

And to be Sold by JOHN BOYLES, at his Printing-Office next Door to the Three
Doves in Marlborough-Street, BOSTON.

A VINDICATION of the Government of the New England Churches: Drawn from
Antiquity; the Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; Its Noble Nature; and from the
Dignity Divine Providence has put upon it. -- ALSO, -- The Churches Quarrel
Espoused: Or, a Satirical Reply, to certain Proposals made, in Answer to this
Question, -- What further Steps are to be taken, that the Councils may have due
Constitution and Efficacy in Supporting, Preserving, and Well-Ordering the
Interest of the Churches in the Country. By JOHN WISE, Late Pastor to a Church
in Ipswich. To which is added, -- A Platform of CHURCH DISCIPLINE: Gathered out
of the Word of God, and agreed upon by the Elders and Messengers of the
Churches assembled at Cambridge, 1648. And, -- A Confession of Faith, owned and
consented unto by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches assembled at
Boston, New England, May 12, 1680. To which is also added, -- An Extract from a
Book entitled. New-England's Lamentations, wrote by the Reverend Mr. JOHN
WHITE, late Pastor of the first Church in Gloucester; to which is subjoined a
Letter by another Hand, showing Reasons for adhering to our Platform as a Rule
of Church Government; and Objections against Ruling Elders answered.

[ This Work is so highly approved of by Mankind in general, (and especially by
those who are allowed to be the best Judges) that it has gone through two
Editions in about six Months; and as many Persons were disappointed of a Copy
in the former Edition, it is hoped they will not be backward in furnishing
themselves therewith in the present. The Publisher having his own Interest, as
well as that of the Congregational Churches, so much at Heart, that he will
Endavour to the utmost, that said Books may be spread universally; and would be
much obliged to his Friends in the Country for any Pieces of a like Nature.]


