Mr. Hopkins's THREE SERMONS, From ROMANS III.5, 6, 7, 8.

SIN, THROUGH DIVINE INTERPOSITION, An Advantage to the Universe; AND YET This no
Excuse for Sin, or Encouragement to it.

ILLUSTRATED AND PROVED: AND GOD'S WISDOM and HOLINESS in the PERMISSION OF
SIN; and that his WILL herein is THE SAME with his REVEALED WILL: Shown and
confirmed.

IN THREE SERMONS, From ROMANS III.5, 6, 7, 8.

BY SAMUEL HOPKINS, A.M. A Minister of the Gospel at Sheffield.

With him is STRENGTH and WISDOM: The deceived and Deceiver are HIS.

JOB xii 16. But GOD meant it unto GOOD.

GENESIS l.20. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may
abound? GOD forbid!

ROMANS vi.1.2. O LORD, how great are thy Works! And the Thoughts of thine Heart
are very deep.

The LORD is righteous in all his Ways, and HOLY in all his Works.

PSALM xii.5. cxlv.17. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the Way, take up the
STUMBLING BLOCK out of the Way of my People.

ISAI. lvii.14. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by J. KNEELAND, next to the
Treasurer's Office, in Milk-Street. MDCCLXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
I QUITE agree with those who think ministers ought not to bring into the
pulpit dry speculations, or dark abstruse, disputed points, which have no
tendency to make the heart better, and influence the practice: But shall be far
from agreeing with any, who may think the subject of the fol^owing sermons to
be such. -- If God has given us sufficient evidence to determine, that all the
sin and misery in the universe is for the general good of the whole, and shall
answer some good end that shall much more than counter-balance the evil; then
doubtless it is of importance, that all should attend to the evidence, and
believe this truth.

It is, I conceive, evident beyond contradiction, that this truth must be
believed in order to a true and cheerful submission to God's will, as it is
manifested in what he does and what he permits. For he who cheerfully submits
to God's will, submits to it as WISE and GOOD, either seeing it to be so in the
instance his submission respects, or believing it implicitly: For it is not our
duty, or indeed possible for us to be reconciled or submit to absolute evil, or
evil as such. But if the sin and misery which take place in the world, are not
for the general good of the universe, then they are absolutely evil, or evil in
every view and sense; and so God's will to permit sin and misery is not WISE
and GOOD, and therefore cannot be submitted to.

"THAT THERE IS NO ABSOLUTE EVIL IN THE UNIVERSE," If the author and governor
of all things be infinitely perfect, then whatever it, is right* of all
possible systems he has chosen the best: And con^equently there is no ab^olute
evil in the universe -- This being the case, all the seeming imperf^ctions o^
Evi^s in it are such only in a partial view; and with respect to the whole
sys^em, they are goods. Tur^bull'^ Christ^an Philosophy, p. 35.
is a maxim on which is grounded all implicit submission to God's will, in his
providential directing and disposing all events; which we are required to be
ready on all occasions, to exercise. So far therefore as this truth is doubted,
or out of view; so far there can be no sincere, cheerful submission. Is it not
then of great importance, that this truth should be maintained and held up to
view? And that especially at a time, when it seems to be much out of sight to
most; and begins to be even called in question by many.

The more a christian's heart is filled with true benevolence, the more
ardently he wishes and seeks the good of the universe; or, which is the same
thing, the m^re conformed to God he is in true ho^iness, the m^re averse he is
to abso^ute evil; and the further from a reconciliation to it: And nothing
would tend more to cross and distress him, than that there should be any such
thing in the universe. And if he should suppose that God had permitted that to
take place, which was, on the whole, a disadvantage to the universe, he must
divest himself of his benevolence, before he could be reconciled or submit to
it. And it must therefore be peculiarly satisfying and pleasing, to find the
contrary revealed as a ce^tain truth in the scripture. If Christians therefore
tamely give up this truth, where will they go for support and comfort in dark
and evil times?

As therefore this truth is of such use and importance to christians, it was
needful that the objections made against it should be answered. Especially that
most common one found in the text. The commonness of this objection, and the
plausibleness with which it appears to many, who do not attend closely to this
matter, was the inducement so particularly to consider it, and show it is
groundlesness and absurdity; which is done in the second sermon.

If we cannot reconcile God's permitting sin with his goodness, holiness and
his revealed will: Then the permission of sin is a dark and unaccountable
affair to us indeed; and we cannot be reconciled to it, or justify God herein.
It becomes us to justify and approve of all God's ways to men; to see and
acknowledge his righteousness in all he does: Yea, it becomes us to be well
pleased with all God's ways, so far as they are made known to us: For in this
way alone shall we be able truly to rejoice that the LORD reigns, and has done
whatsoever pleased him.

They who cannot reconcile God's permission of sin to his wisdom, holiness and
revealed will, can really understand, and be reconciled to few or none of God's
ways to men: For almost all God's conduct toward man, is built upon this, or
some way related to it; as all must be sensible on the least reflection.

If therefore this attempt, imperfect as it is, shall afford any light and help
to any, in these important points, the labor and expense will be richly
compensated^

Sheffield, 19th June 1759.
SIN THE OCCASION OF GREAT GOOD.
SERMON I.
ROMANS III.5, 6, 7, 8. But if our Unrighteousness commend the Righteousness of
God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? (I speak as a
Man)

God forbid! For then how shall God judge the World?

For if the Truth of God has more abounded through my Lie unto his Glory, why
yet am I also judged as a Sinner?

And not rather (as we be slanderously reported* and as some affirm that we
say) Let us do Evil, that Good may come? Whose Damnation is just.


IN these words I shall take notice of two things, which are to my present
purpose, viz.

First, An objection against the reasonableness and justice of God's charging
that on men as a crime, and punishing them for that, which answers some very
good end, and is, in the event, greatly to his glory. This we have in the 5th
verse. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall
we say? Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? When the apostle says, I speak
as a man, he means, that in these words, he states an objection that blind,
sinful men were ready to make. I speak as a Man. i. e. I object this as the
l^nguage of carnal Hea^ts; it is suggested LIKE A MAN, a vain, foo^^sh, proud
Creature.

Henry on the Place. Here I represent the Reasoning of an unbe^ieving I^w

Dr. Taylor's Paraphrase in Loc.
And this obj^ction is more particularly stated in the 7th verse. For if the
truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why yet am I
also judged as a sinner? The question is, How G^d can justly find ^^ult with,
and punish that unrighteousness and wickedness of men, which is the occ^sion of
the exercise and manifestation of his righteousness, truth and holiness; by
which there is made a bright display of his glory? How can that conduct of m^n,
which answers such good purposes, be hated, condemned and punished by God? If
sin is so much for God's glory, then surely sin is on the whole a GOOD, and
consequently the more sin there is, the better. Why then does God forbid it?
Why is he angry with the sinner? And where is the justice of punishing him for
it? Does not this give full license, yea, the greatest imaginable encouragement
to sin? If such great good comes of sin, then let us do evil that good may
come. Carnal Hearts might from hence take occasion to encourage themselves in
sin He (the Apostle) had said, that the universal guilt and co^ruption of man
(...) gave o^casion to the ma^ife^t^^ion of Go^'^ righteousness in Jesus
Christ. Now it may be suggested. If all our sin be so far from overthrowing
God's Honor, that it does commend it, and his ends are secured, so that there
is no harm done, is it not unjust for God to punish our sin and unbelief so
severely? Mr Henry in Loc.


Secondly, The objection rejected as groundless, absurd and impious. Ver. 6.
God forbid! For then how shall God judge the world? As if the apostle had said,
Such a suggestion is to be rejected with abhorrence as absurd and blasphemou^*
as it is directly against God the righteous judge of the world. --

Some suppose that the whole of the 8th verse is an answer to the foregoing
objection, which the apostle gives in these words; by showing where the
objection would lead them, if granted to be just, v^z. that we ought to commit
sin, because God made it the occasion of good, and would some way turn it all
to his glory. Dr. Tailor paraphrases the word^ thus, And (...) you not draw
this into a general ru^e and (...), I ha^ in all cases we ought to do wickedly,
because God can one way or other, turn it to his own glory? An impious
sentiment which some charge upon me, etc. S^e Dr. Taylor's Paraphrase on
Romans. (...) Dr. Dodd^^^ge on this* verse.
But I rather think, with Mr. Lo^ke and others, Lock, P^^l's Synopsis, and
Henry in Loc.
that these words, And not rather -- Let us do evil that good may come, are a
continuation of the objection; and that the words, As we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, which are a parenthesis; together
with the last words, Whose damnation is just, contain the apostle's answer. He
rejects it as an unjust and groundless consequence from the premises, which was
the doctrine of the apostle, viz. that sin was the occasion of God's glory, and
so of the greatest good. And condemns those who made this objection and
practiced upon it, by this short and severe sentence, Whose damnation is just.

But be this as it will, whether the objection is continued in the 8th verse,
or is the whole of it the apostle's answer, the passage taken together holds
forth the following truth, which I design to make the subject of my discourse
from these words, viz.

DOCTRINE.
Though sin is the occasion of great good; yet this affords no excuse for sin, or
the least encouragement to it. I think this implies, that there are certain
rules, which God has said down for u^, disobedience to which, in any imaginable
circumstances, is universally a moral evil; even though the quantity of good
arising from thence to our fe^low-creatures should be greater than that arising
from observing those rules. For if this ^e not allowed, there can be no shadow
of force in the Apo^t^e's conclusion. Doddridge in Loc.


In this doctrine two propositions are co^tain'd, one implied, and the other
expressed, viz.

PROPOSITION I. Sin may be, and actually is the occasion of great good.

PROPOSITION II. This affords no excuse for sin, or encouragement to it. --



I shall endeavor to prove and illustrate these propositions in their order.

PROP. I. Sin may be, and actually is the occasion of great good.

This is supposed in the passage of scripture on which the doctrine is
grounded. The apostle does not deny, but im^licitly grants, that men's
unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God; that the truth of God does
by men's lies and wickedness, abound to his glory; and so that evil or sin is
the occasion of good.

But we are not le^t to learn this truth from this passage only: The holy bible
abundan^ly reveals to us, not only that sin may be the occasion of good; but
that i^ actually is so, by becoming the means of promoting the g^od of man in
man* instances, and advancing the declarative glory of God.

The bible is full of instances of this, a few of which I will mention.

We have an instance, in the sin of Ioseph's brethren, in selling him into
Egypt. It Is expressly said (Genesis l.20.) God meant it unto good. i. e. God
intended good by their wickedness. And God's end was abundantly answered. By
this, and what Joseph suffered in a state of bondage, in consequence of i^, he
was fitted for that honorable and useful station God designed him for. This
was the means of providing for God's church and people, and saving them alive;
as well as preserving the kingdom of Egypt in the time of famine. This sin of
Ioseph's brethren therefore was one means by which God fulfilled his covenant^
promises to his people, and so was the occasion of his truth's abounding to his
glory. And this was the means of God's name becoming great, through the land of
Egypt, and was an introduction to all the mighty works God did there, and in
the wilderness, in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt, and their return to
the land of Canaan; and so was one necessary and important step toward all
that glory God obtained hereby, and all that good which his church received.
Thus this evil was the means of good, and the sin of Ioseph's brethren in
selling him into bondage, had a ^rai^ of good consequences attending it, and
was the occasion of more good than I have time now particularly to mention;
yea, more than can be easily reckoned up, or even conceived of.

We have another instance in the wickedness of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Pharaoh
was an instance of remarkable wickedness. He cruelly oppressed the children of
Israel, he bid open defiance to JEHOVAH, and repeatedly refused to obey him,
and regard his prophets and messengers, though they wrought many miracles and
wonders before his eyes, to convince him that they were sent by the omnipotent
governor of the world. Yea, though when in sore distress, by the hand of God,
that was heavy upon him, he repeatedly confessed his sin and promised
reformation, if God would deliver him; yet he as often hardened his heart, and
broke all his promises. And after the Israelites were go^e out of Egypt, with a
mighty hand, not only by his leave, but his urgent desire, he soon hardens his
heart, and pursues them, resolved to take revenge. What an instance of cruelty,
pride, obstinacy, da^ing presumption and impiety was Pharaoh* -- Yet God made
all his wickedness the occasion of good: Good to his people, and the glory of
his great name. For this we have God's own express declaration. (Exodus ix.^^.)
And in very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. This was the
end God had in (...) up Pharaoh, in preserving him, and suff^^^^g him to go on
and g^^w thus great in wick^^ness; that by destroying him a^ last, and
delivering his people from his oppressive hand, he might besto^ the good on his
church, he had in store for them, and fulfill his promises to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; and that in such a way as to get to himself a great name through all the
earth. And this end was answered; God triumphed gloriously in the destruction
of Pharaoh and his host, and in the salvation of his people from their hand.

Again, the sin of the Jews and Gentiles in putting our Lord Jesus Christ to
death, was the occasion of great good. The death of Christ, considered in all
it is consequences, was one of the most glorious events that ever happened; most
necessary for the good of men, and most for the glory of God. Now the death of
Christ, so full of good to man, and so much to the glory of God, was brought
about by the wickedness of man; yea, one of the greatest instances of
wickedness that ever was: And not only so, but it could be brought about no
other way. If the son of God must die, he must be put to death b^ the hands of
wicked men. Surely no christian who hopes for salvation by the death of Christ,
which was effected by the wickedness of man, can doubt but that greatest sin
has been the occasion of the greatest good.

The ^ast instance of this kind which I shall mention, is the unbelief and
obstinacy of the Jews as a people and nation, when the gospel was preached to
them after the ascension of Christ. This was the occasion of the calling of the
Gentiles, of their having the unsearchable riches of Christ preached to them:
And so being engrafted into the stock from which the Jews were broken off by
unbelief. St. Paul considers the matter in this light in the XI. chap. of his
epistle to the Romans. He says, Through their fall salvation is come to the
Gentiles. That the fal^ of them was the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them, was the riches of the Gentiles. Verses 11, 12. He speaks
of the Gentiles as having obtained mercy through their unbelief. Verse 30. And
in this view of the case, cries out in the 33. verse, O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! Thus the sin and unbelief of the Jews was the
occasion of mercy and salvation to the Gentiles. We Gentiles may now consider
ourselves as reaping the benefit of the unbelief and fall of the Jews, and this
day are in possession of the good that is come to us by that means.

Thus we have considered some instances in which great good has been brought
about by the evil of sin, according to the express declaration of the holy
scripture. I might turn you to many other instances of this kind, which I pass,
as these I have mentioned set this matter, I think, in a plain and
incontestible light.

And since God has in some instances, yea in so many, overruled the sin of
man, to bring ab^ut some great good, who can say that he does not so with
regard to every sin that men commit? Yea, have we not reason to think, and even
be sure that this is actually the case? May we not conclude, may we not be
confident, that all the sin which takes place among men from the fall of the
first created pair, to the end of the world, shall some way or other be
overruled by God to answer some good end? If God does it in one instance, why
may he not, yea why will he not, in every instance? He who is infinite in
wisdom and power, can overruled all sin for g^od, as well and as easy as any
one sin. And our not being able to see h^w he does it, or how it can be done,
is no o^j^ction at all. Surely we don't think to limit infinite wisdom and
power, by our own scanty conceptions. The instances of this recorded in
scripture, which we have been considering, are a specimen and pledge of what
God can do; and doubtless of what he actually does with respect to sin in
general, yea every instance of it that takes place. These instances on record
are a proof that sin is not in it is own nature such a thing, as that it cannot
be improved by infinite wisdom to bring about great good. And if it is not, so
in it is own nature, nothing can make it so, we have reason to think.

AND if God is wise and powerful enough, and so can make sin in general, yea
every instance of it, answer some good end; may we not suppose that he actually
does it? If God does not want wisdom and power to do it; we cannot think he
will neglect it, or suffer sin to fail of answering a good end, through want of
care and attention to this matter. No surely; it is not a matter of indifference
with God, whether sin answers a good end or a bad one, or none at all. To
suppose this, would be to suppose the infinitely holy God perfectly indifferent
about good and evil; yea, perfectly indifferent about the most interesting and
important affair in the universe* Which would be the most unworthy thought of
God, as well as the greatest absurdity.

But as it is of importance that we should all form our opinion right in this
matter, let us again turn to the bible, and see what further light we can get
there in this point. -- And here we may observe the following things: --

I. The bible leads us to look upon the GOSPEL, or the way of salvation by
Christ, as a method God has taken to bring good out of the evil of sin in
general. The gospel is founded in the sinfulness of man, and takes all it is
glory from it; and sin is the occasion of all the good that comes to man, and
all the glory that comes to God by it. The great work of the Savior of the
world, is TO BRING GOOD OUT OF EVIL. And I think, the scripture leads us to
consider the benefits of the gospel as a greater good than would have been, had
there been no sin. The scripture don't represent the work of redemption, as
what God has wrought to mend and patch up, as well as he could, a world that is
spoiled and ruined by sin; as if there would have been more good in the world,
upon the whole, if there had been no sin, and so no redemption by Christ. No,
the work of redemption is represented in scripture as contrived and laid out
before the world was made, and as the most glorious of all God's works; far
more glorious than the work of creation.

Jesus Christ is said to be ordained to the work of redemption, before the
foundation of the world. (1 Pet. i.20.) And the glorious way of salvation,
which is called the wisdom of God, is said to be ordained before the world. (1
Cor. ii.7.) Christ's church and people are said to be chosen in him before the
foundation of the World. (Ephesians. i.3, 4.) The great favor that comes to
believers by the gospel, is said to be given to them before the world began (1 Timothy 1.9.) Thus the scripture leads us to consider the work of redemption as
originally designed by God before he made the world, as his greatest and most
glorious work; in a view to which he made all things at first. Therefore all
things are said to be made for Christ. ( Col. i.16.) For by him, [i. e. Christ]
were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, -- all things were created by him, and FOR HIM.

The new creation, i. e. the work of redemption, is said to be far more
glorious than the first creation. ( Isai. lxv.17, 18.) For behold, I create new
heavens, and a new earth: And the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind, etc. Now the sin of man is the occasion of these new heavens and new
earth: For the glory of Christ and his works could not have been, had not sin
took place. Thus sin in general is the occasion of all that good which is
comprised in the work of redemption, which, according to scripture, so much
exceeds all the good which was in the first creation. The world, considered as
fallen or sinful, and redeemed by Christ, is better and far more glorious than
it was, considered as without sin, according to scripture. Thus we are taught,
that God's greatest and most glorious work, is to bring good out of evil, to
make sin in general, which is the greatest evil, the means of the greatest
good. -- I proceed to observe,

IIdly. The scripture not only teaches us, that good is brought out of sin in
general, by the work of redemption; but also, That God makes the sin and final
obstinacy of those that perish eternally, the occasion of great good. That God
designs good by this evil, and brings good out of it. This we are particularly
taught in Romans ix.22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power
known, endured with much long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? Here we are taught, that God's end in bearing with sinners, and
suffering them to go on in sin to destruction, is the manifestation of his
power and wrath: i. e. his own glory: And that he makes their sin and ruin the
occasion and means of it; and so brings good out of this evil, even their
sinfulness and ruin. And doubtless, the good obtained is greater than the evil
by which it is brought about; for we cannot reconcile it to the wisdom of God,
that he should suffer a greater evil, for the sake of a less good. If God
suffers sinners to go on to destruction, that he might hereby show his wrath,
and make his power known; then it is not only certain that God makes the sin
and ruin of those that perish, the occasion and means of his own glory; but
it is also certain, that he counts his glory so great a good, as to overbalance
all that evil which he suffers to take place, as a means of that good: So that,
upon the whole, there is more good than if there had been no evil. I say, we
are sure of this; for to suppose the contrary, is to impeach God's wisdom: For
to suffer a greater evil, for the sake of a less good, is as if one should part
with a thousand pounds for the sake of ten, or as the means of procuring one
penny. Or as if he should endure a million degrees of pain, for the sake of one
degree of pleasure; which, upon the whole, is worse than nothing at all; and is
really preferring evil to no evil, or a greater evil to a less: Which is the
same with choosing evil for evil's sake; and cannot be supposed of the wise and
holy God, without blasphemy.

Indeed, the instance of Pharaoh, which we have before considered, is a
specimen of all obstinate, impenitent sinners. As God raised him up; i. e.
suffered him to go on to such a degree of wickedness, 'till he was ripe for
destruction, that in him he might show his power, and cause his name to be
declared throughout all the earth: So he suffers all sinners that finally
perish, to go on 'till they are fitted for destruction, that he may glorify
himself in them. And it is from the instance of Pharaoh, and what God says of
him, which St. Paul mentions in the 17th verse, that he is led to say what he
does of finally impenitent sinners in general, in the text under consideration.

He who can understand God's dealings with Pharaoh, and is reconciled to his
suffering him to go on to so great a degree of wickedness, that he might
glorify himself in him, and can see God's righteousness and wisdom in bringing
this good out of Pharoah's wickedness; he will easily see how God makes the sin
of all that are finally impenitent, a means of his own glory; and suffers them
to go on to destruction, that he may answer this end. --

If any should say, Though God glorified himself by the great wickedness and
obstinacy of Pharaoh, and does so by the sin and destruction of all that
perish; yet God would be more glorified, and he would obtain a higher and
better end, if neither Pharaoh, nor any sinner went on in wickedness to final
impenitence and destruction: I say, if any should say so; I think, they would
contradict the scripture-texts we are considering, or at least deny God's
wisdom in his conduct in these instances. God says, he suffered Pharaoh to go
on to the length he did in sin, 'till he was ripe for ruin, that he might
glorify himself thereby. Now, if he would have had more glory, or as much if
Pharaoh had not gone on as he did; then God did not take the best method, and
use the best means to glorify himself by Pharaoh: And therefore did not act
wisely in seeking to glorify himself by Pharoah's obstinacy and ruin: For
wisdom consists in choosing the best means, to answer the best end. This may be
applied to finally impenitent sinners in general.

IIIdly. The scripture teaches us, that God makes ALL the sins of men, from the
beginning to the end of the world, to answer some good end. This we are
particularly taught in the 76th psalm, 10th verse. Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee: The remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

By the wrath of man we are to understand the wickedness of men in general, by
which they violently oppose God, and all that is good. It Is here said, that all
this wrath shall praise God; i. e. shall be to his honor and glory: So that
that wrath, that wickedness of man which would not answer this end, God will
effectually restrain, and not suffer to take place. So that by this scripture
we are assured, that God is glorified by all the sin that is in the world: God
makes it all the occasion of this good. And the reason why God lays the
restraints on men that he does, and so prevents there being more sin than there
is, is because more sin would not answer this end: For God will have nothing in
his world but what he can bring good out of, and turn to his own glory.

Another text which I think is full to this purpose, is that noted one (Genesis
iii.15.) AND IT SHALL BRUISE THY HEAD. i. e. The seed of the woman shall bruise
the serpent's head. Which is as much as to say, that Christ shall utterly and
completely disappoint and defeat the devil, in what he had done in introducing
sin into the world. But this he would not do, if he did not turn all the sin
which the devil had been the means of bringing into the world, into good, by
making it the occasion of more, or at least as much good, as there would have
been if there had been no sin. If there is one instance of sin, which is not
turned to good, the devil is not herein disappointed and defeated; but is
gratified finally: His end is answered, and it is so far just as he would have
it. So far he is not conquered by Christ; but he gains his point, and is
conqueror himself. If the devil has in any degree marred and spoiled the world,
and made it upon the whole worse than it would have been if he (...) not
introduced sin into it, notwithstanding what Christ has done to defeat him;
then he has so far gained his point, and succeeded in the thing he aimed at:
And therefore so far he is not defeated, but conquers and reigns.

So that these words hold forth this truth, in the strongest light; viz. That
all the sin in the world, is by Christ made the occasion of good; yea that
Christ will make sin the occasion of so much good, that the world shall be at
least as good a world, By the WORLD* is not meant, this earth, or things in the
present state only; but the WHOLE UNIVERSE through all it is duration.
as if sin had never been introduced: So that satan shall not gain his end in
one point, in the least degree; but shall be wholly defeated.

This is the way in which Christ bruises the serpent's head, viz. by bringing
good out of evil. And the more good he makes sin the occasion of, the more
effectually is satan defeated: The greater is Christ's conquest, and the more
he triumphs over the devil. If Christ is able to make sin the occasion of so
much good, as that God shall be more glorified, and this be a much better
world, than if sin had never come into it; this will be the most deadly and
dreadful bruise to satan's head, that can be brought upon it. This will be an
overthrow that the devil dreads above all things. To see God greatly glorified,
and the world made much better by sin, by which satan sought to dishonor God,
and spoil his world; yea to see sin made the means of making God more glorious,
and this a better world than could have been if sin had not been introduced: So
that sin becomes the occasion of something directly opposite to that which
satan aims at, and seeks to accomplish: and which he above all things hates,
and desires to destroy: For satan, I say, to see things turn out so, will be
above all things crossing and destructive to him; and must be the most
effectual, the greatest and most glorious conquest over him that can be. This
is to bruise his head in the highest degree. There is nothing the devil dreads
so much as this; and therefore to prevent things coming to this pass, he has
been exerting all his powers, and making unwearied attempts in all ages. And
therefore we may be sure Christ will accomplish this, if he can. He will so
bring things about, that God shall be more glorified, and this shall be, upon
the whole, a much better world, than if the devil had never attempted to
dethrone God, and ruin man: And will make sin, by which the devil sought to
spoil this world, and rob God of his honor, the occasion and means of bringing
this about. I say, we may be sure Christ will do this IF HE CAN, and that to a
wonderful and even infinite degree. And surely no christian can doubt of his
power to do it. For this end he came into the world, and became the seed of the
woman; for this he hung and died on the cross, by which he spoiled
principalities and powers, and triumphed over them. By this he will effectually
and gloriously destroy the works of the devil, and put all his enemies under
his feet.

Thus we see how the scripture represents God as making sin the occasion of
good; even so as hereby to bring about more good, than would have been without
it: And that every instance of sin answers some good end, by the wise,
overruling hand of God. The matter seems to be abundantly plain according to
scripture.

But there may be some yet stumbled at this; it being strange and unaccountable
to them, that this should be, upon the whole, a better world, than it would
have been, had not sin and misery entered into it: It being to them one of the
greatest paradoxes, that That, which in itself is the greatest evil, should be
productive of the greatest good; the occasion of so much glory to God, and good
to the world.

But such, if any there are, are desired to consider the following things.

First, Our not being able to see how this is, or can be done, is no argument
that God cannot do it. Surely infinite power and wisdom can do this, though
infinitely beyond us. Doubtless God knows how to do this, Who disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. Who
takes the wis^ in their own craftiness: And carries the counsel of the
froward headlong. (Job v.12, 13.) This is the peculiar glory of God's wisdom,
that it is able to bring such good, out of such evil.

Secondly, Let such consider, how shocking and dreadful the thought must be, to
suppose, that God has permitted that to come into the world, which has in a
measure spoiled it; so that he can by no means remove the evil, recover the
damage, and make his world as good as it was before! How could God look on and
see this, and be unconcerned, and possess his infinite felicity? Surely this
must grieve him to the heart, in a literal sense, and make him heartily repent,
that he had made a world for satan to destroy; to destroy, so that he never
could perfectly recover it!

Should some one of a nice and elegant taste, build a stately palace, and
furnish it with every thing pleasant and delightful: And when he had done, his
enemy should come and deface it, and throw it into the utmost confusion and
deformity; and place, in the midst of it, something exceeding ugly to the view,
and most offensive and loathsome to the smell: and he should be unable to
remove it, or so contrive to make it answer some good end to himself, as
totally to disappoint his enemy; surely this must be very grievous to him.
Instead of beauty and pleasure, he must endure the mortification of a most ugly
sight, and nauseous, abominable smell; while he has no way to help himself. He
would wish a thousand times, he had never struck a stroke to that building; but
wish in vain. Now if we suppose God's world is, upon the whole, the worse for
sin, do we not represent him to be in the case of such an one, or rather
infinitely worse!

Thirdly, We would do well to consider, whether if we don't allow that every
instance of sin is the occasion of some great good to over-balance it; o^
whether by supposing, that on the whole, the world is worse for sin, we do not
really set something up above God, to rule with him, and even over him, in some
degree.

According to the scripture representation of this matter, which we have been
considering, God is supreme. He is in the heavens, and has done whatsoever
pleased him. He does his will in the army of heaven* and among the inhabitants
of the earth: And NONE CAN STAY HIS HAND. He has all things in his hand, and
orders all events in his world; and lets nothing come into it, or take place
there, but what is to answer some good end, and serves to make the world
better, more perfect and excellent than it would have been without it.

But if si^ has, by coming into the world, marred and spoiled it, so that it
will eternally be a worse, or less perfect and excellent world, than it would
have been if sin had not entered; then surely sin did not come in by God's
permission: but it was thrust in by some one so powerful, that God could not
prevent it; and therefore so far was, and continues to be, above and superior
to the Most High!

The devil designed to rob God of his honor, and spoil the world he had made,
by introducing sin into it; and so to outdo God, and be above him in this
instance; and, as it were, take it out of God's hands, and reign in it himself.
And so far as God, upon the whole, looses any honor by what the devil has done,
so far as this world is, upon the whole, worse, so far the devil has obtained
his end, has outdone the Most High, and reigns and triumphs, and will do so to
all eternity. Surely none would knowingly represent God in such a dishonorable
light, and ascribe such honor and power to the devil and wicked men; but would
much rather say, ALL honor and power belong unto God; and rejoice that God is
above men and devils in the thing wherein they deal most proudly: And herein
discovers himself to be greater than all others, that would desire to be gods.

Having thus endeavored to illustrate and confirm this proposition, I shall
now make some reflections on what has been said, by way of inference.

I. This view of the matter helps us to a short, easy and satisfactory way of
accounting for God's suffering SIN to come into the world, and permitting it to
prevail and abound as it has done. And indeed, it cannot be accounted for in
any other way.

Some of the heathen, in order to account for sin's coming into the world, have
supposed it to be governed by two opposite independent principles or beings, a
good one, and an evil one: And that all sin and evil is from the evil being,
which the good being cannot prevent; and so has no hand, even in permitting sin.

And some who have the advantage of divine revelation, give but a very little
better account of the matter; while they suppose God could not prevent sin
taking place among his creatures: That God made a number of intelligent
creatures, that he could not control and keep from sin, if he continued them
in being, and free agents, and treated them according to the nature and
capacity of such. And so the world has been in a great measure spoiled and
ruined by SIN, introduced by the Free agency of the creature, which could not
be restrained and controlled by God. But how this can be reconciled with the
scripture, or the wisdom, supremacy, and infinite happiness of God, I think
they have never yet shown.

But if God saw that sin's entering into the world, would be the best means of
answering the greatest and best ends, would be the occasion of the greatest
good, a means of the world's becoming better, more excellent and glorious than
otherwise it would be; then it is easy to see why he should determine to suffer
it to take place, even though at the same time he knew how to prevent it, and
could easily have done it. For the sake of the great good, which God saw SIN
would be the ^ccasion of, by his disposal, he was quite willing to suffer it to
take place among his creatures, and therefore permitted it.

OBJECTION. Is not this to make God do evil that good may come, which St. Paul
greatly condemns in the text?

ANSWER. By no means. Surely God does not do evil in permitting his creatures
to sin, but on the contrary, acts wisely and holily herein. The creature does
the evil, and not GOD. The creature's aims and ends in committing sin, are
wicked and vile; but God's aims and designs in permitting the creature thus to
act, are wise and holy. Therefore God does not do evil that good may come; but
all He does is good.

OBJ. But does not this represent God as willing and choosing SIN, and so taking
pleasure in it? ^o suppose which, would be the highest blasphemy.

ANS. This does not represent God as taking pleasure in sin, and willing and
choosing it for it is own sake, in itself considered; but he is willing sin
should take place, for the sake of something else, viz. The great good that it
will be the occasion of producing. This is nothing contrary to God's hating sin
infinitely, considered as it is in itself, in it is own nature, as consisting in
the disposition, views and aims of the sinner; as such, it is the abominable
thing which God hates.

There seems to be no great difficulty in making this distinction. We are
obliged to make the same, with regard to natural evil, or pain and suffering.
This is as truly (though not in the same sense and degree, I say, as really
contrary to God's nature and will, in itself considered, as moral evil. Yet God
is so far reconciled to it, for the sake of the good to be obtained by it, that
he is quite willing it should take place; yea, inflicts it in millions of
instances, with his own hand. Thus it pleased God to bruise his own son, to put
him to the most amazing pain and torture; not because he delights in pain and
misery, in itself considered; but he chose thus to put his son to pain, for the
sake of the good to be answered thereby. In this view of things, God was quite
willing his son should suffer, and was pleased with it. Whereas, if there had
been no good to be answered thereby, it would have been infinitely contrary to
God's nature and will, that his son should be put to such extreme pain. Thus
the permission of sin can be accounted for, as easily as we account for the
sufferings of Christ, and in the same way: viz. That God chose they both should
take place, and therefore suffered them to take place, for the sake of the
great good they are the means of.

If any should say, seeing God chose that his own son should be put to the most
extreme sufferings, and looked on and was pleased with it: And seeing he will
inflict such amazing pain on the damned to all eternity; it seems that the pain
and misery of his creatures suits him, is agreeable to his will, and he really
takes pleasure and delight in it. I say, if any one should argue in this form,
he would talk as consistently, and as much to the purpose, as he who says, That
seeing God chose to permit sin, therefore sin is agreeable to his will, and he
delights in it. -- Both may be easily answered thus: -- God wills neither sin
nor misery for their own sake; they being, in themselves considered, abstracted
from all connections and consequences, most contrary to his nature and will:
And was there no good end to be answered by sin or misery, God would have
forever kept them both out of his world; but since they become the occasion and
means of so much good, he suffers them both to take place.

If God had no good end to answer by the sin of man, he would have taken
eff^ctual care to keep him from sin: But as he intended to make this evil the
occasion of so much good, he willingly suffered it to take place. GOD doubtless
sought a GOOD in his determination to permit sin. And if this was not a good,
which he intended to make sin the occasion of, and which could not be so well
answered any other way, and for the sake of which he permitted it; then he
permitted it ^s being in itself a good, and so for it is own sake. This doctrine
therefore, that God permits sin for the sake of the good he will make it the
occasion of, i^ so far from representing God as taking pleasu^e in sin, and
willing and choosing it should take place for it is own sake, that it is the only
truth that can prevent his being so represented. -- If therefore one should
say, "The works of God are all very GOOD." And another should object, "that if
so, then God is an EVIL being," he would talk with as much reason and
propriety, as those who make the objection above.

There is no inconsistence in supposing, that God may hate a thing as it is in
itself, and considered simply as evil, and yet that it may be his will it
should come to pass, considering all circumstances -- God don't will sin as
sin, or for the sake of any thing evil; though it be his pleasure so to order
things, that he permitting, sin will come to pass, for the sake of the great
good that by his disposal shall be the consequence. His willing to order things
so that evil should come to pass, for the sake of the contrary good, is no
argument that he don't hate evil, as evil: And if so, then it is no reason why
he may not reasonably forbid evil as evil, and punish it as such. President
EDWARDS on freedom of will. p. 262, etc.




II. This view of things affords matter of support and comfort in the darkest
times, when sin prevails and abounds most in the world.

He who rules supreme in the heavens, and has all things, even the heart of
kings and all men in his hand; who is the father of the creation, and has a
heart full of benevolence ^o the universe, and is therefore steadily and wisely
seeking it is good by all he does, and by all he permits; He will bring good out
of all this evil: and therefore permits it because it is the best, the wisest
way to accomplish his benevolent designs. What reason then has the benevolent
heart to sink and despond, though sin abounds and threatens to bear all down
before it; and every thing is to his view in the utmost disorder and confusion?
Let such confide in infinite wisdom and goodness, and rejoice at rest. Let them
cast all their care on the LORD, and trust in him: Trust, I say, in the LORD,
and he will bring it to pass. All things, thus under God's direction and
government, are well, ordered in the best manner, to answer the best ends: and
God will bring more good out of those things, which to us have the most dark
and threatening aspect, than our hearts can easily devise or wish; though how
and in what way, is to us perfectly inconceivable.

They who have a sincere regard for God's honor, and a tender concern for his
church and interest in the world, need some special support in dark and evil
times. When satan and wicked men prevail, and the world lies, as it were, in
ruins, and looks no more like God's world; and the interest which they have
most at heart, and is in a sense their ALL, seems to be almost given up and
lost. I say, when things are in such a situation, the hearts of God's people
must sink and be disconsolate, if they had no special and sure support. But
this they have in the truth before us. Though God is a God that hides himself,
and his way is in the sea, his path in the great waters, and his footsteps are
not known: Though, in this respect, they walk in darkness, and have no light; yet
they may trust in the name of the LORD, and stay themselves upon their God;
being assured that the wrath of man shall praise him: And the remainder of
wrath he will restrain. Yea, they may, even in such times, REJOICE; rejoice
that the LORD reigns, who looks on, and suffers things to take the course
they do, because he intends to bring GOOD out of all this evil. Let Israel then
rejoice in him that made him: Let the children of Zion be joyful in their KING.
AMEN.

SERMON II. SIN'S being the Occasion of GREAT GOOD, no Excuse for Sin, or
Encouragement to it.
ROMANS III.5. -- 8. But if our Unrighteousness commend the Righteousness of God,
what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? (I speak as a Man,
etc.


DOCTRINE.
THOUGH sin is the occasion of great good; yet this affords no excuse for sin,
or the least encouragement to it.

PROP. I. Sin may be, and actually is, the occasion of great good.

PROP. II. This affords no excuse for sin, or encouragement to it.

In the preceding discourse, the first proposition was proved and illustrated.
The second now comes under our consideration.

This proposition, I am sensible, is greatly opposed by many. We often hear it
said by one and another, If sin is the occasion of so much good, if it is, on
the whole, such an advantage to the universe; if God is hereby glorified, and
the world is, all things considered, better than if sin had never entered into
it: Then sin is no crime, and men have all imaginable encouragement to sin,
etc. It seems strange that such persons can be ignorant that they are the very
successors of those, who made the objection St. Paul is confronting in our
text; and are risen up in their stead, to oppose Christ and his apostles. That
they may be sensible of this, and that such language, which militates so
directly against all God's ways to a sinful world, may be no more heard, and
their mouths effectually stopped, is what I am now endeavoring.

I hope therefore, I shall have the serious and close attention of all my
hearers, while I endeavor to confirm and illustrate this truth, and set it in
as clear and striking a light as I am able.

And I shall attempt this by calling in the united help both of scripture and
reason.

FIRST, I desire it may be observed, that the truth of this proposition is
clearly and abundantly taught in scripture.

The holy bible, the best of books, the best, and only infallible guide to us
fallen creatures, in this dark, sinful world, in these important matters,
affords us sufficient light and help in the point before us: And therefore in
enquiring into it, I shall endeavor to keep your eyes on this book, and build
all my arguments upon it. To the law and to the testimony: If they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. (Isai.
viii.20.)

The scripture not only teaches us in general, that sin is most unreasonable,
and altogether inexcusable; most offensive to God, and of most dangerous
consequence, pernicious and destructive to those who commit it: I say, it not
only teaches this; but also, that those very instances of sin, which have been
the occasion of the greatest good, were, at the same time, very offensive and
provoking to God, and brought his awful judgments upon those who were guilty of
it; and in many instances proved the means of their destruction.

What says, the scripture of the sin of Ioseph's brethren? -- Though God meant
it unto good, and it was the occasion of so much good, their own conscience,
which was the candle of the Lord, God's witness in their breasts, accused them
of guilt, and charged it home upon them, when they were in distress. ( Genesis
xlii.21, 22.) And even after they saw and shared in some of the great good that
came of this evil, they don't excuse themselves for what they had done; neither
did their father Jacob, to his dying day, excuse them. But the guilt of this
sin, still lies on their consciences; and they, by the direction of Jacob their
father (which is as though God had directed them) go and confess their sin to
Joseph, and ask his forgiveness. ( Genesis l.15, 16, 17.) And though Joseph forgave
them, so far as he had any c^ncern with it; yet he plainly intimates, that they
were very guilty in God's sight, and must have pardon of him, or they would be
undone. (See verses 19, 20, 21.) And Joseph said to his brethren, fear not: For
am I in the place of God? etc. As if he had said, "Fear no evil from me; I
shall not take vengeance on you, for your injurious treatment of me; I will not
put myself in God's place: Vengeance belongs unto God, and therefore I will
not avenge myself. But you had need to see to it that your peace is made with
God, or you may expect to feel his vengeance."

We have another instance of this in Pharaoh. His sin, as we have heard, was
the occasion of great good. Yet his conduct is represented as exceeding vile
and criminal; most offensive and provoking to God, and that for which he was at
last dreadfully destroyed.

And the Jews putting our Lord Jesus Christ to death, which was the occasion of
such infinite good, is represented as the most horrid crime, infinitely
provoking to God, and of destructive consequence to them as a nation. Of Judas,
who had a great hand in this by betraying him unto them, our Lord says, It had
been good for that man, if he had not been born. (Mat. xxvi.24.) His own
conscience soon felt the weight of his crime; and in the utmost horror he
confessed, he had sinned in betraying innocent blood; cast the money he had
received as the reward of his iniquity, down in the temple, and went away and
hanged himself; and went straight to hell, which the scripture speaks of as his
own place. (Act. i.25.) And there he now is, weltering in that burning lake, as
a due reward for that horrid crime. It avails him nothing to plead, "That thus
it must be that the scripture might be fulfilled." It does not in the least
extenuate his crime, nor is it any relief to him, that the innocent blood which
he betrayed, washes away the sin of the world, and has become the salvation of
thous^^ds. And the Jews as a nation, by the hand they had in this, brought upon
themselves the high displeasure of heaven, and most severe and awful judgments;
which I have not room here particularly to mention.

Thus we see that the sins of men, which, according to scripture, God
overrules for the greatest good, are at the same time exceeding criminal, and
very provoking to God; and greatly expose men to God's wrath, and often bring
it upon them. From which it appears, that God being judge, sin's becoming the
occasion of the greatest good, does not at all extenuate or lessen the crime;
or render those that commit it the less guilty, or afford any excuse to them;
and therefore, that there is not from hence the least encouragement to sin. We
here see how God looks upon the matter, and how he will treat men in such
cases: And we are sure his judgment is according to truth; and consequently,
that the proposition we are upon, is true. Therefore they who think that if
good comes of sin, so far sin is excusable, and there is no harm or danger in
committing it, are under a great and sad delusion.

But, if it be needful, yet farther light may be offered, in this matter, from
the holy scripture. This will appear to all that will observe, That it is the
vileness and inexcusable criminalness of sin, and the ill-desert of the sinner
that is the very occasion, in many instances, of its answering the good end it
does, according to the account the bible gives of the matter. So that if the
sin was in any degree excusable, and did not render the person that is guilty
of it infinitely ill deserving, and so justly expose him to the dreadful wrath
of God, it could not answer the good end it does. This is plain, because the
good end that sin answers, in many instances, is the display of God's glory, by
his pouring out his wrath on the sinner, and punishing him for it. -- We have
an instance of this in Pharaoh. One great and good end answered by his sin, was
by God's taking occasion thereby to show his power, and cause his name to be
declared th^^ughout all the earth, by pouring out his wrath on Pharaoh, for his
sin: And therefore if Pharaoh had not deserved this wrath for his sin, this end
could not have been answered by it. So we are told ( Romans ix.22.) that the
great good that is answered by sinners obstinacy and final impenitence, is by
God's showing his wrath, and making his power known in punishing them eternally
for their wickedness. What if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power
known, etc. If sin was not infinitely criminal, and did not render those guilty
of it infinitely ill-deserving, it would not fit them for that destruction in
which God shows his wrath, and makes his power known.

Surely all will see how, in this case, the scripture unites the ill-desert of
the sinner, and his destruction for sin, with the good end answered by it;
unites them, I say, so that they cannot be separated. So that to say, sin's
answering a good end, renders it excusable and harmless, is expressly, in words,
to separate what God has joined together: Yea, things which are, in their own
nature, inseperably united, so as necessarily to imply each other. If God's
glorifying himself by punishing sin, renders sin harmless, and not deserving of
punishment; then here is the greatest contradiction. For if sin deserves no
punishment, God cannot glorify himself in punishing it. So that, according to
this, by the good end's being answered, it is at the same time, by it is being
answered, absolutely defeated and not answered.

Thus full of c^ntradiction and absurdity is such a notion as this, viz. That
if sin is the occasion of good, it deserves no punishment. And it is directly
contrary to those scriptures which represent the ill-desert of sin as
essential, in order to answer the good end it does; and teach, that sin becomes
the occasion of good, in many inst^^ces, by it is rendering men the proper
subjects of divine wrath: Which it could not do, if it is being the occasion of
good, rendered it harmless, and men excusable for committing it.

But though the scripture is thus clear and express in this matter, yet there may
be some, who don't see into the reason of it: They cannot see, why sin's being
the occasion of so much good, does not represent it as harmless, and afford
encouragement to sin, that those good ends may be answered. I shall therefore,

SECONDLY, give the REASONS of it, and show why it is so: Still directing your
eye to the holy scripture, as our help and guide.

And here I ask your attention to the following particulars:

I. The good ends answered by sin, is no excuse for it, nor does in the least
extenuate it is guilt, because sin is still the same in it is own nature, as if
it answered no good end. Sin, as it consists in contradiction to truth and
reason, and the law of God, is in it is own nature most unreasonable, ugly and
hateful, and therefore criminal and inexcusable; and the consequences of it,
whether good or bad, alter not the nature of it. Though sin be the occasion of
never so much good, yet it is in it is own nature a contradiction to truth and
reason; and therefore is in itself odious, vile and criminal. Sin is therefore,
considered in it is own nature, as consisting in the unreasonable disposition,
views and aims of the sinner, infinitely hateful to God; and he is at an
infinite distance from feeling any temptation or encouragement to it. And
therefore all the good God brings out of sin, does not in the least abate his
hatred of it, or make him look upon it a whit the less criminal; and
consequently does not at all abate his anger at the sinner, and disposition to
punish for sin. And if men looked upon things in this light (as they do, so far
as they see the truth) and had an answerable disposition of mind, they would
not hate sin the less, because of the good that it is the occasion of, or
imagine themselves at all the more excusable therefore on this account. Moreover,

II. It is not owing to any good tendency in sin, in itself considered, that it
becomes the occasion of good. As sin's being made the occasion of good, does
not change the nature of it, so neither does it alter it is natural tendency.
The natural tendency of sin, is to the greatest evil; it is big with infinite
mischief. Sin aims and tends to dishonor God, and dethrone him; to fill the
world with the utmost disorder, confusion and misery; yea, even to spoil and
destroy the universe: So as to make the whole, both creator and creatures,
infinitely worse than nothing. Sin tends to make God infinitely dishonorable,
and infinitely miserable, and would actually do so, if God was not able to
prevent it. And it tends to make the creature eternally miserable, and it is
tendency to this is so great and strong, that this would be the infallible
consequence, if God did not interpose and prevent.

Now, God's overruling this, which tends to so much evil, which has an
unalterable and almost infinite tendency to infinite evil, does not make this
tendency to evil a whit more excusable, or the less vile and mischievous, as it
is in itself; and therefore in no degree removes the guilt and ill-desert of
it. No thanks to sin, that any good comes of it: This is no argument in it is
favor, as it is not owing to it is harmlesness or good tendency in itself, but
to the overruling hand of God, who by his infinite wisdom and unconquerable
power, turns that to good, which in itself tends only to evil, and is full of
deadly poison.

If the conduct of a man toward his neighbor, has a most direct tendency in
itself to hurt and undo him, though the mischief is prevented by the overruling
providence of God, or the kind interposition of some wise and able friend; yea,
is by such interposition turned into the greatest good to him; this does not
render such conduct in any degree the more harmless or excusable, or in the
least lessen the guilt and ill-desert of it. This truth I suppose every one
discerns, who is come to the years of discretion, it being a plain dictate of
common sense: And I see no difficulty in applying it to the case before us. If
the person's conduct toward his neighbor, so full of mischief, and tending
directly to his ruin, looks not the better in itself, and is not in the least
more excusable, for it is being overruled to the good of his neighbor; then
surely, the good which God brings out of sin, affords no excuse for sin, which
is in it is own nature and tendency, infinitely mischievous, and full of deadly
evil. I proceed to observe,

III. As sin, in it is own nature and tendency, is as odious, vile and
mischievous, as if no good came of it; so the disposition, aim and end of the
sinner, is as hateful and vile, as contrary to God and all good, as if no good
came of the sin he commits.

As sin in its own nature tends to mischief, so the sinner, who is the author
of it, aims at that which is unreasonable, mischievous and destructive. If the
sinner could have his will, none of the good which God brings out of sin would
follow, but all the mischief imaginable. St. Paul tells us, "The carnal mind is
ENMITY against God. ( Romans viii.7.) The disposition of the sinner, the whole
bent of his mind is in opposition to God, and his glory, and all the good that
God is seeking. Now the disposition and aim of the sinner is not the better,
because God prevents the mischief sought taking place, and turns all into good;
but the sinner's disposition and end in what he does, is as vile, inexcusable
and deserving of God's wrath, as if no good had followed.

Thus, Ioseph's brethren thought evil against their brother; and were disposed
to injure him. They cared not for his welfare, but aimed to put him into a
state of servitude and misery, and thus prevent his dreams coming to pass.
Therefore their disposition and aim in what they did, was most unreasonable,
and contrary to God's design, and so to all that good, which their selling him
was the means of. And now, who can have a better thought of the conduct of
Ioseph's brethren, or esteem their crime in selling him at all the less,
because of the good which God brought out of it, so contrary to their
intentions.

We are not wont, in the least to excuse men for their bad designs, and their
attempts to do mischief, because they are not able to bring their designs to
pass; and the mischief they aim at and attempt to do, does not actually follow.
Yea, if their disposition and endeavor to do mischief, is the occasion of
good; this don't excuse them in our view.

One Verenus gave his neighbor a dose of poison, with an intent to take away
his life; and thought he had effected what he aimed at: But, contrary to his
expectation and desire, by means of the skilful application of an able
physician, the poisonous dose did him no hurt; but on the contrary, became the
mean^ of removing a dangerous disease he labored under, and so of lengthening
out his life many years. But no thanks to Verenus for all this: Not one was
found, who excused him on the account of the good his neighbor had received.
No, the whole heighbourhood cried out of him as a guilty, murderous wretch. And
verily in this they spoke the common sense of all mankind; for common-sense
teaches mankind, in judging how far any one is criminal, not to determine this
so much by what is the consequence of what he has done, but by the deed itself
which he has done, and his aim and design therein. And if sin is in its own
nature, as ugly and hateful; and in its own natural tendency, as pernicious and
destructive to the universe; and the disposition of the sinner is as vile and
criminal, as contrary to God and all good, as if no good came of it: Then there
is as much reason why it should be hated, detested and abhorred; why we should
be ashamed of it, humbled for it, and renounce it for ever, as if God did not
overruled it for good. And in this, GODLY SORROW essentially consists^ Let the
christian consult his own heart, and he will doubtless find, that it is in this
view of sin he repents, and lies in the dust before God.

Therefore, whatever GOOD comes of sin, it tends not in the least to prevent
godly sorrow, as some have imagined.




IV. Though every sin is made the occasion of great good, yet this affords not
the least encouragement to sin; because all do not share in this good; and no
one that lives in allowed sin, has any evidence that it will be the occasion of
good to him; but has reason greatly to fear the contrary.

There are multitudes to whom sin is never the occasion of any good; but it
proves to them an infinite evil, even their eternal undoing. They are not the
better for all the good that God brings out of sin. They have no benefit of the
good which their own sins are the occasion of; but sin proves to them (what it
is in itself, and in its natural tendency) infinitely mischievous and
destructive.

Thus it was to Pharaoh. His wickedness was the occasion of great good; but he
had none of the benefit of it. His sin was as pernicious and destructive to
him, as if it had answered no good end at all. This was the occasion of his
dreadful overthrow, and no doubt, of his eternal perdition. This was the case
with Judas: He shared in none of the good his sin was the occasion of, but
perished in his wickedness. And this is true of every finally impenitent
sinner. They see not when good comes, and have no part or lot in this matter;
but by their sin become vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

And no one that allows himself in sin, has any evidence that this will not be
his case. Such have no reason to determine but that every sin they commit will
cost them infinitely dear, as they may suffer God's wrath for it to all
eternity. And this they have all reason to fear and expect, as the way of
allowed sin is the way to destruction; as really so, as if sin never answered
any good end. Yea, they know not but the next sin they commit will be their
eternal undoing, as it may provoke God to swear in his wrath, that they shall
never enter into his rest; to give them up to inevitable ruin.

Seeing then, the way of sin is the way to destruction, and none that allow
themselves in sin have any evidence, or any reason to expect, that sin will
turn to their good; but have the greatest reason to fear and expect the
contrary; they have no encouragement to sin, because God does overruled all sin
so as to make it the occasion of good: For what is this to them, so long as, so
far as appears, they are like to have no part nor lot in it? Yea,

V. They are in the utmost danger of having sin become an unspeakably greater
evil to them, than if God had not made it the occasion of so much good.

What God has done to bring good out of the evil of sin, makes sin vastly more
dreadful to those that continue in it, than it would have been had not God done
this. Their having the offers of salvation by Christ, in consequence of this,
will render their continuance in sin much more dreadful than otherwise it would
be. And the good that sin is the occasion of by being a means of God's glory,
and the advancement of the happiness of the blessed, will greatly aggravate
their misery who continue in sin; and make it of vastly more awful consequence
to them, than if none of this good had been brought out of sin.

This is evident; for the more God is glorified, the more his perfections are
discovered to intelligencies, the more miserable they must be, who are doomed
to the eternal hatred and anger of this God; for the more they see of God, the
more dreadful his wrath will be to them. And the more happiness the blessed
enjoy, the more sensible the damned will be of what they have lost by sin; and
consequently the more miserable.

Satan will doubtless be eternally more miserable, than if God had not taken
occasion, by his introducing sin into the world to glorify himself, and make
this a better world than it was before. So all men that continue in sin to
final impenitence, will be more miserable, the more good their sin is made the
occasion of: So that this will be not only no good to them, but an infinite
evil.

Now surely, that which makes the continuance in sin infinitely more dreadful
than otherwise it would have been, gives it a more deadly sting, and so makes
it more dangerous and awful, can be no encouragement to continuance in sin; but
on the contrary, the greatest imaginable discouragement.

VI. God's bringing the greatest good out of the evil of sin, gives no
encouragement or license to sin, because the method God has taken to do this is
so contrived, that at the same time it makes sin the occasion of good, it
serves to show the infinite hatefulness and ill-desert of sin, and the awful
consequences of it to the impenitent sinner.

The greatest good that comes by sin, is brought about by the sufferings and
death of Jesus Christ, the son of God. In this way the serpent's head is
bruised, the works of the devil are destroyed, man is saved and God is
glorified. The death of Christ redeems the world, and is the foundation of the
new creation, which so much exceeds the old, by which the world is so much
better and more glorious than it would have been if sin had never entered. Now
by the sufferings and death of Christ, God has discovered his hatred of sin,
his inflexible resolution to punish it, and the dreadfulness of his wrath, and
so the awful consequence of perishing in sin, and set them in a most clear and
striking light. God has showed his strict and awful justice, his inflexible
resolution to punish sin; so that he will by no means clear the guilty, by
punishing his own son, when he espoused the cause of sinners, and stood in
their place. And in the sufferings of the son of God, is shown the dreadfulness
of God's wrath; and so the awful consequence of continuing in sin: For if these
things are done in the green tree, what will be done in the dry? Thus God has
contrived that the very method he has taken to bring infinite good out of sin,
should be above any thing else a means of discovering how infinitely hateful
and criminal sin is; and how certain and awful is the punishment of it: And so
exhibit the greatest discouragement to sin, and the strongest motives to
holiness.

God has given a more bright and affecting manifestation to the world, of his
hatred of sin; of the infinite ill-desert of it, and how destructive to the
impenitent sinner, in the death of Christ, than could have been given in any
other way. And now, how can God's thus making sin the occasion of good, be any
excuse for sin, or afford the least encouragement to it? Surely, every
considerate person must own, that G^^'s thus bringing good out of sin, is so
far from rendering sin excusable, or affording any encouragement to it; that
hereby he has rendered sin most inexcusable, and done that, which tends above
any thing else, to deter men from it.

Mankind have now, as I may say, infinitely more to teach them God's hatred of
sin, and the infinite punishment it deserves, the certainty of God's punishing
it, and the dreadfulness of his wrath, than they would have had, had he not
redeemed the world by Christ. And does this encourage men in sin? Surely no --
nothing could have been better contrived to make men stand in awe, and sin not.
The grace of God that brings salvation from sin, and makes sin, the means of
infinite good by the death of Christ, is so far from giving the least
encouragement to sin, that it in the strongest manner, teaches men to deny all
ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world. ( Tit. ii.12.)

VII. The good that God brings out of sin, can be no encouragement to commit
sin, because as far as a man is inclined to sin, so far his heart is opposite
to that good which God brings out of sin: And on the other hand, as far as a
person delights in, and has a heart to seek and promote that good which God
brings out of sin, so far he has a heart to hate and forsake sin, and practice
holiness.

It is therefore one of the greatest contradictions to suppose, that the good
which God brings out of sin, should be an inducement or encouragement to commit
sin. For this is for a man to take encouragement to commit sin, from holy views
and ends; or to love and choose sin, out of love to holiness: Which surely is
the greatest absurdity and contradiction imaginable. It Is the same as to say,
the more holy a man is, the more he is inclined to sin; or the more he is like
God, the more he resembles the devil!

The good that God brings out of sin, suits and pleases his heart; and
therefore it is a good, agreeable to infinite holiness, as what that acquiesces
in and seeks. And as far as men are pleased with, value and seek that good; so
far they are conformed to infinite holiness, i. e. are themselves so far holy:
And therefore so far hate sin, and renounce it: So far they are dead to sin,
sin is destroyed in them. Now, what a contradiction is it to say that that
which destroys sin, and roots it out of the heart, is at the same time a motive
and encouragement to sin; So far as a man sincerely desires and seeks the good
which God brings out of sin, as what suits his heart; so far he acts from right
motive, and a right end: And therefore so far is right, i. e. in the exercise
of holiness; and consequently so far hates and renounces sin, yea cannot sin.
How then can this promote sin, and be an encouragement to it?

St. Paul argues in this manner, in answer to the same question we are upon. (
Romans vi.1, 2.) What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid! (says he) How shall we that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein? Q. D. "This is an absolute impossibility. So far as you see and
seek the glory of God in the exercise of his grace; so far you are dead to sin,
sin is killed and destroyed in you: For the nature and tendency of sin is to
dishonor God, and abuse and trample on his grace. How then can we that are
dead to sin, as we are, if we desire God's glory in the exercise of his grace,
live any longer therein? This would be to seek to destroy the very thing, we
are at the same time seeking to promote; which is the greatest contradiction.
As well may we talk of a dead man's performing the functions of life: Yea, as
well may the actions of life spring from death, as their foundation and cause;
and so a man live, purely because he is dead. --

The carnal mind, the heart of the sinner, is enmity against God; and so is an
enemy to the glory of God, and that happiness which consists in holiness, which
God makes sin the occasion of. The heart of the sinner, I say, desires not this
good, but is an enemy to it; and consequently the sinner never does any thing
with a true design and desire to promote it. Therefore, though sin is the means
of promoting this good; yet this neither is, nor can be any inducement to a man
to commit sin; unless a man can desire to promote that which he hates, and is
above all things averse to; and out of a sincere desire to promote it, does
that, which has a most direct tendency to the contrary, and is the most perfect
exercise of enmity against it.

Thus we see it is absolutely impossible in the nature of things, that a man
should do evil that good may come; or commit sin, that he may promote that good
which God makes sin the occasion of: And therefore impossible in the nature of
things, that the good which God brings out of sin, should be any encouragement
to sin. Because so far as any one is a friend to that good, and desires and
seeks it; so far he is an enemy to sin, and necessarily avoids it: And so far
as he is disposed to sin, and loves it; so far he pays no regard to the good
God brings out of it; but is an enemy to it. If therefore any one pretends,
that he does evil that good may come of it; that the good which God brings out
of sin is a motive and encouragement to him to commit sin; we are sure it is
only a pretense, and cannot be true: But he commits sin, because he loves it,
and seeks a good which is opposite to that which God seeks in permitting sin.

Joseph's brethren, being enemies to the fulfillment of his dreams, which God
designed to bring about by means of their selling him, could not be induced and
encouraged to sell him for a slave, from a view of answering this end. No, they
aimed at something directly contrary to this; and if they had pretended, they
sold him into slavery, out of a desire that his dreams might be fulfilled;
Joseph would have known it was a piece of gross hypocrisy. For if they had
desired his dreams should come to pass, they would have loved him, and been
tender of him; and therefore would have had no heart to exercise that cruelty
toward him, they were guilty of.

This may be further illustrated (if it is not plain enough already) in the
instance of Pharaoh. It was impossible that he should do as he did, if he had
desired and sought the good God intended to answer by him. If he had desired
that God's name should be glorified, and his church and people be safe and
happy, he would not have refused to hearken to the GOD of the Hebrews, nor
trample on his authority, and bid defiance to him as he did; but would have
cheerfully obeyed all his commands. And he would not have oppressed Israel as
he did: And therefore it was not possible he should commit the sin he did, with
a design and desire that this good might come of it. No he was an enemy to that
good which God designed; and therefore acted like an enemy, and committed the
great wickedness he did.

And this is the case with all that live in sin. They love sin, and commit it,
because they are enemies to the good which God brings out of sin. Only make
them friends to that good, and their aims and designs conformable to God's, and
this will cure them of allowing themselves in sin, and make them renounce it
forever. Therefore, I say, it is absolutely impossible that a man should allow
himself in sin, that good may come of it; (I mean the good that God designs by
sin.) And therefore whatever pretenses any may make to this, we may be sure it
is not so. --

Indeed, men aim at and seek GOOD, in all the sin they commit. Something, which
appears to them to be good; which they aim to obtain by sin, is always the
motive and inducement to sin. But this is always a good, which is not only of a
different kind from that which God seeks, but directly contrary to it.

But here the following question may arise in the minds of some, viz.

QUEST. If God permits sin for the sake of the good he brings out of it; and so
aims at this good in permitting sin: Why may not men aim at the same good in
committing sin; and so sin for the same end for which God permits it? How can
it be impossible for a man to aim at the same thing in committing sin, that God
aims at in permitting it?

ANS. That this cannot be, is owing to the nature of sin itself. It Is because
sin is what it is; viz. An opposition to God in his ways, his inclinations,
ends and designs. In this, sin essentially consists; even in the opposition of
men's hearts, in their inclinations and ends, to God's inclination and designs.
Therefore, when it is asked, Why a man cannot commit sin, for the same end, for
which God permits it? It is just the same as to ask, Why a man may not have the
same end and design that God has, in that very act which consists in opposing
God's aims and designs? That is, Why a man's aims and designs may not be the
same with God's, which at the same time are perfectly contrary thereto? Which
is no other than to ask, Why the most perfect contradiction may not be
consistent?

The more men's inclinations, ends and designs, are conformable to God's, and
the more they see what the inclination of God's heart is, and understand his
ends and designs; the more they are pleased with them and with all God's ways,
and the more they see God's wisdom in permitting sin: And therefore, the more
pleased they are with his permitting sin, for the ends he does. But this is so
far from making them like sin, or love it, and be well-pleased with it; that
the more they are pleased with God's conduct in permitting sin, the more they
hate sin, the more contrary it is to their hearts. God is infinitely holy in
permitting sin: And the more holy men are, and so, the more they hate sin, the
more well-pleased they are with God's permitting sin, and the more they fall in
with his designs herein.

St. Paul, now in heaven, approves of, and is pleased with God's permitting
sin, for the sake of the good he makes it the occasion of, in a much higher
degree than when on earth. He is perfectly pleased with it now. And the more he
is pleased with it, and falls in with God's ends and designs herein, the
further he is from sinning, and the more impossible it is that he should be
guilty of it.

Thus I have endeavored to lay before you, my hearers, the evidence of the
proposition I undertook to prove. And now leave it with every one of you to
judge for yourselves; Whether there is not evidence enough from scripture and
reason, abundantly to convince every honest, attentive mind, that sin's being
the occasion of the greatest good, affords no excuse for sin: And whether it
has not been now even demonstrated, that this can give no encouragement to sin.

I have dwelt the longer on this point, because I think it of importance that
it should be well understood. May the great head of the church grant that we
all may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding; that we may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect
will of God: And so have a heart to understand and approve all God's ways. AMEN.

SERMON III. The Holiness and Wisdom of GOD in the Permission of Sin, and his
Will herein perfectly agreeable to his Revealed Will.
ROMANS III.5, -- 8. But if our Unrighteousness commend the Righteousness of God,
what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? (I speak as a Man,)
etc.


THAT sin is the occasion of great good, even so much, that there is more good
in the universe than would have been, had there been no sin: And that this
being the case, affords no excuse for sin, or the least encouragement to it,
are the truths which have been considered, illustrated and confirmed in the
foregoing discourses on these words. What now remains is the

IMPROVEMENT.
The view we have had of this subject opens the way to the following remarks.

REMARK I. God's holiness is exercised even in the permission of sin. God's
permitting sin was as high an exercise of holiness, as any we can think of.
This remark is grounded on what has been observed and proved, viz. That sin is
the occasion of promoting the greatest good of the universe.

The holiness of God primarily consists in LOVE, or benevolence to himself, and
to the creature; in the exercise of which, he seeks his own glory, and the
happiness of the creature: Or, in one word, he seeks the good of the UNIVERSE,
as comprehending both creator and creatures. And this God aimed at and sought
in permitting sin, as much as in any act whatever; and therefore this was an
exercise of holiness, even to permit sin. For God permitted sin, because he saw
that this was the best way to promote this end, and accomplish the highest good
of the universe.

If this was not the case; if there is not, on the whole, more good in the
universe, than there would have been, if God had not permitted sin to enter
into the world; then it cannot be shown, how it is consistent with God's
holiness to permit sin. But if this is the case, as the scripture represents it
to be; then the permission of sin is not only consistent with God's holiness,
but God's not permitting it would be inconsistent with holiness: For not to
permit sin in this case, would be to neglect and slight the greatest good, and
prefer it to a less; which is inconsistent with true love to the universe. The
permission of sin therefore is so far from being inconsistent with God's
holiness, that his holiness influenced him to permit sin, and herein is
eminently exercised, and gloriously manifested.

OBJ. But God could not permit sin out of love to ALL; for sin certainly is not
for the good of all, but proves the eternal ruin of multitudes.

ANS. The greatest good of the whole, may be inconsistent with the good of
every individual. God seeks the greatest good of the whole: This his holiness,
his love to himself and the creation, leads him to. It does not follow that
there is, on the whole, less good in the universe by means of sin; because
some, yea, a great number are eternally miserable by it. Notwithstanding this,
God may be more glorified; yea, there may be more happiness among creatures,
than if sin had never taken place. For though sin is the means of the eternal
misery of many, yet it may be the means of increasing the happiness of others
to so great a degree, as that, upon the whole, there shall be more happiness,
than if there had been no sin. If this is a paradox to the reader, he may find
this matter illustrated, and set in a clear and rational view by the Rev. Mr.
Bellamy, in his sermons on The wisdom of God i^ the Permission of sin; lately
published.


OBJ. But where is the justice of making a number miserable, in order to
promote the good of others; even though we grant there is, upon the whole, more
good than if there had been no sin?

ANS. They who are made miserable by sin, are justly miserable. Sin is their
own fault; and for it they deserve eternal destruction: And therefore God does
them no wrong in casting them into hell; they have but their desert. And the
good that sin is the means of to others, does not alter the case as to them,
and make their misery unjust. We may apply to this case the words of St. Paul
(Romans xi.22.) Here we may behold the goodness and severity of God: On them
which fall into destruction, severity; but on them which are saved, goodness.
God exercises severity toward some; but it is a just severity: It Is as just as
if no good came to others by means of sin.

Let none then object against God's permitting sin, as if it was inconsistent
with his holiness; as if it made him the author of sin, and representing him as
delighting in sin, etc. For it is most evident to those who will impartially
consider the matter, that God's holiness is as much exercised, and as really
appears in his permitting sin, as in any of his conduct whatsoever.

If any should here say, that I mistake the matter; that these objections are
not made against God's permitting sin. This is a fact that none can dispute:
And all must grant, God may permit sin and yet be holy. God had a right to
permit sin, as he was by no means obliged to withhold all his creatures from
sinning. I say, if any should talk in this form, I would ask, what it is then
that they object against, as inconsistent with God's holiness?

Do they object against God's permitting sin, for the sake of the good he saw
he could make it the occasion of? Do they think this inconsistent with God's
holiness, that he should aim at a good end in permitting sin? Surely none can
think so; for God's holiness in permitting sin consists in his aiming at, and
seeking good thereby. So that God's permitting sin for the sake of the good
that should come thereby, is so far from being inconsistent with his holiness,
that it is the very thing in which his holiness is exercised in permitting sin:
And if he could permit sin, and aim at and seek no good thereby; there would be
no holiness in permitting sin: Yea, it would be inconsistent with holiness.

To say, That God's seeking good by the permission of sin, is inconsistent with
his holiness, is the same as to say, That God's exercising holiness, i^
inconsistent with his holiness; and therefore in order to be holy, he must
cease to exercise holiness: --

And if God's aiming at good in permitting sin is not the thing they object
against, What is it then? Where is the difficulty? What is there in God's
permitting sin, that should make him the author of sin? --

Is God's DETERMINING to permit sin the thing that is inconsistent with
holiness? Are there any who allow that God may permit sin, and be wise and holy
in so doing; but at the same time imagine his determining to permit sin is
inconsistent with his holiness, makes him the author of the sin he determines
to permit? --

One would think, none could make a difficulty of this, and think and talk in
this form, if this did not seem to be actually the case with some. They make
great objections against something; and represent it as a horrible doctrine,
inconsistent with God's holiness, making him the author of sin, and what not!
And when the matter comes to be examined to the bottom; the thing they object
against is, God's determining to permit sin. They own God has actually
permitted sin; but will not believe God ever determined to (...) it; because
this reflects on his moral character, and makes him the author of sin.

To remove this difficulty therefore, I would say a few words;

First, I would ask, Whether any can possibly conceive of God's permitting sin,
without determining to permit it? Surely God determines to do, all he does.
Therefore to say, God did not determine to permit sin, is the same as to say,
He did not permit sin. If then God has permitted sin, he certainly determined
to permit it.

Secondly, If God had a right to permit sin, and is wise and holy in so doing;
then he had a right to determine to permit sin, and is wise and holy in
determining to permit it. If any piece of conduct, is, in itself proper and
wise; then determining to conduct so, cannot be wrong. Therefore to say, That
God's determining to permit sin is not wise and holy, is to say, That
permitting sin is not wise and holy. For there can be no harm in determining to
do that, in doing which there is no harm: But on the contrary, a determination
to do that which is w^^e and holy, is a wise and holy determination.

Some may perhaps think, I have not touched the difficulty there is in this
matter yet. They believe God has permitted sin for wise and good ends, and
therefore that he determined to permit it. But, they say, some hold that God
DECREED to permit sin; and it is God's DECREE in this case, which they object
against, as little better than blasphemy, as it seems to make God the author of
sin.

To this I would say, I am willing to leave the word DECREE out of the
question, and not to insist upon it, or so much as mention it, as it is a word
that is become hateful and frightful to many. They have, by some means or
other, affixed such horrible ideas to it, that it cannot be used without giving
them great disgust. I indeed suppose that to decree to permit sin, and to
determine to permit it, is precisely one and the same thing; they being only
two different words to denote one and the same idea. However, I am willing to
drop the word decree, and have no contention about it. They who are reconciled
to God's permitting sin, and his doing it for wise and good ends; and so
believe that this is not inconsistent with his holiness; but that the
permission of sin is itself an exercise of infinite holiness; they consent to
all I am endeavoring to make evident in this remark. And though they may be
insensible of it, they indeed consent to all that is implied in the doctrine of
God's decreeing to permit sin. And what then is become of the frightful
objection against the doctrine of God's decrees, as if it made God the author
of sin, which we so often hear from great and small, learned and unlearned? --
I trust, it cannot stand the test of scripture and reason; but being
impartially examined, appears groundless and most absurd: Which I humbly think
is in some measure manifest by what is said above.

The truth is, all this noise is, at bottom, made against God's permitting sin:
By proving God's holiness in this therefore, the objection is wholly
demolished. I am aware it will be said, "That all this does not vindicate the
doctrine of God's decrees: For though o^^ objection is given up, and it is
granted that this does not make God the author of sin; yet it takes away all
blame from man, and makes it impossible that there should be any such thing as
sin in the universe. For God's decree takes away all LIBERTY from man, and
therefore he cannot sin in what he does." --

ANS. What if God determined to make man FREE, and to permit him to sin in the
exercise of his freedom; does this take away man's liberty? Strange! If Gods
decreeing to make man free* and to permit him to sin in the exercise of this
liberty, should take away all liberty: As strange at least, as if God's
determining to make man, and give him existence, should eternally deprive him
of being.

OBJ. What God has decreed, will certainly come to pass: And therefore
introduces a NECESSITY, which is inconsistent with liberty; and so with virtue
or vice. When therefore you say, God decreed to permit man to sin, in the
exercise of his liberty; you are guilty of a contradictio^ (...) terms, and
suppose that which is impossible, viz. that the certainty implied in God's
decree, is consistent with liberty.

ANS. Please to mind, that this objection is made as much against God's
foreknowledge, a^ his decrees: For foreknowledge supposes and implies the
certainty of the actions fore-known, as much as any decree can do, But how will
you prove that the certainty of future actions and events is inconsistent with
liberty? On which the objection is wholly built. Prove this and the bible will
be overthrown at once, and the common sense of mankind will appear to be a mere
delusion. The bible is, as it were wholly plan'd on the supposition of the
certainty of all the future actions of men: It represents God as fore-knowing
all things; and predicts millions of actions; and represents men as free in
those very actions, that are pointed out beforehand. And do mankind, in order
to determine, whether a man is free in what he does, first enquire, what degree
of certainty there was, that he would act just as he has done? Surely no. This
objection therefore is directly contrary to the bible, and all reason.




I think it of importance that all should be convinced of this: If therefore
what has been said affords any light and evidence to this truth, the labor is
not lost.

IId REMARK. God's will in permitting sin is perfectly consistent with his holy
law, which he has given unto man, or his revealed will.

Some have been unable to reconcile these together, and make them consistent.
But what has been said on this subject, I think, removes the difficulty and
helps us to see the consistency and perfect agreement between these two.

The sum of what God requires of man in his la^* is love to God, and love to
man ( Matthew. xxvii.37, 38, 39.) Which love is principally exercised in desiring
and seeking God's glory and the good of man. But God in permitting sin, desired
and sought his own glory and the good of man; and therefore exercised the same
disposition, that his law requires of man; and willed and chose the same thing,
which he requires man to will and choose in his law. And therefore, the more a
man obeys God's law, revealed in his word, the nearer conformed he is to God's
disposition and will, which he exercised in the permission of sin.

Now this being so it is a conclusive argument, that God's will in permitting
sin, is the same, or perfectly consistent with his will revealed in his law.
For it is a maxim that never fails, "That if any two things agree with a third,
they also agree with one another." If therefore the holiness of man, which is a
conformity to God's law, is also a conformity to God's disposition and will
exercised in permitting sin; then God's disposition and will in permitting sin,
and his law, are conformable one to the other.

God's permission of sin was an act of benevolence to the universe, in which he
sought the good of being in general. The sum of what God's law requires of man,
is benevolence to being in general. Therefore God's law is a true expression of
his disposition and will, which he exercised in permitting sin, and is indeed
the very same will expressed and revealed, requiring man to conform thereto. Or
thus --

God seeks his own glory and the good of the creature, in permitting sin; and
so his permitting sin is an exercise of holiness. But if God's disposition and
will exercised in the permission of sin, is a holy disposition and will; then
it must be agreeable to his revealed will, for that is a holy will. God's
revealed will is but an expression of his holiness; and therefore it is but an
expression of his holiness, which he exercised in permitting sin, which
consisted in his disposition and will; and consequently is perfectly agreeable
to it.

I trust my hearers see the force of this argument, which I am endeavoring to
state. The argument cannot be got rid of, I think, but by denying that God
seeks the general good of the universe in permitting sin, which I trust none
will do, who believe the Bible, and have any right notions of the perfections
of God. And i^ not this sufficient for ever to silence the common objection
against the doctrine of God's decrees, viz. That according to this. God has a
secret will which is contrary to his revealed will? For if God's permitting sin
is not contrary to his revealed will, then his determining or decreeing to
permit it* is not.

This objection against the doctrine of God's decrees, has been urged by many
noted writers, with as much confidence, and show of boasted reason and
argument, as any thing that has been advanced in opposition to the peculiar
doctrines of Calvanism. And, perhaps, ALL that has been said in opposition to
these doctrines, will appear as weak and absurd, as I trust this now does,
whenever the voice of scripture and reason shall be suitably attended to.




IIId REMARK. What cause have we to admire and adore the WISDOM of God, which
is so gloriously exercised and displayed in making sin which is the greatest
evil, the occasion of the greatest good: And in doing this, exhibits the
greatest imaginable discouragement to sin, and the strongest motives to
holiness!

Well may we join with St. Paul, and cry out, O the depth of the riches both of
the knowledge and wisdom of God! Satan thought, when he had seduced man, he had
gained his point; had disappointed, and as it were outdone and over-match'd
the Almighty, and spoiled, and robbed him of the world he had made. How, may we
imagine, the old serpent, swelled with pride, and vaunted himself on this
occasion! The good angels, doubtless, beheld what was done, with a sort of
astonishment and surprise, and thought the world ruined and lost. And no
creature could conceive, how the mischief could be retrieved, and all this evil
turned into good. But GOD looked on, and as it were said, --

Satan thinks he has crossed and outdone (...) now, and lots on an eternal
triumph. But he shall be wholly disappointed and defeated; and it shall appear
in the end, that he has by this only been an instrument of promoting my great
and good designs. Sin, which above all things, strikes at my throne; aims to
dishonor me, and in its own nature has a direct tendency to spoil and ruin the
works of my hands; and which is in itself infinitely mischievous and hateful:
Even this greatest and most deadly evil, I will make the special means of my
own exaltation and honor. From this I will take occasion to fill the earth with
my glory, and make it a much better world than it was before: And herein I will
manifest and display my infinite wisdom, to be matter of entertainment, wonder
and admiration to millions, to all eternity.

And God by thus exalting and glorifying himself, and happifying the redeemed
by means of sin, has at the same time condemned sin; shown his hatred of it,
and revealed his wrath against it: And set this in a far more convincing and
striking light, than he would have done, if he had not thus brought good out of
sin. This God has done, by bringing all this about by the sufferings and death
of Christ. If the sinner had been saved without any satisfaction made to divine
justice, and regard to the honor of God's law, which by sin was violated; sin
would not have been sufficiently condemned; But the holy law of God would
rather have been disgraced. In this therefore, there would have been no
manifestation of God's holiness and hatred of sin. But by saving sinners,
through the sufferings and death of Christ, God's justice and holiness shine
brighter, than if there had never been any sin, or all sinners had been damned
eternally. And God's hatred of sin, and love of righteousness, are set in the
most advantageous light: And the evil nature of sin, and the infinitely
dreadful consequence of continuing in sin, appear in the clearest and most
affecting view: Tending above all things to make men afraid of sin, and lead
them to hate it, and renounce it for ever.

The gospel is so calculated to discourage sin and promote holiness, at the
same time that it brings the greatest good out of sin; that whoever understands
it, and believes the truth of it, is thereby transformed into the holy image of
God. (2 Cor. iii.18.) Thus the gospel is so far from encouraging sin, that it is
the great instrument in the hand of God of turning men from sin to holiness.
Yea, God has so contrived things in the gospel, that it becomes the means of
making men much more holy than they would have been, if they never had sinned;
and it advances their happiness by discovering God's holiness, and promoting
their's.

God has so contrived things, that sin is not only the occasion of displaying
his holiness; but the occasion of more holiness in the creature, than if it had
never taken place. How is satan disappointed and deleated herein! While his
sin, and the sin which he introduced among mankind, is made the means of a most
bright display of God's holiness; and of filling heaven with more holiness, and
so with more happiness to all eternity, than otherwise there would have been.

How infinitely above all creatures in wisdom does God appear in this work!
This is by way of eminency, THE WISDOM OF GOD; as St. Paul styles it (1 Cor.
i.24.) Well may we then rejoice and glory in this gospel, and say with St. Paul
(Romans i.16, 17, 18.) I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: For therein is
the righteousness of God revealed. And at the same time the sinner is saved
from sin by faith in Christ, the wrath of God is, in the clearest manner,
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.

Into these things the angels desire to look. And it is here that they see and
learn the manifold wisdom of God. (Ephesians. iii.10.)

Indeed, this is seen but in part now by angels and men. The more bright
display of it will be made at the consummation of all things; when this work of
God shall be brought to perfection, and the good that shall be brought out of
sin, shall be seen in all its fullness and glory. And as the Jews, to whom the
wickedness of Haman was the occasion of so much good, had their sorrow turned
into joy, and their mourning into a good day, -- and had many a day of feasting
and joy upon this occasion: So shall this be the occasion of joy among
millions, while they give all the praise and glory to the ONLY WISE GOD,
through Jesus Christ, for ever and ever.

I shall in the next place improve this subject in expostulating a little with
two sorts of persons.

FIRST, With those who will not allow that God makes sin the occasion of good,
and that he did therefore permit sin, that he might bring good out of it, and
say that such a doctrine gives a full license, yea the greatest encouragement
to sin. Such persons, whenever they hear this doctrine taught, cry out of it as
tending to encourage sin. They say, "If this is true, then the best way is for
all to sin as much as they can, that good may come of it; for the more sin the
better, etc."

If such persons well considered what has been said on this subject, I think
they must be convinced of the gross and dangerous mistake they have made. And
that this conviction may be fastened on the mind of every such one, I would
offer the following things by way of expostulation.

I. I entreat you to consider, how contrary to all reason this is.

It has been proved, I think, beyond all contradiction, That though sin is made
the occasion of the greatest good; yea, though all things considered, there is
more good in the universe than if sin had not entered: Yet this does not render
sin at all the less criminal, or afford any excuse to it: But, on the contrary,
it appears undeniably evident that God has taken such a method to bring good
out of sin, that he has hereby exhibited to all intelligencies, the greatest
possible discouragements to sin, and set it in a most odious and criminal
light. Yea, it is evident to a demonstration, that it is in the nature of
things absolutely impossible that any one should be induced to sin by the good
that God brings out of it. And will you still go on to assert, that God's
bringing good out of sin, is an encouragement to it, and gives full liberty to
all to go on in sin? -- If you do so, you must, so far as I can see, first lay
aside your own reason and conscience; and will hereby prove that you are not to
be reasoned with. For it is in vain to reason with men, who will pay no regard
to reason.

II. Consider how contrary this is to the holy scripture.

Nothing is clearer in the bible, than that God brings good out of sin, and
that God permits sin for the sake of the good he makes it the occasion of. The
bible is built on this plan. In this consists the glorious work of redemption,
which is the chief subject of the whole bible: In this the wisdom and glory of
God ^ppear, and are displayed; and on this all our well-grounded hopes are
built: The great good we hope for, is a good, that is to be brought out of sin.
And the bible teaches us, at the same time, how odious and criminal sin is, and
offers the greatest discouragements to sin, and motives to holiness. Our text
is most directly against you. If you will carefu^ly read it over, you will find
yourselves pointed out, and expressly condemned in it. I don't see how you can
well make a declaration more contrary to the bible, than this which is so often
found in your mouths. And it is quite evident that you cannot really like such
a book as the bible is; however you may pretend, or even yourselves think you
do.

III. Such would do well to consider, how very dishonorable this is to GOD;
yea, how directly they speak against him.

That sin is come into the world, and that the world is full of it, they cannot
deny. But they will not allow that God permitted it; but it came in contrary to
his will and design, as what he could not prevent. Or if he did permit it, they
will not allow him to have any good end in permitting it; but he permitted sin,
he knew not why, or rather for some bad end! For at the same time it would have
been better if he had not permited it! And now he has permitted sin, out of no
good end, or since sin has come into the world in spite of him, as he could not
prevent it; they will not allow him, to make the best of it, and bring good out
of it: Because, if he does so, he will excuse and justify the sinner, and give
all imaginable encouragement to sin, and make himself unreasonable and
unrighteous in forbidding and punishing it!

And now, What a deity, what ^ God is this! Surely this is not the true GOD. --
How impotent and weak, how contemptible is such a God! How disappointed, and
unhappy, while outdone, conquered and triumphed over by his greatest enemy; and
he not able to help himself! If things were so, they would be so far, just as
the devil would have them. He would be glad to fill the world with sin, in
spite of God: He would rejoice to have God's hands tied, so that he could not
prevent sin. Or if he could prevent it, and so it must come in by his
permission, he would have God permit it without proposing any good end in it;
or without being able to answer any by it. The devil would be glad to have it
so, that God could not bring any good out of sin, without at the same time
encouraging sin, and excusing the sinner. Thus, this sets the devil up, as
doing his will, at least on earth, and as having power above the almighty!
Power to fill the world with sin and mischief, which God could not prevent! Or
if he could, now he has suffered it to take place, can by no means help himself
in the matter, by making it answer some good end.

What mean and unworthy notions must such have of God! They degrade him almost
as low as the idols of the heathen, which have eyes, but see not; hands, but
handle not; feet, but walk not, etc. They represent him, either as not seeing
the bad consequences of sin, or unable to prevent them, though they were seen, or
bring any good out of sin: And so as having, in a great degree, lost the world
he had made!

God grant none of us may have such dishonorable thoughts of him! No, " OUR
GOD is in the heavens, -- he has done whatsoever he pleased. He does according
to his will in the army of heaven, and (...) the inhabitants of the earth: And
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? And those that walk
in pride, he is able to abase." He was infinitely able to keep sin out of the
world he had made; and consequently He permitted it to take place, and that
because he saw it would be the occasion of the greatest good, an advantage to
the universe. And he is continually governing the world, and ordering all
events so as to answer the great and good ends, he proposed in the permission
of sin: And will in the end, completely accomplish all the purposes and desires
of his heart. And at the same time he brings good out of sin, he more clearly
discovers his hatred of sin, and it is desert, and exhibits greater
discouragements to sin, and stronger motives to holiness, than if no good had
been brought out of sin. The devil shall be utterly and perfectly defeated and
overthrown, with all finally impenitent sinners, and God shall be glorified by
all they have done; and elect angels and men shall reap advantages from it to
all eternity. That SUCH a GOD reigns, may well be matter of joy to all: And let
those who think and speak against him, repent and reform, and give glory to GOD.

SECONDLY, I would expostulate in a word or two, with those who make a handle
of this doctrine, that sin answers some good ends, to excuse and encourage
themselves and others in sin. They take it for granted that all sin answers
some good end, and profess to believe that this is a doctrine of the bible; and
often speak of this as a palliation and excuse for their sin, and the sin of
others; and as if this was an inducement to it. Now such (if any such are here)
are desired seriously to consider the following things.

I. By drawing, and acting upon such a consequence, you renounce the bible.
For, as has been shown, nothing can be more contrary to the scripture than
this. Now by renouncing the bible, you renounce the doctrine from whence you
pretend to draw this consequence, and take encouragement to sin; and so build
upon nothing at last: For in your very building, you pull down the foundation
you pretend to build upon. "The bible," you say "teaches that sin is made the
occasion of good." Very well so it does. "Well then," you say, "this is a great
encouragement to sin: Let us sin that good may come." But this you know the
bible disallows of. And if the bible is not to be minded in this case, then it
is not to be depended upon when it reveals the doctrine from which you draw
this consequence, and encourage yourself to sin. Thus men must contradict
themselves, as well as the bible, in order to make any such improvements of
this doctrine.

II. You do not value and desire that good which God brings out of sin; and
therefore never felt any encouragement from this to sin: As it has been proved,
that no man ever did, or possibly can do. As therefore you pretend to that
which is impossible, it is nothing but pretense and hypocrisy in you. You care
nothing about God's glory, and the holiness and happiness of the angels and
saints: You are after a good of your own, which has no relation to this good.
If you could promote a million degrees of the good, which God makes sin the
occasion of, by lifting up your finger, you would not do it. Surely then, this
was never any encouragement to you to sin.

III. They who thus abuse this doctrine, are certainly in the way to eternal
destruction. And if you continue thus to abuse this glorious truth of the
gospel all your days, you will fall under the condemnation denounced against
such in the text; and the justice of God will shine bright in your eternal
damnation. You will not see when good comes, or have any part or lot in this
matter, as your heart is not right with God, but in direct opposition to him.
You will be shut out in darkness, where there is weeping, wailing and gnashing
of teeth. But CHRIST's throne shall be guiltless, and established in
righteousness; and on his seed shall be light and peace and joy forever. God
will be forever glorified, and answer his own ends in your eternal damnation.

I c^nclude all with a word of EXHORTATION.

I. Let all hence be exhorted to seek after the knowledge of God's ways, and a
heart to justify and approve of them.

First, Seek after the knowledge of God's ways.

It becomes us to cry after knowledge, and lift up our voice for understanding;
to seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures, if by any
means, we may find the knowledge of GOD. But how shall we find the knowledge of
God? Why no other way, but by searching into his WORKS, as they are held up to
our view in creation, providence, and divine revelation. It Is by understanding
God's WAYS, that we come to the knowledge of God. God discovers himself to
creatures only by his ways and works. These are the glass held forth in the
bible, in which the glorious God is exhibited to creatures. And it becomes us
to search into them with diligence, care, and painful study. The works of God
are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. (Psalm. iii.2.)
They are SOUGHT OUT, with diligent application of mind, and earnest inquiry. He
that is slothful, and inattentive to these matters, he, I say, is the brutish
man that knows not: And the fool, that does not understand this. (Psalm.
xcii.6.)

It is to be lamented, that so many are no more inquisitive after the truth;
are even too lazy and careless to enquire and examine for themselves; and so
make no proficiency in christian knowledge: But are quite ignorant, and groping
in the dark, in the midst of the rich means of instruction we enjoy. St. Paul
speaks to christians as under obligation to make proficiency in knowledge; and
blames them much, that when FOR THE TIME they OUGHT to be teachers of others,
they had need that one should teach them AGAIN the first principles of the
oracles of God. And exhorts them not to rest in the knowledge of the first
principles of christianity, but to go on to perfection. ( Heb. v.12. vi.1.)

I know it is insisted on by many as a maxim of importance, "That we content
ourselves with the PLAIN, INDISPUTABLE things of religion; and not meddle with
dark, intricate and disputable points."

But this is, I think, as much as to say, "Be sure to take no pains to enquire
into, and understand what you know not already; but be content to live and die
in ignorance." For what is there plain to a person, which he does not already
know? And what is there which is not dark and unintelligible, until by THOUGHT
and application of mind, it is understood? And what peculiar doctrine of
christianity is there, that is not disputed, or looked upon dark and intricate
by some?

I have different, and I trust better advice to give you, my hearers. Search
the scriptures daily, that you may know whether these things are so. Strive to
grow in knowledge, that you may not be babes but strong men, who by reason of
use, have your judgment exercised to discern both good and evil. And in order
to this, prove, examine ALL THINGS, and hold fast that which is good.

The most of God's ways revealed to us in the bible, have respect to sin, or do
some way relate to it (such as his permitting it, punishing it, redeeming men
from it, and bringing good out of it:) If therefore we don't understand this,
we know but little of God and his ways. Let us then search the bible: And at
the same time constantly and earnestly cry to the ^ather of lights, that he
would teach us his ways; and open our eyes to behold the wonderful things in
his word.

Secondly* Seek a heart to approve of all God's ways. This will lay the best,
and indeed the only foundation of rightly knowing God's ways. This is, in a
true sense, to have an understanding heart: In this true wisdom consists.
Knowledge will be easy to him who has this understanding; while the scorner
(whose heart opposes God's ways) seeks wisdom, and finds it not. ( Prove.
xiv.6.) "The MEEK (who have a humble, pliable, submissive heart) will God guide
in judgment: And the meek will he teach his way." ( Psalm. xxv.9) "Who is WISE
(truly holy) and he shall understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know
them? For the WAYS of the LORD are right, and the just shall walk in them: But
the transgressors shall fall therein." ( Hos. xiv.9) "None of the wicked shall
understand, but the WISE shall understand." ( Dan. xii.10.) He who has a heart
to do God's will, he is most likely to know of the doctrines he enquires into,
whether they be of God or not; he comes to the light. But he whose heart
opposes God's ways, hates the light, and holds the truth in unrighteousness;
or turns aside to error and delusion, and embraces falsehood because he loves to
have it so. How unhappy is the man, who has a lie in his right hand, and cannot
deliver his soul, because his heart, his corrupt heart, has turned him aside
from the truth! This, it is to be feared, is the sad case of many at this day.
They have no heart to LOVE the truth, therefore God has left them to strong
delusion, to believe a lie.

God's professing people of old said, his ways were not equal. God's ways did
not suit their hearts at all. And they are as contrary to the unsanctified
heart now, as they were then, and are doubtless as much opposed and murmured
against, though under a pretense that they are not God's ways. --

Let us then be greatly concerned to have our hearts right with God. To this
end may God take away the heart of stone, and give us an heart of flesh, in
which his laws are written; and by this direct our hearts into the love of God
as he is revealed in his word!

II. What has been said on this subject, may be improved as a motive to all to
give themselves up to God through Jesus Christ. To trust in him for deliverance
from all the evil of sin; from sin itself, and from all the evil consequences
of it: And that you may share in all that great good that God makes sin the
occasion of.

Thus to save and bless sinful man, Christ came into the world, suffered and
died: And of this we now have the offer. If you give yourselves up to Christ,
you shall be completely saved from all your sins. He will deliver you from the
awful wrath of God, and all the dreadful evils that are coming on an ungodly
world. He will wash you, and make you clean. He will deliver you from all
sorrow, and wipe all tears from your eyes. He will bestow all the blessings on
you that you can wish for. He will cloth you with glorious robes, with a
righteousness more beautiful and glorious than that of angles: a righteousness
which never would have been, had not creatures sinned. He will bring ^ou to
God, and introduce you to a greater near^ess to him, and a higher enjoyment of
him, than man would have been admitted to, if he had never fallen. He will
cause you to sit down on his throne, and make you to share in his honor, glory
and happiness. In sum, you shall share in all the good that is brought out of
sin, and be eternal gainers, by the sin and misery that has filled the world.
O, let no sinner disregard and slight these kind and advantageous offers: Let
him not neglect the gl^rious SAVIOR another day; least i^ should then be
eternally too late, and he be infinitely worse off, than if he never had heard
the joyful news now proclaimed.

III. Let all hence be excited to seek and endeavor to promote the same ends
that G^d seeks and promotes by the premission of sin. This is (as has been
sh^wn) the glory of God, and the good of the creature. This is to be holy, and
so conformed to G^d and his law. God seeks these ends in the exercise of his
holiness; and we have no other way to seek them but in holy exercises, in
keeping God's commands. All that God has done in permitting sin, and bringing
good out of it, all that he has revealed in his word, and all that he will do
to the end of the world, tends to excite to holiness. Let us then seek to be
holy as he is holy. God hates sin infinitely, -- and is infinitely engaged to
punish it; and woe to us if we do not forsake it, and turn to God now while his
patience lasts: For without holiness no man shall see the Lord. May you (...)
so know the Lord, and be made partakers of his holiness, as that your hearts my
echo to the angelic doxology, while they cry, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. AMEN.

APPENDIX To the Second EDITION of the foregoing SERMONS.
BY THE AUTHOR.
WHEN these sermons were first published, it was not thought that any of the
true friends of JEHOVAH and his kingdom would be offended with the doctrine,
that things, even all the sin that has taken place in his dominions, shall, on
the whole, be no injury to his kingdom, but be overruled by him for the great
advantage and glory of it forever: Yea, it was presumed that this truth would
be matter of great joy to all such, and that they would attend to the abundant
evidence which we have of it in the word of God, with a peculiar pleasure. But,
however unaccountable it may be, numbers of these professed friends to God, his
honor, happiness and kingdom, have appeared greatly displeased with this
doctrine; and have spoken much against these sermons, chiefly because it is
there asserted and vindicated.

Mr. Dana ^now Doctor Dana) appears to be one of these, by what he published
some years ago in his sermon on "the inscrutability of divine providence."
There he has the following words. "That sin has been of great adva^tage to the
creation, through divine interposition, some (of confused heads, but
sufficiently opinionated) have undertaken to show. But to prove that the
happiness of the creation would have been less, provided sin had never entered
into the world, they must first be able to tell us what would in fact have
been, had all reasonable beings continued innocent -- which neither men nor
angels can." P. 48.

Every one, I suppose, who has seen the title of the preceding sermons, will
be at no loss in determining who the author had a particular reference to in
these words; though he has, I suppose inadvertently, made a material alteration
by using the word creation instead of universe, which includes all existence,
created and uncreated. How far the words in the parenthesis show the clearness
of the author's head, and his great candor and humility, the reader will judge.
Be this as it may, I think I have good g^ound to say, that if instead of this
parenthesis, he had showed wherein the confusion of the head, or the weakness
of the arguments offered in support of this doctrine, was to be discovered, he
would have given more satisfaction to all his judici^us, candid readers. But
this he has not essayed to do. Yea, so far from this was he, that he has
asserted, over and over again, what is really the same thing which he so
severely censures in the words just quoted.

He particularly considers the permission of sin as an important article in
which the divine providence is concerned, and allows that God did permit sin,
when he might have prevented it. (P. 47.) -- And he says "the plan of his
administration is uniform and fixed; in which the best adapted means are
improved to accomplish his general design, which is plainly benevolent. (P.
46.) The general view of his administration is therefore benevolent: His wisdom
and power are therefore employed in carrying on designs of the greatest good."
(P. 61) If God in his providence, and therefore in the permission of sin, in
every instance of which his providence is concerned, is benevolent, and designs
the greatest good; then the permission of si^, does promote this design, and
answer this end, and is necessary in order to the greatest good: For it is
impossible that God should design the greatest good, or any good at all, in
suffering that to take place in his providence, which is of no advantage to the
universe; or, which is the same, if there is less good than there might have
been, had not sin been permitted. If sin is not, by God's interposition, an
advantage to the universe, but God's kingdom, taken in its whole extent, would
have been much better, more happy and glorious, if sin had not been permitted,
then there could be no benevolent design in permitting it; and God is so far
from carrying on designs of the greatest good in this that less good was
preferred to a greater, which is really the same thing with preferring evil to
good.

And this author not only asserts, as above; but he very justly observes that
it is necessary we should believe that God is good in every instance of his
providence, in order to acquiesce in it, and exercise proper and cheerful
submission. His words are these. "As a foundation of a rational acquiescence in
the providence of God, we must lay this down as a principl^* that we have clear
and abundant proof that he is good, as well as wise." (P. 60.) -- According to
this, we can have no reason to acquiesce in God's providence in permitting sin,
any further than we have "clear and abundant proof" that he is good in
permitting it. But if sin, every instance of it, does not, by God's direction
and overruling hand, answer some good end; but it would have been much better
on the whole, if sin had not been permitted; then God exercises no goodness in
the permission of sin; and consequently there is no ground of acquiescence in
God's providence, respecting this very important, and most interesting affair,
to which most instances of God's providence in this fallen world have some
respect.

Is it not a little unaccountable that this author should stigmatize his
brethren as "of confused heads, and sufficiently opinionated" for asserting
what is fully implied in what he himself says; and which is the only
foundation, according to his own account, of all true submission to God's
providence? It must be left with him to account for it, and reconcile this
palpable inconsistence; or rather retract which part of it he pleases.

Indeed, this doctrine, That sin is by God's interposition and overruling
hand, an advantage to the universe, must be received, unless we call in
question God's infinite wisdom, power and goodness, or deny his universal
providence, which is really the same thing. This author says, that in order to
prove this, "they must first be able to tell us what would in fact have been,
had all reasonable beings continued innocent." How absurd is this! How
inconsistent with the subject he is upon (the inscrutability of divine
providence) and with most he says in other parts of his sermon! Blessed be God!
We have a more sa^e and short way to prove this. God is infinite in power,
wisdom and goodness, and in the exercise of these perfections permits all the
sin that takes place in his dominions; therefore we are sure that all the sin
which takes place shall answer some wise and good end, and is, on the whole,
such an advantage to the universe, that there will be eternally more good than
could have been, had there been no evil. We may be just as sure of this as we
are that God reigns infinitely blessed, omnipotent, infinitely wise and good;
and that the bible is a revelation from him. Archbishop Sharp has fully
asserted this doctrine in his sermon from Psalm. 97.1. preached before the King
and Queen, 1693. That the reader may see that this is no new doctrine, and that
it was then supported by the same good reasons by which it is now proved, I
will transcribe part of a paragraph or two from him.

Hence it follows, that all events whatsoever, that ever did, or do, or shall
happen in the world, are really the best that could or can happen. And if
things were ordered otherwise, it would not be so well. A strange paradox you
will say this is; that not only mischief and calamities that fall upon mankind,
but even their faults and mismanagements, nay, their very sins and
wickednesses, should be for the best. But really so it is, and so it must be,
if both infinite wisdom and goodness and power govern the world.

Not but that a particular man's ^in^ may be the occasion of his ruin, nay, and
certainly will be so, if he per^^^s in them. But still, though every thing that
happens do not prove for the good of that particular person, or that particular
people, that is immediately concerned in the event* yet it will certainly prove
for the general universal good. So that, take the whole series of events
together, that have, or shall come to pass all the world over, we may
undoubtedly affi^m that all things have been as well managed as is possible
they could be; and will be so to the end of the world. For indeed to suppose
otherwise, is to say, either that infinite wisdom does not act so wisely as it
might do: Or that perfect goodness might do more good than it does do; or,
lastly, that omnipotent power cannot do every thing that is possible. All which
suppositions are plainly absurd and contradiction^.

Archbishop Sharp's sermons, vol. 1 p. 384* 385.


The author of a late piece, entitled "An examination of the late reverend
president Edwards's enquiry on freedom of will," has a section "on the supposed
advantage of moral evil to the universe." (Part II. sect. V. page 72.) He
appears sufficiently disposed to oppose and disgrace this doctrine; but he has
not offered any argument against it, which does in the least confute what
president Edwards published on that head, and is not fully obviated and
answered in the foregoing sermons; which I think every careful judicious reader
will perceive. Why did he not particularly attend to Mr. Edwards's arguments,
and point out their fallacy and weakness, instead of suggesting things in a
loose declamatory way, which have been thoroughly confuted by writers on that
subject^ Had he looked their arguments fairly in the face, and so much as
attempted an answer, he would have been worthy of some attention. But, in the
room of this, he has m^st grossly misrepresented Mr. Edwards in two instances,
in this short section (as he has done in other parts of his book) which I think
ought to be particularly noticed, in justice to the truth and to Mr. Edwards.
This author here says that Mr. Edwards asserts, "that moral evil is not of a
bad, but good tendency." (P. 72.) Whereas Mr. Edwards has asserted no such
thing, nor any thing like it. Mr Edwards's words, from which I suppose this
author took occasion to make the above assertion, as a quotation from him, are
these. "'It Is not of bad tendency, for the supreme Being thus to order and
permit that moral evil to be, which it is best should come to pass. For that it
is of a good tendency, is the very thing supposed in the point now in question.
Christ's crucifixion, though a most horrid fact in them that perpetrated it,
was of most glorious tendency, as permitted and ordered by God." (Enquiry into
freedom of will, p. 276.) Who can help seeing that what Mr. Edwards says here,
is consistent with the greatest bad tendency of moral evil; in itself
considered. This tendency, however strong and malignant, is counteracted and
overruled by infinite power, wisdom and goodness. And thus considered in God's
hands, and permitted by him, it answers good ends. In a word, it is not the
tendency of sin, as such, that Mr. Edwards is here speaking of; but the
tendency of God's permitting it, and holding it in his hands, and overruling
it to answer his own wise and good ends by it. How this author could make the
above assertion, in the form of a quotation from Mr. Edwards, is yet
unaccountable.

He also insinuates that Mr. Edwards in his book which he has undertaken to
examine, holds, "That the happiness of the creature is the sole end of the
creation." (Page 78, 79.) Since there is not any thing like this in Mr.
Edwards's whole book; and in his dissertation "Concerning the end for which God
created the world," published since his death, he has asserted and labored to
prove the contrary, is it not unaccountable that this author should take it in
his head to make such a representation? I confess, when I read this paragraph
over, and observe what artful studied method he has taken, in order to fasten
such a sentiment on Mr. Edwards, and make president Clap appear inconsistent
with himself, I am persuaded every discerning reader of an honest mind, will
conclude the author had good reason to conceal his name.

The longer I live, and the more I attend to the word of God, and the nature of
true religion, the more I am confirmed in the belief of the truth and
importance of the principal subject of the foregoing sermons; viz. that sin
shall be the occasion of the greatest good: That God's perfections shall be
manifested in an unspeakably more bright and glorious manner and degree; his
kingdom shall be more glorious; and there shall be immensely more holiness and
happiness forever, than could have been, if sin had not been permitted: And
that every instance of it is so far under God's direction, that it is
overruled to answer some wise good end, which could not have been so well
answered any other way. And the more convinced I am that this truth is suited
to support and comfort all the true friends and servants of Christ: Nor can I
conceive how there can be any ground of true support and consolation to them
who are displeased with this doctrine; and cannot but desire their eyes may be
opened to see that truth, which has been the support and joy of God's people in
all ages; and in which great numbers, I trust, are now rejoicing on earth, and
in heaven!


