AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE OF TRUE HOLINESS. WITH An APPENDIX; CONTAINING An
Answer to the Rev. Mr. WILLIAM HART's Remarks on President EDWARDS's
Dissertation on the Nature of true Virtue: And brief Remarks on some Things the
Rev. Mr. MATHER has lately published. Also an Answer to the Rev. Mr.
HEMMENWAY's Vindication, etc.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS, M. A. Pastor of the First CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH in NEWPORT.

NEWPORT, Rhode Island: PRINTED BY SOLOMON SOUTHWICK, IN QUEEN STREET,
M,DCC,LXXIII.

ERRATA.
PAGE 70, bottom, read heaven. P. 84, line 21, for is r. are. For arises r.
arise. P. 92, l. 10, for truth r. virtue. P. 103, l. 4, from bot. for has r.
had. P. 116, bot. dele the comma after truth, and place it after which. P. 120,
l. 21, for to r. they. P. 124, l. 21, r understand. P. 126, l. 22, r. love. P,
144, l. 12. for H. r. M. P. 150, l. 16, after all place a period. P. 153, l.
27. r. withheld. P. 157, l. 23, r. faculties. P. 162, l. 13, for a r. any. P.
164, l. 11, for those r. these. Marg. l. 4. r affect. P. 165, l. 19. for M. r.
H -- y. P. 166, l. 9, from bot. r. not a duty. P. 167, l. 8, r. doctrine. Marg.
l. 17, for ver. 12. r. viz. P. 168, l. 1, 2, r. position. P. 173, l. 10, dele
comma after by. P. 196, l. 7, for 4 r. 5.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE holiness is, by the confession of all, the sum of all moral excellence,
and the highest and most necessary attainment; it is of the last importance
that we should well understand it is nature, and distinguish it from all
counterfeits. This will help us to understand the bible; to form right
conceptions of the divine perfections, and distinguish true religion from that
which is false. Wrong conceptions of the distinguishing nature of holiness lead
to all kinds of delusion in religion. And, on the other hand, just and clear
apprehensions of this are the best preservative from fatal mistakes; and have
the happiest tendency to remove the difference and opposition in sentiments,
and the sad divisions, so common among professing Christians: And to bring them
to 'speak the same thing, and be perfectly joined together in the same mind,
and in the same judgment.'

The more I have attended to the religious controversies of this day, among us,
the more have I been convinced that our different sentiments chiefly originate,
either from too great inattention to the nature of holiness, or very different
apprehensions about it: And that the real question is, What is God's moral
character? What is conformity to it? What opposes it? Were we agreed in this,
most of these disputes would subside. In this view, they are far from being
trifling, and deserving that neglect and contempt, with which many affect to
treat them. But appear interesting, important, and worthy the attention of all.

I humbly conceive there has been too little attention to the nature of
holiness, among divines in general; and that a proper and intelligible
definition of it is not easily to be found in bodies of divinity, or elsewhere.
And most of those who think it a very easy matter to tell what holiness is, and
that we are all agreed in this, have been contented with a set of words, which
express no distinct ideas; but leave the thing wholly in the dark. They will
perhaps say, God's holiness is his purity. If it is asked, in what does this
purity consist? The common answer is, in that which is opposite to all sin, the
greatest impurity. We have now got what, I think, is the most common definition
of holiness. But who is the wiser? This does not help us to any idea of this
purity, unless we know what sin is. But this cannot be known, so long as we
know not what holiness is: For we do not learn what holiness is, by first
obtaining the idea of sin; but we must first know what holiness, or, which is
the same, what the divine law is, in order to the knowledge of sin.

Some have attempted to tell what holiness is, by saying, It is not properly a
distinct attribute of God; but the beauty and glory of all God's moral
perfections. But we get no idea by these words, till we are told what is this
beauty and glory. To say, it is holiness, is saying nothing, or that which is
no better.

Under a conviction of this too general inattention to the nature of holiness
-- the great defect in the most common descriptions of it -- the importance of
distinct and clear ideas of it -- that the controversies before us turn chiefly
upon this and will be decided the shortest and best way, by determining what
holiness is; I present to the public the following inquiry; hoping it may give
some light on the subject, and assist such as are willing to inquire into the
nature of holiness, as described in divine revelation: And in the light of
this, help them to find on which side the truth lies, in the present
controversies.

In this, however, I don't pretend to be an original. President EDWARDS, in his
dissertation on the nature of true virtue, has given the same account of
holiness for substance, though under a different name, which the reader will
find in the following inquiry. All I can pretend to, as an improvement on him,
is to have explained some things more fully than he did; and more particularly
stated the opposition of holiness to self-love; and shown that this
representation of holiness is agreeable to the scripture: And to have answered
some objections he has not mentioned, and made a number of inferences.

As Mr. Heart had published objections against Mr. Edwards's account of the
nature of true virtue, it seemed necessary they should be considered and
obviated. This I have done in an appendix, that what puts on the air of
controversy might be by itself, and at the same time have the advantage of the
foregoing inquiry.

As Mr. Mather had published something respecting self-love, etc. which
appeared very contrary to the nature of holiness; and on this ground objected
to Mr. Edwards's ac-account of a holy taste, and to some things wrote by me;
some brief remarks on him are subjoined, to detect the fallacy of his scheme,
and show that his objections are groundless. Some remarks were also intended on
what Mr. Dickinson has published in support of the affirmative of the following
questions.

I. Whether blindness of mind, is the primary cause of all wickedness, that
there is in the hearts and lives of men?

II. Whether the work of regeneration, is wrought in the souls of men, by the
supernatural influences of the holy spirit, operating with the gospel, whereby
they are enlightened, and enables to know and love the truth as it is in Jesus?

But as, on further consideration, it appeared probable that few would admit
the extraordinary things he asserts in order to support these propositions, viz
That our first parents, while perfectly holy, admitted the most blasphem us
thought of God, and really believed them to be just, which we sinners can
hardly mention without horror, and that there was no sin in all this. P. 12. --
That the angels before they sinned, and while they were perfectly fautless were
blind, through their own fault, by some means of other.' P. 14 -- That faith in
Christ is the great duty that is commanded in the gospel, and the first act of
obedience:' And yet must take place before there is any change of heart, as the
cause of all obedience. -- And since he does not attempt to confute any thing I
have said in support of the contrary; and all he says is really obviated in the
inquiry and appendix: I have (...) the remarks proposed, to make room for an
answer to Mr. Hemmenway, which seemed of much more importance.




When Mr. Hemmenway's vindication made its appearance, several reasons, the
principal of which is mentioned in the introduction, induced me to answer him
in an appendix: Whence the book exceeds the size at first proposed.

However disagreeable these disputes are in themselves, and offensive to many,
I have the satisfaction to think they have already been of great advantage to
truth; and the pleasure of believing they will yet be more so, if protracted.
When in this sense, many run to and fro, knowledge will be increased.

There are those, I know, who, in their own apprehensions, dwell in superior
light, looking down with pity, if not resentment and contempt, upon those
concerned in these disputes, as doing much mischief -- contending in the dark
about they know not what -- disputing about words, etc. And are too wise so
much as to read any of these controversial writings, being possessed of the
happy talent of determining all these matters without any of this trouble, or
much thought. We are willing such should know we do not envy their superior
knowledge and wisdom; and think they would not give less evidence of them, were
they willing to be at the pains of hearing the matter, before they answer.

The author wishes that peace, truth, and HOLINESS, may be promoted by these
efforts: And that they may, in some measure, conduce to bring on the happy
era, when 'the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall fill the earth, as the
waters cover the sea': And 'there shall be upon the bells of the horses,
HOLINESS UNTO the LORD.'

May every reader remember, that whatever are his speculations, and which side
soever of the disputed questions he takes; yet without holiness, no man shall
see the LORD. And let him who reads, and is in any measure enlightened, and
strengthened in the way of holiness, by what is now offered to his perusal,
bless God, and give all the glory to HIM.

NEWPORT, June 2, 1773.
CONTENTS.
SEECTION I. Some introductory observations concerning the nature of true
holiness, p. 1-7 SECT. II. Holiness consists in love, p. 7-9 SECT. III. What
that love is, in which all true holiness consists, p. 9-18 SECT. IV.
Self-love shown to be no part of that love in which holiness consists; but of a
nature quite different and opposite, p. 19-31 SECT. V. The foregoing account of
holiness and sin shown to be agreeable to reason, p. 31-35 SECT. VI. Holiness,
as taught in divine divine revelation, consists in universal benevolence, p.
35-60 SECT. VII. Objections answered, p. 60-67 SECT. VIII. Inferences from the
foregoing account of the nature of holiness, p. 67-78
APPENDIX
Numb. I. Answer to Mr. Hart's remarks on President Edwards's dissertation
concerning the nature of true virtue, p. 81-142 SECT. I. Mr. Harts's objections
against Mr. Edwards's making true vittue to consist primarily in benevolence,
which has universal being for it is primary object, considered and answered, p.
81-91 SECT. II. Mr. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's notion of the
secondary or natural beauty in virtue, considered and obviated, p. 91-109 SECT.
III. Mr. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's account of natural conscience
and moral sense, considered and answered, p. 109-132 SECT. IV. Mr. Hart's
account of the essential nature of true virtue, and of a defective sort of
virtue, etc. considered, p. 132-142 NUMB. II. Remarks on Mr. Mather, p. 143-160
NUMB. III. Answer to Mr. Hemmenway, p. 161-220 Introduction, p. 161, 162 SECT.
I. The point in controversy more particularly stated: The method Mr. H -- y
takes to support his cause: It Is weakness and fallacy shown, p. 163-167 SECT.
II. Remarks on Mr. H -- y's particular arguments to prove his point, p. 168-197
SECT. III. A brief reply to Mr. H -- y's answer to my arguments, proving the
unregenerate do no duty, p. 198-204 SECT. IV. Remarks on what Mr. H -- y says
of the inability of the unregenerate, p. 204-213 SECT. V. The evil tendency of
Mr. H -- y's book, p. 214-220
An INQUIRY into the Nature of TRUE HOLINESS, etc.
SECTION I. SOME general, introductory observations concerning the nature of
true holiness.
I. HOLINESS is, in all respects, perfectly consistent with right reason, and
agreeable to its dictates: Or reason, properly exercised and improved, will in
all cases, and without fail, determine holiness to be what it really is.
However vitiated the taste may be, and the heart disrelish, hate and oppose
true holiness, the same person's reason and judgment may pronounce it to be
holiness. Though the reason of man is liable to be blinded and prejudiced, by
the vicious taste and reigning lusts of his heart, and often is so to an
amazing degree; yet it is not always and necessarily so blinded; but may, and
often does, dictate the truth in this matter; and always does, when reason is
properly exercised. Hence men of corrupt minds, enemies to holiness in heart
and practice, may reason well about the nature of holiness, and be able to
prove what it consists in, by incontestible arguments. Hence the propriety of
reasoning on this subject. And we may be sure that so far as we reason right,
and find what reason dictates, we have found the truth.

II. Holiness is that in which the highest enjoyment or happiness consists; and
is really the greatest good in the universe. It, in a sense and degree, puts us
in possession of all good. That therefore which gives true enjoyment, and tends
to the highest, perfect, universal good of intelligent beings, is true
holiness; and nothing else can be worthy of that name.

It is true, that holiness may be the occasion of misery; and a perfectly holy
being may not be perfectly happy, in certain peculiar circumstances. As the
imperfect holiness of the saints in this life, is the occasion of pain and
distress of mind, which no unholy person can have: And Christ, in the human
nature, though perfectly holy, was subject to great pain and sufferings. But
this is not properly owing to any thing in the nature and tendency of holiness,
but the peculiar circumstances which attend it. Therefore those exercises of
mind which give a being the highest enjoyment his nature is capable of, and put
him in possession of all possible good, and at the same time promote the
greatest happiness of the whole, is true holiness. And those exercises which
have not this nature, but the contrary, are opposed to holiness.

III. Holiness is the highest possible excellence in the universe. It is that
in which the highest and most perfect beauty, and all real worth do summarily
consist. It Is in such a sense and degree the excellence and perfection of
intelligent beings, that without it they have no real excellence, nor any true
worth; but they are, in themselves, odious, despicable, and worse than nothing.
The more they have of natural capacity, powers and endowments, if they have no
holiness, the further they are from all real excellence, and the more hateful;
because they, not being holy, are of course more opposed to holiness, or have
more of that which is moral evil, than beings of less natural capacities could
have.

If holiness could be banished from the universe, considered as comprehending
Creator and creatures, and should actually cease, there would be no real
excellence or worth in universal existence: But it would be in truth infinitely
worse than universal nothing. Holiness is the beauty, excellence, brightness,
glory and perfection of God, by whatever name it is called. And this is true of
all intelligent creatures. Therefore, if we can find what true moral beauty,
worth or excellence is, it will determine what is holiness.

IV. Holiness is that by which intelligent beings are united together, in the
highest, most perfect and beautiful union. It consists in that harmony of
affection, and union of heart, by which the intelligent system becomes ONE, so
far as holiness prevails; which fixes every being, by his own inclination and
choice, in his proper place, so as in the best manner to promote the good of
the whole. -- There is no moral beauty or happiness among intelligent beings,
without harmony and union of heart. All sin is opposed to this; it sets
intelligences in opposition to each other, and spreads the most disagreeable,
unhappy discord. But holiness unites them; it consists in the highest and most
excellent kind of union in nature. It is the most excellent and perfect bond,
by which intelligent beings are, by their own voluntary exertions, united and
cemented together, in the strongest and most happy manner. If we can, with any
degree of certainty then, determine what affection of heart that is, which thus
unites intelligent beings, we may be equally certain that we have found the
object of our inquiry, viz. true holiness.

V. Holiness is essentially, in nature and kind, the same thing in all beings
that are capable of it. Holiness in God is not different, in nature and kind,
from the holiness of creatures. God's holiness differs from the holiness of
creatures in degree, and in circumstances, or in mode and form, agreeable to
the infinite degree of his existence, and the different manner and
circumstances in which he exists; but is of the same nature, and so essentially
the same thing, in both. We have the greatest certainty of this, in that
holiness in the creature is, in scripture, called the image of God, and that by
which they partake of the divine nature; and is represented to be the holy
spirit of God, or God's holiness, dwelling and acting in them; by which God
dwells in them, and they dwell in God.

Holiness in different creatures may also differ in some circumstances, and in
the particular form and manner of its exercises, owing to their very different
state, relations and circumstances. Thus, the holiness of creatures, who never
have sinned, is, in some respects, as to the form and manner of its excercises,
different from the holiness of those who have sinned, and being redeemed by
Christ, are recovered to holiness. And in this lies the difference between what
is called legal holiness, and evangelical holiness; the former being the
holiness of angels, and of man before he sinned; the latter is the holiness of
those who are redeemed from among men. This difference might easily be pointed
out; but this will not be attempted here, as we are inquiring into the general
nature of true holiness. This, I say, is the same in all creatures; and
therefore has but one and the same rule, the law of God, and consists in
conformity to that.

Therefore, if we can find what is the nature of divine holiness, we may be
certain that we have found what is the holiness of creatures; and so vice
versa. This therefore must be kept in mind, as what may be of use in our
inquiry.

VI. True holiness is in its own nature one simple, uncompounded thing. It is
not made up of different and various kinds of exercises, properties and
ingredients, which may exist distinct and separate, or in any degree
independent of each other, and being put together make one compound: But, in
opposition to this, is perfectly simple and uncompounded.

This is most certainly true of the divine holiness. And if holiness in
creatures is of the same nature and kind, being a participation of the divine
nature, and consists in the spirit of God imparted to the soul, and dwelling in
it, which is the scriptural representation of the matter, as has been observed;
then this must be true of creature holiness.

Holiness is in scripture called life: It is indeed the highest and most
perfect kind of life. Now life is one simple thing: It is not compounded of
different things, and made up of various parts, which differ in nature and
kind, and do not imply and involve the whole. This may receive some
illustration, perhaps, from animal life. This, as it appears in exercises
toward different objects, in various circumstances, and by different senses,
sight, taste, hearing, etc. is called by different names; but it is the same
simple, uncompounded thing in its nature, and in all its exercises: It is the
same animal life, in whatever form or name it appears. Every property and
motion, is the motion and property of this same life, and implies the whole. So
holiness, though it has obtained different names, as it is exercised in
different circumstances, and toward different objects, is the same most
simple, undivided spiritual life. This remark may be of use in the inquiry we
are entering upon. It has been said, that virtue is a complex thing: It does
not primarily consist in one single disposition, tendency or affection of mind,
all other affections rising out of that as their root; but includes various
affections, equally original and essential to virtue. But not the least
probable evidence of this assertion has been offered, or even attempted, so far
as I have observed. See Mr. Hart's remarks on president Edwards, p. 40, 41.


VII. The nature and distinguishing properties of true holiness are so clearly
described in the holy scriptures, that nothing is needed but to understand the
most important truths revealed there, in order to know what true holiness is,
as distinguished from all counterfeits. It is one chief end of divine
revelation to make known and ascertain the distinguishing nature of true
holiness. The great end of divine revelation is to make known the true God to
man, and manifest his glory; especially to reveal his moral perfections, which
is his glory. And this is the same with his holiness; for this is all the moral
perfection in the universe. And so far as the bible reveals the duty and
happiness of man, which is doubtless done with all possible clearness, and in
the wisest and best manner, just so far is the nature of true holiness
revealed; for in this both the duty and happiness of man consist. Therefore he
only understands his bible, who has learned what is true holiness: And he who
is ignorant of the nature and properties of this, is blind to the most leading,
important things contained in divine revelation. He knows not God; he is
ignorant of the divine law, and the gospel; of Jesus Christ, and his own true
interest. The bible is indeed a sealed book to him, and he is in darkness even
until now. But he who has a true idea of holiness, knows him who is holy in
all his works: He understands the gospel, and walks in the light. This at
once shows how important the inquiry is which we are entering upon; and the
great help we may expect from the bible, in determining this question; and
consequently, the reasonableness and importance of attending constantly to
that, in all our inquiries of this nature.

These observations, being kept in view, will greatly help us in our inquiry
into the nature of true holiness, and serve as landmarks to direct us. If
reason, when properly improved will direct us to it -- If it is that alone in
which true happiness consists, and which tends to the greatest general good --
If it is the highest, the supreme beauty and excellence; that in which all the
real worth of intelligences consists, and without which the intellectual, moral
world would be infinitely worse than nothing -- If it unites intelligent beings
together, in the most amiable, happy manner and degree; and is the only bond of
such union -- If it is, in its nature, one simple thing; so that if we can find
what is any one thing which comes into the nature of holiness; or any thing
which is properly a branch of holiness, we have found, in that, every thing
essential. -- If holiness is the same in nature and kind, in whatever being it
is found -- If one chief design of divine revelation is to teach us what
holiness is, and it is from the beginning to the end of the bible held up to
view in the most clear and intelligible manner, in the best way to give us a
true idea of it, as it stands distinguished from every thing else; so that he
who runs may read it See Isaiah xxxv. 8.
-- If all this is true, then surely nothing can be more certainly, and with
greater case determined, than the question before us; as we may be sure, on the
one hand, that whatsoever does not agree to all these, is not true holiness,
however it may seem to agree to some: And on the other hand, that which is
found to bear all these marks, has the divine stamp, and may be safely fixed
upon, without any further researches.

SECTION II. Wherein it is showed that holiness consists in LOVE.
THE law of God is the standard of all moral rectitude, or holiness. Holiness
consists in conformity to this, and in nothing else: Therefore the knowledge of
the precepts of the moral law, decides the question before us; for whatever the
holy law of God requires is holiness, and nothing else can deserve the name.
Our divine teacher has, in his great wisdom and goodness, given us a summary of
the divine law, in the following words: Thou shall LOVE the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first
and great commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou shall LOVE thy
neighbor as thyself. Upon these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets. Matt. xxii. 37, 38, 39, 40.


Here all obedience to the law of God is reduced to one thing, LOVE; love to
God and our neighbor, including ourselves; this is the whole that is required.
Therefore this is the whole of true holiness; it consists in this love, and in
nothing else. When Christ says, 'on these two commandments hang all the law and
the prophets,' he must be understood to assert, that the whole of the law and
the prophets, all that is required in them, is love. All depends upon this; so
that if love is removed, all that is required is removed; the law and the
prophets come to nothing, and fall to the ground. Take love away, and there is
nothing left that is required in the whole of divine revelation. If love was
not the whole that the law requires, it could not be said to be wholly
suspended on this, so as utterly to fall, if love is excluded: For the law
would still exist, as there would be yet something commanded.

But if there could be any doubt about the meaning of these words of our
savior, St. Paul has explained them, when he says, 'LOVE is the fulfilling of
the law; for all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.' If all the law is fulfilled in love, then this
is all that the law requires; for the law is not fulfilled, unless the whole is
given which it requires. Therefore love is the whole of that obedience which
the law requires. Perfect, supreme love to God, and that love to our neighbor
which is implied in it, i. e. loving him as ourselves: This LOVE expressed in
all proper ways, which is implied in its being perfect, is the fulfilling of
the law; this is true holiness. Therefore the love of God, and keeping his
commandments is spoken of as one thing: 'For this is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments.' 1 John v. 3.
This could not be, if there was any obedience or holiness, which is not love;
or there was any command which required any thing less or more than love. Romans
xiii. 10. Gal. v. 14.


Thus far then we go on sure ground, and have the greatest certainty that
holiness consists in LOVE. And all the difficulty in the question before us is
in determining what is meant by love; what is the nature and kind of that love
which the law requires. This will be particularly attended to in the following
section.

SECTION III. Wherein it is inquired what that love is, in which all true
holiness consists.
THOUGH it is certain from the holy scriptures that all true holiness consists
in love; yet all love is not holiness. If it were, then all men would be holy,
and have a great degree of holiness; for we all exercise much love, even in all
our volitions and conduct. But it is so far from being true, that all kinds of
love, and love to all objects is holiness, that there is a sinful love often
spoken of in scripture. Such is the love of them that hate the Lord; 2 Chronicles.
xix. 2.
The love of the world; 1 John ii. 15.
and love of our own selves. 2 Timothy iii. 2.
There is a kind of love therefore which is in its nature contrary to holiness.
Of this the world has been full in all ages. It is necessary therefore that we
should carefully inquire into the nature and kind of holy love, in order to
find the true and proper distinction and difference between that, and the love
in which there is no holiness.

Love has been usually distinguished into love of benevolence or good will;
love of complacence or delight; love of esteem -- and love of gratitude. The
love of benevolence is good will to beings capable of good or happiness, and
consists in desiring and pursuing their good, or rejoicing in their possessing
it. By benevolence is, I suppose, most commonly meant, that good will which is
exercised toward other beings, in distinction from self-love: But good will is
as really implied in self-love, as in the love of others; for they who love
themselves only, exercise good will toward themselves.

Complacence is that affection of the mind in which we are pleased with any
object. There is what may be called complacence in benevolence itself, even in
all the exercises of it; being necessarily implied in it. Good Will to any
being, supposes a taste for good and happiness, and that we have some good in
view, with which we are pleased. If any one wishes well to himself only, this
is taking delight in some good, as his own. And wishing well to others, implies
a taste and relish for the good of others, as theirs, and a delight in it, when
they are seen possessed of it.

But by the love of complacence, when distinguished from benevolence, is, I
think, generally meant, the pleasure and delight we take in the person and
character of an intelligent being, as beautiful and excellent. In this sense
the word will be used in this discourse. And, complacence being understood in
this sense, it may be observed, that benevolence and complacence have not
always the same object. We may exercise good will to a person whose whole
character is very disagreeable and displeasing to us; so that he may, at the
same time, be the object of our benevolence and of our displicence and
aversion; because, though capable of happiness, his present character is
disagreeable and hateful.

The love of esteem is nothing distinct from benevolence and complacence,
exercised toward a worthy, excellent object, at least in our apprehension. The
love of gratitude is that affection which we exercise toward another,
considered as a benefactor, for his good will exercised toward ourselves, or
others. This includes in it both benevolence and complacence, and is nothing
distinct from this, as might be easily shown, was there need of it; and will
perhaps be mere particularly attended to in the sequel.

Having observed these things concerning love in general, it now remains to be
said, what that love is in which holiness consists. This is love to God and
our neighbor, including ourselves; and is universal benevolence, or friendly
affection to all intelligent beings. This universal benevolence, with all that
affection or love which is included in it, and inseparable from it, is the holy
love which God's law requires, and is the whole of true holiness. This love is
distinguished from all other kinds of love, both in its nature, and object. The
object is,

1. Universal being, including God and all intelligent creatures. Benevolence,
or universal goodness, has for its object all beings which exist, capable of
good, or that can be, in any sense and degree, objects of good will. Any kind
of good will, or any thing which has the appearance of benevolence, which is
limited to particular objects, and will not extend to all toward which good
will can be exercised, is not universal benevolence; but is essentially
different from it, and quite of another nature. That good will, which will
extend only to a limited number, or a certain kind or circle of beings, by the
supposition, is not universal good will: It falls, as it were, infinitely short
of it, in this respect, and is so far from uniting its subject to universal
existence, that it is circumscribed by very narrow bounds, and is consistent
with ill will and opposition to general existence; yea, it is in fact in its
own nature such: For it sets up an infinitely small part of existence, compared
with the whole, and regards it above the whole; which has the nature of
unfriendly disregard, and real opposition to the whole. It hence appears to be
so far from true universal benevolence, that it is of an opposite nature; as it
does from its nature oppose it. Besides, it is certain that such limited good
will has nothing of the nature of universal goodness, but it is something in
its own nature which thus limits it to a small part of being, in opposition to
being in general, as there can be no other reason of this limitation, but the
nature of the affection itself: Which could not be, if it was not in nature
different from universal benevolence, and contrary to it. Mr. Edwards has set
this in a clear light, in his dissertation concerning the nature of true
virtue, p. 129, 130, 131.

And this view of the matter shows us in what sense universal existence is the
primary object of holy benevolence. This is the first and most essential thing
in it, in which lies its distinction from all love which is not holy. This is
the leading, governing thing in it, as that in which its peculiar
dishinguishing nature consists. He who exercises true benevolence toward any
particular being, does it as a friend to the whole; so that his love to him is
really love to being in general, as he belongs to the whole, and is included in
it.




But holy love unites the heart to universal existence, so far as it comes into
view, and is the most cordial friendship to all without exception; and wishes
and seeks the good of every individual, so far as this is consistent with the
greatest good of being in general; except those who are known implacable
enemies to general existence. And these are necessarily opposed by this
universal benevolence.

2. Another object of universal benevolence is the highest good of the whole.
As soon and as far as the eyes of the benevolent person are opened to see what
is the true good of intelligent beings, and highest happiness of the universe,
this good becomes the object of his wishes. And as holiness itself is this true
and highest good, even holy love and benevolence, by which intelligences are
united together in the most beautiful, happy manner, every one to his utmost
conspiring to promote the greatest general good, and enjoying this good: I say,
as this is the highest good, it becomes the object of his delight, and of his
wishes; so that this is the object of his benevolence, and of his complacence
at the same time. And in this also holy love is distinguished from every other
kind of love, as that has not holiness for its object in any sense or degree,
but is consistent with the utmost aversion to it. And this holy love differs
from all other kinds of love in its nature, as well as object. The nature of it
may be determined by its object. That affection whose object not only differs
in nature and kind from the object of other love, but is opposite to it, must
itself be of a different and opposite nature. But the particular nature of this
love will be more fully explained hereafter.

This universal benevolence, or love to being in general, must have God, who is
infinitely the greatest and most excellent, and the sum of all being and
perfection, for its object, and is exercised toward him, in loving him with
all the heart, with all the soul, with all the mind, and with all the strength.
This is, I think, well expressed by Mr. EDWARDS, in the following words: The
mind being under the sovran dominion of love to God, does, above all things,
seek the glory of God, and make this his supreme, governing, and ultimate end;
consisting in the expression of God's perfections in their proper effects, and
in the communications of the infinite fullness of God to the creature; in the
creature's highest esteem of God, love to God, and joy in God, and in the
proper exercises and expressions of these. -- And as far as such a mind
exercises benevolence to created beings, it chiefly seeks the good of the
creature, consisting in its knowledge or view of God's glory and beauty, its
union with God, conformity and love to him, and joy in him. And that temper or
disposition of heart, that consent, union, or propensity of mind to being in
general, which appears chiefly in such exercises, is real holiness. And no
other affection but this is of the nature of true virtue. Nature of true
virtue, p. 133.


But it will be proper here more particularly to show, that all holy affection
consists in this benevolence or goodness; and that it can consist in nothing
but this, and what is implied in it. This will be evident, if the two following
propositions can be supported.

1. Universal benevolence does imply love of complacence, and all holy love. He
who exercises universal benevolence does esteem and take complacency in all,
according to their worth and excellence: For not to do so is unkind and
injurious, and therefore contrary to the nature of benevolence. And benevolent
affection, from the necessity of its nature, is pleased with this same
affection in others. Every one must be pleased with friendship to those to whom
he himself is a friend; for not to be so, would be a contradiction.

Benevolent, kind affection necessarily implies also gratitude to benefactors
for kindness exercised; for this is nothing else but being properly affected
with the benevolence of others, which has just been shown to be the nature of
benevolence. Besides, not to exercise gratitude toward the benevolent and
kind, is itself unkind; and therefore contrary to the nature of benevolence. A
man must be stripped of all true benevolence, in order to exclude gratitude:
Where the former is, the latter is found to an equal degree. -- Thus evident is
it, that all holy love is implied in universal benevolence; so that he who has
this, certainly has the whole. To suppose a person truly benevolent, and not to
exercise holy love of esteem, complacence and gratitude, in all suitable ways,
and toward all proper objects, is a most glaring contradiction, and to imagine
a character which never did, nor can exist,

2. On the contrary, where there is no holy love of benevolence, there can be
no holy love of any kind. Since benevolence necessarily includes all holy love,
in its very nature; where this is not, there is not, there cannot be, any holy
love.

The love of gratitude supposes benevolence, and is really an exercise of this.
Gratitude is certainly an approbation of benevolence, which never takes place
in a mind destitute of it. And what is gratitude but an exercise of friendly
affection toward the benevolent? So certain is it that where there is no good
will, there is no true gratitude. This is so evident at first thought, that
it is needless to enlarge.

But I shall be more particular in producing evidence that there can be no holy
love of complacence, where there is no benevolence. Holy complacence is the
love of holiness for holiness sake; or the approbation of a holy character, for
its intrinsic beauty and excellence. That there can be no holy complacence,
independent of benevolence, is evident from the following considerations.

The mind cannot have any holy complacence in universal goodness, while itself
is wholly destitute of it. The mind which is wholly devoid of kind affection,
has no true, sensible idea of benevolence, and consequently can have no delight
in it. Delight or complacence is a sensation of the mind, which cannot be
exercised toward that object of which it has no true sense; but the mind which
has no benevolence, has no sensation of it; for such a sensation implies
benevolence; and therefore can have no complacence in it. As the love of
holiness, is an exercise of holiness; so the love of holy benevolence, implies
the exercise of benevolence. Therefore he who has no benevolence, has no
complacence in it. -- But that affection of the mind which is not the love of
all holiness, in whatever it may consist, is not a true holy complacence; but
something of a different nature. Therefore there can be no holy complacence in
holiness, without the exercise of benevolence: Consequently where there is no
benevolence, there is no holy exercise of mind.

But this will be more evident, if possible, by considering the love of
complacence, as exercised toward God. It will appear, on due consideration,
that the person who has no universal benevolence, does not heartily approve of
the benevolence of God; and therefore does not delight in God's holiness or
moral character, so far as it consists in benevolence. -- But he who is not a
friend to the holy benevolence of God, is certainly not a friend to holiness in
general, and so has no complacency in any true holiness. Yea, he who has no
benevolence in his heart, is an enemy to benevolence: For the heart of man is
in no such instance indifferent, neither friendly, nor opposed to any thing in
God's moral character; is never in such a state, as neither to approve nor
disapprove. Therefore such an one is an enemy to universal benevolence in God:
Whence it follows that he has no true love to God's moral character. For he who
is displeased with any thing in the moral character of God, is certainly
displeased with the whole, as the holiness of God is not inconsistent with
itself; but is one most simple thing.

The holiness of God, which is expressed in his law, and in the gospel (for the
same character and the same holiness is expressed in both) consists, in a great
measure at least, in such supreme regard to himself, and the highest happiness
and glory of his kingdom, that he holds every one who opposes him and his
kingdom, or has the least disrespect, or even indifference toward him and his
glory, justly exposed to eternal damnation; and is disposed to inflict it on
all such who cannot be delivered from it, consistent with his own highest
honor, and the greatest good of the whole.

Now, it is in the nature of things impossible, that he who has no regard to
God and his glory, and no universal good will, should in the least approve of
such a character. Yea, he must be at enmity with it, as there is no medium. He
who is not for it, is against it. The mind thus estranged from universal good
will, is 'The carnal mind, which is enmity against God." Romans viii. 7.


This will appear still more glaring, by observing, what will be more
particularly considered hereafter, that the holy love of God, which is most
celebrated in the divine oracles, as worthy of our love and imitation, is the
love of benevolence, which God exercises and manifests toward fallen man, who
has become his enemy. This is certainly a love, not of complacence, but of
benevolence, as all love to enemies must be. Now he who has not that
benevolence which disposes him to love his enemies, will not be pleased with
this love of God; but displeased. He who has no love to his enemies, but
cherishes the contrary affection, will not be pleased with that good will which
is equally extended to his enemies, and to himself; but such love must be the
object of his aversion.

Thus evident is it, that they who have no benevolence, do not approve of God's
holiness or moral character, revealed in his word; since universal benevolence
must be the object, not of their delight, but of their aversion: And
consequently, that the holy love of complacence cannot exist independent of
benevolence; which was the point to be proved. Mr. Heart says, men are drawn to
God 'by his giving them to feel in themselves his attracting love and virtue,
and paternal benevolence and propensity of heart toward them; by a realizing
belief of which, their hearts are put in motion toward him, that all true
virtue, and virtuous love begins thus.' That this being 'perceived, realized,
and felt, as extended to them, is the true cause, ground and source of the
first existence of such a thing in them as a truly virtuous propensity of heart
to him,' (remarks on president Edwards, p. 23, 24.)

Upon this it may be observed, that the love of God, which Mr. Heart here speaks
of, is the love of benevolence, God's paternal benevolence.' It is the love of
benevolence, not only as it is love to enemies; but as it is love and grace, in
and through Jesus Christ; in which God is represented in the most clear and
striking light, as having such a regard to himself and the general good (which
is nothing but universal benevolence) that he will not show any favor to
sinners, unless his glory and the general good be effectually secured by Christ
the mediator. And he who sees not God's grace and love to men in this light,
knows not what is the grace of God in Jesus Christ. Therefore the sense of this
love of God, in which their hearts are drawn to him, is itself of the nature of
benevolence, and the exercise of it: For, as has been shown, it is impossible
that be who has no holy benevolence, should heartily approve of such
benevolence, and take pleasure in it. Therefore, according to Mr. H. the first
exercise of holiness in men cannot be an exercise of love, in which there is no
benevolence; but this must be the very essence of the first holy act, in which
the soul is attracted to God, as the fountain and (...) of benevolence, or
universal goodness.

If Mr. H. will show how a sinner, while wholly destitute of benevolence, and
wholly inclined to contrary exercises, can feel the attracting influence of
God's benevolence; and take complacence in his universal goodness; and, under
this attracting influence, return to God, and become his true friend, without
any good will to God, or any other being: We will then grant that universal
benevolence is not necessarily implied in the first, nor in any subsequent
motion of the sinner's heart toward God, and his neighbor.

If it should be said, that when sinners have a realizing belief of God's
'paternal benevolence and propensity of heart toward them,' they do not
consider it as universal benevolence; but only as love to themselves in
particular, and that this attracts their hearts to God, while yet they have no
approbation of general benevolence, or the least apprehension of it: -- Upon
this I would observe, that this may be Mr. H.'s meaning, and he may express
himself thus, through inattention to the true notion of general benevolence, as
many doubtless have done. But if the matter is viewed in this light, there is
nothing of the nature of holiness in the attraction of their hearts to God,
merely because they think he loves them. As they may exercise this love without
any benevolence, so they may, and must do it, without the least degree of
holiness. It has been shown that this is not a true fight and belief of the
love of God; and it will appear, I hope, in the sequel, that this has nothing
of the nature of holiness; but is consistent with the reigning power of every
lust. I shall here only take notice of the most express decision of our savior
himself. 'If ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? For sinners love
those that love them.' (Luke vi. 32.) Men may be easily converted upon this
plan, without having new hearts given them, or any change of heart for the
better. They want this light only, i. e. a belief that God loves them (which is
not light indeed, but delusion) and they will love him, in this view, and on
this ground only, without any disposition to love their enemies, and consistent
with their continuing to hate the holiness of God.




But if any reader should not see the conclusiveness of these arguments, he is
desired to reflect on his own sense of this matter, whether he does not always
so include benevolence in his idea of a good character; that to exclude it,
will utterly spoil the whole; I doubt not this is the common sense of all men;
and nothing is looked upon a more certain evidence, that a man has no holiness,
than that conduct which discovers he has no kind affection, but is unmerciful
and cruel.

SECTION IV. Wherein self-love is shown to be no part of that love in which
holiness consists; but of a nature quite different and opposite.
SELF-LOVE has been represented by many, not only as a branch of holiness; but
that in which it radically consists, making it the spring of all our actions.
Some have thought it not only no part of holiness, but opposed to it. Others
have taken a medium between these two, and represented self-love to be in its
nature innocent and good; but not holy love, unless love to God and our
neighbor be joined with it, to regulate and govern it. -- In order to
determine which of these opinions is right, we must understand what is intended
by self-love. By this very different things are meant by different, and often
by the same persons. There are three things especially, often called by that
name, and their not being distinguished, has occasioned great confusion and
error in treating this subject.

First. A general appetite to good, and aversion to evil, considered merely as
such, or a perception of pain or pleasure, is called self love. This is
essential to all moral agents, being implied in every act of will. If nothing
was good or evil to us, we could have no choice or power of will, more than a
tree or rock; for by the supposition we should be perfectly indifferent to
every thing We could neither love nor hate, choose nor refuse. This general
appetite is therefore common to all moral agents, holy and sinful, and is
essential to every act, both of sin and holiness. It is properly a natural
capacity; as much so as the faculty of understanding, or power of will; and is
the very same thing, indeed, with the latter, or at least implied in it. It is
therefore, in itself, neither sinful nor holy; but a foundation or capacity for
either. Should this cease in angels and devils, they would no longer be holy or
sinful.

Secondly. By self-love is sometimes meant selfishness, or those exercises in
which a person loves himself only, which wholly confine him to his own personal
interest; he taking no pleasure in any thing else, but placing all his good and
happiness here. This is most properly called self-love; as it is a man's love
of his own self as self, and of nothing else; and therefore is opposed to the
love of others, or universal benevolence. This is wholly an interested, selfish
affection, by which a person sets up himself as supreme, and the only object of
regard; and nothing is good or lovely in his view, unless it coincide with his
selfishness, and be suited to promote his own private interest: All other
beings are by him subordinated to himself, and loved for his own sake only; and
so far as they oppose, or do not serve this contracted, partial interest, in
which he places all his good and happiness, are either hated, or totally
disregarded. -- In a word, the disposition and language of his heart is, There
is nothing in the whole universe of any worth to me, but my own self; if I may
be happy, it is enough. There is no need of any labored proof to show that
such exercises of heart are, in their nature, opposition to universal
good will: This appears at first view. Therefore, if the latter has any thing
of the nature of holiness, the former must stand directly opposed to it.

Thirdly. By self-love may be understood the love a person has for himself as
part of the whole, which is implied in universal benevolence. He who loves the
whole, loves every part of the whole; therefore must love himself, and seek his
own happiness, as he is included in general being. It Is a contradiction to
suppose that a person has universal good will, and yet has no regard to
himself. This love of ourselves is therefore necessarily implied in that
universal benevolence which is opposed to the selfishness described above. That
is altogether selfish, consisting in a man's loving himself, as self, or merely
because he is himself, but this love of himself of which I am now speaking, is
not love of self, as self, but as implied in the general object of love; and
therefore is no other than love, love to being in general, or universal
benevolence. It is the same kind of affection with which he loves his
neighbor; in loving his neighbor, he loves himself also, because he cannot
love his neighbor as part of the whole, and not love himself also as such; his
own happiness, as an individual, being worth as much in itself, and to the
whole, as that of his neighbor, and as much included in the general good,
since it equally conduces to the happiness of the whole.

And it may be further observed, that this love, in which a man regards himself
as part of the whole, and his interest and happiness, for the same reason he
regards that of his neighbor, may be exercised with greater strength, and more
sensibly, with respect to his own interest and welfare, than toward that of
his neighbor, who is as worthy of regard as himself; and yet there be nothing
selfish in his affection, but it may be wholly of the nature of general
benevolence. -- And that for two reasons --

1. He has a more clear, full and constant view of himself and his interest,
than he can have of his neighbor's; therefore he must be more affected with
the former, and it will be more the object of his concern, than the latter. As
man is not omniscient, and his mind cannot comprehend universal being; but is
limited in his views and exercises, he must be most affected with those objects
which are most in his view. This is right, and his duty: And not to be thus
affected is inconsistent with general benevolence.

2. Every person has a more particular and immediate care of himself committed
to him by God, than of his neighbor. As he is under greater advantages to know
his own state and circumstances, wants and enjoyments, and promote his own
interest, in general, than another can be; so this concern is more especially
committed to him; which is a further reason why he should pay a greater regard
to it, than to that of his neighbor, though in itself as great and important
as his own. This is not selfishness; but the genuine exercise of disinterested
benevolence.

Thus a man who has a benevolent regard for a whole community or kingdom, and
is equally a friend to every part and each person of that community, and
equally exerts himself for the welfare of each, so far they come under his
notice; when he is fixed in a particular town, and thereby obtains a clearer
knowledge of their circumstances, both good and evil, and of the best means to
promote their greatest happiness, he will necessarily turn his attention to
them more constantly and in a greater degree, and be more sensibly affected
with their miseries and enjoyments, than with those of the neighboring towns.
And of the inhabitants of this town, they whose circumstances and interest are
most in his view; and who by their particular situation and connection, are most
under his care, will have the first and greatest share of his attention and
benevolent regards. This is no evidence, that he is selfish; it is the natural,
genuine exercise of general benevolence.

This view may serve to show us one reason why, in many cases, it is so
difficult to distinguish that self-love which consists in selfishness, from the
benevolence which is its contrary; and why these are often confounded, and
taken for the same thing. That self-love which consists in selfishness, has
self for its first and supreme object, and is extended to others, only as they
are viewed as more or less favorable to the interest of self, as such.

Thus selfishness may extend to a whole community, and each individual member
of it; because the selfish man considers their welfare as connected with his
own. And as his welfare is commonly in a higher degree, and more sensibly
connected with the welfare of those who are nearest to him, especially those
who love him; he will have a greater regard still for them and their welfare,
purely from selfishness, or for his own sake. And since his near relations, his
own family and children, are in a sense a part of himself; and his interest and
happiness is in a peculiar manner dependent on their's, his selfish regards
will be more particularly extended to them. In this respect there is in
selfishness a resemblance to what is found in benevolence; which, though it
consists in disinterested good will to the whole, is, as observed above,
nevertheless exercised by the benevolent person to individuals; and more
strongly to those who are more nearly connected with him, and more particularly
to himself.

There is, however, a great difference, and opposition in these two kinds of
affection; which appears from what has been already said. This selfish
affection, though extended to the whole community with which the selfish man is
connected, is at bottom nothing but love to himself. This is the foundation and
center of his love. He in reality loves nothing but himself, and regards others
wholly for his own sake. Therefore, when he considers their welfare as
inconsistent with his own; or any way opposing or impeding his interest, his
heart will turn against them, and hate them, whatever be their connection or
relation. On the other hand, the regard to a man's own interest, which is
included in general good will, is not love of himself, as such: There is
nothing contracted and selfish in this affection, which is founded on his
good will to the whole.

This brings into view another thing, in which these two sorts of love of self
differ, and oppose each other. He whose regard to himself and his own interest
does not arise from selfishness, but general benevolence, is ready to give up
his own personal good, for the sake of the whole: He desires no good for
himself, unless consistent with the common good. Whatever supposed good of his
own, or of another, interferes with the greatest general good, is no good to
him, but the object of his aversion, in this view of it: So that all his own
particular interest is subordinate to that of the whole. This is necessary,
when regard to ourselves is but a branch of general good will. Thus the
interest of the benevolent man is the common interest, and he has no other. In
a word, he subjects and devotes himself, and all things, to the glory of God,
and the happiness and glory of his church and kingdom; which is the greatest
universal good, and includes the highest good of the creature; he having no
other interest but this.

But that self-love which consists in selfishness, is, in this respect, most
opposite to this. So far as the heart is governed by this, it does not, it
cannot give up its own private good, for the sake of the greatest public good;
since, by the supposition, he knows no good but the former, and every thing is
by him subordinated to that. -- But enough has been said to show the difference
and opposition there is between selfishness, and that regard and concern a
benevolent person has for his own interest, as a part of the whole, which is
necessarily implied in general benevolence.

It has been said, though inordinate self-love is sinful, it is not so in
itself; but when joined with love to God and our neighbor, and subordinate to
the general good, it is a virtuous, holy affection: And to confirm this, the
divine command has been alleged, Thou shall love thy neighbor, as thyself.
Here, it is said, we are commanded to love ourselves, as much as our neighbor.
Self love is therefore not a sin, but a duty, so long as it does not exceed due
bounds.

Upon this the following things may be observed:

1. It is utterly unaccountable, and carries in it a direct contradiction, that
the same affection, when exercised in a certain limited degree, should be
holiness; but when exercised in a higher and stronger degree, should not only
have less holiness, but change its nature, and become sin. This none will
assert, after due attention: Yet this is asserted in the proposition under
consideration. However self-love may be restrained, it is still self-love, and
of the same nature with that which is under no restraint; and therefore as
opposite to holiness, though not to so great a degree, and the bad effects of
it may not be so great, or so manifest. A devouring beast of prey, when
confined in a cage, may not be so mischievous, or appear so dreadful, as when
let loose, and destroying all before him: But his nature is not changed by his
confinement; he is still, in his nature, not a harmless creature, but a beast
of prey.

2. This self-love cannot be subordinate to the good of the whole; it is
contrary to the very nature of it, and implies a contradiction. It seeks to
advance self only, and subordinates every thing to this; and therefore will not
consent that self should be subordinated to any thing else, or have any rival.
Whenever it consents to this, it is no longer self-love, but generous,
disinterested affection; as contrary to selfishness, as mercy is to injustice
and cruelty. Such a consent and change is, however, impossible, being a
contradiction. This affection must be rooted out, or counteracted; and a
directly opposite affection must take place, in order to a person's
subordinating his own personal interest to any other interest whatsoever.

Therefore, if they who speak of self-love, so regulated as to be subordinate
to a proper regard to others, and to the general good, mean any thing which is
consistent, and agreeable to the truth, they, must intend that regard to
ourselves, which is not self-love, but real benevolence to the whole, and
respects ourselves as part of the whole only. This regard to ourselves, as has
been shown, is always, of necessity, subordinate to the good of the whole.

3. Self-love is so far from being enjoined or approved in the command, 'Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self,' that it is utterly forbidden. Self-love
is wholly a partial affection, giving all to ourselves, and nothing to our
neighbor, and is therefore opposed to love to him; especially to loving him as
ourselves.

Nothing but universal benevolence can be obedience to this command; and so far
as this takes place it is obeyed, and self-love is opposed and mortified. This
benevolence, as has been shown, implies a proper regard to ourselves, and an
equal regard to our neighbor; having all that impartiality, and love to our
neighbor and ourselves, which this law requires. -- And, by the way, this is a
clear evidence that universal benevolence, with the affection implied in it, is
that in which all holiness consists, since no other kind of love is obedience
to this command; but he who has this, does of necessity love his neighbor as
himself.

ON the whole, it appears that three different kinds of affection have been
called self-love. The first is neither sin nor holiness, but is equally implied
in both. The two last are directly opposed to each other; the latter being
general, disinterested benevolence, extended to ourselves as included in the
whole; and is the same holy love which has God and our neighbor for its
object. The other is contracted selfishness, by which self only is regarded,
and exalted above God and our neighbor, and in opposition to the general good;
and is, in every degree of it, sinful -- This selfishness is properly called
self-love; and in this sense the word will be used in the following inquiry.

That universal benevolence is the whole of holiness; and, on the other hand,
all sin consists in self-love, will more fully appear by the following
consideration of each, in its exercises and fruits.

Universal good will comprehends all the love to God, our neighbor, and
ourselves, required in the law of God; and therefore must be the whole of holy
obedience. -- Every pious sentiment and affection is comprised in this; and all
piety in words and practice is but an expression of this love: Where this love
is not, all outward expressions of piety, in words and actions, are emptiness
and hypocrisy. Let any serious person think what are the particular branches of
true piety: Let him view each one by itself; and when he has discovered the
nature and essence of it, he will find that disinterested, friendly affection
is its distinguishing characteristic. For instance, let fear and reverence of
the divine majesty be considered in this view. What but love and friendly
affection distinguishes this from the fear and dread of devils? All the
holiness in pious fear, by which it is distinguished from the fear of the
wicked, consists in love. Leave all disinterested, friendly affection to the
divine being out of fear, and all holiness is excluded. --

Again, if we consider what is contained in true gratitude to God, we shall
find disinterested, kind affection, the only thing wherein it differs from the
affection of the most wicked creature. Where there is no good will, there is
nothing in what is called gratitude, better than that which the legion of
devils exercised, when they were so far gratified by Christ, as to be suffered
to destroy the herd of swine. But so far as good will is exercised, the
goodness of God to us and others, will excite holy gratitude; which is nothing
else but good will to God and our neighbor, in which we ourselves are
included, and correspondent affection, excited and acted out in the view of the
good will and kindness of God.

And universal good will implies the whole of that affection and duty we owe to
our neighbor. It all consists in the exercise and expression of this, and
those affections that are implied in it. The exercise and practice of
righteousness or justice toward our neighbor, implies a benevolent regard to
him and his interest. Where this is not, there is no exercise and practice of
justice in the heart, whatever is the external conduct; for justice consists in
doing to our neighbor, as we would he should do to us; or, in other words,
loving our neighbor as ourselves. And where this benevolent regard to our
neighbor is, there is justice; for this love works no ill to our neighbor.
-- And as righteousness, truth and faithfulness are implied in universal
benevolence, so are temperance and chastity, or sobriety in the proper
restraint and government of our own appetites and passions: For it is easy to
see that the undue indulgence of these is contrary to benevolence, as tending
to hurt others, or ourselves, or both; and so is opposite to the general good,
and the divine command, in which all the crime of such indulgence consists. In
short, there is not any one virtue, or branch of godliness, humanity or
sobriety; not any duty we owe to God, our neighbor, or ourselves, that is not
comprehended in universal benevolence; and is not necessarily exercised and
practiced, so far as this affection takes place in the heart: And where there
is no defect in the latter, the former are found in their fullness and
perfection: For the whole is nothing but benevolence acted out in its proper
nature, and perfection; or love to God and our neighbor made perfect in all
its genuine exercises and expressions.

On the contrary, all sin consists in self-love, and what is implied in this.

Self-love is, in its whole nature, and in every degree of it, enmity against
God. It is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be; and is the only
affection that can oppose it. It cannot be reconciled to any of God's conduct,
rightly understood; but is in its very nature rebellion against it; which is
all an expression of that love which is most contrary to self-love. This is
therefore the fruitful source of every exercise and act of impiety and
rebellion against God, and contempt of him, that ever was, or can be. --
Self-love exercised and indulged, blinds the heart to every true moral
excellence and beauty. This does not suit the taste of the selfish heart, but
gives it disgust. Self-love is the foundation and reason of all that blindness
to spiritual things, to God, his glorious character, works and kingdom, which
the scripture represents wicked men to have; and is therefore the source of all
the errors which men imbibe, as well as all the open idolatry in the heathen
world, and false religion under the light of the gospel. All this is agreeable
to that self-love which opposes God's true character; and under the influence
of this, men go off from the truth, and believe, love and practice a lie; it
being itself the greatest practical lie in nature, as it sets up that which is
comparatively nothing, above universal existence. Self-love is the source of
all the profaneness and impiety in the world; and of all pride and ambition
among men; which is nothing but selfishness acted out in this particular way.
This is at the bottom of all the worldliness and sensuality that men run into;
as it blinds their eyes to all true good, contracts their hearts, and sinks
them down, so that they look upon worldly enjoyments to be the greatest good,
and that in which their true interest lies. This is the spring of all the
hatred and ill will, strife and contention among men; for this leads men to
hate and oppose all those whom they view in the way of their own selfish
interest. This is the source of all falsehood, injustice and oppression under
the sun; in which men are, through their selfishness, seeking, by undue
methods, to invade the right and property of others. Self-love produces all the
violent passions, envy, wrath, clamor and evil speaking, of which men are
guilty. Take away selfishness, and all these would cease immediately. And if
there be any other sin, any thing which is contrary to the divine law, it is
briefly comprehended in this fruitful source of all iniquity, SELF-LOVE.

And hence we may see that holy love is wholly a disinterested affection, and
in what sense it is so. Self-love is wholly an interested affection, as self is
the only object of it. Holy love has no regard to self, as self; but is a
regard to the greatest general good and interest; the glory of God in the
highest glory of his kingdom, and the greatest good of the creation. So far as
a man exercises holy love, he has no other interest but this; as all is devoted
to this, and given up for the sake of it. And in this sense all his love is
disinterested, as it seeks not any self interest, but the contrary. He who
exercises this disinterested love, has pleasure indeed, and is pursuing an
interest and happiness; though it is not a selfish interest, but that in the
pursuit of which he renounces what self-love seeks.

A judge is said to be interested in a cause he is to decide, so far as his own
personal interest is concerned in it, and his self-love will influence him to
take one side, rather than the other; which renders him unfit to judge the
cause. But if his own personal interest is not concerned in the case, and there
be nothing to bias him to one side rather than the other, he is said to be
disinterested. And though he may be bribed, or some way interested in the
matter; yet if he is not at all influenced by this, and decides the cause
contrary to the dictates of self-love, he is said to act disinterestedly. In
such a sense as this, all holy affection is disinterested. Such a judge, when
he renounces all selfish considerations, and espouses the cause of the widow
and fatherless, and delivers them from the hand of oppressors, has an interest
which he seeks; but not an interest, which selfishness prompts him to pursue:
And the more he interests himself in the cause of the poor, helpless widow, and
the greater pleasure he takes in helping her, the more disinterested are his
exertions and conduct, and the more is self-love counteracted and mortified.

So, he who, in the exercise of holy love, pursues the glory of God, and the
highest interest and happiness of his kingdom, which includes the greatest good
of his fellow creatures; pursues the best, the most important interest, and has
the most noble, refined pleasure in the exercise of this affection; yet in all
this he is wholly disinterested, as he opposes selfishness, and all regard to
self, which is not implied in being thus devoted to the greatest general good;
and forsakes the whole interest which self-love seeks, for the kingdom of God's
sake.

SECTION V. In which the foregoing account of sin and holiness is shown to be
agreeable to reason.
I. IT is most reasonable that the common and greatest good of the whole should
be sought by every particular member of it: That every one should be so devoted
to the good of the whole, as to give up the less good of individuals, and
consequently his own personal interest, whenever inconsistent herewith. Thus,
it is highly reasonable that a particular member of a community should
cheerfully give up all his personal interest, his whole estate, and even his
life, when this is evidently necessary to save the whole nation from ruin. If a
city is on fire, and in order to stop its progress, and save the city, it is
necessary that the house of a particular person should be totally demolished;
he should with pleasure give up his house to be destroyed, however magnificent
and costly, and though it contains all he has in the world. If in this case a
man should hesitate a moment, and be inclined to save his own house, to the
utter destruction of the whole city; every one would condemn him as acting a
most unreasonable, sordid part. But if he is such a friend to the city, and
interests himself so much in its welfare, as to take more pleasure in saving
it, even at the expense of all he has in the world, than a selfish man can have
in whatever he possesses, he will be applauded as one of an excellent spirit.
And every one must grant he ought to be imitated by all. And it is reasonable
that every one of the society should be regarded by the rest, according to his
importance and worth; his disposition and ability to promote the greatest good
of the whole community.

But this is universal, disinterested benevolence. Nothing but this will form
men to such exercises and conduct. But where this benevolence reigns in every
heart, each one will be thus a friend to all. He who has this benevolence,
will, by it, be united to the grand community of the universe, including all
existence, and be devoted to the good of the whole: And as this is comprised in
the glory of God, and the perfection and happiness of his kingdom, this will be
the object of his affection, and he will subordinate all to this; and in so
doing will act a most reasonable part.

On the other hand, nothing can be more unreasonable than that every individual
should be altogether selfish, and seek his own personal interest only; not
caring what becomes of the community, or any belonging to it, further that his
selfishness prompts him to it; being ready at any time to sacrifice the public,
and the greatest good of every individual to his own private advantage, however
important and worthy he is, and whatever obligation he is under to him.

This carries in it every thing mean, mischievous and perverse. But this is
self-love. This is the nature and tendency of every degree of it, though it may
be many ways under restraints, and often put on the appearance of benevolence
and friendship.

II. This universal benevolence alone, can produce the strong, happy union of
intelligences, which reason teaches must be the attendant of holiness. It fixes
each in his proper place, and effects the highest and most beautiful harmony
conceivable.

III. Reason teaches that universal benevolence is the highest good of
intelligences. This makes every one a wise, hearty friend to all the rest, and
devotes him to the public good: By which the highest common good has the
greatest possible security, and is advanced to the utmost. Should a king and
his subjects be thus united in the most perfect friendship to each other, and
entirely devoted to the highest general good; each one knowing wherein it
consists: And the community having wisdom to contrive, and power to execute the
best means to effect it; there would be no evil in this kingdom, but what is
necessary to promote the general good; which would be advanced to the highest
degree; and it must be, in this respect, the most happy community imaginable.

And this raises the happiness of each individual to the highest pitch his
capacity will admit. For his universal benevolence will necessarily put him in
possession of the good of the whole, and of every particular, so far as he
perceives it, and in proportion to the degree of his benevolence. By his
disinterested good will, this is become his good; or he enjoys it as much as if
it were his own personal good; whereby he has immensely more happiness than in
any other possible way: And, in proportion to his good will to the whole, he
takes pleasure in others who are friends to the same; and must be filled with a
peculiar satisfaction and delight, while he sees all around him, not only
delighting in himself, as a friend to the whole, but devoted to the general
good.

This may be applied to the grand community, THE KINGDOM OF GOD; which
comprehends GOD, the supreme king, and all who are voluntarily united in
subjection to him. The reason of man cannot invent any way to secure and
promote the happiness of this community, unless universal benevolence be
introduced. And no other kind of virtue is necessary to the highest conceivable
good of the whole, and every individual. This might be more particularly
illustrated; but is left to the pleasing contemplation of the benevolent
friends of Christ and his kingdom.


But self-love, when it has its genuine, unrestrained influence, destroys all
public good. This is the mother of all the lusts which bring evil into the
universe. It prevents individuals enjoying the good of others; and indeed
blinds them to all true happiness. It contracts the the mind, and degrades it
below the proper pursuits of a rational creature, and entails misery on its
unhappy subject.

IV. The natural world, we know, was created for the moral; and it is generally
granted that the former is an emblem of the latter. We may hence expect to find
that in the former, which bears a conspicuous analogy to holiness, the
perfection and glory of the intellectual system: And this must be the general
law of attraction, the common bond of union in our material system; by which
all bodies are mutually attracted, and tend to one center: Every part, while it
attracts, being also attracted by the whole, is fixed in its station, and
extends its influence to all; so that each particle has, in a sense, a regard
to the whole, and contributes to the general good. This is the source or the
order and beauty so obvious in our world. The sun, the center of all, spreads
his kind influence over the whole; and each inferior body, at the same time it
pays a due regard to all other bodies, pays him a supreme regard. This is one
most simple affection, universal attraction: A most clear, striking resemblance
of universal benevolence in the moral world, in which all its union and glory
consist.

Further, the repulsive quality found in some bodies, by which they resist
others, and which, should it universally obtain, without control, would issue
in the destruction of the material world, is an apt representation of self-love.

Thus reason, nature, and, I may add, general experience, join to point out
universal benevolence as the sum of all holiness. -- Hence almost all writers
on morality have made virtue to consist chiefly, if not altogether, in what
they call universal benevolence; though many of them have left GOD and his
kingdom, the great object of true benevolence, out of their system: Nor have
they distinguished properly between benevolence and self-love.

SECTION VI. In which is shown that holiness, as taught in divine revelation,
consists in universal benevolence, agreeable to the foregoing account.
THE holy scripture is the best and only sure guide in determining the question
before us; which has therefore been kept in view in what has been already said:
But we shall now consult it more particularly.

I. The revealed law of God teaches what true holiness is. This is the only
standard of all moral excellence and perfection. It is not only the standard of
all holiness in the creature; but is a transcript of God's moral perfection.
Nothing more is necessary then, in order to know what holiness is, in God and
the creature, but to understand this law.

Our savior has taught us, as has been before observed, that all the law
requires is love: Consequently holiness must consist wholly in love. We have
considered what kind of love this must be; and arguments have been offered to
prove it consists in universal, disinterested benevolence: At the same time,
what is meant by this, has been explained. Our present inquiry is, Whether this
is the love required in the divine law? The answer is not difficult to him who
will attend.

The law does not require self-love; but love to God and our neighbor; not
from selfish motives, which is nothing but self-love extended to them, merely
because of our connection with them, or the benefit we have received, or hope to
receive from them, or because they love us. Our savior tells us this is not
holiness, but consistent with being wholly sinful. 'For if ye love them which
love you, what reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same?' Matt. v.
46.


Let any one consult his own sense, whether he accepts that as true respect and
love from any one, which appears to be wholly selfish; being nothing but a
regard to the benefit to himself which he hopes to receive from him. He will at
once feel that this has nothing of the nature of true love; but is a mean,
sordid affection, which he cannot but despise. And this is the sense of all
mankind, in their own case; however they may put off their maker with such
selfish affection, and think he will accept it at their hands as true love and
holiness. Thus the degenerate priests in Israel offered that to God, which
would affront their governor, had they offered it to him; nor would they accept
it from their neighbor. Mal. 1.8.


The love to our neighbor, which God's law requires, is certainly universal,
disinterested good will, since it is a love which will dispose us to do good
unto all men, and must extend to our greatest enemies: For no love but this
will do so. Therefore when Christ himself gave an instance of this love, he
produced one in which there is nothing but the most disinterested goodness;
benevolence toward an enemy in distress. Luke x. 25, -- 37.
This we are sure he would not have done, if this were not the very love
required in the command. And he expressly declares that the command does not
mean a love to our neighbor, as distinguished from our enemy, as it was then
understood by the Jews; but love to enemies, which wishes them well, and will
lead us to do them good, however injuriously they treat us. Mat. v. 43 44.


And is it not very unreasonable to suppose, that the second command, which our
Lord says is like unto the first, requires something of a different kind,
though it is called by the same name, love? There can be no difference but what
arises from the very different objects of this same love.

St. John teaches us that love to God, and to our brother or neighbor, is
inseparable; that he who loves one of these, certainly and necessarily loves
the other; which could not be, if love to God was different in kind from love
to our neighbor. 'If any man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a
liar. Whosoever has this world's good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?' 1 John iii. 17. iv. 20.
It is to be observed, that the love to our brother, here spoken of, is the
love of good will, expressed in showing kindness to him; and indeed the apostle
speaks of no other kind of love in this epistle, as every instance of love
which he mentions, is love of benevolence. Now, if love to God is not
disinterested good will, how can this imply good will to our brother, or lead
to it, so as to form an infallible connection?

It has been said, that he who loves God, is hence led to love his neighbor,
in obedience to God's command, and from his example, who is good to all; and
not because love to God, and kind affection to our neighbor, is the same kind
of love. To this it may be answered,

1. That love to God, which is not disinterested good will, nor implies it, is
no principle of obedience to the divine command, and can have no tendency to
it. No love will dispose men to obey God, but the love of 'good will;' Ephesians. vi.
7.
or the love by which they are true friends of God. He who does not obey God
from this motive, does not obey him at all: He is influenced only by fear,
which none will say is true obedience. Therefore they who assert we are led to
love our neighbor, purely because God commands it, and from love to him, if
they attend to their own ideas, will find they suppose this to be love of good
will, which is the very thing they are attempting to oppose; and so contradict
themselves in the supposition they make, and really grant all we assert.

2. If love to God, which implies no good will to him, could induce to
obedience in any instance, it would not dispose him to obey this command, and
exercise good will to his neighbor, and such command will not in the least
influence him to it. If his inducement to love his neighbor is wholly from
selfish principles, which is always the case, where there is no disinterested
good will, it is, by the supposition, not love of his neighbor, but of himself
only; and is so far from obedience to the divine command, that it is rebellion
against it.

3. God's universal, disinterested good will cannot be a motive to love our
neighbor, with the same good will, any further than we are pleased with it;
for we are never disposed to imitate what we dislike. But to be pleased with
this goodness of God, supposes our hearts to be in the exercise of the same;
for benevolence is implied in taking pleasure in benevolence, as has been
shown. This therefore supposes that good will is implied in that love to God,
which leads us to the love of good will to our neighbor; so supposes the very
thing it is adduced to oppose.

Thus impossible is it to account for that inseparable connection of love to
God, with good will to our neighbor, which the scripture asserts, unless this
love, in these two branches of it, is the same in kind. But if love to God is,
in its nature, universal, disinterested good will, the scripture representation
appears consistent and intelligible.

Thus it appears that the love required in the law of God is universal,
disinterested goodness in all its branches, attendants and fruits: Therefore
this is holiness. But it must be further observed,

God in giving such a law, requiring such love, has expressed his universal,
disinterested goodness, and showed that his moral character consists in love.
We have good authority therefore, even from the divine law, to say, that GOD IS
LOVE. His love is as really expressed in the law, as in the gospel. In the
latter, this disinterested love and goodness, which appears in the law, is
expressed and acted out in a more full and glorious manner and degree, and set
in a more affecting and striking light. In this sense the law is good, it is
love and goodness, as really as the gospel. And as the divine holiness is
expressed in the law, in requiring love; so the creature, by exercising this
same love, is a partaker of God's holiness, or of the divine nature, as the
scripture represents the matter: He is transformed into the image of God; or,
as St. John expresses it, 'God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him.' 1 John iv. 16. It is observable, that as the apostle
says here, 'He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him,' he also
says, chap. iii. ver. 24. 'He that keeps his commandments, dwells in him,
and he in him.' Whence it appears, that dwelling in love, and keeping God's
commandments, is the same thing: Consequently love comprises all the obedience
required; or, as St. Paul says, 'Love is the fulfilling of the law.'


OBJ. The law is not all love and goodness. It requires love indeed, but it is
guarded with the most awful sanction, and curses him who does not obey it
perfectly. This is not an expression of love, but strict and awful justice.
What love can there be in cursing a sinner, and punishing him forever? Love is
exercised in saving sinners, but not in damning them.

ANS. He who is infinitely good, is in the same degree an enemy to all
opposition to the highest good. This will be the greatest, the only crime in
his view; and from this love, he will be disposed to maintain his law, which
requires love, in the punishment of all such who turn enemies to the greatest
good of being, according to their desert. This is the only way in which this
love can properly express itself in the divine law. Had God commanded love, and
not threatened the contrary with the most dreadful punishment, he would not
have expresssed his love and goodness, as he has done by this threatening. In
this view, divine justice is nothing but the most perfect love and goodness,
exercised in a proper way against the enemies of this goodness, and manifested
in hating and punishing such. And the sufferings inflicted on the son of God,
when he stood in the place of sinners; and the eternal punishment of the wicked
in hell, are the necessary effect and proper expression of divine love; even
that same love which is expressed in the precepts of God's law, or by any other
medium. This is nothing but universal benevolence, which seeks the greatest
good of the whole, properly expressed in this way.

Divine love comprehends wisdom, justice, truth and faithfulness, and every
moral perfection and excellence whatsoever. Wisdom consists in proposing the
wisest and best end, and pursuing it by the most proper means. This is
comprised in universal benevolence, which fixes on the greatest good of the
whole, and seeks it as the supreme, ultimate end. He who has not universal
benevolence, does not propose and pursue the wisest and best end; but is wholly
blind to it. Thus, universal, disinterested goodness appears to be that in
which all true wisdom consists. This therefore must be the holiness which is
called wisdom in scripture: And its opposite, selfishness, is the foolishness,
which is there opposed to wisdom.

It may be also observed here, that righteous and holy often mean the same
thing in scripture; and righteousness frequently intends holiness; and is often
used to express the whole of God's moral character; though it is many times used
in a more limited sense, and intends holiness as exercised with regard to some
particular object. But it never signifies any thing which is not holiness, and
does not comprise love; and the whole is comprehended in universal,
disinterested benevolence. He who has this, is righteous; his heart is right
toward all beings, and disposed to give every one his due. This is
righteousness, in the most proper and comprehensive sense of the word; and
without this love there is no righteousness. Hence righteousness seems to be
put sometimes for goodness and mercy. See Psalm. 36.10.89.16.103.17.143.11,
12.145.7. -- So holiness evidently means the divine goodness. See Psalm.
30.4.97.12.


What is called by these different names, is but one most simple thing, even
divine LOVE; for God in his whole moral character is love. Take away love and
goodness, and there will be neither wisdom, truth, faithfulness, nor justice;
for they have no existence but in the exercise of love; and love implies all
these, and necessarily acts out, so as to form a character, properly denoted by
these names, as it appears to creatures in different relations, and respects
different objects.

The law of God then leads us to consider holiness as consisting in universal,
disinterested good will, considered in all its genuine exercises and fruits,
and acted out in all its branches toward God, and our neighbor. This holiness
is exercised toward God, in such a regard and kind affection for him, as to be
wholly devoted to his honor and interest, and the honor and glory of his
kingdom, and seek it, as the highest and ultimate end. This good will exercised
toward God, his kingdom and interest, with all those affections it comprises,
is to love God with all the heart. -- This same holiness or love is exercised
toward our neighbor, in wishing and pursuing the greatest good of all, and of
ourselves as included in the whole; and in all that disinterested affection
which is necessarily implied in this.

And let it be observed here, that this love to our neighbor, as it regards
the greatest good of the whole, as its chief object, and respects the good of
individuals, as included in this; and as the greatest good of mankind consists
in being the voluntary subjects and servants of Christ, in belonging to his
kingdom, and promoting the highest interest of that: This love, I say, is not
really a distinct thing from seeking the glory and kingdom of God; as these
perfectly coincide. In seeking the glory of God, and interest of his kingdom,
we necessarily seek the greatest good of mankind; and so far as we are devoted
to their best interest, we act as friends to God, and seek his honor, and the
interest of his kingdom. The whole therefore is summed up in seeking first the
kingdom of God, or making this our supreme and ultimate end; so as to be
willing to do or suffer any thing that shall be necessary or proper to promote
this. In this the love of God and our neighbor center in one point, so that
they cannot be divided; and this affection in which all holiness consists,
really has but one object, viz. THE KINGDOM OF GOD. Our divine teacher sets the
matter in this light, and speaks as no man would have spoke, when he directs
men to seek the kingdom of God, as the only object of their pursuit, for the
sake of which he commands them to forsake every other interest. See Matt. vi.
33. Luke xii. 31. xviii. 29. -- In Matthew the words are, "Seek first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness." The kingdom of God is the kingdom which
Christ is erecting, and bringing to its highest perfection and glory; and
comprehends God's moral kingdom, in its whole extent; in which is the full and
most complete display of the divine perfections, or glory; and all the good and
happiness of the creation. This is 'that great city, the holy Jerusalem,' which
St. John saw, 'descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God,'
Rev. xxi. 10.11. To seek this kingdom first, is to make the interest, happiness
and glory of it our ultimate end, so as to do all for its sake, and subordinate
every thing to this. This kingdom, considered in its full extent, and all its
appendages, is the first, the only object of the desires and pursuit of Christ
himself: So that in these words he directs his disciples to imitate him, and be
holy, as he is holy.

By his righteousness is not meant any thing distinct from the kingdom of God.
It intends the divine perfections displayed in this kingdom, in the glorious
work of redemption, including the salvation of the redeemed, and the complete
overthrow of all his enemies. In this sense the word is used in the following
passages. 'The Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth
before all nations. -- And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all
kings thy glory.' Isai. 61.11.62.2. 'Hearken to me, ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the Lord -- For the Lord shall comfort Zion, etc.
-- My salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law, fear ye not the reproach of men -- For the moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: But my righteousness shall be
forever, and my salvation from generation to generation chap. 51.1, -- 8. Here,
to follow after righteousness and seek the Lord, is to seek first the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness. And God's righteousness, and his salvation, mean
the same thing. This being so, when St. Luke mentions this injunction of our
Lord, he puts it in the following words, 'But rather seek ye the kingdom of
God'; this including the whole: For if his righteousness was not included in
this, it would not be omitted.

The same thing is inculcated by Christ, when he directs and encourages all to
subordinate every thing, however dear to them, to this grand interest, and
forsake all 'for the kingdom of God's sake,' Luke 18.29. It is observable that
in a parallel text (Mark 10.29) instead of the kingdom of God's sake, the words
are ' for my sake, and the gospel's,' because these words express the very same
thing. The kingdom of God and the gospel are the same: Therefore to preach the
gospel, is to preach the kingdom of God. Luke 4.43.9.2, 60. Act. 20.25. And
it is called the gospel of the kingdom of God, Mark 1.14. And as this is
Christ's kingdom and interest, comprising himself, and the whole which he
seeks; whatever is done for the sake of the kingdom of God, is done for his
sake.

The holiness of the mediator is wholly exercised in seeking this kingdom: His
righteousness, by which sinners are justified, consists in what he did and
suffered for its sake. And the holiness of men consists wholly in seeking this
kingdom, which is love to God and their neighbor, or universal, disinterested
benevolence. --




That love to God and our neighbor, which seeks the greatest good of the
whole, the greatest display of the divine perfections, and the highest
happiness of the creation will fix and center in this as the grand object; for
this comprises all the good in the universe; all things being made, and every
thing ordered and done by God, for the sake of this, and in order to bring it
to the highest perfection and glory, and that it may comprise the greatest
possible good. Nothing is of any worth in God's view, any further than it may
serve to promote the glory and happiness of this kingdom; and all the holiness
of creatures consists in that love, which has this for its great object, and
desires and pursues this as the great and only interest, to which every thing
else is subordinated.

II. It will serve to confirm what has been observed concerning the law of God,
and further show what true holiness is, according to scripture, if we consider
what is that divine love which is there represented as the holiness of God, or
that in which his moral character and glory is revealed; in conformity to which
the holiness of man consists.

St. John says, 'God is love.' By which it is evident he means to express the
whole of God's moral character. And we have a good warrant to take his words in
this sense from the divine law, which is a transcript of God's moral character,
and requires nothing but love. The apostle tells us how this love appears, and
wherein is the greatest manifestation of it to man, viz. in giving his son to
die for the redemption of man, and accomplishing all that good which is
comprised in it. 'In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because
that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through
him.' 1 John iv. 8, 9.
This is wholly love of good will, as expressed in the highest act of kindness,
and is the most perfectly disinterested love, as it is exercised toward
enemies. This is elsewhere spoken of as that in which the love of God appears
in its greatness, excellence and glory. 'But God commends his love toward
us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.' Romans v. 8.
This highest instance of the most disinterested benevolence is thus spoken of,
as that in which the divine character, or God's holy love, is acted out and set
forth to our view. It hence appears, that disinterested benevolence is the love
in which God's holiness consists. Therefore we are called upon to imitate this
love of God, as that by which we may be like him, partakers of his holiness.
St. John says, when speaking of this love of God, 'Beloved, if God so loved us,
we ought also to love one another. If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his love is perfected in us.' If we love one another with that love which
God exercised and manifested in giving his son to die for us, we by this are
conformed to God, his image is in us, and his love, which is his holiness, is
complete and perfect in us. What words could more expressly declare that the
divine holiness consists most essentially in disinterested goodness; and that
in the exercise of this, we are holy, as God is holy? To the like purpose is
what Christ says to his disciples. When he is recommending to them the highest
exercise of disinterested benevolence, in love to their enemies; he tells them
that they would hereby imitate God, who is good to his enemies; and then says,
'Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.'
Matt. v. 44, 48.
According to this, the holiness and perfection of God and his people,
consists, so much at least, in disinterered benevolence, that there is no moral
perfection without it, in God or the creature. The reader will observe how
exactly parallel these words of Christ are to those of St. John, we have been
considering. He says, if we love one another, with a love of pure benevolence,
like that which God exercised in giving his son to die for sinners, 'God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.' Christ says, that in the
exercise of this love, his disciples shall be perfect as their heavenly Father
is perfect. --

The same thing is declared by St. Paul. When speaking of God's love and mercy
to sinners in forgiving sin, and of the love of Christ in dying for sinners,
which are instances of disinterested goodness, he says to the Ephesian
christians, 'Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk in
love:' Ephesians. iv. 32. v. 1.2.
Here he directs christians to disinterested benevolence, by which they would
imitate God's holiness, exercised in love to sinners.

Thus we see the holy love of God is represented as consisting in disinterested
benevolence and goodness, the highest and most remarkable exercise of which
appears in redemption; in giving his son to die for sinners, that they might
live through him; and that the holiness of men consists in imitating this
benevolent love. Hence it appears that, according to scripture, holiness
consists in benevolence, and what is implied in it, and in nothing else. --

OBJ. It Is granted that holiness consists in part in love of benevolence;
especially as it respects indigent creatures: But God's holiness does not
consist wholly, or chiefly, in good will to men; but in love to himself; and
the holiness of men consists principally in love to God: And it does not appear
from these scriptures that this love to God, either in God or the creature, is
of the nature of benevolence; but may be something else; and so holiness may
not consist principally in benevolent, disinterested affection.

ANS. 1st. According to these scriptures, God's love of benevolence is spoken
of as the most bright and striking expression of the excellence of his nature
and character, or his holiness; and that love in us which is an imitation of
this love of God, is represented as that in which our conformity to God
consists; which could not be true, or a proper representation, if holiness
consisted chiefly in something of another kind, not included in this. We have
therefore good ground to conclude from these passages, that this is the leading
excellence, and the sum of all holiness in God and the creature; especially as
holiness exercised toward the creature must be of the same nature with that of
which God is the object. But more especially, as the object of holy love, God
and the creation, is, in a sense, one and the same, or are united in one
object, the kingdom of God, as has been shown. According to this, loving our
neighbor is really loving God, as love to God is implied in it. This seems to
be expressed by St. John in the passage we have been considering. 'No man has
seen God at any time, if we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love
is perfected in us,' i. e. by loving one another, while we see and converse
with each other, with the love of benevolence and kindness, in doing good to
others, our love to God is expressed in the best and most perfect manner;
especially as we herein imitate God, and follow him as his dear children. Dr.
Doddridge has, I think, given the true sense of this text, in his paraphrase,
in the following words, 'But as he [God] is the great fountain of benevolence,
if we love one another, it appears that God dwells in us, and that his love
is perfected in us; for this is the best proof we can give of our love to him,
and of the prevalence of his grace in our hearts, transforming us into his
image.


ANS. 2d. If this love of benevolence, this amazing goodness of God's nature,
expressed in redeeming sinners, and giving them eternal life through Christ, is
so much the glory of the divine character, and such a clear and bright
expression of his perfection and holiness, as is represented in scripture, this
gives us reason to conclude that the love of which he himself is the object, is
of the same nature and kind with this, viz. an infinite benevolent regard to
himself; and that his love to man, expressed in giving his son for his
salvation, is a stream, and the brightest emanation from this fountain of love;
and so shows the nature of the infinite divine love and holiness. Therefore
creatures have no need of any thing but this love, in order to be like God,
little images of his infinite benevolence.

ANS. 3d. God's love and regard to himself is not excluded, but necessarily
included in this instance of his benevolence to sinners, in giving his son to
die, that they, through him, might live. This love to himself must be kept in
view, in order to see his benevolence in giving his son to die for sinners; for
had God no benevolent regard to himself, and care for his own honor, there
would have been no need of giving his son, that sinners might live; as a
mediator would have been needless, in order to his being reconciled to sinners.
So that God's supreme regard to himself is supposed, yea expressed and brought
clearly into view, in giving his son to the world. And it is that regard to
himself, and his own honor, which consists in benevolence and its attendants
and fruits, of which his benevolence to man is an emanation and fruit; or
rather they are one and the same thing, acted out in the work of redemption. In
this view, we may see how God's love in giving his son to die for sinners is a
specimen, and most clear display of his holiness, which consists in
benevolence, and why men are represented as imitating God in the exercise of
the love of benevolence; their love to God and one another, being one and the
same undivided affection.

WHAT God says to Moses, when he besought him to show him his glory, serves to
confirm what has been said on the above passages of scripture. In answer to
Moses's petition, God says to him, 'I will make all my goodness pass before
thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, and will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show
mercy.' Exodus 33.19.
God here tells Moses how he would show his glory, and what it consisted in,
viz. GOODNESS; sovran goodness and mercy, which is the most disinterested
benevolence possible. If God showed Moses his glory, by causing all his
goodness to pass before him then God's holiness, or his moral character,
consists in goodness; for holiness is his glory. -- And we are told how he did
this; 'The Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; By
truth nothing distinct from goodness is intended: It denotes the immutability
of divine goodness: It is goodness that never fails, and may be depended upon
with the greatest safety. Where there is no goodness, there is no truth and
faithfulness; and these are properties essential to the goodness of God.
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty.' Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7.
Here there is nothing expressed but the highest, God-like benevolence or
disinterested goodness. This therefore is that in which God's glory consists;
consequently this is the divine holiness; and this is the glory into which men
are changed by the spirit of God, when they are made partakers of his holiness.

When it is added, 'And that will by no means clear the guilty,' nothing is
expressed contrary to goodness, or different from it; but it expresses the
peculiar excellence and perfection of God's goodness. It is a goodness which
regards the greatest good of the whole; a goodness which regards the interest
and honor of the divine being; so that none of his rights shall be given up, or
his law set aside in favor of man, that mercy may be showed to him. This is
the thing meant by his not clearing or acquitting the guilty. This is the same
goodness which is opened and celebrated in the gospel, manifested in God's
giving his son to die for the redemption of sinners, and granting them pardon
and life through him. In this, God's love and regard to himself, and goodness
and mercy to sinners, are joined together, as one and the same undivided thing:
It is all divine benevolence; and it is the same goodness when it condemns and
punishes the guilty, as when it pardons and saves the believer in Christ. --
This goodness, this disinterested good will, is the glory of God: In this
divine holiness, the glory of God's moral character consists; and so far as men
exercise this goodness, they are holy as God is holy.

III. We are under great advantages to know what is true holiness, by the
character and example of Christ. He is the great pattern of holiness, as it
respects God and the creature; and the most bright and perfect instance of it,
that ever was, or will be, on earth: He has acted it out to the life. He is
both God and man; and if we can find what is the true moral excellence of his
character, we shall at the same time learn what divine and creature holiness
is, as it respects both God and man. It wholly consisted in conformity to that
law, which he himself said was fulfilled by love to God and our neighbor:
Therefore it all consisted in love: And if we properly attend to what he has
said and done, we may, with the greatest certainty, determine the nature and
kind of this love. His love to men was, in the highest degree, disinterested
benevolence, as it was love to enemies; and such a regard for their good, as to
lead him to be willing to take their misery on himself, and bear it all, that
they might escape, and live forever. This is the highest instance of pure,
disinterested benevolence that ever was known; and it is commonly spoken of as
such, and the excellency of it is owned to consist very much in its being in
such a striking degree disinterested love and goodness. Thus Christ's example
of love to men consists wholly in disinterested goodness: If this is left out,
there remains nothing holy and excellent.

His love to God was also a disinterested, benevolent love, as it was acted out
in seeking and promoting the glory of God. He sought not his own glory, but the
glory of him that sent him. And this he himself speaks of as that in which the
distinguishing excellence of his character consisted. Joh. vii. 13. viii 50.
This was the great thing he pursued, as the work he had to do. 'I have
glorified thee on earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.'
Joh. xvii. 4.
He subordinated every thing to this; and for its sake, he gave up his own
ease, and willingly endured the greatest sufferings. When in the view of his
terrible sufferings, he was reconciled to them, and willing to go through them,
it was from a zeal for God's glory; and he expressed his whole heart in this
matter, when he said, 'Father glorify thy name.' Joh.
As if he had said, 'Let God be glorified, and all my ends are answered; for
the sake of this, I have undertaken this work, and am willing to go through the
dreadful scene of sufferings that is before me.' Thus, 'Christ PLEASED NOT
HIMSELF, but, as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee
fell on me.' Romans xv. 31.
He pleased not himself, i. e. he sought not himself, was not in the least
degree selfish; but at the greatest distance from it. He had such a strong,
disinterested, benevolent regard to the glory of God, in the advancement of his
kingdom, in the salvation of men, that all the reproach cast upon God by sin,
fell with its full weight on him; and that he might vindicate the divine
character, and take away the reproach that would come on God and his law, if
sinners were saved without a complete atonement, he took the reproach and
punishment of sin on himself; that hereby God might be honored in the salvation
of sinners. Thus he pleased not himself, but practiced the greatest
self-denial; and took all the evil on himself, that God might be glorified, and
sinners be saved: This St. Paul mentions as an example to his disciples, in
following which, they must not please themselves, must not be selfish, and seek
themselves; but the good of others, in the exercise of disinterested
benevolence. ver. 1, 2.
Thus he himself followed Christ, and imitated his holiness, which he sought
not his own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved. 1 Cor. x.
33. xi. 1. When the apostle says, 'I seek not mine own profit, but the profit
of many, that they may be saved;' he expresses the most disinterested
benevolence; and a disposition to give up every thing that could be called his
own, to promote the salvation of many. In this he followed Christ, who pleased
not himself, and sought not his own profit, but gave himself away, delivered
himself up to infinite evil, for the sake of others, that they might be saved.
These words lead us to the true sense of that passage, which has been so
difficult to many. 'For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ, for
my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.' Romans ix. 3. The plain meaning
of these words is, that he interested himself so much in the salvation of his
brethren, that he was willing to give up all his own personal interest in
Christ, for their sakes, if by this means they might be saved. This is the
genuine expression of disinterested benevolence, which always gives up a less
good for a greater, and the private good of individuals for the sake of the
public good, or the salvation of many. Therefore, if the apostle could save all
his brethren by giving up his own personal interest in Christ, he ought to be
ready to do it; for not to do it, in this case, would be to seek his own
profit, in opposition to the profit of many, and to act most contrary to
benevolence; and to the example of Christ, who gave himself a ransom for many,
and was willingly made a curse, that men might be saved from it.

I know there have been many objections made to this sense of the words. It is
said, this represents the apostle as willing to be an enemy to Christ, and to
be damned forever, which is impossible.

Ans. It is indeed a contradiction, that he should be willing to become an
enemy to Christ, in the exercise of that benevolence in which he imitated him,
and acted as his friend: especially that this benevolence should make him
willing to be Christ's enemy. But no such thing is expressed in the words. The
apostle might be willing to give up his own personal interest in Christ for the
sake of the salvation of millions and yet not be willing to be an enemy to
Christ: And indeed it was impossible he should be an enemy to him, while in the
exercise of such benevolence; just as impossible as it was that he should be
willing his brethren should all be lost, while he was ardently wishing their
salvation, though it were at the expense of his own.

As to his being willing to be damned; he was willing to give up all the
happiness, and suffer all the evil which was consistent with his benevolence to
his brethren, and the love to Christ implied in this: But this benevolence was
inconsistent with his being really miserable; for he would be so gratified in
their salvation by his means, and he so placed his happiness in this, that he
must be in a great degree happy, much more so than he could be in any possible
enjoyment, which he should have, at the expense of their salvation, or while
destitute of this benevolence.

I am sensible this sense of the words is most contrary to all selfish
religion; but it is perfectly consistent with that charity, that disinterested
benevolence, which 'seeketh not her own,' but the profit of many, that they may
be saved; without which it is impossible to be a true follower of Christ,




And here, by the way, we may see how Christ sought one undivided interest in
the exercise of disinterested benevolence. He was devoted to the greatest
general good, the glory of God in the salvation of sinners; or that kingdom of
God in which God is glorified in the highest degree, and all the good of the
creature is comprised. So that his being wholly devoted to the glory of God in
all he did and suffered, was not in the least in consistent with his
benevolence to man, nor did in any degree exclude it; but the latter is implied
in the former, and the more benevolence he exercised toward God in seeking his
glory, the more love did he exercise and discover to man: So that Christ did
not only seek the glory of God, and the salvation of men, and express his love
to God and man, in the same actions; but this was one and the same undivided
affection, which centered in one and the same thing, the greatest happiness and
glory of God's kingdom, or the greatest good of the whole; so that he really
sought but one thing, which is all comprised in the glory of God. And this may
serve to remove a difficulty which has risen in the minds of some persons, with
respect to this. They have asked, 'If the ultimate end of Christ in what he did
and suffered was the glory of God, so that this was the greatest, and in a
sense, the only thing he had in view, and this induced him to be willing to
suffer unto death; how can he be said to lay down his life for man, out of pure
benevolence to him? He never would have done this, had it not been for the love
he had to God, and regard for his glory. What reason then has the sinner to
thank him, for doing it out of love to him? Certainly if he was chiefly
influenced in this by love to God, his regard to man had but a proportionably
small influence in this affair.'

The solution is, the benevolence which Christ exercised toward God, and
toward men, is one undivided affection. The glory of God, and the salvation of
men by Christ, are not to be distinguished, as different objects of pursuit.
Therefore in seeking the glory of God, he sought the salvation of men, and in
seeking the salvation of men, he sought the glory of God, the one being
necessarily included in the other. And in this does the holiness, the moral
excellence of Christ consist, according to scripture. Therefore we are left at
no loss about the nature of true holiness in God and in the creature. It
consists in disinterested benevolence, and all that affection which is included
in this, in opposition to self-love.

OBJ. But Christ himself sought his own interest and glory, and had respect to
the recompense of reward; 'who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross,' etc. Heb. xii. 2.


ANS. 1. Jesus Christ, in the exercise of disinterested benevolence, sought the
glory of God, and the highest happiness and glory of his kingdom in the
salvation of men, as the greatest good. In this he placed his happiness and
joy. This was the great end he sought in enduring the cross, this was the joy
that was set before him. Therefore he was so far from pleasing or seeking
himself in this, that the reward he sought was the object of disinterested
affection, and nothing else. His benevolence set this up as a good, for the
sake of which he was willing to give up his life, and suffer an ignominious
death.

ANS. 2. Christ's own honor and interest is included in the glory of God, and
the greatest good of the creation. As God, his own glory is the same with the
glory of the Father: As man, his interest is great, as well as of infinite
importance to the good of the whole. Therefore, as has been shown,
disinterested benevolence, or love to God and men, implies a regard to himself,
and a joy in his own happiness and glory. There is not the least degree of
selfishness in this; but it is essential to disinterested benevolence.

IV. We may learn what is the nature of true holiness from what Christ says to
his disciples: 'Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, -- that ye may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on
the evil and on the good. -- For if ye love them which love you, what reward
have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? -- Be ye therefore perfect, even
as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.' Matt. v. 43 -- 48.


On this passage of scripture we may observe the following things:

1. What our Savior here condemns is selfishness, which had been, by the
Jewish teachers, justified and inculcated, as true holiness, and obedience to
the divine law, requiring us to love our neighbor as ourselves. By our
neighbor, they understood one who is kind to us, and our hearty friend. And
our enemy they distinguished from neighbor, and put in opposition to him, and
taught that the latter is to be hated, that it is our duty to do so, and the
former loved. This interpretation made the command very easy indeed, and
brought it down to suit the heart of the most wicked man on earth. And all the
selfish religion that is taught now is as agreeable to corrupt nature, as this
was then; which leads me to observe,

2. Christ condemns this, and enjoins directly the contrary, even the most
disinterested good will, in loving our worst enemy, with that kind, benevolent
affection, which will lead us to do him all the good in our power.

3. He shows that this selfish love has nothing of the nature of true holiness,
by observing that sinners, even the worst of them, exercised such love. They
love those that love them; for selfishness itself will do this. And by the way,
Christ not only condemns selfishness here, as no part of holiness, and in
opposition to it; but his argument supposes that Publicans and sinners, yea,
all that are not the children of God, are wholly destitute of holiness; for if
they were not, his argument would not be conclusive.

4. Therefore love to enemies is here enjoined as essential to the character of
a disciple of Christ; so that no love which does not imply this disinterested
benevolence, or love to enemies, is the love in which holiness consists, by
which the true disciples of Christ are distinguished from others; every thing
else, which does not imply this, being found with sinners. According to this,
disinterested benevolence, or that love which will extend to enemies, is the
holy love which distinguishes the true disciples of Christ from all others, and
nothing will pass for true holiness in Christ's account, but such love, and
what is implied in it.

5. It is by such love alone that they are conformed to God, and formed after
the likeness of his moral perfection or holiness. When Christ tells his
disciples, that by loving their enemies, they should be the children of their
Father which is in heaven, i. e, imitators or followers of God as dear
children, it is implied that they could become so by nothing else. So that in
this view, this kind of love is represented as the only holy love, as it is the
only love by which they imitate God. And it hence follows also, that this is
the love in which the divine holiness consists: For if it consisted in any
thing of another kind, which this did not imply, they might be like God without
love to their enemies. According to this representation, God's holiness, which
consists in love to himself and his creatures, is such, that it carries in its
nature love to enemies; and therefore that love which is not of such a nature,
is not true holiness. Therefore the christian's love to God and Christ is of
the same nature with love to enemies, which is disinterested benevolence; and
in this his holiness consists.

6. We may also observe from this passage, though it is not immediately to the
point we are upon, that the holy love by which christians are distinguished
from others, will love God even though he were our enemy; therefore it is not
necessary we should see him to be our friend, or that he loves us, in order to
our loving him. They who hold this, and that all true love to God is of this
kind, teach a selfish religion, directly contrary to what Christ taught, and
which he said publicans and sinners might have as well as christians. If we
cannot be Christ's disciples, unless we have a heart to love our enemies, even
such as are so unjustly, and are doing us all the injury they can; then none
are his disciples who have not a heart to love God, even though he is their
enemy, and disposed to curse and destroy them; who cannot be an unjust and
injurious enemy. Surely that disposition which will love an enemy, who is
unjustly and injuriously so, will not find it hard to love an enemy, who is so
with the highest reason and justice. And all true love to God is of this kind;
it is such a generous, disinterested, benevolent affection, that it is so far
from originating from a belief of his love to us, that we should continue to
love him, even though he appeared to be our enemy; and that love which would
fail in this case, is not true holiness. Therefore it is certain, that he who
does not love his enemies, does not love God with a true holy love. This is, at
least, implicitly asserted here by our Savior.

V. That all true holiness consists in disinterested, benevolent affection, and
what is implied in this, is evident from what St. Paul says, 1 Cor. xiii. Here
the apostle speaks of charity as comprising all real holiness, or true
religion; by which he means that love to God and our neighbor, which the law
of God requires. The word in the original signifies love, and ought to have
been so translated here, as it is above an hundred times in the new testament.


He says, whatever gifts and seize a man may have, which may be without
this love, he is still nothing, and they will be no profit to him. And whatever
exercises he has, and whatever he may do or suffer, and not have this love, he
is yet nothing; by which it is very strongly asserted, that love is true
holiness, and that nothing else has any thing of this nature. In giving the
character of this holy love in its exercises, he says, IT SEEKS NOT HER OWN.
Ver. 5.
This ascertains the nature of this love beyond dispute. It is not self-love,
in whole or in part; for this always seeks it is own, and nothing else. Yea,
it is set in opposition to self-love, it SEEKS NOT her own. Nothing can answer
to this description but that disinterested affection which consists in
benevolence, and what is implied in it; and this answers to it exactly. It is
so described here, that nothing else can be meant. Therefore the apostle
exhorts christians to exercise this same holy love in the following words, 'Let
no man seek his own: But every man another's wealth.' 1 Cor. x. 24.
Let no man seek his own, i. e. as his own, in a selfish way. All selfishness
is wholly forbidden. Let him put on that holy love which seeks not her own;
but something else, viz. the general good of all. This charity, this
benevolent, disinterested affection, is the only bond of holy union among
intelligent beings, therefore it is called the bond of perfectness,' i. e. the
most perfect bond. Col. iii. 14.


VI. The words of St. Paul, 'Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God,' 1 Cor. x. 31.
might he mentioned here as pointing out the nature of holiness, as exercised
toward God. It is such a love to God, which implies and consists in seeking
his glory constantly in every action. But nothing but benevolence will do this.
It is strange that any should think good will is not to be exercised toward
God, when we are in every thing to seek his glory; for the least reflection on
the matter, must convince every one, that nothing but good will, or friendly
affection toward God, will seek his glory, or care any thing about it. This is
to be constantly exercised toward God; so as in the strength of it to devote
our selves, every action, all we are, and all we have, to his interest and
glory. And this is to exercise kind, disinterested affection toward God; in
which we give up every other interest, for the sake of his glory.

VII. Christians are expressly said to live not unto themselves, but unto
Christ. 'And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves* but unto him which died for them, and rose again. For
none of us lives to himself, and no man dies unto himself. For whether we
live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord.' 2 Cor.
v. 15. Romans xiv. 7, 8.
Here the christian's life of holiness, is set in opposition to self-love, in
which men live unto themselves; which was their case before their conversion,
and denotes a state of total corruption: I say, christian holiness is opposed
to this, and therefore must be disinterested affection; a benevolent regard to
Christ, by which men devote themselves wholly to him, living to his glory, and
seeking the advancement of his kingdom; which implies love to men, and seeking
the greatest general good.

VIII. Scripture holiness is that by which men devote and consecrate themselves
to God, to be wholly for his use and service. This is expressed by being holy
unto God; it is therefore called, holiness to the Lord. It is with reference to
this that all men and things, which were in a peculiar manner consecrated to
the service of God by the Jewish ritual, were called holy; as there was in this
consecration an outward image and resemblance of true holiness; which is a
voluntary consecration to God, and devotedness to his service. This is the same
with giving themselves to the Lord. 2 Cor. viii. 5


This will lead us to place holiness in that universal benevolence, which has
the kingdom of God for its object, and subordinates all to this. This
consecrates a man to God, his honor, interest and kingdom, in the strongest
manner; and effectually draws him off from every other interest: and no other
kind of affection will do this. -- Therefore this is holiness, according to
scripture.

Who can attend to this scripture account of holiness, and not be sensible that
universal, disinterested goodness is the leading and most essential thing in
it; and that where this is wanting, there is no holiness; and this implies the
whole? The word love is seldom, if ever, used in any other sense in the bible,
where a holy affection is meant. And this is perfectly agreeable to the account
that has been given of true holiness, which is the only reasonable, consistent
idea that can be given of it, viz. That it is universal benevolence, and all
that love of complacency and delight, and every disinterested affection which
is implied in this; and cannot take place without it.

SECTION VII. Answers to several objections against the foregoing account of
true holiness.
OBJ. I. TRUE christians ought to have respect to the reward they shall receive
in heaven, for what they do and suffer in this world. It is expressly asserted
that Moses had; and is spoken of as part of the excellence of his character.
This is contrary to the disinterested affection, in which it is said all true
religion consists.

ANS. 1. If the recompense of reward, that Moses had respect to, consisted in
being confirmed in God's service and favor forever, and put under the greatest
advantages to glorify God, and promote the interest of his church, and in
seeing this accomplished to the highest degree; then there was nothing selfish
in this, but it was the genuine exercise of that disinterested religion, which
consists in love to God and our neighbor. The disinterested, benevolent person
seeks a recompense of reward, as much as any other person can, and more; but
it is a reward with which benevolence itself is well pleased, and not
selfishness. Selfishness never seeks the reward which God gives his people;
this is suited to gratify benevolence only: Therefore it is respected and
sought only in the exercise of benevolence.

ANS. 2. It has been observed, that the benevolent person seeks his own highest
good, as this is included in the highest good of the whole; and that his
attention and concern is more particularly turned to this interest, as it is
more in his view, and is more especially under his care, and he is under better
advantages to promote it, than the interest of another. Therefore it is no
argument of selfishness in Moses, or any other man, that he has respect to his
own future happiness.

OBJ. II. The promises and threatenings in God's word are all directed to
self-love. They suppose that all men have self-love, and are suited to
influence this, and nothing else. If a person has nothing but disinterested
affection, promises and threatenings will be of no use to him. If men ought not
to have any self-love, why does God address himself to that in his word, and
seek to lead men to avoid sin, and practice holiness, in the exercise of
self-love?

ANS. 1. The promises and threatenings in the word of God, suppose men
possessed of a desire after happiness, with an aversion to evil, and a regard
for their own interest, answerable to its worth. This is so far from being
inconsistent with the most disinterested affection, that it is implied in it,
as has been proved at large. See page 19, 20, 21.
Therefore promises of good, and threatenings of evil, are as much suited to
influence the benevolent person, as him that is selfish.

ANS. 2. The good promised is a good which benevolence seeks, and it has the
most perfect aversion to the evil threatened; and the benevolent person has a
much more clear and realizing view and sense of the greatness and desirableness
of the good, and the dreadfulness of the evil, than the selfish person can
have. This being so, the promises and threatenings in the bible are so far from
supposing that men ought to regard them from self-love, or that there is any
selfishness in true religion, that their proper end is answered only in them
who are influenced by disinterested benevolence; and such only pay a proper
regard to them. The selfish person may be influenced many ways, and to a great
degree, by the threatenings and promises in God's word: They may excite high
hopes and great fears, and restrain him from many things he would otherwise
practice, and lead him to do many things; but they will not influence him to
forsake sin, and practice holiness, or to love God and his neighbor; but after
all, he is as much under the power of sin as ever.

And it is to be observed, that the promises are not made to selfish exercises
and doings; and therefore, rightly understood, are not suited to encourage
self-love, but benevolence. All the promises and threatenings in the bible
oppose selfishness, and are calculated to destroy it, and encourage
disinterested affection, love to God and our neighbor, so far are they from
encouraging self-love.

Christ promises honor and exaltation to them who humble themselves. Should any
one hence infer, that this promise was designed to encourage pride in seeking
exaltation and honor, and that pride is a duty, he would be guilty of great
absurdity and self-contradiction; for this would be saying, a man ought to
exercise pride in seeking humility; and that Christ has set before us a motive
to excite pride, in order to induce us to be humble. This promise is so far
from encouraging pride, that it tends to destroy it. The honor and exaltation
promised, is not that which pride seeks, but that which is most opposite to it.
And should a proud man be hence influenced by his pride, to seek humility, he
might put on some external appearances of it; but he would be as far as ever
from real humility, for by the supposition, all his exercises are exercises of
pride; and humility is not the object of his desire, but of his aversion. This
may serve to illustrate the case before us, and show how far the divine
promises are from being suited to encourage pride and selfishness; and that
they encourage nothing but benevolence. And it also leads to another answer.

ANS. 3. The great and chief good which is promised in the word of God, is not
a good that pleases selfish persons, and therefore is not designed nor suited
to excite self-love. As the duties to which the promises are made, are contrary
to self-love; so is the chief good that is promised. The honor and exaltation
promised to humility, are as contrary to pride, as is humility itself. The
honor which the proud man seeks, is not the same which Christ promises to him
who humbles himself; but entirely of a different nature, and contrary to it. A
person who humbles himself, renounces that self-exaltation and honor, in
comparison with other beings, which pride and selfishness seek; and places his
honor and happiness in abasing himself, and becoming the servant of all, by
exalting God, and promoting his glory, and serving his fellow creatures;
ministering to their greatest good, in the exercise of universal benevolence;
and so obtains true exaltation and honor, which is most contrary to selfishness
and pride. So the happiness in general, which is the subject of divine
promises, is not a happiness which suits self-love, nor can it be induced to
desire and seek it. This is a happiness which consists in glorifying God and
promoting the interest of his kingdom: In devoting ourselves wholly to this;
and seeing it promoted to the highest degree. This good is therefore just as
contrary to self-love, as is universal, disinterested benevolence. This good is
suited to please the benevolent, and excite them to pursue the practice of
holiness, and seek this glory, honor and happiness; but to self-love, is the
object of aversion.

If these things are well considered, it will appear how groundless this
objection is. If the benevolent person is as capable of being influenced by
promises and threatenings, as any one else, and much more; and these are suited
to animate him in the practice of disinterested, universal benevolence and
goodness. -- If the promises and threatenings in the bible are, in a peculiar
manner, suited to encourage and promote benevolence. -- If neither the duty to
which the promises are made, nor the chief good promised, is agreeable to
self-love, nor can be chosen and embraced by it: Then there being so many
promises and threatenings in the bible, is not the least evidence that true
religion does not consist in disinterested affection, or that self-love is any
part of it. But the contrary appears with strong and irresistible evidence,
even from these considerations, --

OBJ. III. There is not such a difference and opposition between what is called
benevolence and self-love, as has been supposed; nor is there any such thing as
disinterested benevolence; men are seeking their own happiness in all their
affections and exercises. He that seeks the good of another, does it because he
takes pleasure in it; and he seeks his own pleasure and happiness as much as he
who seeks his own personal good only; and the one is as much self-love as the
other, And men are friendly to one thing rather than another, because one gives
them pleasure, and the other does not: So that self-love is at the bottom of
all; and one man is really as self-fish as another; all the difference is, one
man's selfishness operates in a different way from that of another man: All
love springs from self-love, and cannot be distinguished from it.

ANS. 1. If by self-love the objector means a general appetite to happiness,
and aversion to misery, or a capacity of pleasure and pain; it is granted that
this takes place in benevolence, as much as in self-love. But, as has been
shown, this is in itself neither selfishness, nor disinterested affection; but
only a capacity for either.

ANS. 2. It Is true that disinterested affection gives a higher pleasure and
enjoyment than self-love; and therefore it is greatly for a person's interest to
place his happiness in the glory of God, and the interest of his kingdom, and
the greatest good of mankind: But it does not hence follow, that the pleasure
to be enjoyed in loving God and our neighbor is the cause of this love, or the
inducement to a selfish person to love God, in order to answer a selfish end,
and make himself happy. I say, this does not follow, for two reasons:

1. This is to put the cause for the effect, and the effect for the cause. The
ground and reason of a person's taking pleasure in the happiness of his
neighbor, is his disinterested good will to him; and not this pleasure the
cause of his good will to his neighbor. But the objector supposes the latter,
viz. that the pleasure a person has in benevolence is the cause of his loving
his neighbor, which is absurd.

2. There is a contradiction in supposing that self-love will lead a person to
place his happiness in his neighbor's good; for the latter stands in direct
contradiction to the former. Selfishness is directly opposed to a person's
placing his happiness in the good of another: This consists in an opposite
affection, which selfishness cannot be reconciled to. Nor can the selfish
person so much as have an idea of the enjoyment which attends benevolence; and
therefore it is impossible that the happiness benevolence gives, should be a
prevailing motive with him, to love and seek the happiness of another, that he
may hereby make himself happy.

If one should suppose that because exaltation and honor is the certain
attendant of humility, this will induce a proud man, in the exercise of his
pride, to be humble, for the sake of the honor he will obtain by it; and
therefore that pride and humility are at bottom the same thing, and seek the
same honor, the supposition would be as consistent and rational, as that we are
considering.

If a person places his happiness in the good of his neighbor, it may be asked,
how came he to do this, rather than another; and by what medium does he enjoy
this pleasure? The answer must be this; the former is a friend to his
neighbor, and this gives him pleasure in his happiness: Whereas the latter is
not his friend, and bears no good will to him, but regards his own interest
only, and therefore cannot take pleasure in his neighbor's good. The character
of these two men are essentially different; their exercises are of a different
and opposite nature; the latter is a lover of his own self only; the former
loves his neighbor as himself, and is so united to him, in disinterested good
will, that he necessarily shares in his happiness. In this case he does not
love his neighbor, in order to get possession of his happiness, this is not
the motive of his benevolence; for this is a contradiction. It is impossible he
should get possession of his neighbor's happiness in this way, and from this
motive, for so far as he acts from such a motive, he, by the supposition, cares
nothing about it, and it is no happiness to him. Nothing but disinterested
benevolence will give him a share in his neighbor's good; this is the ground
and cause of his enjoying it, and not a desire of enjoying this happiness the
ground of his benevolence. So far as a man desires to enjoy his neighbor's
happiness from self-love, just so far he is incapable of enjoying it. The more
he desires it therefore, in this sense, the further he is from it.

ANS. 3. Disinterested good will, which puts a man in possession of his
neighbor's happiness, also makes him share in his misery, if he is miserable,
and bear his burdens. But this is most contrary to self-love; therefore it is
opposed to benevolence. If self-love would lead a person to take pleasure in
his neighbor's happiness, and share in his good, and this were possible; it
would not certainly, desire to share in his misery, and so put him in
possession of that too. But benevolence does this, therefore it is not
self-love, nor the fruit and offspring of it; but an affection of a different
and opposite nature.

OBJ. IV. Holiness consists, in part, in hatred of sin; therefore it does not
wholly consist in love; for hatred is opposite to love.

ANS. Hatred of sin is not opposed to the love of benevolence; for we may love
them who are most vile and odious, with a love of good will, and are commanded
to do it. And God loved sinners with the greatest benevolence, while they were
most odious to him, and hated them with a perfect hatred of disapprobation and
displicence. Thus we may, and are obliged to love and hate the same persons at
the same time, in many instances, to love them with a love of good will, and
yet hate them with a hatred of displicence.

Nor is this displicence, and hatred of sin, opposed to the love of
complacence, so as to imply any thing of a contrary nature. Hatred of sin is
implied in all holy love; and that affection which takes complacence in
holiness, is exercised in the hatred of sin; it being in its nature one and the
same thing, exercised toward different objects. Love to God is, in its nature,
displeasure at enmity against him; and necessarily hates those who hate him;
not with the hatred of ill will, but of disapprobation and displicence.

SECTION VIII. Inferences from the foregoing account of the nature of true
holiness.
I. FROM the view that has been given of holiness, we are led to observe the
impropriety many have been guilty of in speaking of holy, christian love, as
consisting chiefly, if not wholly, in love of complacence. It has been very
common, where love to God, and love to our brother is spoken of and explained,
very much, if not wholly, to overlook the love of benevolence, and keep the
love of complacence chiefly or altogether in view. This is not agreeable to
scripture, which I trust appears from what has been said. The love of
benevolence is chiefly kept in view there, as what comprehends the whole of
holy love; and we cannot have, or communicate a proper notion of holiness, if
we depart from the holy scripture in this particular. This has doubtless been
the occasion of great confusion, and many mistakes.

II. We may hence learn what true self-denial is, and in what it consists.

Our Lord teaches us, that in becoming his disciple, a man must deny himself:
That there is no other way to be a christian; and this must be practiced in
every step in which men follow him, 'If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.' Luke ix. 23.
This self-denial consists, most essentially in acting contrary to self-love,
in crossing that, and giving up the interest that it seeks, for the sake of
some other interest; or in giving up our own private, personal interest, for
the sake of the glory of God, and the greatest good of mankind; which is the
same with exercising disinterested affection; or to love God with all our
heart, and our neighbor as ourselves. Self-denial consists in the exercise and
practice of true holiness, as it has been described above, and in nothing else;
in which self is renounced, and men forsake the whole interest which self-love
seeks, for the sake of the kingdom of God. Whatever men do or suffer, whatever
they give up, for the sake of this, they deny themselves; and where there is no
thing of this disinterested love exercised, there is no self-denial, whatever
is done or suffered; as self is not in the least renounced. Christ himself is
the most perfect example of self-denial; which consisted in seeking not his own
glory, but the glory of the Father, and the greatest good of the creation, in
promoting the kingdom of God, the whole of which is expressed by the apostle in
the following words, 'For even Christ pleased not himself.'

Self-denial does not therefore consist merely in crossing our natural
inclinations, in parting with that which is very dear to us, or going through
great toil and sufferings, to obtain some end. When this is done, not for our
own sake, or from self-love; but for Christ's sake, or for the sake of the
kingdom of God, it is true self-denial. But when it is done for our own sakes
wholly, there is no self-denial in it. The most selfish creature in the world
may part with one good for the sake of another, by which he greatly crosses
some of his inclinations and appetites; and may go through great labor and
sufferings, purely to please himself, or gratify his self-love. Thus a man may
give up his ease, and practice hard service and toil, throughout a whole year,
for the sake of the wages he is to receive, while he is wholly selfish in what
he does and suffers, having no regard to any other interest but his own. So a
man may be willing to do and suffer many things, and cross many of his own
natural inclinations to a great degree, for the sake of his eternal interest,
that he may obtain salvation, purely from self-love. In this there is no
self-denial.

A man may give all his goods to the poor, and devote his whole life to the
most severe discipline, and practice the greatest austerities imaginable; and
then give his body to be burned, with a view to escape hell, and obtain heaven;
and yet if he has not that charity which seeks not her own, but does and
suffers all wholly under the influence of self-love, there is no true
self-denial in it; but it is as really self-gratification, and pleasing
himself, as if he indulged his sensual appetites in riot and wantonness; and
there is really no more true religion in it. For there is no more true holiness
in desiring and seeking eternal happiness in a selfish way, and from self-love,
than there is in desiring any temporal, worldly enjoyment. Of this sort, we
have reason to think, are all the abstinences, fastings, prayers, whippings and
austerities, as well as giving large sums of money, practiced by multitudes in
the popish world, for the sake of obtaining the heaven they have in view. And
of the same kind are all the labors and painful doings and sufferings; all the
reformations and abstinences; yea, every thing else that men do or suffer is
the practice of religion, and with a view to obtain salvation, in the
protestant world, or any where else, who act wholly from self-love, and have no
disinterested regard to Christ and his kingdom. There is no self-denial in all
this. -- But, by the way, the heaven and happiness which these selfish persons
are seeking by all their pains, whether in popish or protestant countries, is
no more like the true happiness and haven, than is the mohammedan paradise.


But here two questions arise, which may be worthy of particular consideration,
as it may serve to throw some further light on this subject.

QUEST. I. Do persons give up their eternal interest in self-denial, so as not
to have a selfish regard to this in their religious exercises? It Is easy to see
that persons may and ought to give up their own private, temporal interest, in
many instances, at least, and to a great degree, for the sake of others, and to
promote the greater general good. -- But is it not unreasonable, and even
impossible, for them to disregard and give up their own eternal interest, for
the sake of others, or for any thing whatsoever? --

ANS. 1. Whatever temporal good any one gives up for the sake of his own
eternal interest, and wholly from self-love, he is, by the supposition, as
selfish in this, as he can be in any thing whatsoever; and therefore there is
no self-denial in it, if self-denial is acting contrary to self, or denying
ourselves. So that he who does not know how to deny himself with respect to his
eternal interest, is really a stranger to self-denial. To give up our temporal,
worldly interest, for the sake of eternal happiness, wholly under the influence
of self-love, is as real an instance of selfishness, as parting with all we
have now, to possess a large estate the next year. Therefore, if no person can
renounce his eternal interest, in oppposition to a selfish regard to it, there
is no such thing in nature as self-denial, or public, disinterested affection.
But let it be kept in mind, that in the practice of the greatest self-denial, a
person does not divest himself of a love of happiness; for this is impossible,
as has been shown, as well as contrary to the supposition. But he places his
happiness, not in his own private interest; but in a good more worthy to be
sought, viz. the glory of God, and the prosperity of his church and kingdom.
For the sake of this, he gives up the former, and forgets himself.

ANS. 2. There is the same reason why self-love should be wholly crossed, in
every instance, as there is that it should be crossed at all; so the same
reason that our whole interest, so far as it is the object of self-love, should
be given up, for the sake of an interest of unspeakable more worth.

True benevolence always seeks the greatest good of the whole; and is a
disposition to give up the less good for the greater. That affection which
hesitates at this, and makes any selfish conditions, is private affection, not
public love. If benevolence will lead us to forsake our personal interest, in
any degree, it will lead us to forsake it wholly, for the greater good of
others, if it is exercised to a sufficient degree, and there is nothing selfish
in us to counter-act and oppose it.

If we consider what GOD is, how infinitely great, important and desirable, and
of what infinite worth are his being, happiness and glory; and how infinitely
worthy and excellent he is: What an absolute and infinite right he has to us,
and to all creatures, to dispose of them as he sees fit, in his infinite wisdom
and goodness, for his own happiness and glory, and for the greatest glory and
happiness of his kingdom: I say, if we well consider this, it must appear most
fit and reasonable, that we should love him above all, and without any reserve,
i. e. with all our hearts, etc. and give up ourselves wholly to him, to be for
his use, that his ends may be answered by us; and he be, in the highest degree,
blessed, and glorified, and his kingdom most happy and glorious forever, let
what will become of us, and without making any conditions with regard to
ourselves. Therefore it becomes us always to feel so toward GOD, and place our
whole happiness in his felicity and glory; having in this sense, no will of our
own. But this is denying ourselves, and giving up the whole of our own interest
for his sake. A choosing to be wholly devoted to him, and to be and do every
thing wholly for his sake, is to choose to do nothing for our own sakes; which
is to give up the whole that self-love seeks.

If we make conditions in this case, and are willing that God should be
supreme, and have the whole disposal of us, and glorify himself by us, IF he
will secure our highest personal interest, and employ all his wisdom and
goodness in our behalf; but are disposed to oppose this, on any other
condition; there is no disinterested affection to God in this, nor indeed any
true love to him; nor is there any self-denial in it: Yea, it is itself real
opposition to God; and the most selfish creature, and the greatest enemy to God
in the universe, may be brought to this, consistent with all his selfishness
and enmity.

It is true, indeed, as has been shown, that the most disinterested affection
does not exclude proper regard to our own being and interest; but necessarily
includes it: But it must be observed, that if our own personal interest is
inconsistent with the general good; universal benevolence will give it all up,
for the sake of this greater good; for to be unwilling to give up our own
interest, when the public good requires it, is criminal selfishness, and enmity
to being in general; and therefore enmity against God.

For the same reason for which I shall be willing that the interest of any
individual in the universe should not be regarded, but given up, when
inconsistent with the general good, I shall be willing to give up my own
interest, on the same supposition, if I am governed by benevolence. Therefore,
however great and important is our whole interest, temporal and eternal, we
ought to be willing to give it all up, if it is inconsistent with the highest
interest* the greatest glory of HIM who is at the head of the universe, and the
sum of all being and perfection; and true benevolence will do this; since the
latter interest is infinitely greater, and more important than the former, and
that not worthy of any regard, in comparison with this.

But this leads to another question.

QUEST. II. How can our eternal interest be inconsistent with the greatest
display of God's glory, and the highest interest of his kingdom? Are not these
so united together, that they cannot be separated; how than can the former be
given up, for the sake of the latter? --

ANS. If we know that we are true christians, we may be sure that it is for the
glory of God, and good of the whole, that we should be eternally happy in his
kingdom. But even in this case, we are capable of making the supposition that
it would not be so; and, on this supposition, we shall be disposed to give up
all our personal interest, so far as we are in the exercise of disinterested
affection, and willing to deny ourselves. -- But if we do not know that we have
embraced the gospel, we cannot be sure that it is, on the whole, most for the
honor of God, and the glory and happiness of his kingdom, that our eternal
happiness should be secured: So we have opportunity to try how we shall feel,
and be disposed, on such a supposition. In this case, the language of supreme
love to God will be to this purpose: 'Let infinite wisdom dictate. Let GOD
reign, and dispose of me and all creatures, so as shall be most for his own
glory, and the greatest good of the whole, whatever becomes of me, and my
interest.' In this case, not to have infinite wisdom order; not to have GOD
supreme, and dispose as pleases him, so as to glorify himself in the highest
degree, and make his kingdom most perfect and happy, would be a greater evil,
infinitely greater, to the true friend of God and his kingdom, than the giving
up his own personal interest: Yea, on supposition his own interest and highest
happiness is inconsistent with the glory of God, it will be worth nothing, and
worse than nothing to him. He will therefore say with Moses, 'Blot me, I pray
thee, out of thy book.' If God may not be God, and order all things for his own
glory, and the greatest good of his kingdom; and if my salvation is
inconsistent with this, I give all up, I have no interest of my own to seek or
desire.

It is true, he who has such disinterested, benevolent exercises, must be happy
so long as God reigns, and is glorified, and his kingdom is in the highest
degree advanced; beause this, by the supposition, is become his good, or he
places his happiness in this. And when he comes to know, that he is thus
devoted to God, he may be sure of his own eternal salvation. But let it be
observed, he must first have such exercises of disinterested affection as
these, before he can have any evidence that he shall be saved; for he must
become a friend to God, before he can have any evidence that he is interested
in his favor and shall inherit eternal life.

QUEST. III. How can we in any case give up our own eternal interest for God's
sake, and for the interest of his kingdom, since by devoting ourselves to God,
we take the most sure and the only way to secure and promote our own highest
good, in our eternal salvation: Is there not an inconsistence in this?

ANS. Though a person by giving himself to God is the exercise of disinterested
affection, in this way denying himself for God's sake, does indeed take the
most direct and effectual way to true happiness, and to secure and promote his
highest interest: Yet he as really gives it up for God's sake, as if he did not
secure and promote it in this way. And he does as truly deny himself, as if he
did really and eternally loose his whole interest. -- Therefore it does not
hence follow that he is selfish, and seek his own private interest in giving
himself to God, and loving God more than himself: For this is a contradiction
being the same as to say, he is selfish, and loves himself more than God, in
renouncing self, and loving God more than himself, and doing all for God's sake.

Christ, when speaking of self-denial, says, 'Whosoever will save his life
shall loose it; but whosoever shall loose his life for my sake and the
gospel's, the same shall save it.' Mark, viii. 35.
That is, he who is so selfish, as not to be willing to deny himself, and give
up his own interest, even all of it, for my sake, out of a disinterested regard
to me, and my kingdom, he shall miss of all true happiness, and must
necessarily loose it forever. But he, who in the exercise of disinterested
affection, denies himself for Christ's sake and the gospel's, and places his
happiness in Christ's honor and interest, shall be really happy, and secure his
highest interest forever. But it does not follow from this, that a man seeks
his own life and happiness in a selfish way, and so does all for his own sake,
in loosing his life for Christ's sake and the gospel's; for this involves a
contradiction. And if this could be, it would not be self-denial, but
self-gratification.

III. What has been said of the nature of holiness, will help us to distinguish
between true religion, and that which is false. The leading and most essential
difference lies here: True religion consists in disinterested affection, and
'seeketh not her own:' False religion wholly consists in selfish affections and
exercises. The former is true holiness; the latter is nothing but sin.

This will serve as a touchstone, by which we may try the various doctrines
and schemes of religion, which are embraced and contended for by professed
christians. If they are the dictates of universal, disinterested benevolence,
and suited to please and promote this, they are doctrines according to
godliness. But if they are suited to gratify self-love only, and formed on a
selfish plan, they have no foundation in scripture.

There are many who professedly make self-love the foundation of all religion,
and represent it as wholly a selfish thing, from beginning to end. They do so,
who teach that love to God, and all practical religion has its foundation
wholly in a belief that God loves us, and has forgiven our sins; and that the
faith by which the just do live, consists most essentially in this belief. And
this selfishness is involved in the scheme of religion that many others
embrace. The five points, so long disputed between calvinists and arminians,
being examined by this criterion, it will appear, I doubt not, on which side
the truth lies. The latter form a scheme of doctrines exactly suited to gratify
the selfishness and pride of man; to exalt men, at the expense of the honor of
God, and happiness and glory of his kingdom. That of the former is suited to
exalt God, and display the glory of his grace, in the happiness and glory of
his moral kingdom; and therefore is most agreeable to the dictates of universal
benevolence. The doctrines here referred to are, 1. God's decrees. 2. Original
sin. 3. Man's moral impotency. 4. Justification by faith through imputed
righteousness. 5. The perseverance of the saints. Calvinists take the positive
side. Arminians the negative.
He whose head and heart are truly formed upon this disinterested, benevolent
plan, will not find it difficult to distinguish between those doctrines which
are the dictates of selfishness and pride; and such as are suited to exalt God,
and abase man, and set up the glory of God, and his kingdom, as the supreme end
of all: And will cordially embrace the latter, and renounce the former.

And this will help us to a rule to try the spirits of men, so far as we are to
judge of their hearts by their practice. A man appears to have true religion,
who embraces the doctrines which are according to godliness, and appears to be
devoted to the honor of God, and the redeemer, and the advancement of his
interest and kingdom in the world; for which he is at all times ready to spend,
and be spent. And he is kind to his fellow men, doing good to all as he has
opportunity; and especially good to the professed friends of Christ and his
kingdom. He puts on 'bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, etc. Col. iii. 12. It is worthy of observation, that a kind,
benevolent spirit, exercised toward men; especially the saints, in doing them
good, is much spoken of in scripture, as an evidence of true religion And the
reason of this appears from the foregoing account of true holiness.
And if a person appears in his life and conversation to be wholly selfish and
proud; seeking his own ease, pleasure and honor, rather than the honor of
Christ, and the promotion of his kingdom, and the good of mankind; whatever
doctrines he prosesses to embrace, and however full of religious zeal and
devotion, he may appear to be at times, we have reason to conclude he is a
stranger to true religion.

And by this rule every one may try his own religion. If it began in a belief
that God loved him, and had bestowed salvation upon him, etc. and all his
religious joy and sorrow, and darkness and light, respect his own interest in
God's favor, etc. it has the appearance of false religion. OBJ. St. John
taught this religion. He says, 'We love him, because he first loved us,' 1 John
iv. 19.

ANS. What is asserted here is, that God's love is first in the affair. Had he
not first loved us, and given his son to die for us, and then called us by his
grace, and given us a heart to love him, we had continued enemies to him. This
is the plain sense of the words, and is agreeable to innumerable other passages
of scripture. Whereas the other sense is quite forced, and makes the words say
what they do not. They are not, we love him because we first believed he loved
us. Besides, such a sense is contrary to the whole run of scripture, and the
express declaration of our Lord, who says, there is no true religion in such
love. See page 55, 56, 57, of the inquiry. And it is contrary to the whole
bible, in another view. According to scripture, we can have no evidence of our
interest in God's special love, and pardoning mercy, until we believe and
embrace the gospel; and love to God or what implies it, is the only evidence we
can have that God loves us. It is therefore impossible, on good grounds, to
believe God loves us with a design to save us, before we love him. We must
first love him, before we can have the lead evidence that God loves us. They
therefore who believed God loved them, while they had no love to him, and have
begun to love God wholly upon this belief, have believed a lie, in the face of
the whole bible: And all their religion is nothing but delusion.


He who comes to the knowledge of the truth fixes on something infinitely more
important than self, and his own personal interest, as the object of his regard
and pursuit. He from that moment devotes himself to the glory of God, and the
greatest general good, in the advancement of his kingdom. From this time he
begins to pray, and say, 'Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be
done in earth as in heaven.' And it now becomes his study and labor, to
promote this grand interest, by serving God and his generation; and thus he
seeks first the kingdom of God. He whose religious discoveries, views and
exercises are not of this kind, and do not issue in this, may safely conclude
himself a stranger to true religion.

IF this most fundamental difference between true religion and false, was
attended to by public teachers; and they labored to keep it in view, in all
their descriptions of the christian's character and exercises, and set the
doctrines and precepts of the gospel in this light; it would tend to kill the
false comfort and confidence of those who have a selfish religion, and
undeceive them. And on the contrary, it would tend greatly to the instruction,
enlargement and joy of the true friends of God, and his kingdom.

But, instead of this, how common is it to hear the preacher speak of religion,
as if it consisted altogether in selfishness! To represent the hopes and fears,
the joys and sorrows, and all the exercises of the christian, as wholly
selfish; and treat of all the doctrines and duties of christianity in this
light! How common to find arminians, neonominians, professed calvinists,
antinomians, or whatever other name they may bear, and however they may differ
in other things, all agreeing in this! This is to stun and starve the true
christian; and feed and strengthen such as have a lie in their right hand.

THE END OF THE INQUIRY.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. Heart, in his dialogues, asserted concerning the moral taste, common to all
men, what was thought to be inconsistent with the total corruption of man,
described in the holy scripture; and of a very bad tendency. He was publicly
told that Mr. Edwards, in his dissertation on the nature of true virtue, had
considered and confuted his notion of moral taste: And it was suggested that he
ought first to answer Mr. Edwards, before he advanced so much on a tenet,
which, it was thought, had been sufficiently exposed. See animadversions on Mr.
Hart's dialogues, p. 17.
This led Mr. Heart to read that dissertation; and be has since published '
Remarks on it, showing that he has given a wrong idea and definition of virtue,
and is inconsistent with himself.' The following appendix is an attempt to
vindicate Mr. Edwards. The author would have been glad to be excused from this
task: But since he was persuaded Mr. Edwards had given a right idea and
definition of true virtue, and that it is of importance he should be
vindicated, and Mr. Hart's objections answered: And what had publicly passed
between him and Mr. Heart, seemed to point him out for this work, he has thought
it his duty to undertake it, hoping it may be of some advantage to the cause of
truth and virtue,

APPENDIX. NUMB. I. Containing an answer to Mr. Hart's remarks on President
Edwards's dissertation concerning the nature of true virtue.
SECTION I. Mr. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's making true virtue to
consist primarily in benevolence, which has universal being for its primary
object, considered and answered.
MR. Edwards, in his dissertation on the nature of true virtue, has said it
consists primarily in benevolence; and that the primary or first object of
universal benevolence is being simply considered, or being in general,
agreeable to the representation in the foregoing inquiry. -- To this Mr. Heart
objects two things.

First, He says, that as being simply considered, or being in general, is
neither God nor the creature, but an abstract idea, love to this object is not
commanded; for we are commanded to love God and our neighbor only. According
to Mr. Edwards, there ought to be another, and a first command to love being in
general. But as we find no such command, we may be sure there is no such duty,
and that holiness does not at all consist in such love. Remarks on Edwards, p.
5, 6.


ANS. Love to being in general, is obedience to the law of God, commanding us
to love God and our fellow creatures; for these are being in general, and
comprehend the whole of being. He who does not exercise universal benevolence,
does not obey the first, nor the second command: But he who loves being, as
such, or simply considered, which is the same as being in general, (and it is
evident Mr Edwards uses these terms as synonimous) I say, he who loves being in
general, loves God and his fellow creatures; and therefore obeys the two great
commands.

OBJ. 'This is no answer,' says Mr. H. 'According to this notion of the root,
or first principle of true virtue, love to God, as well as to our neighbor, is
the offspring of this general, indeterminate benevolence.' And if it is fit to
command or require the daughter affection, much more the mother love. p. 6.

ANS. 1. If being in general was something distinct from God and the creature,
and more than these, and not included in them, the objection would appear to
have some foundation: But as the case is, it is wholly groundless. If a
particular member of a community or nation, should be commanded to love the
king, and all his fellow subjects; and he should be told, this love must be
primarily, good will to all in general, and not to any individuals, exclusive
of the rest; would he have any reason to say, this was not included in the
command he had received; and that he was not by this bound to exercise this
good will to the whole nation, as such: Because he was to love only the king
and his fellow subjects? That the whole nation, simply considered as such, or
the nation in general, including king and subjects, was only 'an abstract
idea,' including neither king, nor his subjects; but something else, which he
must love first; and then from this 'mother affection' 'the daughter love' must
slow, viz. love to the king and to his fellow subjects? If not, what Mr. Heart
has said, is not reasonable. --

ANS. 2. It will more fully appear how frivolous this objection is, if we
consider in what sense being in general is the primary object of true
benevolence. It means no more than that true benevolence is of the nature of
love to being in general. This is fundamental and original in its nature; so
that it cannot, from its very nature, be limited to any particular sort or
circle of beings; but for the same reason it loves one, it loves all. Therefore
it regards individuals, and is exercised toward them, not in a limited,
confined sense, but as part of the whole. In this view, it appears that love to
God may be an affection which has being in general for its object; and its true
nature, by which it is distinguished from every thing else, may consist in
this; and yet there be no exercise of heart toward being in general,
antecedent to love to God, of which love to God is the fruit and offspring. All
that is asserted is, that this true love to God, is a disposition to love being
in general; and carries this in its very nature, else it would not be true
benevolence. See the preceding inquiry, p. 11, 12.
And where is the ground of representing love to being in general, as the
'mother affection,' and love to God and our neighbor as 'the daughter love,'
when the matter is viewed in this light?

Secondly, Mr. Heart objects, that Mr. Edwards, by making being in general the
primary object of holy love, sets this up as supreme, and makes an idol of it,
to which the first and supreme regard is to be paid; while nothing but a
secondary, subordinate, inferior affection is left for God.

ANS. When it is said that being in general is the primary or first object of
benevolent love, the meaning is, that this affection in its primary quality and
distinguishing nature has being in general, as such, for its object; and is a
disposition to regard all, and not a part only; and that being in general is
its first object, in distinction from benevolent being, which is a secondary
object of benevolence, and the primary object of complacence. This is not only
consistent with God's being the chief and supreme object of this affection; but
he is so necessarily, as Mr. Edwards has observed and proved in his second
chapter.

Mr. Edwards took care to guard against both these objections of Mr. Hart's in
the following words. When I say, true virtue consists in love to being in
general, I shall not be likely to be understood, that no one act of the mind,
or exercise of love, is of the nature of true virtue, but what has being in
general, or the great system of universal existence for its direct and
immediate object; so that no exercise of love, or kind affection to any one
particular being, that is but a small part of the whole, has any thing of the
nature of true virtue: But that the nature of true virtue consists in a
disposition to benevolence toward being in general. My meaning is, that no
affections toward particular persons or beings is of the nature of true
virtue, but such as arises from a generally benevolent temper, or from that
habit or frame of mind, wherein consists a disposition to love being in
general. p. 118, 119.

What can be plainer than this? According to this a person may love God
supremely, with a love which has not universal existence for its direct and
immediate object (only as God is in a sense universal existence) but God may be
as much the first, direct, and immediate object, in all respects, as if there
were no other existence; and yet this love carry in its nature, love to being,
as such, or universal existence, and this be the ground and reason why it fixes
on God, as the supreme object; and distinguish it from every thing which is not
holy love; for if it were not a love, which in its nature is love to being in
general, it would not be true, holy love to God.

But it seems Mr. Heart has understood Mr. Edwards, as he thought he should not
be likely to be understood; and as he expressly declared he would not be
understood. With how much reason and justice, the reader must judge.

Mr. Heart allows, that according to Mr. Edwards's scheme, GOD may be the
primary, chief and supreme object of the love of complacence, p. 5, 8.

But let us consider whether there are not as many and great difficulties in
this, as there are in making God the supreme object of benevolence to being in
general. This perhaps may give us some further light in this matter.

The love of complacence has beauty, or beautiful, excellent being for its
object. Hloy complacence has moral beauty in general, moral beauty as such,
simply considered, for its object; and not any particular beauty or the beauty
of any particular being, as confined and limited to that, and exclusive of
moral beauty in general. It is exercised toward particular beautiful beings,
as sharing in the beauty common to all holy beings, and is love to moral beauty
in general, as such: Or, in other words, it is love of holiness, for holiness
sake, simply considered, as being what it is, in its own nature. Therefore love
to particular holy beings, has its first original and primary ground in love of
holiness in general, and is really in its own nature love of holiness, as such,
which distinguishes it from all affection, which is not true love of holiness.

Mr. Hart's objection against benevolence, as Mr. Edwards has represented it,
may be applied to this view of complacence, in the following manner, 'According
to this doctrine, there ought to have been three great commands. The first,
greatest, and most fundamental of all, should have been thus, viz. 'Thou shall
love holiness in general, simply considered; for complacence in this is the
root and mother of all complacential love; and all holy complacence primarily
and most essentially consists in it. Secondly, subordinate to this, and as the
first great branch of this root, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. -- See remarks, p. 5, 6.
Is not this argument, in all respects, as strong and conclusive, as when used
by Mr. Heart, against what Mr. Edwards has said of benevolence?

Mr. H. will doubtless acknowledge that God may be the supreme object of the
love of holiness, as he is infinitely holy, and the fountain and sum of all
holiness; and that he must be so, to him who loves holiness in general, or for
its own sake, simply considered: Though he might not be the supreme object of
any other kind of love which has not holiness, as such, for its primary object.
And why must not this be as true of the love of benevolence, as Mr. Edwards has
defined it?

Mr. H. uses the following argument to prove that God cannot be the supreme
object of the benevolence Mr. Edwards describes. p. 7.

Upon Mr. Edwards's principles, the absolutely great being must have an
incomparably greater share of the primary benevolence to being, simply
considered, than all other particular beings. Compared with them, he has chief
and supreme benevolent regard: But not so, compared with the primary object of
virtuous love, viz. being in general. That must be the chief object; for the
great being does not exhaust all being, so as to reduce all others to
nonexistence, or no degree of being. He infinitely outweighs all other beings,
as put in the scale against him. But if his infinite degree of being is put
into one scale, and the same be put into the opposite scale, and together with
that, the degrees of existence of all other beings, it is obvious this great
being's weight, in the opposite scales, will balance itself, and the whole
weight of the other beings will remain clear, and turn the scale. This scale
has in it the whole of the primary object of virtuous love, the other not; and
the virtuous attraction, or tendency of primary benevolence to being, simply
considered, is in proportion to the quantity of being.

Every one must see, at first view, that if this argument proves God cannot be
the supreme object of universal benevolence, it equally proves he cannot be the
supreme object of any love and regard, in which the creature has the least
share: And that the heart which has any regard to the creation, cannot pay
supreme regard to God. But I will now apply it to the love of complacence in
particular, by substituting that in room of benevolence; by which it will
appear this argument will prove, if it proves any thing, that God cannot be the
supreme object of complacence.

Upon Mr. Edward's principles, (and in the case before us, we may say, upon Mr.
Hart's too) 'the absolutely great being must have an incomparably greater share
of the love of holiness for holiness sake, or the love of moral beauty in
general, simply considered; than all other particular beings. Compared with
them, he has the chief and supreme, complacential love; but not so, compared
with the primary object of holy love, viz. holiness in general, or moral
beauty, as such. That must be the chief object; for the great and most holy
being does not exhaust all holiness, so as to reduce all others to no degree of
moral beauty. His holiness infinitely outweighs the holiness of all other
beings, as put in the scale against him. But if his infinite degree of
holiness, is put into one scale, and the same be put into the opposite scale,
and together with that, the holiness of all other holy beings, it is obvious
this great being's holiness in the opposite scales, will balance itself, and
the whole weight of the holiness of other beings will remain clear, and turn
the scale. This scale has in it the whole of the primary object of the love of
complacence, the other not; and the holy attraction, or tendency of primary
complacential love to holiness in general, simply considered, is in proportion
to the quantity of holiness. -- Mr. H. subjoins to this argument the following
words, 'How do false metaphysics entangle and mislead, the greatest and best
men, when they wander in them!' To whose metaphysics, Mr. Edwards's or Mr.
Hart's, this exclamation is most properly applicable, the judicious reader, I
suppose, will be at no loss. It may not be useless, perhaps, to observe here,
that as being in general is the primary object of general benevolence, and
benevolent being a secondary object, as has been observed; so there is a
distinction to be made in the object of complacential love, into primary and
secondary, in some measure analogus to that of benevolence. The primary object
of complacence, is that holiness and beauty which consists in pure benevolence,
and a secondary object is the holy complacence itself. It must be evident to
any one who will attend, that this must be the case; for there must be
complacence, before there can be any delight in complacence, or complacential
love of complacence; therefore the first complacence cannot have complacence,
or love of holiness for its object; but the first love of holiness must be the
love of holy benevolence. And when this complacence in benevolence once exists,
it does itself become an object of complacence, and in this sense is a
secondary object of complacential love; it being a secondary beauty, implied in
benevolence and flowing from it. And indeed, the mind cannot have any true
conception of the love of holiness, or holy complacential love, until it
actually takes place in the mind; and therefore the first exercise of it in
every mind, cannot have the love of complacence for its object; but it must be
the beauty of benevolence. The mind in this way getting an idea of the beauty
of complacential love, immediately takes delight in it, or approves of it as an
excellence, which is a secondary and consequential exercise of complacence
toward this secondary object. The case seems to be plainly this. The first
exercise of holiness is benevolence to being, as such; in which the heart is
disposed to unite itself to being in general, in seeking the highest universal
good. And this general benevolence implies in it benevolence to benevolent
beings, and a disposition to (...) benevolence, with a love of complacence. And
the benevolent mind, being thus pleased with benevolence as the greatest beauty
and excellence, is of course in the next place pleased with this beautiful
complacence in benevolence.

Of this holy love, in all its branches, and exercises, GOD is in a true sense
the first and supreme object, as he is the sum of all being; so that all
created existence, in comparison with him, sinks into nothing. And he is the
sum and fountain of all benevolent being, and of complacence in moral beauty;
or of all excellence and moral beauty and perfection And his existence and
relations to his creatures, in which he is infinitely distinguished from all
other beings, are the ground of peculiar exercises of the benevolent mind
toward him: such as holy fear and reverence; a humble trust and rest and joy
in him, as the supreme good, and a sweet acquiescence in him, and in his
government and works, and resignation to him etc all which is implied in
benevolence, even in its very nature; and is nothing but universal benevolence
acting according to its nature, toward this infinitely great and glorious
object.




Mr. Edwards says 'true virtue must chiefly consist in love to God, the being
of beings, infinitely the greatest and best of beings,' and that 'it may be
asserted in general, that nothing is of the nature of true virtue, in which God
is not the first and the last,' etc. p. 125, 134. And he thought this was
evident from what he had said upon the nature of true virtue; which he has
particularly proved in his second chapter. Mr. Heart says, herein 'he is very
inconsistent with himself;' and that 'there is indeed a strange confusion and
inconsistence in this great man's ideas and reasonings upon this subject.' p.
9, 11.

But enough has been said, to show how groundless this charge is, and that Mr.
Edwards is perfectly consistent in this matter; and I trust that whoever will
consider the subject with proper attention and candor, will find it the only
consistent notion of true virtue, that has ever been proposed; and that can be
supported by scripture. This, I hope, has been made evident in the preceding
inquiry.

IT may not be improper to take notice here, of the objection Mr. H. makes
against Mr. Edwards's speaking of any affection to God, under the name of
BENEVOLENCE. He presents us with an extract of a letter from one, who, he says,
is 'an ingenious gentleman:' In which Mr. Edwards is severely censured for
using this word thus. He says this is 'more than odd; it is quite improper, and
sounds irreverent!' p. 10. margin.

Mr. Edwards has taken particular notice of this objection, and answered it, p.
126, 127. Mr. Heart, or his friend, had no right to renew this very objection
against Mr. Edwards, without taking notice of his answer, and showing wherein
his reasoning fails; which neither of them have attempted.

I trust none will deny that any affection exercised toward God has the nature
of good will to him; but if we are to exercise any good will toward God, and
be in any degree his friends, we must so far exercise benevolence toward him;
for good will and benevolence are two names of the same thing. And why, of
these two names, which are used for precisely the same thing, one should be
'improper and irreverent,' when used to express this same affection toward
God, and the other not, remains for this ingenious gentlemen to show. Why this
same affection may not be called by the same name, when exercised toward a
superior, and one that is above all dependence on us, as well as when exercised
toward an inferior and dependent, no man, I believe, can show. If benevolence
implies indigence, and dependence in the object toward which it is exercised,
it would indeed be improper and irreverent, to call any affection exercised
toward God by this name. And I conclude this gentleman, and all others who
make this objection, have affixed this idea to the word benevolence; and that
this is the ground of their disgust. But in this they are very arbitrary; in
affixing a meaning to the word which it does not express, nor was ever designed
to signify.

Mr. H. allows that God is the first object of his own benevolence, p. 18. If
God exercises benevolence toward himself, why may not his creatures? Yea, why
must they not? In the exercise of holiness they imitate God as dear children,
and are partakers of the divine nature. Their love to God then must be of the
same nature with God's love of himself, and if his is a love of benevolence,
theirs must be so too. And why God's love of himself may be called benevolence,
which Mr. H. ventures to do, and yet the same kind of love of God in the
creature may not be called so, is quite unaccountable.

Besides, Mr. H. makes all virtue summarily to consist in 'giving up all
inconsistent interests, as loss for God's sake, and his kingom's.' p. 33. Now,
what is this but benevolence or good will to God, and his interest and kingdom,
in such a regard for his honor and interest, as to be willing to give up every
thing for the sake of this? If this is not benevolence, of which God is the
first and chief object, we may despair of ever knowing what is benevolence.

But Mr. H. is more express yet. He says, a ' benevolent propensity of minds to
minds, is communicated to the hearts of men, by a sight and feeling sense of
God's benevolence to them,' in the exercise of which they attract to him in the
first place, etc. p. 23, 24. Surely Mr. H. falls under the 'just' reproof of
this 'ingenious gentleman,' if any one does.

SECTION II. Mr. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's notion of the
secondary or natural beauty in virtue, considered and obviated.
MR. Edwards observes, there are two kinds of beauty. One is moral beauty, or
the beauty of true virtue or holiness; which is the highest kind of beauty, and
consists in cordial agreement and harmony, or general benevolence; and is
discerned and approved of, by such only, who love true holiness; which love is
itself the exercise of holiness. The other is natural beauty, which consists in
natural harmony or agreement, etc. and takes place in the natural and material
world, in numberless instances. And this same kind of beauty is found in things
immaterial and mental, as well as in other things; and there is a natural
beauty in virtuous exercises of the mind, and the fruit of those exercises,
which is entirely distinct from the moral, holy beauty, and of a different
nature; even the same kind of beauty which is found in the material world. Thus
there is a natural beauty, harmony and agreement, in a man's doing to others as
he would think proper they should do to him, of the same kind with the beauty
and harmony of a building, the different parts of which are harmoniously fitted
to answer each other. Which beauty is distinct from that general benevolence,
in which the truth of a man's doing to others as he would they should do to him
consists, and which is the true moral beauty of the heart. This natural beauty
is found in all virtuous exercises and conduct, especially in relative duties
between man and man, according to their different stations and relations; which
may be relished and delighted in by those who have no virtue, as a taste for
this natural beauty, is natural to all men, and does not imply disinterested
benevolence, but is consistent with the highest degree of selfishness and sin.
Therefore they have run into a great mistake, who have thought this relish for
natural beauty, which is found in virtuous conduct, which is common to all men,
an evidence that all men have a degree of true virtue. [See Edwards's nature of
true virtue, chap. III d. throughout.]

Mr. Heart objects against all this, as 'very injurious and destructive to true
virtue.' And in order to expose it, he makes the following observations. chap.
III d.

'1. If this doctrine is true. God's revealed law, -- no where commands,
recommends, or once mentions that in which all true virtue primarily and most
essentially consists; but only enjoins and commands it in regard to its
secondary beauty.' p. 16.

ANS. The law of God requires universal goodness or love, and nothing else; in
which Mr. Edwards says all true virtue consists. This is sufficiently
illustrated in the preceding inquiry; from which it appears this argument is
very ill chosen indeed, to be used against Mr. Edwards's notion of virtue; and
is nothing but begging the question. Mr. H. says, 'If I mistake not, Mr.
Edwards does implicitly acknowledge this in what has been transcribed above.'
Ans. he is doubtless greatly mistaken, and must lie under this imputation, till
he has particularly shown where and how this is implied in what Mr. Edwards has
said. Mr. H. goes on,

'2. If this doctrine is true, it may be suspected that the holy men of old,
prophets and apostles, never knew or practiced true virtue.'

ANS. Our Lord has told us that love to God and our neighbor is the whole of
what the law and the prophets inculcated; even that same universal benevolence
in which Mr. Edwards says all true virtue consists. We have therefore no more
reason to suspect the prophets never knew or practiced this virtue, than we
have to suspect that Christ was not a teacher come from God. And one of the
chief apostles said, 'love is the fulfilling of the law;' and that all true
religion and holiness consists in this, and nothing else, 1 Cor. xiii. 2. He is
therefore so far from placing virtue in this secondary beauty, that he
expressly places it in something else, even in universal love and benevolence.

The instances in scripture Mr. H. brings to support this observation, are not
to his purpose, Psalm. 18, 25.26. Rev. 16.5, 6. There is a true moral beauty in
the righteousness of God here celebrated, which consists in universal
benevolence. Take this from that conduct which is called righteousness in God
or man, and no moral goodness remains; so nothing worthy of holy admiration and
praise. There being a secondary beauty, a natural fitness, in justice, does not
prove, or suppose, there is no higher beauty and excellence in it. If Mr. H.
would prove the point he has set up here, he must produce an instance of
virtue, recommended and celebrated, as such, which has nothing in it of the
nature of universal benevolence. In what he has yet said, he has only begged
the question. He proceeds,

'3. Let it be observed that there is no such object of God's attention and
regard, as being simply considered.' p. 18.

ANS. There is such an object as being in general, or universal being, which is
the same with being simply considered, as Mr. Edwards uses the terms. And
universal benevolence has this for its object; and that is not virtuous love
which will not extend to being in general, as such, or simply considered. This
has been sufficiently explained and evinced by Mr. Edwards, p. 129, 130, 131.
and in the preceding inquiry, p. 11, 12.

Mr. H. to support his assertion, goes on to say, God is his own first object.
He sees himself as he is, as possessed of an absolute fullness of being,
enriched and adorned with all possible mental perfections. As such, he is the
primary object of his first and chief love, both of benevolence and complacence.

On this passage I would observe,

1. It is granted that 'God is his own first object.' This Mr. Edwards grants,
and has proved: And it has been shown in the foregoing section, that this is
consistent with virtue's consisting in love to being in general; not only as
God is, in effect, being in general; but his love of himself is, in its nature,
love to being, as such, or being simply considered.

2. According to Mr. H's account of the matter here, God's love of benevolence
and complacency, is no part of his excellence and perfections. God is 'enriched
and adorned with ALL POSSIBLE mental perfections,' independent of his love; and
as thus possessed of all possible perfections, 'he is the primary object of his
first love.' This is a bold stroke indeed! It strikes out all love of
benevolence or complacence from being any part of holiness. The scripture says,
'God is love;' but according to Mr. H. no part of his perfection is expressed
in this, nor any thing worthy or excellent. And the law of God, which requires
love, is no transcript or expression of the divine perfections; for these do
not consist, in the least degree, in love, but in something entirely different
from this. And if God's love to himself is no part of 'all possible
perfection,' he having all possible perfection antecedent to this; then his
love of benevolence and complacence toward his creatures is no part of his
holiness and perfection. And it will also follow, that love of benevolence and
complacence in creatures, the angels for instance, is no part of their moral
excellence. Thus we see where Mr. H. is carried in his opposition to Mr.
Edwards's account of true virtue. This was no inadvertence in Mr. H. No one can
do better than he has done on this head, if he sets up to oppose general
benevolence to being, as such, as the foundation and sum of all holiness: It
will necessarily land him in this firstborn of absurdities, and he can give no
better account of the divine holiness and perfections than Mr H. has here
given. M. H. has the same sentiment, in the following extraordinary sentence,
p. 12. He [GOD] is not virtuous and holy because he loves himself; but he loves
himself because he is holy. That is, God's holiness does not consist in love,
but something which is antecedent to all love, and the ground and object of it;
and is therefore quite a distinct thing from love.

Mr. H. may be asked, what this holiness is, and wherein it it consists? What
are ' all possible mental perfections,' in which there is no degree, no kind of
love? Doubtless he will be as much puzzled for an answer, as the Indian he
mentions, who asserted the earth stood on a tortoise; and being asked what the
tortoise stood upon? 'He cried out, with surprise, Me don't know!' p. 23.

Perhaps Mr. H. thinks he has answered this question, in his chap. of the
essential nature of true virtue. but if I can understand him there, what he
says of the divine holiness and perfection is in direct opposition to this
extraordinary assertion, and very consistent with Mr. Edwards. He represents
God's holiness as consisting in an equitable regard to himself, and his
creatures. This may be benevolence to being in general, notwithstanding any
thing he says. Yea, I think it must be this, according to his own account of
the matter, when all he says upon it is put together. He speaks of 'an
established virtuousness of character' in the creature, as conformity to God
himself; and he says this consists in love; p. 43. and that it is in effect
universal love. p. 47. Now what can universal love be, but love to being in
general? And if this is virtue in the creature, by which he is conformed to
God's moral character, then God's holiness consists in this same universal
love, or love to being in general. But, be this as it may, it is certain Mr. H.
makes the holiness of God to consist in part, if not wholly, in love. What can
God's equitable regard to himself be, but love to himself? Let him tell who can.

Moreover, he speaks of the love and goodness of God, as a 'most virtuous' [or
holy] propensity; p. 43. and as that which is his glory. p. 44, 45. Now, if
God's love, his benevolence and goodness, are his holiness, and his glory, how
can it be that he is 'enriched and adorned with all possible mental
perfections,' antecedent to his love to himself, and as the ground of it; and
antecedent to his love to his creatures? This love cannot be any part of his
perfection, holiness and glory, if he is 'adorned with all possible
perfections' antecedent to it. Thus we see Mr. Heart has been so far from
telling us what all possible perfection is, considered as aside from love, and
the ground and object of it, that he has contradicted this his position, and
placed the moral perfection and holiness of God in love, and nothing else.
'Error is fated to run crooked!'

Mr. H. proceeds to say, p. 19.

4. Let us next consider the destructive influence of this notion of virtue,
upon virtue itself. All relative duties which we owe to God, to Jesus Christ,
and our fellow servants, -- partake of the nature of justice: They are
equitable, fit and right in their own nature: They have a natural agreement and
harmonious proportionableness to the nature and characters of their respective
objects. -- All this you see and approve, and the dispositions and exercises of
your mind or heart toward all these relative duties, are natural, harmoniously
proportionable to them, and in concord with them, equitably suited to them.
Your heart then is very beautiful, but not at all virtuous, if these harmonious
and equitable dispositions and exercises of your mind do not arise from pure
benevolence to being, simply considered. So then the beauty of your mind, as
adorned with all these relative, equitable and harmonious dispositions only, is
of the same sort with that of bodies. Your heart is as beautiful as a square or
a cube, and no more virtuous than they.

On this the following things may be observed, 1. There is, in things of a
moral nature, a natural beauty, which consists in harmony and agreement, etc.
which is distinct from any thing properly moral in them; and therefore a beauty
which is distinct from moral beauty, and of a different nature. This Mr.
Edwards has asserted, illustrated and proved: And I do not find that Mr. Heart
has so much as attempted to show wherein his proof fails, and how what he says
is not to the purpose. All Mr. H. attempts to do, is to draw absurd
consequences from this notion of secondary, natural beauty in moral things;
which consist in begging the question, or assertions without any manner of
proof. Some of which have been considered; or in misrepresenting Mr. Edwards'
doctrine on this head: Of which the words before us are an instance, as I shall
show before I have done.

There is a uniformity and proportion and an answerableness of one thing to
another, in moral things or true virtue, which is of the same kind with the
uniformity, etc. which takes place in the material world, and the same taste
which discerns and takes pleasure in the latter, will do the same with respect
to the former. And therefore this taste and pleasure don't imply love of
virtue; for it is not the virtue itself that is discerned and relished; and if
there was nothing there but what is discerned and relished by this taste, there
would be no virtue in it. This is what Mr. Edwards has asserted, and Mr. H. has
said nothing to prove it is not so: Nor will he ever do it, it is presumed. It
is a truth which every considerate, judicious person must discern; Mr. H.
himself not excepted; for he has acknowledged it, as I shall show presently.

A person wholly selfish may be pleased with some things which attend general
benevolence; there is to him a beauty in it, so far as he has advantage by it.
This may be while he sees nothing of the true beauty of benevolence. Saul,
under the influence of selfishness, saw a beauty in David's conduct, in sparing
his life when he was in his hands, and was highly delighted with it, while he
wholly overlooked the true beauty of it, and the virtue he exercised, and had
no pleasure in it, but would have been displeased with the same conduct in
David, had it been toward one of Readiness enemies. It is granted that in this
case, the beauty seen, and Readiness pleasure in David's conduct, are not wholly
of the same kind with that under consideration, as the former has its
foundation chieflly in selfishness, the latter not; yet, I think it serves to
illustrate the case before us, and show that men may see a beauty in virtuous
conduct, and be pleased with it; and yet not see the true beauty of virtue, or
have any regard to the true virtue which is exercised; but be disposed to be
displeased with that, and hate it.

The just proportion and symmetry of a beautiful picture is adjusted and marked
out by a number of exactly proportioned lines, drawn so as in a certain manner
to agree with each other, and form a proper uniformity. Now these lines, thus
exactly drawn and proportioned, form a beauty different from that which we call
the beauty of a picture, or a human face, which consists in a certain symmetry
and just proportion. An accurate mathematician, who has no taste or discerning
of what is meant by the beauty of a picture, which is formed by certain colors
and shades, proportioned to these lines; yet might discern the just proportion
of these lines, exactly drawn to suit and answer each other, see a beauty in
it, and be pleased. Here we see there are two distinct beauties, the one
inferior, the other higher, the latter the true beauty of a picture; and yet
the former is discerned, and not the latter. And why may it not be so in the
case before us; though the beauties, one of an inferior, the other of a higher
kind, have a different and greater distinction, than in this instance? The
exact proportion and harmony in the vibrations of the chords of a musical
instrument, have a beauty in them that would give pleasure, if clearly
discerned, distinct from the harmony of a tune; and he who has no taste for
music, might discern the harmony and exact proportion of these vibrations, and
be pleased with this beauty.

Mr. H. insists upon it, that what Mr. Edwards calls the secondary beauty that
attends true virtue, and says is the same kind with natural beauty, is true
virtue, and all the beauty there is in it. This seems to be at the bottom of
all he has said against Mr. Edwards on this head. He might, so far as I can
see, with just as much reason say, all the beauty of a beautiful picture
consists in the exact proportion of a number of lines: Or that the whole of the
beauty and sweet harmony of music, consists in the exact, harmonious,
correspondent vibrations of the air, or of the chords of a musical instrument.
He says, The truth is, this mavelous scheme has changed the natural, moral
beauty and glory of true virtue, into an image made like to the beauty of an
equilateral triangle, or a chessboard. p^ 21.

That he had no reason to bring this charge against Mr. Edwards, any one must
see at first glance. Mr. Edwards says virtue does not consist in this secondary
beauty; but in something else of quite a different nature and kind; that though
there is a beauty which consists in proportion, and the answerableness of one
thing with another, that attends true virtue, which is of the same kind with
the proportion and beauty of a triangle or chessboard; yet this is of a nature
entirely different from virtue, and has nothing of its beauty and glory. What
more could Mr. Edwards have done utterly to exclude the beauty of a
chess-board, etc. from the beauty and glory of true virtue? This was the design
of this chapter on secondary beauty. But may not this charge, with great
justice and propriety, be retorted on Mr. Heart himself? he insists upon it,
that this secondary beauty, which Mr. Edwards has proved to be like to the
beauty of material things (and Mr. H. has not shown that it is not so) is all
the beauty and glory there is in true virtue. This charge must lie upon him
till he can prove the beauty attending true virtue, which Mr. Edwards calls
natural, secondary beauty, is not a beauty of the same kind with the beauty in
material things. This leads me to another observation.

2. There is a misrepresentation in this passage. Mr. H. here supposes that all
relative duties to God, to Jesus Christ, etc. may be practiced from the heart,
according to Mr. Edwards, without the exercise of true virtue; and the
dispositions and exercises of the mind or heart toward all the objects of
these relative duties be natural, harmoniously proportionable to them, and in
concord with them, equitably suited to them, and the heart be thus 'very
beautiful; but not at all virtuous. This is a gross misrepresentation. Mr.
Edwards speaks of this secondary beauty as the attendant of true virtue, which
does not take place in the mind that is destitute of virtue. He allows of no
dispositions and exercises of heart, harmoniously proportionable and equitably
suitable to the objects of relative duties, in the mind destitute of true
virtue, or general benevolence, and which are not the exercises of that. And in
this misrepresentation Mr. H. really begs the question in dispute, or takes for
granted what he had to prove, viz. that a man may heartily practice all
relative duties toward God and his neighbor, while he has no universal
benevolence. If he had proved this, which he has taken for granted, and Mr.
Edwards had allowed what he supposes, viz. that the mind may have all the
beauty which he supposes in relative duties, without any true virtue, 'the
destructive influence of his notion of virtue, upon virtue itself,' might have
appeared. But as the case stands, nothing of this kind is made to appear.

Mr. H. goes into the same way of arguing (if it can be called arguing) in
another passage which I will transcribe. After having made a quotation from Mr.
Edwards, in which he supposes, what he had abundantly proved, viz. that there
is a natural beauty accompanying true virtue, in which true virtue does not
consist, but is of the same kind with the natural beauty in material things, he
cries out, 'Wonderful!' And then goes on in the following words, Here an appeal
is made to experience, and the argument is built on this supposition, that
moral proportion and harmony is a beauty of the same kind with that of material
things. Here is a misrepresentation. Mr. Edwards does not assert this of '
moral proportion and harmony,' but says that besides the moral proportion and
harmony in true virtue, there is also a natural proportion and harmony, which
is the attendant of true virtue, in which there is a natural beauty of the same
kind with that of material things. And Mr. H. has said nothing to disprove it,
that I can find. And surely Mr. Edwards had a right to build an argument on a
premise which he thought he had fully proved; and which, it seems, Mr. H. did
not think best directly, and expressly to attempt to disprove, or so much as
deny. But Mr. H. goes on. It is not possible to conceive of any thing more
absurd. I desire any one to take a human mind, adorned with all right, relative
affections and exercises to Jesus Christ, harmoniously agreeable, and
beautifully proportioned to his characters and relations to us (only excluding
benevolence to being, simply considered; and let the faith of him be their
spring) and carefully compare it with a square, a cube, and a beautiful piece
of embroidery, and try if he can discover any such likeness in their beauties
as to lead him to pronounce them beauties of the very same sort or order. He
will as soon discover the actions of a spirit to be of the same kind with the
action or motions of a clock.

Here Mr. H. supposes what is impossible, viz. that a mind may be adorned with
all right, relative affections and exercises to Jesus Christ, etc. when
benevolence to being in general is excluded; and that a man is a true believer
in Christ while wholly without this benevolence. He has attempted to form a
character here that never existed, and never will, because it implies a
contradiction. Therefore there is no such character to be considered. Mr. H.
here introduces the beauties of true virtue, and then asks if there is any
likeness between these, and the beauty of a square, etc. Mr. Edwards does not
say these are beauties of the same sort. What he says is, that over and above
the true virtuous beauty in these relative duties, there is also a beauty of
another kind, which itself is not virtue; but only the attendant of it, and is
of the same kind with the beauty in material things, and may be perceived and
delighted in by one who has no virtue, nor any relish for it. Now, Mr. H. has
not offered the least evidence that this is not so, in this passage; nor has he
said any thing really in opposition to Mr. Edwards. Mr. Edwards allows there is
a natural beauty in the practice of justice, and other virtues, in external
conduct. And when these are the expression of the heart, there is a moral
beauty in the exercises of that, the beauty of holiness. But when there is no
true virtue in the heart, there is no natural beauty in the exercises of the
mind; all the natural beauty is in the external conduct.


But I proceed to observe,

3. Mr. H. after all he has said to the contrary, allows the very thing he here
opposes; so opposes himself only, while he thinks he is opposing Mr. Edwards.
He says, men who are destitute of true virtue, are many times determined to do
particular equitable actions to others from a regard to the equity of the case,
as their true spring, and for equity's sake, etc. That a man in dealing with
his neighbor, may see what is right between them, and from a regard to the
equity of the case, deal justly with him. p. 50. Here he allows that equitable
conduct in relative duty may be approved and practiced, and yet there be no
virtue in it. I would ask Mr. H. whether there is not a sort of beauty in this
justice and equitable conduct, in which there is no virtue? He must answer in
the affirmative; for what he says implies it, as he supposes it is practiced
from a regard to the justice and equity of the case, and for equity's sake. The
next question is, whether this beauty is the beauty of true virtue, or a beauty
of another kind? This he has also answered. It cannot be the beauty of true
virtue; for he expressly says there is no true virtue in it. And if there is a
beauty in one instance of equitable conduct, which is of a different kind from
the true beauty of virtue, this may be the case, yea certainly must be, in all
instances. And this is a secondary beauty, which consists in a natural harmony
and agreement of one thing with another; the very same beauty which is found in
material things. Thus Mr. Heart allows all that Mr. Edwards has asserted
concerning secondary beauty, and expressly asserts at the latter end of his
book, what he greatly condemns in Mr. Edwards toward the beginning. Error is
fated to run crooked. The greatest men cannot govern, and keep it straight. Mr.
Heart, p. 28.

Mr. Edwards having observed that it was evident, from what he has said, that
the 'disposition or sense of the mind which consists in a determination of mind
to approve and be pleased with this (secondary) beauty, considered simply, and
by itself, has nothing of the nature of true virtue, and is entirely a
different thing from a truly virtuous taste;' there being no more virtue in it
than there is in 'a disposition to approve the harmony of good music,' etc. Mr
H. makes the following observation upon it. If this good man had attended to
one obvious distinction, he might have saved himself from falling into this
grand absurdity, viz. The difference there is in the nature of things, between
the mind's seeing and approving the harmonious proportion and justness of
virtuous dispositions and exercises of heart, toward God and our neighbor,
and having such dispositions and exercises himself. A man may see and approve
the beauty and excellence of true virtue, in some degree, and yet his heart not
be in this beautifully harmonious and equitable temper and state. p. 20.21.

ANS. 1. 'This good man' has attended to this distinction, and thought he had
demonstrated the 'grand absurdity' and impossibility of what is supposed in it,
in the following words. It is impossible that any one should truly relish this
beauty, consisting in general benevolence, who has not that temper himself. I
have observed, that if any being is possessed of such a temper, he will
unavoidably be pleased with the same temper in another. And it may be in like
manner demonstrated, that it is such a spirit, and nothing else, that will
relish such a spirit. For if a being, destitute of benevolence, should love
benevolence to being in general, it would prize and seek that which it had no
value for. Because to love an inclination to the good of being in general,
would imply a loving and prizing the good of being in general. For how should
one love and value a disposition to a thing, or a tendency to promote a thing,
and for that very reason, because it tends to promote it, when the thing itself
is what he is regardless of, and has no value for, nor desires to have it
promoted. p. 125.

Had Mr. H. well attended to this passage, and determined to say nothing
contrary to it, till he could answer it, 'he might have saved himself from
falling into the grand absurdity' contained in the words just quoted from him.
For, --

ANS. 2. Nothing can be more absurd, and imply a greater contradiction, than
that which Mr. H. here affirms, viz. that the heart which is in no degree
virtuous, does at the same time approve of virtue; and that there is a
difference in the nature of things between these. Heartily to approve of virtue
for its own sake, is to be at heart a friend to virtue, and to love holiness
for holiness sake; and can this take place in an unholy heart? A heart that is
an enemy to all virtue? It is impossible. It is even a self-evident
proposition, that the love of holiness, is holiness; and therefore has passed
for an incontestible truth, till Mr. H. has risen and contradicted it. He says,
'a man may see and approve the beauty and excellence of virtue, in some degree,
and yet his heart not be in this beautifully harmonious and equitable temper
and state.' But why does he limit this to some degree? Why may he not approve
of the beauty and excellence of virtue in every degree, as well as in some
degree? It is impossible for him, or any one else to tell, unless it be because
his heart is in some degree a friend to virtue, i. e. really virtuous; but not
so in every degree. All Mr. H's proof of this extraordinary assertion, is in
the following words. Nothing is more common, and nothing more to be lamented,
than this monstrous inconsistence between the moral sense or taste of the mind,
and the ruling dispositions and exercises of the heart of man. Here is an
appeal made to experience; but the whole evidence of the thing to be proved,
lies in Mr. H's confident assertion. I may say, in my turn, If Mr. H. had
attended to one obvious distinction, he might have saved himself from falling
into this grand absurdity, viz. the difference there is, in the nature of
things, between the dictates of the judgment and conscience, and the relish and
approbation of the heart. An inconsistence between these is indeed very common;
men often love and practice that with their whole hearts, which their reason
and judgment declare to be wrong and hateful; and their conscience pronounces
that to be beautiful and excellent, which their hearts do not in any degree
approve; but utterly detest and hate. Here is an inconsistence between the
judgment and the heart, which is consistent with the nature of things, and
evident from abundant experience: But for the heart to approve of that which at
the same time it hates and wholly rejects, is indeed a monstrous inconsistence.
It implies the most palpable contradiction; and therefore never did take place,
nor ever will, in any one instance To see beauty, and heartily approve of it,
as such, or to taste and relish the beauty of holiness, as such, is the same
with the love of holiness, as such, or for its own sake. And when Mr. H. will
prove that the heart of man may be thus friendly to holiness, and love it for
its own sake, while destitute of all true virtue, he will show that he has not
fallen into the grand absurdity with which he is charged.

Mr. H. says, that according to Mr. E. the nature and character, or perfections
of God, are no cause or ground of the first existence of a virtuous or holy
principle in the hearts of created, intelligent beings. And adds, I should be
glad to know how the general attraction or propensity of mind to being, comes
into existence. p. 22, marg.

ANS. It comes into existence by the omnipotent energy of God. It is his
workmanship, by which men are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, who
first created man in his own image. Genesis 1.27. Ephesians. 10.4.24 God gives them a
new heart; a heart to know him, etc. Jer. 24.7. Ezekiel. 36.26. Giving a heart to
know God, must be a work of power, in order to their knowing him; and therefore
cannot be effected by the knowledge of him, or a true sight of the perfections
of God. A sight and knowledge of the divine perfections cannot be the cause or
ground of that which is done in order to this knowledge taking place, or in
giving a heart thus to know God. It is the new heart, the circumcised,
benevolent heart, and not the old, uncircumcised, selfish heart, that sees the
divine character, and loves it. It is granted the heart would not see and love,
were there nothing to be seen and loved; and in this sense the character seen
and loved, is the ground and cause, sine qua non; as without this there would
be no object of love. But the efficient cause, ground and foundation of all, is
the divine power and energy, circumcising the heart to know and love; giving a
new heart, or the spirit of God taking possession of the heart, is a powerful
principle of benevolence. And in this way, even by the immediate exertion of
divine, new-creating power, the heart becomes benevolent.

Mr. H's representation supposes divine power and energy to be the cause of all
virtue in the creature, and that it owes its first existence to this; and so
has really answered the question which he puts. He supposes 'a realizing
belief' of the divine character and love, by which God's excellence and love is
'perceived, realized and felt, as extended to them,' is given to them by God:
Or that it is God who 'gives them to feel in themselves his attracting love,'
etc. and that this is the cause, ground and reason, why one sees, realizes and
feels this excellence and love of God, rather than another, and why he does it
now, rather than before. p. 23, 24. This realizing belief, sensibility, and
feeling is given by God, in taking away the heart of stone, which would not
realize and feel this excellence and love, and giving a new heart, a heart of
flesh. This then is the cause, ground and source of the first existence of all
true virtue, and must be so, according to Mr. H. And I conclude Mr. H. will not
say, this divine operation, by which it is given to men to see and feel God's
excellence and love, is by the truth seen; because this would be to make the
effect the means and cause of itself, and to suppose God works by that which is
the fruit and consequence of his own operation. Surely that which God does, in
order to make men see and feel, is not done by their seeing and feeling, or by
the things seen and felt; but by an immediate operation. If Mr. H. will not
grant this, he will find himself in the case of his beforementioned Indian.

Mr. H. says, This doctrine of Mr. Edwards's seems to be the foundation on
which several doctrines, in the new scheme of divinity, are built. These in
particular, viz. That the moral perfections and character of God, as revealed
by the gospel, and seen by natural men, under the teaching of the word and
spirit of Jesus Christ, so far as they are capable of seeing them, can have no
possible influence in changing their hearts. Regeneration consists in giving or
planting in the heart a new, spiritual taste or relish. This change is not
wrought by the instrumentallity of light, or by any means whatsoever; the word
of God is not a means in the hand of the spirit, in working this change; but it
is effected by mere, absolute, and properly creating power, etc.

Mr. Heart has not mentioned these doctrines exactly in the words of those to
whom he imputes them; and when they have used any of these words, they have
explained them, and guarded against a wrong sense, which the reader will be in
danger of putting upon them, as they are here used by Mr. H. The sum of the
doctrines that have been advanced on this head, so far as I can learn, is this,
viz. that the human heart is naturally so wholly corrupt, so blind and opposite
to the beauty and excellence of divine truth and holiness, that in order to its
seeing and relishing this, a divine power must be exerted on the heart, of
which divine power and operation, this sight and relish of truth is the effect.
The divine operation in this case is as much antecedent to this sight and
taste, as the opening the eyes is antecedent to seeing; and as much the effect
and consequence of this work, as seeing is the effect and consequence of having
the eyes opened: Therefore light, or the truth seen, is not any means of that
powerful operation, which is antecedent to seeing the truth, and does produce
this sight, as the cause of it: For, by the supposition, it is the effect, and
not the cause; and divine truth seen and relished, is really that in which the
active change consists, which is the effect of the divine power.

Mr. H. grants this is all true, if Mr. Edwards's notion of true virtue is
right: So that, according to him (and I suppose it is the truth of the case)
the dispute is, at bottom, about the nature of true holiness, which is the same
with the nature of God's moral character. If this is rightly stated in the
preceding inquiry, what Mr. H. calls 'the new scheme of divinity,' is as old
as the bible, and the only scriptural one: If not, his opposition may perhaps
be justified.

SECTION III. Mr. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's account of natural
conscience, and moral sense, considered and answered.
MR. Hart's objections against Mr. Edwards's description of natural conscience
and moral sense, are grounded on his excluding from it all relish and
approbation of heart, of the beauty and excellence of virtue; and all true
sense and discerning of that in which it consists. He has formed his
observations upon this under five particulars. p. 29 -- 39. But the whole of
the objections he makes against it, may be reduced to the three following.

I. If natural conscience does not see and relish true virtue, or that very
beauty and excellence in which it is distinguished from every thing else, then
the dictates of conscience, and the sense of desert which is implied in it, are
without foundation, and wrong, and it unavoidably deceives us; for moral desert
is necessarily connected with, and has a natural and direct relation to, this
quality in moral actions, wherein their virtuousness or viciousness consists,
and to nothing else. But (according to Mr. Edwards) natural conscience has no
perception or sense of that quality in moral actions, wherein their
virtuousness essentially consists; but, as a wrong-headed thing, places it in
that wherein it does not at all consist, and so connects the sense of desert
wrong, and contrary to the true nature of things. p. 30, 31.

ANS. There is in natural conscience the exercise of reason and judgment, which
may be right, and agreeable to the truth, independent of the exercises of the
heart, and in direct opposition to them. Reason and judgment may pronounce a
thing right, morally good and excellent, while to the relish and inclination of
the heart, it is utterly ineligible and displeasing. In this case, conscience
is not a wrong-headed thing, but dictates the truth. Reason and judgment being
rightly informed, and free from speculative error, are so far from deceiving
us, that, by the supposition, they dictate nothing but the truth, and place
virtue and vice, and moral desert, in that in which they truly consist. There
is so much evidence of this from fact and experience, that I suppose it
needless to attempt to make it more evident by reasoning upon it.

It will be said, this does not remove the difficulty; for these dictates of
reason suppose an idea of the thing, of which it judges, and that it is seen in
a true light. How can the mind judge of that, of which it has no true sight or
conception? It judges of what it sees, and not of that which it does not see.

ANS. The reason and judgment may be convinced of the beauty, excellence and
worthiness of an object, of which beauty and excellence the mind has not the
least taste and relish; and in this sense there is no idea or sight of the
beauty and excellence of the object. This is certain from fact and experience,
as has been just observed. And this is all that is affirmed in the case before
us; and therefore the thing that is objected against. Consequently the
objection must be groundless. The taste and sense of the natural beauty which
there is in true virtue, and a desire to be self-consistent, and opposition to
the contrary (both which Mr. Edwards observes come into natural conscience, and
the moral sense) may be necessary to give an idea and sense of any thing moral,
and of moral desert; and yet the judgment and conscience place true virtue and
moral desert, in that in which it really consists. Reason may dictate that the
beauty which the mind discerns and relishes, is not the true beauty of virtue;
but this is something of a more noble kind, consisting in union of heart to
heart, in universal benevolence; and that all moral desert lies in this, and
its contrary. I say, reason and conscience may dictate all this, without any
actual idea, or real perception of that sweet beauty and excellence there is in
virtue, or the least degree of relish of it: And will do so, if all speculative
error is removed. Thus natural conscience, when duly enlightened, will approve
of true virtue, and nothing else, as really excellent and praise worthy. And if
a man does not judge right in this case; but is deceived. and judges that true
virtue consists in that natural agreement and secondary beauty, which he sees
and relishes, it is his own fault, and an abuse of his reason, through the
prejudices and corruption of his heart. Mr. H. says, according to Mr. Edwards's
notion of virtue, 'natural conscience is wholly ignorant of it, and
uninterested in it.' But herein he is greatly mistaken. The reason and judgment
may be fully convinced that true virtue consists in benevolence, while the
heart is wholly opposed to it, and the moral taste have no relish for it, no
sense of its sweetness, beauty and excellence. So a man's conscience may be
convinced that he is wholly without all true virtue, and all proper idea and
sense of it; and that he is wholly to blame for not exercising this virtue.

A man who never felt in his heart the least degree of love to God, or had any
delight in worshipping him; but the greatest aversion to i, and is always most
uneasy when obliged to be present where he is worshipped: But has the highest
relish for gaming, drinking, and profaneness, and places all his happiness in
these: Such a man may be convinced in his conscience, that there is such a
thing as true supreme love to God, and that there is the highest and most
refined pleasure in this, and in worshipping and serving God, with such love:
That he is under all imaginable obligations to love God, and delight in him and
his service, so that it is wholly his fault that he does not: And yet go on in
his old way, with as strong an inclination as ever. In this case, the man, by
the supposition, has no true idea of that about which he reasons right; but is
wholly ignorant of the beauty and excellence of God, and has not the least
taste and relish of the pleasure in worshipping him with true devotion. He has
indeed speculative ideas of these, i. e. all the ideas that speculation, by the
help of all the sensations he has, will give, or is capable of, while his heart
is wholly without any taste and relish for moral excellence. In this instance
and there are many such) his conscience does not deceive him, but judges right,
and his reason condemns what his heart relishes and approves, and pronounces
that right, excellent and happy, of which he has not the least taste or relish;
and so no true idea of the beauty, excellence and happiness of what his
conscience approves, or his reason judges to be right and excellent.

The man who has no disinterested benevolence, may have a speculative idea of
it, i. e. all the idea that there is, or can be, in mere speculation, and all
that is necessary in order to reason about it; but can have nothing of that
idea which comes by taste and relish of the thing, and implies a sight and
sense of its true beauty and excellence. All the blindness and ignorance there
is in this case, lies wholly in the want of such a taste and relish, and in an
inclination to that which is opposite to it. The natural moral taste, which
does not reach to true virtue, or imply the least relish for it, but is
consistent with the greatest disrelish of it, is necessary in order to the
mind's forming an idea of any thing moral; and therefore is implied in natural
conscience and sense of moral desert; but is entirely a different thing from a
relish of true virtue, or an idea of it is true beauty and excellence. --

Mr. H. observes that Mr. Edwards says, Natural conscience will approve of true
virtue, without seeing the true beauty of it. And upon it has the following
words. Approve of that which you have no idea of, no relish for! Is not this a
contradiction?

ANS. No, by no means. What has been said, I hope, is a sufficient answer to
this question. The approbation of conscience in this case is entirely a
distinct thing from any relish and approbation of heart. By approbation of
conscience here is meant conviction of conscience, or the reason and judgment
dictating that true virtue is right, excellent, and most beautiful, which is a
distinct thing from relishing, or seeing the beauty.

II. Mr. H. objects that 'From Mr. Edwards's doctrines it does necessarily
follow, that men are under no natural obligation to be virtuous, and cannot
equitably be required to be so.' p. 34.

The sum of what he says in support of this is, Natural conscience and the
moral sense cannot taste and approve this kind of virtue, any more than the
white of an egg; and natural reason, and common sense say there is no worth in
it, nor any use or occasion for it in the moral world. Nothing but this
preternatural principle itself (i. e. a truly virtuous taste, or a benevolent
mind) can taste the sweetness of this primary beauty, or perceive any moral
excellence in this sort of virtue: It lies far beyond the sphere of natural
conscience and the moral taste. It is no object to them; consequently man is,
by the constitution of his nature, as incapable of seeing or tasting this
primary beauty of moral things, as beasts are of relishing their secondary
beauty. He is no more made for the one, than they are for the other, and is no
more obliged to relish the one, than they are to relish the other; and cannot
equitably be required to do so, till a new faculty or taste is given him,
adapted to this object, by a new creating act of power.

ANS. 1. When Mr. H. says, natural conscience cannot approve of this kind of
virtue, if by approve he means conviction of conscience, that this is true
virtue, and that there is a beauty and excellence in it, while the heart
disapproves and rejects it, his assertion is not true, as has been proved. If
by approve he means a relish and approbation of heart, it is granted, and has
been proved that no man, who has nothing of the nature of true virtue, can thus
approve of it.

When he says 'natural reason and common sense say there is no worth in it' (i.
e. virtue which consists in benevolence to being in general) 'nor any use or
occasion for it in the moral world,' he only begs the question, and asserts
what is most contrary to known fact. There are multitudes, the dictates of
whose reason and common sense are, that all true worth and excellence consist
in this; and that this is the life, excellence and happiness of the moral
world. And this is the universal dictate of natural reason and common sense,
when properly enlightened, and impartial.

And his assertion, in which all the seeming force of his argument lies, is
wholly without foundation, viz. That man is, by the constitution of his nature,
as incapable of seeing or tasting this primary beauty of moral things, as the
beasts are of relishing their secondary beauty. Man is, by the constitution of
his nature, as capable of seeing and tasting this beauty, as he is of
exercising virtue; for this is one and the same thing. Man has all the natural
faculties which are necessary in order to his being virtuous; and therefore by
the constitution of his nature, is capable of seeing and tasting the beauty of
moral things, and of being perfectly holy. He wants nothing but an inclination
to this, a heart to improve the faculties he has, in order to see and taste
this beauty, and be truly virtuous. In short, he is furnished with every thing
needful in order to see and exercise virtue, except it be virtue itself. This
he has not; but has every thing else, which a creature can have, and not be
actually virtuous. And if the want of a virtuous disposition, or a heart to
discern, and exercise virtue, and a strong and fixed opposite inclination, take
off all obligation to virtue; then it is not possible that any man should be
under any obligation to exercise more virtue than he actually has, and does
exercise; and consequently there is no such thing as sin and blame or ill
desert in nature.

But Mr. H. says, This is no more than saying, if they had this new kind of
relish, they would have it, and if they had it, they might easily exercise it.
But what is this to the purpose, when at the same time they confess, there is
no natural faculty in human nature, by any possible application of truth to
which, this taste can be raised up in the heart? On these principles, we might,
with as much reason, and as good a grace say, the inability a blind man is
under to see and relish the beauty of light, is of the moral kind, and solemnly
impute it to him as sin. p. 35.

ANS. This is saying that this new kind of relish depends on the will or heart,
and consists in the disposition and exercise of that: That so long as the
disposition and choice of the heart is wrong, and in opposition to virtue, it
has no relish for it; but when the mind is disposed and inclined to virtue, it
has this taste and relish; for they are one and the same thing. Therefore all
the defect lies in the heart, being indisposed to love and choose that which is
in itself most excellent, and to which it is invited by the strongest reasons
and motives.

If Mr. H's servant should utterly refuse to live in his house, or obey him in
any one thing, and declare that he saw nothing agreeable in his house, or any
of his ways; but he took his whole delight in gaming, drinking and debauchery,
and was determined to spend the rest of his life in these. His master would
doubtless tell him, that he had a very false and bad taste indeed, that he was
very capable of knowing and doing better, and it was wholly owing to the
viciousness of his heart, that he could take no delight in his house and
service, and had become such a disobedient servant, etc. and solemnly impute it
to him, as his sin. If the servant should say, 'This is no more than saying, if
I had a relish for your service and your ways, I should have it, and if I had
it, I could easily exercise it, and should then be willing to stay with you:
But as I have not this taste and turn of mind, but the contrary you have no
reason to blame me in the least, or think me under any obligation to love or
obey you;' his master would doubtless think he argued very weakly. And if Mr.
H. by all experiments in his power, should find nothing in him, 'by any
possible application of truth, to which' he could raise up in his heart the
least degree of taste and relish for the beauty and order of his house, or any
inclination to live with him; but a fixed abhorrence of his service and all his
ways, would this excuse his servant in his eyes? No: If he did not divest
himself of all reason and common sense, the further he found his servant from
all taste and relish for the business and enjoyment of his house, and the more
impossible, by any applications to his mind, to raise in his heart such a
taste, or eradicate the contrary, the more would he blame, and impute sin to
him.

ANS. 2. We do indeed 'confess there is no natural faculty in human nature, by
any possible application of truth, to which this taste can be raised up in the
heart,' so long as the will remains wholly perverse, and opposes all such
applications; and every one must confess this who will not hold the most
palpable absurdity. But this does not suppose any want of natural faculties, or
any natural defect in them; all the defect lies in the inclination or will;
it is the perverse, obstinate resistance of that, to the applications made,
which prevents their efficacy; therefore the person is wholly blamable for not
having this taste, if a perverse inclination is in any case blamable. This is
illustrated in the instance of the servant above.

ANS. 3. Mr. H. himself allows the same thing, which he is here condemning. He
says wicked men, or vicious minds have no virtuous taste, this being a distinct
thing, and essentially different from any thing which they have; and that their
hearts are in opposition to it; p. 32.33. and then goes on to say, There is no
cure for this evil disease of the heart, but by the grace and truths of the
gospel, as strongly impressed upon the mind by the spirit of Christ. If the
perverseness and obstinacy of wicked minds prevails to that degree, under the
enlightening influences and strivings of the spirit of truth and grace, as to
provoke the Lord to withdraw his gracious influences, and give them wholly up
to their own hearts lusts, their perverseness becomes absolutely incurable, and
they go into perdition.

According to this, men are as far from a virtuous taste as Mr. Edwards
supposes they are; and they cannot be recovered to this by any thing but the
spirit of Christ. And yet he holds they are under obligations to be virtuous,
and to have this virtuous taste, even while they are under the power of this
'incurable disease,' incurable by any powers in themselves, or by any
application, unless by the spirit of Christ; and even incurable by him,
'absolutely incurable', if perversely and obstinately resisted by them. Let Mr.
H. vindicate his own positions here, and he will answer all his objections
against President Edwards, and his disciples, on this head.

Mr. H. in his letter to Dr. Whitaker, p. 10. allows, 'That men must have these
things presented to their view by God's teaching, before they can perceive
their moral excellence.' Mr. H. may be asked, Why then are they under
obligations to see this moral excellence, and relish it, antecedent to God's
teachings, or the impressions of the spirit of Christ? What if the spirit does
not strongly impress these things on the mind, and they have not God's
teachings; will this leave them under no obligations to see and relish these
things, and wholly blameless in their 'incurable disease?' It must, if what Mr.
H. says on this head against Mr. Edwards has any reason and weight. -- And why
is their perverseness blamable, from whom the spirit of God withdraws himself?
Why are they sent to perdition, since their disease always was incurable by
themselves, and they are as far from a virtuous taste, as a blind man is from
seeing the light; and it is become absolutely incurable now? As well may you
condemn a blind man for not seeing and relishing the light of the sun, Mr. H.
being judge. I said above, Mr. H. holds that men who have no virtue, or
virtuous taste, are under obligations to be virtuous; because this is supposed
in his objection against Mr. Edwards, which we are considering, and is implied
in all he says upon it. But I think he has said what is inconsistent with this,
and a sufficient ground to conclude he does not hold that unregenerate men are
under obligations to be holy. I have reference to what he says, when it was
urged against him, that the representation given in his words just quoted,
which he had before given, in substance, in his dialogues, was as inconsistent
with man's obligations to be holy, etc. as the doctrines he objected against.
They are the following words. The gospel is a ministration of supernatural
truth and grace, fitted in its nature to work in the mind as a vital seed and
sacred leaven; and the mind of man is naturally capable of being influenced and
changed or spiritualized by it, when firmly believed and realized The holy
spirit of God accompanies this ministration of the word of life, with some
degree of his influence, at a common grace. If sinners improve this, and the
outward helps they have by the gospel, AS FAR AS THEY ARE IMPROVABLE BY THEM, I
believe he will crown his common influence with special and effectual, leading
them on to saving faith, and so regenerate them If they do not, but continually
resist and rebel against the motions of the spirit, and so provoke God to
withdraw his spirit and give them up to final blindness and hardness of heart,
he grace of the gospel is vindicated, and they perish as despisers of it. This
belief is consistent with my doctrine above. Letter to Dr. Whitaker, p. 32.

On these words the following things may be noted.

1. When Mr. H. says 'the mind of man is naturally capable of being influenced
and changed by the truth of the gospel, when firmly believed and realized,' it
is implied that it is not naturally capable of this, until this is the case;
which he says is the work of the spirit alone; and that none can believe and
realize it, unless strongly impressed by the spirit. According to this, men are
not naturally capable of holiness, i. e. have no natural capacity while without
the spirit causing them to realize the truth and strongly impressing it on
their minds: Therefore cannot be under obligation to be holy. Thus he who,
without any reason, charges Mr. Edwards with holding that sinners have no
natural capacity of holiness, does himself assert it, so as to be justly liable
to the charge.

2. He places all the sinner's duty in improving what he calls common grace,
and the outward helps they have by the gospel, as far as they are improvable by
them. This they may do without the exercise of the least degree of holiness;
therefore they are not obliged to be holy; they not being capable of it, until
they have the special and effectual influence of the spirit. Thus Mr. H. holds
'that men are under no natural obligation to be virtuous at all.' With how poor
a grace then does this objection against Mr. Edwards's doctrine come from him?

3. His belief that God will effectually lead them on to saving faith, and so
regenerate them who improve the common influences of the spirit, as far as they
are improvable by them, (i. e. as far as is consistent with reigning lust, and
enmity against God) is a belief without any evidence from scripture, or any
other quarter; and therefore this belief is doubtless consistent with all his
doctrines, as it is with all the doctrines of Arminians and Pelagians; who have
as much of this fond belief as Mr. Heart.




But as Mr. H. has undertaken to show particularly what inability does not
excuse, we will attend to that, and see if he has given any better account of
the matter, than they do whom he thinks he opposes. He says, That kind of moral
inability which does not excuse from blame, but rather aggravates it, is that
which our Savior, and the prophets and apostles charge upon the perverse Jews,
when they say they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hearts capable of
understanding, and yet understand not, etc. It consists in an indisposition,
and perverse refusal to exert those moral powers which men have.

He has here given a very good account. The disease lies wholly in the
indisposition and perverseness of the will or heart; therefore their not
seeing, and all their inability to see, is their own fault. This account is
indeed agreeable to scripture, and to reason and common sense; and is the very
same they give of the matter, whom Mr. H. thinks he is opposing. He goes on But
upon the principles of Mr. Edwards's scheme, the inability of natural men to
see, or rather taste the sweetness of what he calls virtue, consists in the
want of a natural faculty, or taste suited to the object. This is a most
ungrounded and injurious assertion, directly contrary to the whole tenor of Mr.
Edwards's writings. I might on as good ground say, that according to Mr. H. in
the account above, men's inability to see consists in the want of a natural
faculty, because they want a disposition or heart to see. Men shut their own
eyes, through an indisposition and perverse refusal to exert the powers to
have, in seeing and relishing divine things. The spirit of God alone can cure
this evil disease of the heart, by removing this indisposition and perverse
refusal to see, and so opening the eyes of the blind. This is a renewing the
will, or changing the heart, to discern and taste the sweetness and excellence
of true holiness, and not giving any new natural faculty.

And now the reader is left to judge whether Mr. H. has in any measure
supported his objection. I proceed to the consideration of another.

III. Mr. H. says Mr. Edwards is grossly inconsistent with himself in what he
says of natural conscience. -- p. 27.

Mr. H. observes Mr. Edwards says that 'natural conscience, if well informed,
will approve of true virtue, and will disapprove and condemn the want of it;
and yet without seeing the true beauty of it. If men's consciences were fully
enlightened, as they will be at the day of judgment, they would approve nothing
but true virtue." And then remarks upon it, 'Thus natural conscience does, and
does not, can, and cannot taste or approve the true beauty of virtue.'

ANS. What has been said, in answer to the first objection, may serve to show
how groundless this is, and that Mr. Edwards is perfectly consistent here.
Reason and conscience may be truly convinced, and judge, that virtue consists
in general benevolence, and in nothing else; and therefore that this is the
highest beauty and excellence; and yet the mind have no taste for this beauty,
and consequently no true discerning of it. Reason and conscience may be so
enlightened and convinced, as to judge perfectly right in this matter, which
will doubtless be the case at the day of judgment, without any taste of the
beauty of virtue, and consistent with the greatest distaste and abhorrence of
it.

Mr. H. might as easily, and with as much reason, fasten a contradiction on our
Lord, because he has said of his persecutors, 'They have both seen, and hated,
both me and my Father,' Joh. xv. 24. and yet at the same time, said of the same
persons, They have not known the Father, nor me, chap. xvi. 3. And with as good
reason might he charge St. John with expressly contradicting his Lord and
master, when he says, Whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him,
1 John iii. 6. Whereas Christ says of some of the greatest sinners, ' they have
seen both me, and my Father,' In a word, the bible is so express in this, that
they who do evil, even all who have no true virtue, whatever advantages they
are under to know God; and whatever knowledge of God they have by natural
conscience and moral sense; yet do not know God, nor have seen him, and do not
see nor know the holy spirit, who is the sum of all holiness in God and the
creature, Joh. xiv. 27, that it is not a little wonderful, Mr. H. should take
such great exceptions against Mr. Edwards's saying the same thing and imagine
he had contradicted himself.

Mr. Edwards says, natural conscience, when well informed, and thoroughly
awakened, approves true virtue, and indeed approves nothing that falls short of
it. Upon this Mr. H. says, 'But the secondary beauty falls short of it.'
Because Mr. Edwards had said there is in natural conscience, a taste for
secondary or natural beauty, he supposes he has here contradicted himself. But
all the seeming contradiction lies in Mr. H's mistake. Mr. Edwards's plain
meaning is, that natural conscience is capable of being convinced what true
virtue is, so as to judge or pronounce that, and nothing which falls short of
it, to be virtue* There may be a taste for secondary beauty, and yet conscience
not approve of this as true virtue; but pronounce it not to be so.

The following words of Mr. H. are remarkable. Speaking of Mr. Edwards's
sentiments, he says, 'At the day of judgment natural conscience will be so
improved' (i.e. according to Mr. Edwards) as to see the true beauty of virtue,
consisting in general benevolence, and wholly approve it; which nothing but
virtuous benevolence can do. Will not the wicked then become virtuous,
according to this doctrine? p. 27, 28.

ANS. The doctrine is not Mr. Edwards's, but Mr. H's. One which he has
invented, and palmed on Mr. Edwards. Mr. Edwards does not say that conscience
will at the day of judgment see the true beauty of virtue, but he says directly
the contrary in the clearest and strongest terms. It is not easy to say how Mr.
H. could be guilty of this gross misrepresentation and abuse, who is so great
an advocate for fairness, candor, honesty and justice in controversial
writings. He must be very eager to find contradictions, who will take such a
method to do it. No one will envy Mr. H the triumph and flourish he has made
upon this, in the following words Error is fated to run crooked. The greatest
men cannot govern and keep it straight. It is our wisdom to have nothing to do
with it. Since so great a man as Mr. Edwards could not alter its crooked
nature, but was drawn by its wilely turnings into numberless inconsistencies,
it is in vain for others to attempt to manage so involved a creature. The error;
the crookedness be upon Mr. H. It lies wholly with him. If the great EDWARDS,
who wrote with so much clearness and prec^ssion, may be so perverted and
charged in the lump with numberless inconsistencies; it is truly in vain for
others to attempt to tame the crooked, involved creature, who will do all this.




WE will now attend to Mr. H's account of natural conscience or moral sense,
and see how he distinguishes it from a virtuous taste, between which he says
there is 'a real and essential difference.' He says, By the moral discernment
and taste, natural to man, we are constituted moral agents. By the exercise of
this moral faculty the things that are morally good or virtuous are seen to be
so, as such are approved, the obligation we are under to choose and practice
them, is felt, in some degree. This does not render a man virtuous. To render a
man truly virtuous or holy his heart must agree with his enlightened conscience
or moral sense; or in other words, his will must choose, with preferring love,
and a determined resolution to practice what is approved and recommended by the
moral sense; and this, not in some particular branches of virtue only, but in
its whole extent. -- This sense, choice and attachment of heart to God, or to
virtue and its interests, is that wherein a truly virtuous taste or spiritual
sense consists, as distinguished from the natural, moral sense of the mind:
They are really two distinct things, though in perfect harmony, p. 32, 33.

On this it may be observed,

1. What Mr. H. here says may be understood so as to be perfectly consistent
with Mr. Edwards. He distinguishes natural conscience and moral sense from the
heart or will, and supposes the latter may oppose the clearest dictates of the
former. Mr. Edwards grants that by natural conscience 'the things that are
morally good or virtuous are seen to be so, as such are approved;' so far as
they can be seen and approved, without any taste or approbation of heart; and
the obligation we are under to choose and practice them, is in some sense and
degree seen and felt. And that a virtuous taste consists in quite a different
thing, viz. a disposition to love and choose what a well enlightened conscience
dictates to be right. And this is all Mr. H. seems to say here. If we
understand him as meaning no more, it is not only consistent with all that Mr.
Edwards says of natural conscience, and a virtuous taste; but he will be
consistent with himself, when he says. They who have not received the spirit of
God, as their teacher, in his revelation of the hidden things of God to men,
and do not give credit to his supernatural witness to their truth; but act
under the biasing and blinding influence of the spirit of error and worldly
lusts, do not receive these things as true and divine, neither can they know
them to be so, so long as they refuse the light and witness of the spirit of
God; for they are spiritually discerned. -- (Letter to Dr. Wh -- r, p. 60.) I
do not pretend to understand Mr. Hart's labored explanation of the text which
speaks of the natural man's not discerning the things of the spirit of God. He
is to me very dark and confused, if not inconsistent, and has left the text as
unintelligible, at least, as he found it. However, I think we may safely
conclude that in the passage now quoted, by them who have not received the
spirit, and do not give credit to his witness, he means all unholy men. And
these, he says, do not receive the things of God as true and divine, neither
can they know them to be so. Then certainly they do not see their true beauty
and excellence, their blinding lusts do effectually blind their eyes to this;
for if they see this, they must see them to be true and divine, and know them
to be so. Now this is all that Mr. Edwards asserts. This therefore makes him
inconsistent with himself in opposing Mr. Edwards; for he is herein opposing
himself as much.

2. But if we understand him here as saying any thing really in opposition to
Mr. Edwards, and agreeable to what he elsewhere supposes and asserts viz. that
men who have no virtuous taste, do see the true beauty and excellence of
virtue, and relish it as such, p. 29, he has not only expressed himself in a
very dark, ambiguous manner; so that it is difficult to know what he means; but
is inconsistent with the above quoted passage of his own, and even with himself
in this very passage: But, what is worse, he contradicts the bible, as well as
plain reason and common sense. For,

3. To see the amiableness and excellence of an object, and taste and relish
it, as beautiful and excellent, is precisely the same with loving that object,
with a love of complacence. Therefore if men naturally see God's holiness as
amiable, beautiful and excellent, and have a relish for it, as such, they do
know God, in the highest sense of knowing him, and they do love him; for these
are one and the same thing. To say there is no love in this sweet sense and
relish of God's amiableness, is contrary to reason and common sense. And to say
that men naturally have such a knowledge and love of God, is contrary to
scripture; and is contrary to this very passage of Mr. H's; for he says this
natural conscience and moral taste is a different thing from a virtuous taste;
yea there is an essential difference between them; and does not imply any
relish or choice of the object, but the choice, or will may be directly opposed
to it. What then does Mr. H. mean by his moral taste? He gave such a
description of it in his dialogue, that it was thought it necessarily implied a
degree of true love to God, and to holiness, or a really virtuous taste: But
when he saw this construction was put upon it, he complained that he was
greatly abused, and said he meant no such thing. But has not yet shown his
consistence in this, so far as I can judge. He asserts that 'a perception of
beauty is not love' of beauty; but has offered no proof, nor will he ever do
it. He has attempted to show that his moral taste, and sense of the amiableness
of holiness, is not love of holiness, in his letter to Dr. Whitaker, p. 8 9. to
which the reader is referred. I don't see any proof of this in all that he has
there-said. The most that he says, is an account of natural conscience and
moral taste, very consistent with that which Mr. Edwards gives, and he makes a
proper distinction between this and the heart, choice or will, in its judgment
in favor of virtue, etc. But he has not shown that there may be a sight of the
beauty and amiableness of holiness, and a taste and relish for it, without any
exercise of heart or choice in favor of it; and while the heart hates and
opposes it. Unless he can do this, his cause cannot be maintained.
Therefore,

4. The only way I can think of to make Mr. H. in any measure consistent with
himself in these things, is to suppose that by moral taste, by which the true
beauty of virtue is seen and relished, he intends the same thing in kind with a
virtuous taste; and that the difference lies wholly in the different degrees of
the same kind of thing. That when this sight and relish of the beauty and
excellence of virtue is in so low a degree as not to govern the mind; and
suppress all contrary lusts, it is not true love to God or to holiness, so is
not a holy love; that this consists not in this low degree of relish and love,
but in a 'preferring love, which so prevails as to bear down all opposite
lusts. His way of expressing himself on this head gives ground to think this is
his notion. In the passage under consideration, he says this moral sense,
common to all men, approves of virtue, and feels the obligation they are under
to practice it, in some degree; but does not render them virtuous, while
vicious lusts prevail, and the prevailing relish of the heart is in opposition
to this moral sense. To render a man truly virtuous or holy, his will must
choose with preferring love, and determined resolution to practice what is
approved by the moral sense, And he always speaks after this manner, on this
subject. He says, a man may see and approve the beauty of virtue, in some
degree, when the ruling dispositions and exercises of his heart are
inconsistent with this, p. 20, 21. Speaking of men who have no virtue, he says,
Their hearts in many instances concur, in some degree, with the moral sense of
their minds. A sense of equity, moral honor, of gratitude; a spirit of
benevolence, compassion, etc. and some kind of regard to God influence them to
do many worthy deeds, -- when yet they will deny and counteract all these for
some other lusts, and under greater temptations, and have no effectually
governing regard to God, and to virtue, its interests and reward, p. 48. The
heart does not embrace the truths believed, with governing love p. 51. He
expresses himself in the same way on this head, in his letter to Dr. Whitaker:
He says the sight and taste of the amiableness of holiness, and approbation of
actions and characters morally good, is not holy love, as it is not the same with
their being chosen and embraced by the will, in preference to all that stands
in competition with them. p. 6. And that it 'is not the same thing with a
supreme love and prferring choice of them, by the heart; which is essential to
true virtue,' p. 10. He does not say there is no degree of real love of
holiness in this sight and relish of the true beauty of it; but he says it is
not holy love; i. e. supreme love, and preferring choice.

These expressions are suited to such a notion of virtue, as consists in a
prevailing, governing degree of the same kind of dispositions and exercises
which all men have; but are not true virtue till they rise to such strength and
high degree, as to rule and govern in the heart: And, I think, they are not
consistent with any other notion of it.

But if this is his notion, he has designedly covered himself, and carefully
avoided speaking out plainly, which if he had done, we should better know what
to say to him. For it might be easily proved, that such a notion of virtue is
very unreasonable, and contrary to the bible. And it does not well consist with
his saying that this same taste and relish of the true beauty of virtue is
essentially different from a virtuous taste; for the things which are of the
same nature and kind, and differ only in degree, cannot properly be said to have
an essential difference. So that even this supposition will not make him
consistent. I hope, if he ever writes again, he will honestly and with all
plainness tell what he means. This was Dr. Mayhew's scheme; though he did not
think it best to declare it expressly in any of his publications. And this is
the scheme of most Arminians; and of many who call themselves moderate
Calvinists. But none of them, I think, have yet undertaken expressly to
vindicate it before the public.


As a conclusion to this and the foregoing section, the following observations
may be made.

1. The holy scripture represents all men who are not true believers, and not
born of the spirit, as in such darkness and blindness that they do not see and
know God and Jesus Christ, and cannot see the things of God's kingdom, Joh.
3.3. do not see the spirit of God, Joh. 14.17. not can discern the things of
the spirit, 1 Cor 2.14. so that the gospel is HID from them, 2. Cor. 4.3, 4.
That they only who have a virtuous taste and are regenerate, do know God and
Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. 1 John 4.8. and taste his goodness, Plas. 34.8. 1 Pet.
2.3. i. e. discern and relish his moral perfection or holiness, which is love
or goodness. And they only have the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4 6. with respect to which all the
unregenerate are in total darkness, which glory can be nothing else but
holiness, which is the beauty and glory of the moral world. And yet the
scripture represents these persons, who are thus blind* as actually blamable
for not having that virtue and holiness which they do not see, and not loving
what is hid from them; and that this blindness and unbelief is itself a very
great crime; though they cannot be cured of it, so a to see the mavelous
light of God's beauty and glory, by any thing but the mighty power of God,
quickening, and new creating them, making them new creatures, opening their
eyes, or giving them eyes to see, or a new heart, a heart to perceive and
understand.

Now, since this is the scripture account, it is sufficient to support all that
Mr. Edwards has said on this head, and ought to silence all Mr. H's objections,
until he can show that it is not the same with that which Mr. Edwards has
given, and is consistent with unregenerate men seeing and relishing these
things in a sense and manner, in which Mr. Edwards says they do not: For, as
the case now stands, his objections seem to be equally against the holy
scriptures.

2. What Mr. Edwards has said, and Mr. H. objects against, is perfectly
agreeable to reason and experience. That they who have no virtue, and whose
hearts are wholly governed by contrary inclinations and lusts, cannot, while
they remain so, see and relish the beauty of true virtue, is, in a sense, a
self-evident proposition, as the contrary implies a most evident contradiction.
This is so evident, that a (...) could say. A mind destitute of virtue, cannot
see the beauty of truth. Hierocles.
Besides, we know by experience, that we get the idea of all those things which
belong to the mind and heart, by what takes place in our own minds and hearts;
and cannot obtain it any other way. For instance, we obtain the idea of love,
by the exercise of this in our own hearts. If nothing of this kind had ever
taken place in our minds, we could not have any true idea of it. And though men
exercise a sort of love, and so know what it is; yet, if this is a love which
is distinct in its nature from disinterested benevolence, it will not help them
to the true idea of such benevolence; and they never can have it, till this
takes place in their hearts. The inclination and lusts of their hearts, which
are inconsistent with the least degree of benevolent love and goodness, do
necessarily blind their eyes, and shut all true knowledge of this love, all
true sense and relish of its beauty, out of their minds. However, they may from
the various tastes and exercises of their hearts, and their mental powers, be
able to reason well upon the subject, and be convinced that benevolence, and
the affections included in this, is true virtue, and that nothing which falls
short of it is virtue, or has any moral excellence. And as their eyes are shut
to the beauty of holiness, and this is excluded from their hearts by nothing
but their lusts, they really close their own eyes, to keep the light from them;
and are therefore wholly inexcusable in their ignorance and lusts: And their
conscience may be convinced of this, and that they are justly condemned for
their blindness and want of holiness.

3. Mr. H. has really acknowledged all this, even all that Mr. Edwards has
asserted; so that all his opposition to Mr. Edwards is, in effect, opposition
to himself. This has been evident, I conclude, to every attentive, discerning
reader, from what has been observed. He allows that the eyes of all unbelievers
are fast closed, and shut so as not to receive the knowledge of the truth;
which cannot be opened, but by the powerful work of the spirit of God; and that
this blindness, is so far from excusing men for not being virtuous, and not
seeing its beauty, that it rather aggravates their guilt. That all the children
of Adam are naturally without the spirit of God, and that while they are in
this case (in which they all are, till they receive the spirit of Christ, and
become true believers in him) they are led and influenced in their judgment In
their judgment. If by judgment here, Mr H. means reason and conscience judging,
he carries the matter much further than Mr. Edwards does, and further than the
truth; for he says the judgment, in this sense, may be right and according to
the truth, even in men destitute of the spirit, and under the dominion of the
spirit of this world, and their blinding lusts. It is granted that lust and sin
in the heart does, in many instance, blind and pervert the reason and
conscience of men; but this is not always so. If by judgment, he means the
taste and discerning of the heart, he asserts the same thing which Mr. Edwards
does, and which he himself objects against. --
concerning these things (i. e. the things of the gospel) by the spirit that is
of this world; i. e. act under the biasing and blinding influence of the spirit
of error, and worldly lusts. Such do not receive these things as true and
divine, neither can they know them to be so. They may in some measure see what
his doctrine is; and see his works and witness by the gospel revelation; but
they don't see the spirit of God in them. (Letter to Dr. W. p. 60, 61.) If they
do not see the spirit of God in the doctrines and works of Christ, they do not
see their holiness; but all the beauty of this is entirely hid from them; for
he who is blind to the holy spirit, is blind to holiness itself. This needs no
proof. Now this is all that is implied in what Mr. Edwards has said. I know Mr.
H. says, that according to Mr. Edwards's doctrine, men have no natural
capacity, by which they may see the beauty of virtue, and become holy; and that
they can be brought to this only by the immediate, physical, miraculous, work
of the spirit of God, etc. but this might as reasonably be charged on Mr. H's
doctrine, and as easily proved.

4. Not only man's blindness to the beauty of true virtue, which Mr. Edwards
speaks of, is consistent with their obligations to holiness; but they may be
obliged, though their reason and conscience be blinded and deceived. It Is not
necessary that natural conscience and moral taste should dictate right, and
pronounce true holiness to be so, and that it is beautiful and excellent, and
the contrary wrong and hateful, in order to the man's being under obligations
to be holy, and wholly to blame for not being so. A man may be so deceived as
to believe in his conscience that the highest virtue is nothing but a piece of
wickedness, and that he ought to hate it; and yet be under obligations to love
and practice it. This all will grant, I conclude. The reason is, because such
blindness of the judgment and conscience, and perversion of the moral taste, is
wholly owing to the blinding lusts of the heart, so that if the heart were
right, reason and conscience would judge according to truth. And if the heart
remains blind, and sees not the beauty and excellence of virtue, but hates it,
though the dictates of the conscience are right, and reason pronounces it
beautiful and lovely; is not this as blamable, at least, as if reason and
conscience agreed with the heart? Shall the blinding lusts of men's hearts take
off all obligations to love what they disrelish and hate, though conscience
tell them, that it is excellent and lovely; when this same blindness of heart,
if it blinds the conscience too, and bribes that to agree with it, would be
altogether blamable? How unreasonable then is Mr. H's objection against Mr.
Edwards's doctrine of the blindness of men's hearts with respect to the beauty
of virtue; as if, according to this, they were under no obligation to holiness!
And it is now left to the reader to judge whether all his objections against
Mr. Edwards's account of true virtue, are not equally without foundation.

SECTION IV. Mr. Hart's account of the essential nature of true virtue, and of
a defective sort of virtue, etc. considered.
AS Mr. H. had opposed Mr. Edwards's notion of true virtue, as wrong, and
subversive of all religion, and then undertook to show what is the essential
nature of true virtue, we might reasonably expect he would fix on something
which is in its nature essentially different from that which Mr. Edwards
describes, and particularly show what it is, and wherein the difference lies.
But we are wholly disappointed! He has not described virtue, so as to give his
readers any clear idea of it, or show wherein it differs from that which Mr.
Edwards describes. He says true virtue consists in EQUITABLE AFFECTION toward
God and our fellow creatures. This is consistent with what Mr. Edwards has
said: According to him, it consists in equitable affection; and he has
particularly shown what this is; and that nothing is equitable affection but
benevolence to being in general, and the affections included in this.

And when what Mr. H. says about his equitable affection is put together, it
will agree to nothing else, but the same universal benevolence, or love to
bring in general; which he seems to think he is opposing. He allows that all
equitable affection or holiness in the creature consists in love, p. 43. And
speaks of this as a love of kindness or benevolence, a 'friendly regard' to the
object beloved; and says this is 'in effect universal love,' p. 47. and that
this universal friendly love, is a conformity to God's holiness, p. 43. which
must therefore consist in this same love. And he particularly speaks of this
equitable affection in God, as exercised in universal love or goodness; which
is the same with love to being in general, or to being, as such; viz. a
disposition to give his family of rational creatures as great a measure of
happiness as can be communicated by the exercise of a paternal government over
them. p. 42. Thus we see Mr. H. represents his equitable affection as a
friendly love, which is really universal benevolence; which is love to being in
general. And he say, 'This spirit of equitable, FRIENDLY REGARD, will dispose
the virtuous mind to behave to every one, in a manner suitable to their various
characters, offices, and relations.' p. 47. This friendly regard is
benevolence, and nothing else, and it must be universal benevolence, if it will
dispose to behave to every one in a suitable manner. And this must be true
virtue in its essential nature, and comprehend the whole of holiness, as this
will lead to all right exercises and conduct toward every one.

Mr. H. seems indeed to suppose that he is here opposing Mr. Edwards's notion
of true virtue, as essentially wrong, and repeatedly asserts it to be so, but,
as his assertions don't so much respect the essential nature of true virtue, as
the manner in which it takes place and begins in men, and the cause and medium
by which it is produced; and as he says nothing here on this head which he had
not said before, and has been considered; and since he does not pretend to
argue, but seems to expect the reader will believe his bare assertions, without
any manner of proof, they are not worthy of any further attention. However, it
may be proper to take a little notice of two passages in this chapter.

Mr. H. having asserted That God himself is the source and support of virtue in
us, which is the attraction and active tendency of our minds toward him, in
consequence of their being brought under the attractive influence of his
blessed character and gracious love to us in Jesus Christ, goes on to say, --
To talk of a moral change in the mind, forming the heart to a virtuous temper,
as preceding this attraction of God upon the mind, and as necessary to render
that effectual, is the same absurdity in divinity or moral philosophy, as it
would be in natural, to assert that a body naturally cold, must first change
its nature, and become of a hot nature, like the sun, before it can be warmed
by the action of the sun's rays upon it, however near the sun may approach
toward it. p. 44, 45.

ANS. a body, naturally cold, must be of such a nature and construction, as to
receive the rays of light and heat from the sun, or imbibe them so that they
shall be in a sense incorporated with it, in order to its being warmed by them.
If a body should not be of such a nature and construction, but formed so as to
repel the rays of the sun, no degree of heat from the sun would impart the
least heat to that, till the nature of it is changed, or without the exertion
of a power upon it, entirely different from the influence of the heat of the
sun. Mr. H's instance is therefore not to the purpose; for it does not appear,
that it is the least absurdity in natural philosophy to assert, that a body
perfectly cold, and of such a nature as to repel all heat, cannot be warmed by
the action of the sun's rays upon it; for, by the supposition, they cannot act
upon it, while it is of such a nature. --

THE other passage I would take notice of, is in the following words, virtue,
as it respects our neighbor, summarily consists in loving him as ourselves.
Which implies that there is a love of ourselves, which is virtuous, and
approved of God: Otherwise our loving our neighbor as ourselves, could not be
a virtuous love. p. 46. What Mr. H. here observes is doubtless true, and his
argument just and conclusive. There is a love of ourselves which is virtuous;
but this is not self-love; for this is, in every degree of it, sinful: But it is
that love of ourselves, which is implied in universal benevolence. This has
been already particularly considered. See preceding inquiry, Sect. iv. p. 24,
25, 26.
Therefore if Mr. H. by a love of ourselves meant selfishness, or any thing
different from universal benevolence, his assertion is not true.

MR. HEART has a chapter on 'that defective sort of virtue which is found in
some unregenerate men,' to which I shall now attend. He says, It Is undoubtedly
true in fact, that many men, who are not truly religious, practice many duties.
Their hearts, in many instances, concur, in some degree, with the moral sense
of their minds. A sense of equity, of moral honor, of gratitude, and a spirit
of benevolence, compassion, etc. and some kind of regard to God, influence them
to do many worthy deeds, worthy in some respects: So are in a great degree
inconsistent with themselves, in their dispositions and conduct: And he says of
him who practices these duties, The action he does is a right action, in
respect to what is positive in it, commanded by God, and the motive on which he
acts is a right motive, one of the motives God wills him to be influenced by.
p. 48, 49, 50. He says this is not true virtue; not because it is not in itself
right and duty; but because it is not attended with something else, which ought
to take place, viz. an effectually governing regard to God

On this the following observations may be made.

1. There seems to be a great absurdity in this; viz. that a man's heart should
concur, in some degree, with his enlightened conscience or moral sense, and he
have a spirit of true benevolence, and some kind of regard to God* under the
influence of which he does his duty, what God requires, from the motives which
God has commanded him to be influenced by; and yet not exercise the least
degree of true holiness. This is indeed a great paradox, and seems to be as
much of a contradiction as to say, a man may be holy, and yet have no holiness.
If a person may do his duty, and have his heart conformed to the law of God in
the exercise of true gratitude, benevolence and compassion or mercy, and yet
not exercise any true virtue, it is doubtless impossible to tell what virtue
is. If it does not consist in benevolence, in duty, and obedience to the law of
God, and conformity of heart to it, we may despair of ever finding it in any
creature.

Mr. H. says, this is not true virtue but 'essentially deficient' because there
is no governing, or religious regard to God. But this is so far from giving a
rational account of the matter, that it supposes what is impossible, viz. that
the former may be without the latter. There is no such character in nature as
Mr. H. here gives. He whose heart is opposed to a religious regard to God, is
equally opposed to every thing which God has commanded. He who is benevolent
and merciful, knows God and loves him, and cannot but have a religious regard
to him, (See Jer. xxi. 15, 16. Mat. v. 7.) Mr. H. says ''Tis undeniably true in
tact, that there is such a character;' but he has asserted this in opposition
to scripture and reason. Yea he has herein opposed himself; for in the
preceding chapter he represents love to our fellow men and all equitable regard
to them, as the fruit of love to God, and flowing from it, being 'the result of
a truly pious and filial regard to him.' p. 46, 47. Here he asserts that this
equitable regard to men, a regard to justice, benevolence and compassion, takes
place, when there is no religious regard to God; and that when this religious
regard to God is added to this benevolence, it is sanctified by it, and forms a
truly virtuous character. This passage is agreeable to the notion that all men
have some degree of that love to God and their neighbor in which true holiness
consists; but being defective, i. e. not governing love, it cannot be called
holiness. The whole of this chapter is suited to such a notion, as is most Mr.
H. says; else where of his moral taste; though he has some expressions which
seem to be inconsistent with this. See p. 126, 127, of this appendix*


2. Since Mr. H. has only asserted these things, without attemping any proof of
them, I have none of his arguments to answer. He has, however, referred to two
passages of scripture, as an illustration of what he asserts, which perhaps
ought to be considered. He observes, when the Jews had set their servants free,
according to God's command, but soon brought them into bondage again; God,
reproving them for their last conduct, says, with reference to their dismissing
them, 'ye had done right in my sight.' Jer. 34.15. This he mentions, I
conclude, to prove that wicked men who have no true virtue, may do that which
is right in God's sight. p. 51. marg.

ANS. God in these words has reference to their external conduct, and not to
their hearts, and the motives from which they acted; and speaks to them, not as
the searcher of hearts; but as looking on their outward conduct, and treating
them accordingly. Mr. H. allows that all the actions which spring from vicious
motives, and lusts of heart, are positively vicious. p. 52. But it is pretty
evident the Jews did not let their servants go free, from any higher or less
vicious motive, than that which influenced them to bring them into bondage
again. The king of Babylon had laid close siege to the city, and they feared
the destruction that was threatened. The prophets told them to dismiss their
servants, as one way to obtain deliverance. But when their danger seemed to be
over, the Chaldeans having raised the siege, in order to repel Pharaoh's army,
which was coming for the relief of the Jews, they brought their servants into
bondage again. They did not release them, from any regard to justice, from
benevolence and compassion, but from the same sordid, selfish motive, under the
influence of which they forced them into their service again, when they thought
the danger of the evil was over, from fears of which they let them go. They
acted from the same motive which induced Pharaoh and the Egyptians to let the
Israelites go; and therefore when their fears of destruction were removed, they
repented, as Pharaoh did. And I conclude, Mr. H. will not say that Pharaoh
exercised even his defective sort of virtue in letting the people of Israel go,
and even thrusting them out of Egypt.

Mr. H. represents this defective virtue, which he says is good, and doing
well, so far as it goes, 'the agent being faulted only for that which is
wanting in his work,' by what he says is called historical faith, of which St.
James says, 'Thou believe there is one God, thou do well. But lest men
should rest here, he adds, devils also believe and tremble.' This he brings as
a proof that wicked men may do well. And supposes that to encourage them to do
better, the apostle adds, 'The devils also believe and tremble.' p. 52. It is
evident at first view, that he tells them their doing well was no better than
what the devils do: Yea, he represents the devils as going further than they
did; for they not only believe, but tremble. Can any one seriously think the
apostle meant to represent the devils as doing well? This is shocking indeed!
As well may we suppose our Savior commends the Pharisees and Scribes as doing
well, when he says ' full well ye reject the commandment of God,' Mark 7.9. The
sense of the apostle's words is as plain and natural, as of these words of
Christ, and they are spoke in the same way. As if he had said, 'You believe
there is one God. Well done! A fine attainment this! This is to do as well as
the devils, except that they not only believe, but tremble also.' It is to be
observed, that the word used by Christ, translated full well, is the same that
the apostle uses here. If Mr. H's defective sort of virtue is 'fitly resembled'
to this faith, as he says it is, and is found to as great degree, at least,
among the devils, as 'in some unregenerate men,' it turns out to be a very low,
'defective sort of virtue' indeed, by which, they who have it are not much
distinguished from the worst of men, unless they are much worse than devils.
Mr. H. complains of Dr. Whitaker for saying 'Man is turned devil'; and says
'before he gets out of his hands, he makes him look worse than a devil, Dial.
p. 42. But he has now fallen into the same wickedness himself, while he
represents those men, who do not believe and tremble, as worse than devils.


Mr. H. says, There are certain middle principles or springs of action wrought
into the mind of man, by our gracious Creator, which, though they are not
virtuous, and do not necessary imply a principle of virtue in the heart, yet
are friendly to virtue, and espouse its cause within us, suppose the mind duly
instructed: Such are reason, natural conscience, the moral sense or taste, etc.
p. 49, 50.

Remark 1st. It seems to be a contradiction, that there should be any thing in
the mind of man, which is friendly to virtue, which is not virtue, nor implies
any principle of virtue in the heart. Can there be any thing in the heart
friendly to virtue, which has nothing of the nature of virtue? If a man is a
true friend to virtue, we think we may safely pronounce him a virtuous man.

Remark 2d. What Mr. H. instances in here are consistent with the highest
degree of wickedness; as they take place in a higher degree in devils, than in
men. Reason and natural conscience, if enlightened, do in a sense 'espouse the
cause of virtue,' i. e. bear testimony in its favor. But this is consistent
with the greatest degree of vice; and serves to set the sinner further from all
virtue, if possible, by rendering him more criminal and vile; for the more
clear this testimony is, the more opposition is made to it by the sinner, and
the more criminal he is, in refusing to comply with the dictates of his
conscience. This Mr. H. himself allows. He says, 'These have some degree of
influence in natural men.' I ask, what influence? Do they influence them in the
least degree to comply with that, whose cause they espouse? This Mr. H. denies;
for this would make them virtuous. All the influence they can have then, while
their hearts oppose virtue, is to render this opposition more vile and
criminal, as well as stronger, and more directly turned against that in which
true virtue consists. Mr. H. allows that if men resist the call of reason and
conscience, and refuse to comply with their dictates, they hereby become much
worse, and that herein consists the exceeding sinfulness of sin: but this they
do, so long as they refuse to become truly virtuous, if conscience espouses the
cause of virtue in them. What room then is there left for Mr. H's 'defective
sort of virtue,' by means of the dictates of natural conscience? It is wholly
excluded; or rather is nothing but the exceeding sinfulness of sin.

Remark 3d. If we should grant all Mr. H. says here, that there are principles
or springs of action, wrought into the mind of man, by our gracious Creator,
which are friendly to virtue: Why may not a principle of true virtue be wrought
into the mind by God, as well as these principles, which are friendly to
virtue? These principles of action, which are favorable to virtue, are not
wrought in the mind by moral power, or the power of divine truth or love; but
by creating power, I conclude Mr. H. will allow. Why may not the principles and
springs of virtuous actions themselves be wrought into the mind in the same
way, and by the same power? The same power that can form in the mind principles
friendly to virtue, can doubtless create virtuous principles themselves, in the
very same way.

Mr. H. speaking of his defective sort of virtue, says, There is an essential
defect in the agent, which renders him not well accepted. His action is
essentially deficient, and cannot be accepted, as an instance of true, divine
virtue. And yet he says in the same page There is something in them which is
right, and required by God. This is approved, not abhorred and thrown back as
dung in the faces of the doers of them. See p. 50, 51. This seems to be no less
than a contradiction. The same doings are not well accepted, and cannot be
accepted; and yet they are approved, i. e. are accepted; for I conclude
accepted, and approved, mean the same thing. Besides, is it not very
unreasonable, and even daring presumption, to say, that the infinitely holy God
approves of that moral exercise and conduct, which is confessed not to be of
the nature of holiness?

On the whole, Mr. H. in this chapter censures them who represent all the
doings of the unregenerate, as having nothing in their nature but sin, and an
abomination to God; and their best moral actions as altogether vicious, and in
direct opposition to the spirit and law of God, etc. But has offered no matter
of conviction from scripture or reason. Any judicious person who reads this
chapter, must be sensible how empty it is of any shadow of argument.

This middle character, this sort of exercises and doings, which are neither
sinful nor holy, are not known in the bible; and is a mere chimera, full of
inconsistencies. This, I trust, will appear to any one, who attends to the
account given, from the scripture, of holiness and sin, in the foregoing
inquiry. The scripture representation of all men by nature is, that there is
none that does good, no not one, Romans iii. 12. That the mind, the whole heart
of every one who has not the spirit of Christ, is enmity against God, and his
law, Romans viii. 7, 8, 9. And Christ says, 'He that is not for me, is against
me. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree
corrupt, and his fruit corrupt.' Mr. H. has not taken this advice; but has made
the fruit of a tree, which he acknowledges to be corrupt, not corrupt, but
good, even so good as to be approved by God!

APPENDIX. NUMBER II. REMARKS on some passages in the piece entitled, The
visible church in covenant with God, further illustrated. Containing also, a
brief representation of some other gospel doctrines, which affect the
controversy. Interspersed with remarks upon some things advanced by Dr. Bellamy
and Mr. Hopkins, in these important points. By MOSES MATHER, A. M.
MR. Mather's 'representation of some other gospel doctrines,' is founded
wholly on the account he gives of SELF-LOVE. If what he says of this is true,
he has indeed made some new discoveries; upon which he has built a system of
doctrines. He says, as self-love is essential to man, as a moral agent, Adam
was possessed of it in a state of perfect holiness; and he had this same
self-love when he had turned rebel against God. And as God was now become his
enemy, and all the divine perfections were against him, and stood engaged to
destroy him, to love God in this situation, would be the same with loving his
own misery, and total destruction: Which being contrary to his self-love, which
God had implanted in him, it was naturally impossible he should love God. Nor
was it his duty to love him, in these circumstances, as it was not only
impossible, but contrary to the divine command; for he was commanded to love
himself. And all Adam's posterity are in much the same state he was in after
the fall; so that it is neither possible for them, nor their duty, to love God,
until they understand and believe the gospel, which sets the divine character
in a new light, and opposite to that in which it appears in the law, and
declares his love and kindness to them. This discovery and belief, will
reconcile their hearts to God, so that they cannot but love him, and embrace
the gospel from this same principle of self-love, from which, they, before
this, necessarily hated God; and therefore need no new principle in their
hearts, in order to turn to God, and become real christians. Mr. M. does not
expressly say it is the duty of men to hate God, before they believe the report
of the gospel; but this is necessarily implied in what he says: For the same
self love which renders it impossible to love God, renders it equally
impossible not to hate him, while he is considered as disposed to destroy them.
And if we are commanded to exercise this self-love, which is opposed to God,
this is the same with being commanded to oppose and hate him! Mr. M. thinks he
has proved this self-love is commanded, from the words of the command, 'Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself.' This argument has been confuted in the
preceding inquiry. See p. 25.26.
All this Mr. H. thinks he has demonstrated, by the help of self-love, using
the word without any fixed, determinate meaning, and in different senses.

When he says self-love is essential to man, as a moral agent, he means a
general love of happiness. But when he infers from this, that Adam's self-love,
after he had sinned, rendered it impossible for him to love God, he means quite
a different thing by self-love, viz. selfishness, which is most properly called
self-love. Nothing is therefore necessary, in order to see the futility of all
he says on this head, but to attend to what has been said on this subject, in
the preceding inquiry, p. 19. -- 26.

When Adam saw himself condemned by the law of God, and all the divine
perfections were against him, had he been a benevolent friend to the greatest
good of the whole, he might, with the greatest gust for happiness, have placed
his happiness in the honor of God, as the greatest good; and dreaded his
dishonor, and an injury done to his government and kingdom, as the greatest
evil; and most heartily say, 'Let God be glorified; let his government be
maintained, and his kingdom flourish, whatever becomes of me, or any other
creature!' And he might have been pleased with God's perfections and law, as
excellent and worthy to be loved and honored, though they were against him, and
implied his destruction; for their excellence appeared in this very thing.
Nothing was inconsistent with this but that selfishness, in which all his
rebellion consisted. In short, nothing was in the way of Adam's loving God, in
this state, but his sin, consisting in a disposition to love himself only, and
exalt himself above God, which was implied and acted out in his first
rebellion. And it this rendered it not his duty to love God, and made hatred of
him no crime; then his first rebellion was no sin; and there never was, nor
will be, any such thing as sin: For every one that rebels against God, does it
in the exercise of that self-love which is contrary to loving and obeying him.

Mr. M. by the help of his self-love, also undertakes to show that what I have
published concerning the state and character of the unregenerate cannot be
true. I have represented an unregenerate sinner, who is awakened to fearful
apprehensions of the wrath to come, and has a painful sense of his continual
exposedness to it; and is convinced in his conscience that salvation is freely
offered to him; and that it is his duty and highest interest to embrace the
offer and return home to God, that in this way and no other, he may escape the
evil he dreads and be eternally happy; under all this light and conviction of
conscience, yet obstinately refusing to embrace the gospel, and his heart
rising against God more directly and with greater strength than it did before
he had this conviction, in horrid exercises of hatred, enmity and fixed
opposition to God's character and government. Mr. M. says this is impossible,
as it is contrary to self-love; that human nature is not capable of acting such
a part; as this would be disinterested malice; yea more, 'such a fixed,
inveterate malice, as overcomes all regard to his own happiness in the sinner's
heart.' (p. 15)

ANS. Upon the principle on which Mr. Mather opposes me here, the sinner always
heartily complies with what his judgment and conscience are convinced is for
his interest: For if his heart may, in any instance, refuse to embrace what he
is convinced in his conscience would be for his interest to embrace, he may do
so in any instance, even in the instance before us. And all Mr. M. says is
against the former, as much as the latter. -- But that the former is true, none
will deny. Is there no instance, in our world, of a person's refusing to comply
with what he was convinced, in his conscience was his duty, and for his own
interest? Are there not innumerable instances of this every day? Yea, have we
not all a witness in our own breasts, that our hearts, in many instances, have
not conformed to the dictates of our consciences; but have refused to love and
embrace that which we have been convinced in our consciences, would be for our
highest interest to love and embrace? Mr. M. is not such a stranger to mankind,
and to himself, as to be insensible of this, I conclude. And if a man's heart
may oppose his conscience telling him what is most for his interest in one
instance, it may in another, and in any supposable case whatsoever. Does Mr. M.
think that nothing is necessary, in order to the conversion of a sinner, but to
convince his judgment and conscience, that it is for his interest to embrace the
gospel? And that all who have this conviction are certainly converted and
saved? Surely he does not. Why then has he supposed it in his opposition to the
proposition under consideration?

And when a sinner's heart exercises itself, as in the case before us, it
supposes no disinterested malice, or any thing contrary to the greatest degree
of self-love: Yea, it is purely from self-love, and because his heart is under
the dominion of this, that he thus opposes the dictates of his conscience, and
hates God, his law and government, Jesus Christ and the gospel: And that
because all these are contrary to self-love. The sinner's heart must cease from
loving himself wholly, and love God supremely, and exercise that benevolence
which loves and seeks the glory of God and the general good, in order to be
willing to embrace the gospel. This the selfish or unregenerate heart is fixed
in opposition to; and the more clear conviction he has in his conscience, that
it is for his interest to love God, etc. and the more his conscience is
convinced of the truths respecting the divine character, the nature and true
import of the gospel; the more fully will he find these things to be contrary
to his heart, or his selfishness; and consequently the more strong and vigorous
will be the opposition of his heart to them.

The pride of a man's heart may oppose true humility, and be the only reason of
his obstinately refusing to submit to it; while under a conviction of
conscience, that to be humble is the only way to be truly happy and honorable.
The pride of a man's heart, which, at bottom, is nothing but selfishness, seeks
honor and happiness which are not the honor and happiness that attend humility;
but of a different and opposite kind: And his being convinced in conscience,
that in opposing humility he opposes the greatest good, will not alter the
taste and bent of his heart, or render the honor and happiness that attend
humility any more agreeable to his pride, than they were before. The proud
heart will oppose humility at all times, and under all imaginable convictions
of conscience. So the selfish heart will oppose benevolence, and every thing
that implies it, whatever conviction of conscience there may be, that
selfishness is the source of continual misery, and that the benevolent are only
happy. You may convince the conscience of the covetous miser, that it is his
duty, and for his interest, to be charitable and liberal; as with such a
disposition he would enjoy himself more, and have more comfort in what he
possessed, and hereby lay up immense, eternal riches. But would this certainly
make his selfish, covetous heart charitable and liberal; or do any thing
toward it? It might induce him to give something to the poor; but so far as he
is influenced to this by mere selfishness, it would be as far from charity, and
as really opposite to it, as were any of his former exercises. How then, it
will be asked, shall this selfish churl become liberal? Ans. Not merely by
being convinced, in his judgment, that to be liberal is the only way to become
truly rich and happy; and hence from his selfishness desiring and attempting to
be liberal: For all such desires are, by supposition, selfish desires and
attempts, and as opposite to liberality as were his former desires and
attempts: But by having a new heart given him, a truly benevolent, liberal,
bountiful heart.

Mr. M. says (p. 14. marg.) If the enmity of our hearts is really a principle
of disinterested malice, it must be owned, that the more it is opposed by the
light, and convictions of conscience, it will work in our hearts after the
manner here described; [i. e. the more light and conviction the conscience has,
the higher will the fixed hatred and opposition of the heart rise against God]
and he grants that, on this supposition, 'no light and conviction of conscience
can humble, subdue and convert, the heart:' And 'that therefore regeneration is
the effect of mere and immediate divine power.'

I am as confident as Mr. M. or any one else can be, that there is no such
thing in nature, as disinterested malice. And if it can be made to appear that
any thing I have asserted concerning the unregenerate, implies any such thing,
I am ready to retract it. All sinful exercises are interested and selfish: All
sin consists in self-love, and those affections that are implied in it, and
flow from it. There is properly no disinterested affection but that in which
holiness consists. This has been proved in the foregoing inquiry.

And why is not the exertion of mere and immediate power, as necessary to
subdue the heart which is under the power of this selfishness, as if it was
full of disinterested malice? And how will conviction of conscience remove the
former, and turn it into benevolence, any more than the latter? I believe none
can give any reason for this. I think therefore Mr. M. has really granted the
whole I have asserted, by his concession under consideration. Selfishness is as
opposite to holiness, or disinterested benevolence, in its whole nature, and
all its exercises, as disinterested malice could be, if any such thing were
possible: And the former is as strong and fixed a principle as the latter could
be. Let any one give a good reason why disinterested malice, were this
possible, might not be removed by light, or conviction of conscience, and that
mere and immediate divine power is necessary to subdue and convert such a
heart, and it will be as good a reason why all this must be true of a heart
wholly under the dominion of that self-love which is most opposite to holiness
of any thing in nature, and indeed the only thing in the heart that can oppose
it.

This brings the matter in dispute to a point; and may lead us to see what is
the ground of our difference on this head. It has its foundation in different
notions of the nature of true holiness, and so, of God's moral character, which
is the sum, and partern of all true holiness. If the true scriptural holiness
has been described in the foregoing inquiry, then all must grant, that what I
have advanced about the state and character of the unregenerate, and the
necessity of 'mere and immediate divine power,' to change the sinner's heart,
must be true, and agreeable to scripture. Mr. Heart acknowledges this (p. 23.
marg.) and Mr. M. implicitly acknowledges it in the passage now under
consideration. The truth is, if holiness consists, in whole, or in part, in
selfishness, or if this is in any degree friendly to true holiness, and does
not oppose it; then he who has all possible depravity, may be recovered to
holiness, without any immediate, divine power exerted to change his heart:
Nothing is needful in order to this, but to have his conscience enlightened to
see what holiness is, how agreeable it is to his selfishness, and suited to
gratify it; and what kindness and wonderful love God exercises toward him;
which is suited to affect and win his selfish heart, and draw forth strong
exercises of love to them that love him; while God requires nothing of him that
is not perfectly agreeable to self-love; I say, on this supposition, nothing is
needful in order to conversion, but that light and conviction of conscience,
which shall bring these things into clear view.

But then it must be observed, such a conversion is really no change of heart
at all, it is supposed that the perfectly selfish heart is disposed to love God
and holiness, and embrace the gospel, whenever they are truly and properly set
before it; and love to God and holiness, and embracing the gospel, are nothing
but selfishness exercised toward these things: And all religion and holiness is
nothing but self-love, and what springs from this root: And that disinterested
affection, which has been spoken of, as opposite to selfishness, and as that in
which all true holiness consists, is no part of holiness; but a mere chimera,
being as contrary and impossible to human nature, as disinterested malice. Here
lies the great difference between us, even in our different and opposite
notions of the nature of holiness, and of the divine, moral character. If we
were agreed in this, we should be agreed in our notions about total depravity;
the state and character of the unregenerate, regeneration, etc. Mr. M. makes
the total depravity of fallen man, primarily and radically, to consist in his
incapacity of loving God, because this was in that state, contrary to
self-love, together with the darkness that was on his mind. But this cannot
properly be called depravity, as it is not in the least degree sinful; it being
naturally impossible, and so not his duty to love God in these circumstances.
But if it were allowed to be sinful depravity in some degree, it cannot be total
depravity, according to Mr. M. for this his self-love was a good thing, even a
duty which was commanded in the divine law; and it was ready to flow out in
love to God, whenever he should be revealed in a truly amiable light, even as
the kind savior of sinners. According to this, self-love is itself holiness,
and that in which it radically and summarily consists.

I have said (sermon on regen. p. 42. marg.) that the doctrines of the total
corruption of man, and regeneration by light in the understanding, were
inconsistent with each other. And no one has yet proved the contrary: But the
evidence of the truth of this assertion rather increases, in that all who
undertake to vindicate this notion of regeneration do, in order to do it,
really deny total depravity. If self-love is so friendly to holiness, and such
an essential ingredient in it, that when the conscience is properly
enlightened, this same self love, will grow up, and act out, in all the
branches of holy love; then man is not totally depraved; for he has this good
principle in him, which being cultivated will grow up into all holiness. But if
self-love is, in every degree of it, opposed to holiness, and that in which
human depravity consists, and fallen man is wholly under the power of this; and
the more strongly this is exerted, the more he opposes God and holiness; then
no degree of light and conviction of conscience will change his heart, or
produce new and opposite principles there: But the more light and conviction is
in the conscience, the more clearly the hateful object, holiness, is set before
the mind; the more directly and vigorously will self-love hate and oppose it.
This all will grant, on the supposition made. So that the dispute really is,
whether man is totally depraved; and what true holiness is: Whether it is
opposed to selfishness; or whether selfishness itself, is not friendly to it?
The dispute therefore is to be determined by determining what true holiness is.
If the foregoing is a true and scriptural account of it, the controversy is
decided, by the confession of all. I hope therefore in all disputes on this
head, for the future, that which at bottom is in question, will be kept in
view, viz. What is holiness? What is the divine character? What is God? -- If
we can be agreed in this, we shall agree in all the rest.

Mr. M. says (p. 14. marg.) But Solomon did not apprehend that natural
corruption would rise the higher, the more it is opposed (Prove xx. 15)
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction shall
drive it far from him. -- If then this corruption does not necessarily rise the
higher, the more it is opposed; but does sometimes yield; why may we not
suppose that the father of our spirits, through light, powerfully impressed on
the conscience by the holy spirit, may obtain a more complete victory over this
corruption, than ever is obtained by human correction; even so as that it may
be truly mortified?

In answer to this it may be observed, if these words prove any thing against
the doctrines I have advanced, they prove too much; more than Mr. M. himself
will grant; or can be true, consistent with the whole current of scripture. If
foolishness means natural corruption in general, and the rod of correction will
drive it far from him; then it is overcome and mortified; and there is no need
of any thing else, in order to effect it, or to obtain a more complete victory
over this corruption, than is obtained by the rod of correction. If the rod of
correction will remove, and subdue this corruption in any degree, no reason can
be given why it may not wholly remove and subdue it. Therefore, the consequence
from the words is this, 'If then the natural corruption of the heart does yield
and will submit under the discipline of the rod, why may we not suppose, yea,
be certain, that the rod of correction, properly and powerfully applied, will
obtain a complete victory over it?' If this reasoning is not just, neither is
Mr. Mather's.

These words may be taken in three different senses; and let which will be the
right, neither of them are to Mr. Mather's purpose.

1. By the rod of correction, may be meant the whole of parental discipline and
education. This, when wisely and faithfully administered and practiced, may, by
divine constitution and promise, be connected with the deliverance of the child
from sin; so that God's blessing and his giving a new heart to a child, is the
certain attendant or fruit of such education and discipline. In this sense the
words in the 6th verse of this chap. may be understood, 'Train up a child in
the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it.' And
agreeable to this, it is expressly said (chap. xxiii. 13, 14.) 'Withhold not
correction from the child. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver
his soul from hell.' If God has promised to the child which is faithfully and
wisely educated, under parental discipline, and brought up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, deliverance from sin and hell; this does not determine
any thing about the manner in which God effects this, whether he gives a new
heart by light, or immediate divine influence. And it is consistent with the
child's being more perverse, and his corruption rising higher and growing
stronger under discipline, if God's blessing should be witheld.

2. If these words, with the others just mentioned, only import, that this is a
proper means, and the likeliest way to turn a child from sin, and promote his
salvation, they determine nothing with regard to the matter in dispute.

3. If by foolishness is here meant, not corruption of heart in general, but
those particular exercises and outbreakings of it, in which children are
stubborn and rebellious, and impatient of restraint; by which they show their
folly, and render themselves disagreeable and troublesome to all who have any
special connection with them: Children may, by a wise parental government, be
cured of this folly; it may be driven far from them, and they, as to their
external appearance and conduct, be quite different from those who have no
education, or a bad one. The many examples of this are sufficient to confirm
this observation. But this discipline, by which children are thus formed, does
not eradicate or subdue the corrupt principles of their hearts. The corruption
of their hearts is restrained from acting out in that particular way, and is
turned into some other channel; and may act with as much strength another way,
and more. It will do so, unless the heart be renewed by the spirit of God.

Mr. M. here refers to president Edwards's book on freedom of will, and says,
The whole design of that book is to prove, that the will is as the greatest
apparent good is. All the arguments there offered, must be confuted, before
this character here given of the sinner can be established. P. 13.

ANS. President Edwards does not attempt to prove, nor say, that the will
always is, according to the conviction and dictates of the judgment and
conscience, with respect to what is best, and most for a person's interest: But
he says directly the contrary, p. 12. And the whole that he says in showing
that the will is as the greatest apparent good, shows that he does not mean the
appearance that is made to the judgment and conscience only; but to 'the whole
faculty of perception or apprehension, and not merely what is called reason or
judgment.' He supposes the heart may be such as to resist the clearest dictates
of conscience; so that what this dictates to be most for his interest, shall
not be the greatest apparent good; but something directly opposite. If
president Edwards had said any thing inconsistent with this, it would be
contrary to known fact and universal experience.

To the selfish heart, that which selfishness dictates is the greatest apparent
good, and not what reason and conscience dictate. Therefore, to such an heart,
that is always the greatest apparent good, which opposes universal,
disinterested benevolence. If selfishness is agreeable to itself, and a selfish
good is to this the greatest apparent good; then this benevolence is
disagreeable, and it opposes and hates this and the highest good which it
seeks, as the greatest evil. Mr. M. speaking of Adam in his fallen state says,
He having now a separate interest from God, there was of course contrariety to
the divine character, so far forth as that stood in opposition to his own
separate interest. P. 15. The selfish man always has a separate interest from
God. This is the very nature of self-love, it consists in setting up a separate
interest from God; and therefore is of course, in its nature, contrariety and
enmity to the divine character; for this always did, and always will stand in
direct opposition to the separate interest of a selfish man. And this separate
interest will be the greatest apparent good to selfishness, whatever reason and
conscience may dictate to the contrary.

Mr. M. thinks the doctrines about regeneration, etc. which he is opposing,
originated from what president Edwards has advanced in his treatise on
religious affections; where he represents holiness and the exercises of it, as
something of a different nature from any thing that takes place in unholy men;
and says that in these holy exercises and affections, 'there is a new inward
perception or sensation of the minds of holy persons, entirely different, in
its nature and kind, from any thing that ever their minds were the subjects of
before they were sanctified;' which he calls 'a new spiritual sense.' P. 35,
etc. This, Mr. M. thinks, is a great error, and of a very bad tendency; it
being the source of a set of doctrines, which he calls ' new divinity,' which
says he, 'are surprisingly spread in the land, in the present day.' P. 36, etc.

No wonder Mr. M. objects against this, seeing if it is true, it overthrows all
his divinity at once. According to him, the same self-love which in unholy men
is inconsistent with their loving God, and leads them to hate and oppose him,
is a principle of holiness in the saints; and is really exercised in true love
to God, when their eyes are opened to see that his character is favorable to
their own dear selves; and that they had been under a sad mistake all their
days before: So that holiness does not differ, in nature and kind, from
unholiness or sin. But it holiness consists in benevolence, and the affection
implied in it, and this is in its nature different from selfishness, and
opposed to it, what Mr. Edwards says of holy affections must be true. So that
we still see the dispute is about the nature of holiness, or what is God's
moral character. If we were agreed about this, it would end the controversy.

Mr. M. makes three objections against Mr. Edwards's doctrine on this head.

First. He says, 'If regeneration is such a change as is here described, it is
evidently not a moral, but a physical change.' His argument is this: Giving
this new, spiritual sense or taste, is the same with giving a new bodily sense,
or opening the eyes of the blind; but this would be a physical change;
therefore the giving this taste is a physical change.

ANS. 1. The scriptures, speaking of this change, represent it by giving eyes
to see, a being turned from darkness to mavelous light, giving a new heart,
the new creature, or new creation, a being raised from death to life, etc.
These expressions as strongly import a physical change as does Mr. Edwards's
description of it, and are therefore as liable to Mr. M's objection. Mr. M.
though it of this, and said, I am sensible that very strong expressions are used in
the scripture about this change; it is styled a new creation, etc. but if
regeneration is no other than a moral change, then those strong scripture
expressions will not warrant us to describe it as a physical change. P. 40.
These scripture expressions are full as strong as Mr. Edwards's: What warrant
then had Mr. M to say his import a physical change, when he owns he has none to
put such a construction on the scripture? He has not offered a word to show why
Mr. Edwards's description of this change does make it a physical change, which
will not equally prove that the description of it in scripture makes it so.

ANS. 2. What does Mr. M. mean by a physical change? I think he has not
sufficiently explained himself, Mr. Edwards expressly says he does not mean, by
his new, spiritual sense or taste, any thing which implies any new natural
faculties of the soul, of understanding and will; but that it consists in a new
disposition of the same will, or affection of heart. And if this is not a moral
change, and nothing else, let Mr. M. show why it is not, and tell what a moral
change is, and what he means by it. A moral change is a change of the heart or
will, in which it is disposed to hate what it before loved, and to love and
choose those objects to which it before had an aversion, with a new kind of
sensation or love, which it never had before. And will not Mr. Mather allow
that men pass a change like this in regeneration and conversion? A physical
change is a change of the natural faculties of the soul, or giving new natural
faculties: But this is no more implied in the change Mr. E. describes, than in
that which Mr. M. supposes takes place in regeneration. And Mr. E. expressly
declares he does not mean any such thing.

Mr. M. says, If God should give sight to one that was born blind, we should
readily agree that the change wrought in him was physical, and not a moral
change: And it is equally evident, that it is a real physical change which is
here described by Mr. Edwards. And to describe regeneration as a proper
physical change, and then say, we don't mean so, is only to bewilder ourselves
and our readers about that important change. P. 39. It appears that Mr. M. has
bewildered himself by not sufficiently attending to the matter, and not
distinguishing between a change of the heart, in which a new inclination takes
place there, which was not there before, and that change in which a new natural
faculty is given, in which the heart is not in the least concerned. This
appears by the instance he brings. He has bewildered himself in not
distinguishing between a spiritual sense, which consists in the disposition or
affection of the heart, and our bodily senses. If a man who has always been
wholly contracted and selfish in all his views, designs and pursuits, becomes
benevolent and generous, in a hearty love of God and his neighbor, placing all
his happiness in the glory of God, and the greatest good of the creation, he is
turned from darkness to mavelous light, and has a set of sensations that are
quite new, and opposite to any thing he had before. But is this therefore a
physical change? It is altogether of a moral kind, if there is any such thing
as moral change. Now this is the change Mr. Edwards describes.

ANS. 3. Mr. M's regeneration has much more of the appearance of a physical
change, then that which Mr. Edwards describes, and will be found to be really
such, I believe, if examined. He supposes the change, as wrought by God, to be
wholly in the understanding, considered as distinct from the will, and to
consist in giving a new set of ideas, in which the will or heart is not
concerned, and which could not take place, however well disposed the heart is,
as they are entirely independent of any disposition of heart. Now this is no
more a moral change than any other change whatsoever.

Secondly. Mr. M. says, 'If regeneration is such a physical change, the sinner
is so far from being to blame for his continuing in an unregenerate state, that
he is wholly excused from all blame. P. 39.

ANS. 1. This is granted, if regeneration is a physical change, i. e. is a
change not of the disposition of heart, but something else independent of this.
But Mr. Edwards describes no such change, but only a change of heart, which
consists wholly in new sensations and affections, in which it turns from sin to
God.

ANS. 2. This objection is made with an ill grace by Mr. M. For though it is
groundless, as made against Mr. Edwards, it lies with full force against
himself, and all who hold that men are regenerated by light, and not by giving
a new taste and disposition of heart. -- For, according to them the difficulty
of the sinner's forsaking sin, and turning to God, does not properly lie in the
heart or will; but in the understanding, which being blinded, does not see
divine objects in a true light. This is the only cause of their continuing
unregenerate; and not any thing wrong or blamable in the will. The fault is
wholly in the understanding; and this is a blameless fault or defect, for the
will or heart has no hand in it; and can no more help or remove it, however
well inclined, than a blind man can restore himself to sight. All that hold to
regeneration by light, without any immediate divine influence on the will, may
be challenged to show how men are wholly to blame for continuing in a state of
unregeneracy, or that this is any crime at all. They never can do it: Nor can
they tell how this is consistent with total depravity; for this is always
implicitly, if not expressly, denied, in all they say in vindication of their
scheme.

But Mr. M. has gone beyond all others on this head, and expressly declared
that Adam was, in his fallen state, under a natural impossibility of loving
God, and that his total depravity, which is the same with a state of
unregeneracy, primarily and radically consisted in this, together with the
darkness that was upon his mind: And that this is the case with his posterity.
How then can they be to blame for continuing in this state, which is wholly
owing to their external circumstances, and a natural impossibility they are
under of being otherwise? And yet this same Mr. M. thinks it is a sufficient
objection against Mr. Edwards's scheme, if it is inconsistent with sinners
being to blame for continuing in a state of unregeneracy!

Thirdly. Mr. M. says, 'If regeneration is such a physical change, it will
follow that every regenerate person must have the most certain knowledge of
it.' P. 39.

ANS. It is not a physical change. But if it were, why must the subjects of it
be more certain of the change, than if it were a moral change? The exercises
and affections of the heart are as perceptible, as any thing that can take
place in the mind. And when, in this respect, all old things are passed away,
and all things are become new, and a person is called out of darkness into
mavelous light; this change is in its own nature as perceivable, and the
subject may be as sure of it, if called moral, as if it were called physical;
and it is being really a moral or physical change, alters nor the case with
respect to the evidence or certain knowledge of it.

The only reason that can be given why every person that is possessed of real
holiness (let him come by it how he will, and whatever may be the change that
brought him to it) has not the certain knowledge of it, is, that he has so
small a degree of it, and is no more changed, and conformed to God; and so much
darkness and sin still remain in his heart. -- But it is needless to spend time
to answer such an objection: It is not easy to say by what means it was
suggested to Mr. Mather, and why he thought it worthy to be inserted.

APPENDIX. NUMBER III. An Answer to the Rev. Mr. Hemmenway's "Vindication of
the power, obligation and encouragement of the unregenerate to attend the means
of grace -- Against the exceptions of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Hopkins."
INTRODUCTION.
IN my reply to Mr. Mills, I had occasion to consider the duties of the
unregenerate, which he spoke so much of, as required of them, and performed by
them, while unholy and under the dominion of sin. And I undertook to prove that
such do not do any duty, or comply with any of the commands which God has
given to men. Mr. Hemmenway had, not long before, published seven sermons,
which were designed to prove and inculcate the contrary doctrine; and were
wholly confuted, if I had proved the point I had advanced. This was probably
the occasion of his more particularly attending to what I had said in this part
of my reply, and undertaking to write against me.

As I am far from being convinced that what he pleads for is agreeable to
divine revelation, and look upon it of a very hurtful tendency; I have
undertaken an answer. It is thrown into the form of an appendix to the
foregoing inquiry, because what is there said, is, in my opinion, a full answer
to the leading sentiments and fundamental principle in his piece; so that, by
refering to that, the answer may be much shortened.

After having observed that I had not given a right representation of the
question in dispute, he proceeds to state it in the following words: Though Mr.
H -- y did not choose to dispute the question as I stated it, I yet believe it
was stated agreeable to the sense of most of those who have asserted that
duties are prescribed in the word of God, to be done by those who are in a
state of unregeneracy. And it will, I believe, appear to be his own sense of
the matter before we have done. But I think it not worth while to enter into a
dispute about this, since he owns 'the whole drift of my reasoning is to oppose
and confute' the affirmative of the question, as he has stated it, p. 5.
Whether any actions which men do, or can perform, while unregenerate, are
required of them in and by a divine command? He asserts and undertakes to prove
the affirmative of this question; and has wrote a book upon it of two hundred
and twenty-seven pages. If I was to state the question in my own words, I
should say, it was, Whether the unregenerate do any duty which God has
commanded? But as Mr. H -- y appears to mean nothing different from this, by
the words he has used, and to understand the real matter in dispute between us;
I shall make no exceptions against his state of the question; but proceed to
consider his vindication. I have an objection against the title he has given
his book, viz. A vindication of the power, obligation and encouragement of the
unregenerate to attend the means of grace, against the exceptions of the Rev.
Mr. Hopkins. This is not a just title, as it does not tend to give the reader,
who casts his eye upon it, a right idea of the matter in dispute; but will
unavoidably deceive him, if he knows no more about it than what is said here,
for it is really contrary to the truth. I have not made any exceptions against
the power, obligations and encouragement of the unregenerate to attend the
means of grace, that I know of, but held to all this, as fully as he does. And
I think more fully: For he does not pretend they have power to do this in the
manner he contends for, unless they have the assistance of the spirit of God:
Whereas I suppose the secure sinner has this power. And he acknowledges I
grant, they have encouragement to attend on means, and that he has no dispute
with me about this, p. 3. So far therefore as his book is to the purpose, the
title is a very improper one, if not (...)


SECTION I. The point in controversy more particularly stated: The method Mr. H
-- y takes to support his cause: Its weakness and fallacy shown.
MR. H -- y agrees with me, that the divine commands require holiness, and
nothing but holiness; or 'nothing but what is some way included in holiness.'
P. 3. And we are agreed that the unregenerate are wholly destitute of holiness,
and that all their exercises and actions are unholy. I supposed the plain and
undeniable consequence from these premises was, that they do not obey the
divine commands, or do their duty in any degree. Mr. H -- y denies this to be a
just consequence; and says, 'though no actions of the unregenerate are so fully
conformable to the divine command, as that they can be denominated holy in the
least degree; -- yet some actions are conformable to the divine command, in
some respects, and therefore comprehended in the requirement of it.' P. 4. To
vindicate this, and answer what has been said in opposition to it, is the
professed design of his book.

In order to this, he particularly considers the nature of true holiness, and
what is included in this. He says, holiness is a very complex thing, containing
many parts; all which are necessary to make up that compound holiness.
Therefore, the commands which require holiness, require every part which is
involved in the whole. That the unregenerate may do some of the things
contained in this compound, and so far obey the command requiring holiness;
though it being but a part, such doings, being so defective, have no degree of
true holiness; yet in doing this, they do their duty, and so far obey the
divine command.

To prove that there are some parts of duty and holiness which the unregenerate
may perform, and yet be unholy, he divides holiness into principle, end, manner
and matter. Mr. H -- y makes many more distinctions, divisions and
subdivisions, in what he says about the nature of holiness, and says a number
of things, which appear to me very exceptionable: But as they do not effect the
matter in dispute, I shall make no remarks upon them. Let him who understands
and approves, avail himself of the edification. Wherein we differ in our
accounts of holiness will in some measure appear from the foregoing inquiry.
All those, he says, are required, and necessary in order to render an action
truly holy. And though the unregenerate do nothing from a holy principle, in a
holy manner, and to a holy end; yet they may do THE MATTER OF DUTY; and in
complying with this part of holiness, they so far obey the command requiring
holiness, and do their duty. As the whole dispute now turns upon the matter of
duty, it is necessary we should well understand what is meant by this, in order
to judge on which side the truth lies.

Mr. H -- y has used this phrase often enough, and said a great deal about the
matter of duty; but after all (under favor) I must think he has not given a
clear, consistent account of it. He says it does not mean external actions,
aside from the will producing them; but the effective acts of the will,
choosing and producing external effects; that by the substance and matter of an
action is meant THE ACTION as abstracted from all its circumstances, and not
any consequent effects distinct from it.' P. 40. Matter of external duty,
according to him, 'is the act of the will, ad extra, productive of an external
work, required in the divine law:' And this action is to be considered as
abstracted from all its circumstances, viz. principle, motive, design and end.

Upon this I would observe,

1. There is in nature no such effective act of the will, nor can any such
thing be conceived of, as it is self-contradictory. An act of choice, without
any motive or design, is just as impossible, as an act of choice without an act
of choice. Therefore we may be sure no such action is commanded, or done by the
unregenerate or regenerate.

2. If there could be any such actions, there would be no more duty or any
thing of a moral nature in them, than there is in external conduct, considered
as abstracted from all acts of choice, or in themselves considered. An act of
will, abstracted from all motive and design, if any such thing could be, would
have no more morality in it, than the wind or fire, producing effects, and
would be no more praiseworthy or blamable. Mr. M. is confident that no one
'ever dreamed that the mere motion of matter, separate from the agency of the
mind, has any morality in it.' p. 40. We might with as much assurance assert
that no man ever dreamed that the mere motion of the mind, separate from all
motive, design and end, has the least morality in it, had he not furnished us
with an instance. He is however, perhaps, the first, and, I hope, will be the
last.

But Mr. H -- y comes out of the clouds before he has done, and appears
sensible that matter of duty done without any motive and design, good or bad,
is neither duty nor sin; and grants that any action done with a bad end is
'materially evil,' that is, not the matter of duty, but the matter of sin.
Therefore it was not the matter of duty; but 'vile treachery in Judas to kiss
his Lord, in order to betray him.' p. 91. If the matter of duty was the
effective act of the will, abstracted from all circumstances; then Judas did
the matter of duty, as much as any one can. But if his end and design cannot be
abstracted, but must come into consideration to determine, whether he did the
matter of duty or not; and his evil design made it the matter of sin, then a
man never does the matter of duty with an evil design, or from a wrong motive.
So that the whole comes to this at last. There are certain effective acts of
the will producing effects, ad extra, which are either good or evil, matter of
duty, or matter of sin, according as the end of the agent is either good or
bad. This is very agreeable to common sense. When the beloved disciple John
kissed his dear Lord, as a sincere expression of love to him, it was a good
action, the matter of duty. When Judas kissed him with a traitorous design, it
was a vile action, and the matter of sin.

Mr. H -- y being sensible of this, notwithstanding all his distinctions about
matter of duty, undertakes to show that the unregenerate may act from a good
end; and rests his whole cause on this. He says, though they do not act from
the highest and best ends, which men must act from, in order to denominate
their actions holy; yet they may act from self-love, which is not forbidden,
but an innocent, useful and good principle. Therefore when they do things
externally right, from this principle, and seeking their own interest as their
end, they so far obey the divine command, and do their duty.

He does not expressly say, that I have observed, that self-love is commanded,
and so a duty; but if it is not commanded, and so a duty to act from this end,
how can acting from self-love make an action a duty, or the matter of duty, --
or what obedience is there in this? I do not find that he has told us.

He has said self-love is a natural, innocent and good principle. But I do not
find that he has offered any evidence of this; or that there is any thing to
support it but his bare assertion. This surely ought not to be taken for
granted; since he builds all his opposition to me on this foundation. If
self-love is not a good or innocent affection, but forbidden and sinful in
every degree of it, all his building falls to the ground, and his matter of
duty done by the unregenerate, turns out to be the matter of sin. This I have
endeavored to make evident in the preceding inquiry; and I think I have a
right to consider it as a full answer to the whole he has said in proof of the
doctrines he has advanced, till it be shown that I have not given a right
account of holiness and self-love. I therefore refer him and the reader to
that, hoping it may be the means of such light to him and all who attend to
this controversy, as shall put an end to the dispute. Mr. H -- y's dividing and
splitting up holiness into so many parts, in order to find something belonging
to it to be duty for the unregerate to do, has brought to mind the following
similitude, which may serve to illustrate it. A certain debtor owed his
creditor a thousand dollars; but instead of paying him the real dollars, which
he was able to do at any hour, had he been inclined, he brought to him an equal
number of counterfeit dollars, and pleaded he had paid the debt, and answered
his obligation, in part at least; as there are several things in counterfeit
dollars, which belong to true dollars, such as external appearance, shape, etc.
though they want the most essential thing, and are not true silver. And though
he had no regard to his creditor and his interest, yet he acted from the
innocent principle of self-love, as he did it in hopes that hereby he should
escape being cast into prison.

Mr. H -- y undertakes to confute a position which he says I 'often lay down,
and build much upon it, without once offering any thing in the shape of an
argument to prove it: ver. 12. That the unregenerate act wholly from
self-love.' p. 60, etc. It may be proper to take some notice of this. I grant
the unregenerate have appetites and tastes which are not self-love, but quite
distinct from it; such as animal appetites, hunger, thirst, etc. And such are a
taste for natural beauty, and what is called natural affection, etc. But these
are not of a moral kind; and therefore man's moral agency does not consist in
these; and if he had no other affections and principles of action, he would be
no more a moral agent than the beasts. Therefore when we speak of man's moral
actions, it is not proper to say he acts merely from these appetites and
instincts; but must find some other principles of action. Mr. H -- y says, p.
23. 'By moral actions I mean such as are commanded or forbidden by the divine
law.' But these instincts and appetites are neither commanded nor forbidden in
the divine law. Therefore there is no moral agency in them, in themselves
considered. Though these may have influence in moral actions many ways; yet the
morality of them does not consist in these, but in universal benevolence, or
self love, one of which is implied in every moral action, and determines it.
And in this the moral good or evil of every action wholly consists. For
instance, if a man determines to gratify any particular bodily appetite, or not
to do it, as a moral agent, he does this in the exercise of self-love, or
universal benevolence; and therefore all his moral actions are determined by
benevolence or self-love; a regard to others which includes a regard to
himself, or that regard to himself only, which is selfishness.

Mr. H -- y gives a different account indeed, p. 61 -- 64. He thinks because
'men often, in their actions, follow the impulse of particular instincts or
appetites, in opposition to their own interest on the whole; yea, in opposition
to what reason declares to be best or most for their happiness, taking in the
whole of their duration,' it follows that they not only do not act from
self-love in such instances, but directly contrary to its dictates. The fallacy
of his argument is easily detected. Self-love never prompts men to that which
is on the whole most for their happiness, but to the contrary; and therefore to
choose and act contrary to the judgment, and determines men to do that which
their reason dictates not to be for their greatest happiness, the whole of
their duration considered. Reason may dictate that the only way for a person to
be truly happy is to be benevolent, and devoted to the greatest good of the
whole.' If any one should hence infer that self-love will influence such a
person to seek the general good in a disinterested way; and that not to do this
would be to act contrary to self-love, he would argue as well as Mr. H -- y
does. But I need say nothing to show the weakness and self contradiction of
such an argument. He is lead by his way of arguing to the following conclusion,
p. 64. The disorders and miseries which abound in the world, through the
wickedness of men, are perhaps chiefly owing to the inordinate strength of
particular appetites and inclinations, ungoverned by a regard to their own
general good. According to this, self-love is so far from being sin, or tending
to it, that the wickedness of men is chiefly owing to the want of self-love, or
the weakness of it. And if this took place to a sufficient degree, so as to
govern men, there would be very little wickedness among men, if any; even
though they had no love to God or their neighbor! How different this account
of self-love is from that given in the preceding inquiry, sect. iv. p. 19. etc.
every intelligent reader will see; and will judge for himself which if most
agreeable to scripture, reason and experience.

Mr. H -- y has attempted, by several arguments, to prove that the unregenerate
have love to persons, distinct from self-love, which may influence them to wish
them well, do them good, etc. He says, if the unregenerate act merely from
self-love, then we are under no obligations of gratitude to them for any acts
of kindness they may do us. 'But this is a consequence not to be endured, which
at one stroke cancels all obligations of gratitude to parents, friends and
benefactors, for all favors and kindnesses, if they are unregenerate.' P. 66,
67.

ANS. 1. We are under obligations of gratitude to others for the kindness they
show us, so far as there is an appearance of kindness, which ought to affect us
as such. Where there is an appearance of kindness, we ought to be affected with
it as such, unless there be as great and sensible appearance of something to
the contrary, or of no kindness intended, sufficient to counterbalance it. And
in such a case there is, on the whole, no appearance of kindness. When an
unregenerate man shows us kindness, there is commonly a more sensible
appearance of kindness than of any thing to the contrary. The act of kindness
is generally, if not always, more apparent and certain than his unregeneracy.
And if we could be as certain he is unregenerate; yet that this is the
character of all the unregenerate; and therefore this is really his character,
and he has no real disinterested good will to us; consequently it is not really
an act of kindness, however kind he may appear to be; we get the evidence of
all this by a course of reasoning, and a number of deductions, which cannot
affect our minds so much, as the appearance of good will in the kindness shown;
therefore the latter ought to preponderate in our minds, and affect us most,
produce and feelings and exercises answerable. Therefore there is in such cases
an obligation to gratitude. If Mr. H -- y, or any other person, is not
satisfied with this solution, let him account for our Savior's weeping over
Jerusalem, in any other way; or the child's being grieved at the pain and
trouble of his parent, while he verily believes it will all work for his good;
and that he will be unspeakably more happy, on the whole, than he could be
without it.

ANS. 2d. Let it be remembered, the unregenerate have no true gratitude to
benefactors. They are not pleased with disinterested good will, for its own
sake. All their gratitude consists in self-love, and a consequent love of those
who appear to love them. Whatever obligations they are under to gratitude for
disinterested kindness, they never fulfill them, nor are influenced by them,
more than if they did not exist.

The regenerate or benevolent are thankful to God for all the benefits they
receive by the hands of men: And if they have the most clear and sensible
evidence that these act wholly from self-love, they will love them, and do them
all the good they can. In this view, the consequence Mr. H -- y dreads, does
not appear so intolerable.

Mr. H -- y further says, 'That love the unregenerate have sometimes to others,
cannot possibly be educed from self-love. It is evident that the unregenerate
have sometimes such a love to others, as causes them to have a real pleasure in
and concern for their welfare, separate from all hopes, or prospects of being
benefited by them,' which could not be if they loved others only for their own
sakes, or wholly from self-love. He instances in one dying, and yet manifesting
concern for the welfare of his friends after he is dead, which can be of no
benefit to him. P. 67, 68.

ANS. There is not the least difficulty in accounting for this from self-love.
Self-love will lead men to love others and wish them well, for the good they
have done to them, as well as for the good they expect they will do to them.
Therefore this will influence a man to wish well to another who has been, and
is now his friend, though, because he is now going out of the world, he does
not expect to receive any future benefit from him. Self-love does in a sense
unite us to them who love us, and do us good; and leads us, by a necessary
association of ideas, to look on them as belonging to us, and as part of
ourselves. Hence there is a desire in selfish men, which arises from self-love,
to exist after they are dead, in their surviving friend or relations, which
they look upon in some sense as themselves. And hence they are disposed to wish
and provide for their existence and comfort after they themselves shall be
dead, for the same reason they would do this for themselves, if they were to
live, viz. from love to themselves.

Mr. H -- y says, 'More arguments might be offered to the same purpose.' P. 70.
If they are no more to the purpose than those he has mentioned, it is to be
hoped he will never be at the pains. However, it is to be observed, if he had
proved that the unregenerate do not act wholly from self-love, it would answer
no end in his dispute with me; for he does not make use of this at all to prove
his point, but, as has been observed, does this wholly by self-love. Indeed he
does not pretend that the love to others in the unregenerate, which he contends
does not spring from self-love, is more virtuous, or in any respect better than
self-love; and says 'it will not follow from any thing that has been pleaded
for, that mankind have naturally a principle of true holiness.' He will
however, be put to difficulty to prove this, I believe. If disinterested
benevolence to our fellow-men is not of the nature of holiness, and in its
nature universal benevolence; and does not imply a friendly regard to God, and
supreme love to him, it will be impossible to tell, I believe, what holiness
is. Therefore Mr. Edwards, to whom Mr. H -- y had reference here, did, with
good reason, suppose if it could be made evident that men naturally have
disinterested benevolence to others, it must be granted they are naturally
virtuous and holy. See his nature of true virtue, chap. iv. Mr. H -- y adds,
'nor does it enervate the proofs of man's natural depravity from scripture and
experience.' This, with the whole of his scheme, is doubtless inconsistent with
man's total depravity, which the scripture asserts; and in this view, is not
only false; but of a most destructive tendency. The scripture represents the
natural depravity of men, as rendering them hateful and hating one another,
Tit. iii. 3. and says love and good will to others is of God; and none have
this but they who are born of God. 1 John iv. 7. Moreover, the scripture says
of men, in their natural state, 'they are altogether become unprofitable, there
is none that does good; no not one.' Romans iii. 12. Their 'mind is enmity
against God; is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be.' chap. viii.
7. 'That every imagination of the thoughts of their heart is only evil
continually.' Genesis vi. 5.




SECTION II. Remarks on Mr. Hemmenway's particular arguments to prove his point.
OUR author attempts a particular proof of his positions by nine arguments,
which are so enlarged as to take up above an hundred pages. I shall not take
notice of many particulars in these pages, which I think might be easily shown
to be very exceptionable: Nor is there need of a particular answer to such of
his arguments as are built wholly on the foundation he has laid, which has been
particularly considered in the preceding section, and shown not to have any
sufficient support.

His first argument is expressly built wholly on this, p. 104 -- 119. And is
sufficiently confuted by observing the unregenerate do not the matter of duty,
if self-love is not a good thing, but sin; and that so far as men act from
this, they act not for a good end, but a bad one, the opposite to which he has
not proved, but rather begged. -- There is one passage, however, in these pages
which requires particular attention. P. 116, he says, when he (meaning myself)
says, that the unregenerate in attending the externals of religion, do nothing
that is their duty, he considers these things as enjoined on men only on
supposition that they are regenerate, and have a holy love to God: For he says,
they are required only as expressions of love to God. From this he draws four
frightful consequences, and says, I could easily go on further, but I forbear.
Methinks these consequences are so intolerable that no principle ought to be
admitted, from which they are fairly deduced. If they can fairly be avoided on
Mr. H's plan, let it be shown. p. 118.

ANS. This is all a misrepresentation. I do not say that the attending on the
externals of religion, or any thing else, is enjoined on men, only on
supposition they have a holy love to God. I say God requires all men to love
him with all their hearts; which they do not, unless they express it in all
proper ways, in a proper attendance on the externals of religion. This command
is absolute, without any supposition that they are regenerate, etc. I say they
who have no love to God really do no duty when they attend on the externals of
religion. And if they cannot do this without a pretense and profession of doing
duty, and of love to God; then his consequences will follow. But till he shall
prove this, they can be as fairly avoided, and as safely denied, on my plan, as
on his own.

His second argument is taken from a passage in Mark, parallel to that in Matt.
where our Savior gives a summary of the divine law, from which I thought I had
proved, that they who do not love God or their neighbors, do no duty. As what
he says here, p. 119 -- 132, is chiefly to obviate and confute the sense in
which I understood these words of Christ, I shall leave the particular
consideration of this argument to another place. I would however just observe,
that under this argument, he asserts, and thinks he proves, that an attendance
or religious ordinances is enjoined on men by other commands than those which
enjoin holy love. P. 121, 122, 123. This is a different and contrary strain
from that in which he sets out: For, in the beginning of his book, he is ready
to allow there is no command that does not require holiness; and says I have
stated the question wrong in saying it is, 'Whether there are any commands
given to the unregenerate, which do not require any thing truly holy, but only
require such exercises as have not the nature of true holiness.' see p. 3, 4,
6. But he seems to have forgotten all this now, and asserts the affirmative of
this question, and what is directly contrary to what he had granted. For if
there are ' other commands than those which enjoin holy love;' then there are
commands which do not enjoin holiness, or any thing truly holy: Since he grants
there is nothing truly holy, where there is no holy love.


Mr. H -- y's third argument is taken from Romans ii. 14. 'For when the Gentiles
which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these
having not the law, are a law unto themselves.' Here the Gentiles, whom he
concludes all will allow to be unregenerate, are expressly said to do the
things contained in the law: Therefore the unregenerate may obey the law and do
their duty in some instances.

ANS. 1. If the apostle is speaking of the heathen, the words taken in their
connection will prove that the heathen by, nature, do those things by which they
shall be justified. This will suit the gross Pelagians, and they have improved
them to this purpose, as Mr. H -- y observes; but this will prove too much for
him, I conclude. The apostle, in the verse immediately preceding, says the
doers of the law shall be justified; and then these words came in. FOR when the
Gentiles do the things contained in the law, that is, are doers of the law. It
would be doing violence to these words to suppose that doing the law, in the
former clause means one thing, and doing the things of the law, in the next,
which is connected with the former by the illative particle for, means quite
another thing. Therefore if the doers of the law shall be justified; and the
heathen do the law, they shall be justified, and saved, whether they are
regenerate, or ever hear of Christ and the gospel, or not. Mr. H -- y argues
that, since the same word is used in each of these verses, it must mean the
same thing; and this, I think, is the most weighty reason he gives against Mr.
Glass's sense of the words. Mr. Glass observes that the words in the original,
rendered, do the things of the law, might more properly be rendered, do the
offices of the law; i. e. their own consciences dictate to them what is right,
and condemn or justify, by which they are a law unto themselves.
He says 'It ought not to be supposed, without evident reason, that the apostle
should immediately use the same word, in effect, to express a meaning entirely
diverse.' P. 136. If he does not, he speaks of such a doing of the things
contained in the law, which is connected with justification and salvation; for
of such doings he speaks in the sentence immediately before.

ANS. 2. Some have supposed the apostle is here and in the preceding verses
speaking of that doing the things of the law, by which they who did them should
live; and is explaining what he afterward says is the tenor of law. Chap. x.
5. 'For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, that the man
which does those things, shall live by them.' That he speaks of keeping the law
in the sense in which the Jews generally understood it, as the way to life; and
observes that on this footing the Gentiles stood as fair a chance for life as
the Jews, if they were doers of the law, by a patient continuance in well
doing. Yea, while such Gentiles were saved, the Jew, who heard the law, and did
not keep it, would certainly perish. That he says this only to convince the
Jews of their error, without supposing that any one, Jew or Gentile, ever did
or will do the things contained in the law, which if a man do, he shall live in
them. This sense is much preferable to that which represents the heathen as
actually doing those things by which they shall be saved, without any knowledge
of Christ and the gospel. But there are objections against this sense, which I
stay not now to mention, but proceed to another, which to me is the most
natural and easy.

ANS. 3. The apostle is not here speaking of unconverted heathens, but of such
doing the things contained in the law as is implied in embracing the gospel, or
in the character of a christian, which in the preceding context he calls a
patient continuing in well doing and working good. And this is agreeable to our
savior's account of the matter, Matt. vii. 21. and on. And St. James describes
the true christian in the same manner. Jam. i. 25. 'But whosoever looks into the
perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.'

The words following confirm this sense, in which these Gentiles are said to
show the work of the law written in their hearts; i. e. discover, by their
prefession and conduct, the law written on their hearts. But this is spoken of
as the character of God's people, as the effect of God's power, and a blessing
peculiar to the covenant of grace, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.

The passage under consideration might, consistent with the original, be
rendered thus, 'For when the Gentiles, who by nature have not the law, do the
things contained in the law.' The word translated by nature being used to
denote their natural state, by birth and education, by which they are
distinguished from the Jews, and not what they did by the force of mere nature.
We have an expression parallel to this in the 27 verse, where the same word is
used: 'And shall not uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it fulfill the law
etc.' This phrase means the same with that under consideration, 'the Gentiles
who by nature are without law.' When St. Paul distinguishes the Jews from the
Gentiles, he uses the same word. 'We who are Jews by nature.' Gal. ii. 15. In
opposition to this, the Gentiles were by nature distinguished from the Jews.
And he is here evidently speaking of the same thing; to fulfill the law is the
same with doing the things contained in the law. And he goes on to show what
this is, to the end of the chapter, viz. that it is nothing merely external,
but belongs to the heart. But none will suppose this character belongs to the
unconverted Gentiles. He speaks of the same Gentiles in the following parts of
this epistle, 'Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of
the Gentiles. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness.' chap. ix. 24, 30, see
also x. 12, etc. xv. 18.

The Jews were greatly prejudiced against the Gentiles being received as the
people of God, without being circumcised, and becoming Jews by submitting to
their law in every particular. They said to the Gentiles, 'Except ye be
circumcised, after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, that it was needful
to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.' Act. xv. 1,
5. The apostles themselves had the same prejudices at first. And when Peter
came to understand the truth, he said, 'Of a truth, I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons: But in every nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Act. x. 34, 38. This is the truth Paul is
vindicating in this chapter, and laboring to convince and confute the opposing
Jews. This might be more fully shown, had I room.

It will perhaps be objected, that the last clause of the verse seems
inconsistent with the Gentiles here spoken of being christians: 'These having
not the law, are a law unto themselves.' Gentile converts had the law as much
as the Jews.

ANS. They had not the law in the sense in which the Jews had it. It was not
given to them as it was to the Jews; nor in this sense binding on them.
Therefore in the sense in which the Jew had the law, as a Jew, the Gentile had
it not, but was without law, and continued so, after he was converted to
christianity. And by voluntarily improving the revelation of the moral law,
made to the Jews, being approved by his own reason and conscience, for his own
instruction, conviction and practice, he was a law unto himself. This sense of
the words has been mentioned by Augustine and others, as may be seen in Poli
Syn. in loc. Though Mr. H -- y thought not fit to take any notice of it. This
sense is consistent with the whole bible, and particularly with it is being said
of all men by nature, chap. iii. verse 12. 'There is none that does good, no
not one,' which cannot be easily reconciled with their doing by nature the
things contained in the law; and being such doers of the law as shall be
justified. Mr. H -- y must prove this cannot be the sense of the text, before
his argument from it will be of any service to him.

His three next arguments, viz. from its being said of Herod, that when he
heard John, he did many things, Mark vi. 20. From Paul's exhorting the
christians at Philippi to practice whatever things are true, honest, etc. Phil.
iv. 8. And 'from diverse testimonies from the Old Testament, manifesting God's
approbation or favorable notice of the actions of unsanctified men, when for
the substance conformable to his will,' are not so different as to require a
distinct answer to each of them.

The general answer is, Whatever men do from an evil principle, or for a
forbidden end, is not duty in any sense; but sin. 'No man may do any acts of
religious obedience for such ends as are simply and absolutely unlawful. Such
sacrifices are in a peculiar sense an abomination to the Lord.' Hemmenway's
sermon. p. 51.
Mr. H -- y grants the unregenerate act from no higher or better principle than
self-love, and have no better end than this sets up. But this is a sinful
principle, and always pursues a wrong and bad end. Consequently such really do
no duty. Therefore if he cannot prove that self-love is an innocent and good
affection, there must be some fallacy in all his arguments from these
scriptures, or any others in favor of the unregenerate doing any part of their
duty; especially their doing that which is worthy of God's approbation and
favorable notice.

It is said that Herod did many things; but not that he did any duty, or one
thing, as John directed him to do it. John directed him to repent, and express
his repentance by acts of righteousness and mercy; and if he had two coats, to
give one to him that had none. Luke iii. 8 -- 14. If Herod gave a coat to the
poor from self-love, he acted from no better principle or higher end than he
did in depriving his brother of his wife, and ordering John to be put to death.
Selfishness and pride governed him in the former, as well as in the latter. He
was the same man, acted from the same principle, and had the same end in view,
in each of these actions.

His argument from Paul's directing Christians to practice whatsoever things
are true, etc. is indeed somewhat remarkable. He says, 'I have not cited it
because straightened for proofs.' P. 139. None will imagine he can be straightened
for proofs, who thinks this text to be one: Every command in the bible might be
as 'pertinently cited as this. Christ's command to his disciples, 'Bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you,' is full as pertinent; for the unregenerate can do this,
so far as it consists in externals, as well as speak the truth, and do
whatsoever things are lovely. And indeed this implies what our Savior enjoins;
for a kind behavior toward our enemies is one of these lovely things. But I
believe Mr. H -- y will not say that they whose character is, hating one
another, hating those that hate them, do ever bless their enemies, according to
the command of Christ. For when they bless with their mouth, their heart is
full of cursing and bitterness. And he insists, as has been observed, that
whatever is done for a bad end, is not duty. Men may bless their enemies to
gratify their ill will against them: But this is not doing the matter of duty,
he grants. And they who bless them from no higher principle than self-love,
always do it from ill will; for self-love is always and necessarily ill will to
enemies. In a word, Mr. H -- y's argument from this text takes its fair
appearance wholly from a gingle of words; and a supposition that the
unregenerate may speak the truth not for a bad, but a good, end, which he has
not yet proved.

The truth of the matter is plainly this. There are certain external actions in
words and conduct, which are the fruit of volition, or an expression of the
heart, acting out in these ways. Such of these as are the proper expression of
love to God and our neighbor, or universal benevolence, are put for the whole;
the external sign or effect, which alone is seen by men, is mentioned and
spoken of as including the whole. Therefore these are mentioned in the command,
and are commanded, as comprehending the whole. And when these effects are
produced by men, they are said to do the things that were commanded, the whole
being implied, unless there be an express exception. Therefore when only
something external is mentioned in the command, and this is complied with and
done, men are said to do as they are commanded in scripture, and in common
language among men, where none imagine that nothing is intended, but the
exernal thing which is mentioned. This I take to be a full solution of all the
seeming difficulty in all the passages of scripture Mr. H -- y mentions, or
that can be found, where only external actions are mentioned in the command,
and men are said to do as they were commanded, when they did the external thing
mentioned in the command. Mr. H -- y supposes the effective act of the will is
implied, when only something external is mentioned; and we have as good
authority to say the motives and design of the agent are implied; for these are
as essential to every effective act of the will, as is this effective act, to
the external effect; and more so; for the external effect may take place where
there is no act of the will, whereas there can be no effective act of the will
without motive and design.

The whole therefore comes to this: There are certain external things which are
the proper expression of love to God and our neighbor, and by which the
greatest good of the whole is promoted. These are therefore commanded. Our
author says, p. 48. 'The highest good of the universe is the original reason
and foundation of the divine law.' This therefore must be the design of every
particular command. And when any particular external action is commanded, it is
supposed it must be done with a design to answer this end, which is the great
end of all laws. And if the external action mentioned in the command is done
with a contrary view and design, there is no obedience to the command, but it
is nothing but disobedience. But this is true of all who act wholly from
self-love. No affection but universal benevolence agrees to the highest good of
the universe. Self love does always necessarily oppose it. Therefore he does
not obey any command, who has no universal benevolence. See the preceding
inquiry.
And when the command is complied with, and the external thing is done with a
right view and design, i. e. with a disposition to promote the general good, it
is matter of duty: But if it be done with a bad design, and from a contrary
motive, viz. to set up self in opposition to the general good; it is not matter
of duty, but matter of sin.

With respect to what is said of God's manifesting his approbation of the
doings of wicked men, and taking a favorable notice of them, out of respect to
what they did, in the case of Ahab, Jehu, etc. I said in my reply to Mr. Mills,
God did not conduct in these instances, as a searcher of hearts, but in what he
said of them, and his conduct toward them, had respect to their present
external appearance, profession and conduct, i. e. as if they really were what
they professed to be, true penitents, etc.

Mr. H -- y demands 'direct and positive scripture evidence of this
hypothesis;' and says, 'Of this, according to my best observation, his book
affords nothing.' Ans. I mentioned two passages of scripture, Isai. lxiii. 8 --
10. Psalm. lxxviii. 36. which I thought amounted to a full proof of this. How
this paragraph came to escape his observation I cannot tell: -- If he observed
it, and saw it was not to the purpose, why was he not so kind as to help our
ignorance? He adds, 'Nor has he told us how it could properly be said of any
one, without any respect to his heart, that his heart was or was not perfect,
upright, etc. when his behavior was externally right.'

ANS. There is no such instance. It is said of Amaziah that he did that which
was right; but not with a perfect heart. 2 Chronicles. xxv. 2. But this has
reference to what appeared in his external conduct. This was not altogether
right, and this discovered that his heart was not perfect. This would not have
been said of him, if his behavior had been externally right.

I also said, if God granted favors to Ahab, Jehu, etc. out of respect to
their repentance and good deeds, and manifested hereby his approbation of their
doings, and took this favorable notice of what they did, and favored them
because they did so well, while they were considered as having no connection
with Christ, and enemies to him; then he might bestow the greatest favors on
men, out of respect to their own goodness; and consequently they may be
justified by the deeds of the law; which overthrows the gospel, and represents
Christ as dead in vain.

To this he says, in the first place, God does in fact grint favors to men who
are not believers in Christ, and therefore if my position is true, he might
grant the greatest favors as well, even eternal salvation, had there been no
mediator; -- so that according to my way of arguing, a mediator was not
necessary, in order to the salvation of men; etc.

ANS. He has wholly overlooked the argument. I do not say it is inconsistent
with the gospel for God to grant favors to men, antecedent to their believing
in Christ; but that it is inconsistent with the need of atonement for sin by
Christ, if men, while unbelievers and enemies to Christ and the atonement, may
do those works, by which they obtain God's approbation and favorable notice;
for this implies pardon and acceptance, out of respect to their works, and
purely for their works sake; which is the same with being justified by their
works. If a man can be approved and accepted of God in his person and works,
while he has no union to Christ or faith in him; then he is so far accepted,
and favored, purely out of respect to his good deeds; and not in the least out
of respect to the righteousness and worthiness of Christ. The necessity of
Christ's atonement is grounded in man's being in such a state by sin, that he
cannot have God's approbation and favorable notice, on account of any thing he
can do; even though he should become perfectly holy. If he could, Christ's
atonement would be needless. There is a wide difference between God's
exercising benevolence to men; and his approving and accepting them and their
doings, and taking a favorable notice of them because they have done so well.
The former is exercised toward men antecedent to their union to Christ; the
latter cannot take place, unless they are actually united to Christ, and
interested in his worthiness and righteousness, which alone recommends men to
the divine approbation and acceptance in their persons and works; for they are
accepted in the beloved. Antecedent to their believing in Christ, they are
condemned and accursed, which is inconsistent with their having God's
approbation, and his taking a favorable notice of their doings. It men could
be thus delivered from the curse by their own doings and righteousness, there
was no necessity of Christ's being made a curse, to deliver them from it:
Therefore, as to such, Christ is dead in vain. Gal. ii. 21. Mr. H -- y has not
said a word to show the defect of this argument, that I have observed.

But he goes on to make another mistake, and upon this says, the very same
objections lie against the sense I put on these passages. For if God treated
them as if their conduct was right and acceptable to him, having respect only
to their external conduct, without searching their hearts, he did this, either
on account of Christ's mediation, or not. If not, then all the consequences
follow from this, which I have mentioned as following from his interpretation.
If he in this has respect to Christ's mediation, his doctrine is as vindicable,
on this principle, as mine. He concludes thus, Plainly then, when he will tell
us how it can be reconciled with the divine purity to speak of, and conduct
toward, sinners, not as the searcher of hearts, but merely according to their
visible behavior; and clear his own hypothesis from the consequences he draws
from the doctrine he opposes; then I suppose a man of his discernment, or even
half an eye, will easily see that the doctrine he opposes may in the same way
be as well vindicated. P. 155.

ANS. God, in treating them, not as the searcher of hearts, but according to
their visible profession and conduct, had respect to them, and expressed his
approbation of them, considered as interested in the atonement, or as his
servants truly devoted to him; which was true, if their hearts were answerable
to their external appearance. Since he really accepts and approves of all true
penitents, purely for Christ's sake; he visibly approved of them who were
visibly penitents, and devoted to him, or appeared to be interested in the
atonement.

Mr. H -- y has got to show, it will follow from hence, that God may as well
manifest his approbation of men's characters and doings, considered as
impenitents, and not united to Christ. At present I believe he who has not so
much as half an eye is most likely to attempt it. -- While we treat men
according to their visible appearance, we are obliged to take a favorable
notice of and love him who professes subjection to Christ, purely for his sake,
without knowing his heart, but treating him as if it was answerable to his
profession. If any one should hence infer, that we may, with as great
propriety, manifest the same approbation and love to those who are visibly
unbelievers, and bear no particular relation to Christ, he would argue as Mr. H
-- y does, if he understands my argument. The way is now prepared to see with
how much propriety he introduces the following words: Methinks it is somewhat
odd, first to deny and dispute against the fact, viz. That God expresses his
approbation of some actions of sinners, and grants temporal rewards to them
because of such actions, and then immediately suppose the same fact, and
introduce a scheme to account for it, or show it to be consistent with the
divine perfections, and the truth of the gospel. I at present think it somewhat
more than odd that a gentleman of his abilities should be so much in the dark
in so plain a case.

I shall finish this head by observing, that in the passages under
consideration, and others of the like kind, there is as much evidence from the
expressions themselves, that they did the whole of their duty, as that they
really did any part of it. And Mr. H -- y is very arbitrary, having nothing in
these expressions or any where else to warrant him, in asserting the meaning
is, they did the matter of duty. Yea we are as certain they did not the matter
of duty, as he explains it, as that they did not the whole of their duty, when
they are said to do as the Lord commanded; for in order to this, according to
him, they must do it in a serious, conscientious manner, with a regard to their
duty, and under the influence of the spirit of God; and for ends that are
innocent and good. But we have no more reason to think that all the Israelites,
or the bigger part, had all this, than that they were all holy. But we are sure
they did right, and as the Lord commanded, in appearance, and so far as their
external conduct is concerned. Why then should we not be content with the
plain, obvious sense, though this be consistent with their really doing no
duty; but, as their act, may be an act of rebellion?

His seventh argument is taken from sinnners having encouragement to attend on
means in order to their salvation. He says it hence follows that this is their
duty; for 'God never encouraged any one to do that which was not his duty.' P.
157 -- 165.

ANS. 1. It has been shown that the unregenerate do no duty, according to his
own account, if self-love is not an innocent and good thing, but is sin, and so
far as men act for the end that proposes, they act wrong. But this we shall
conclude to be true, till some evidence that it is not so be produced. Therefore
till he has done this, his own scheme must be considered as involved in all the
difficulties he thinks he finds in mine. He says, 'No one must be encouraged to
perform duties for such ends as ought not to be proposed, or cannot be
attained.' Sermon. p. 39. But they who act from self-love only, always act for
such ends: Therefore ought not to act from self-love. He also says, 'God's
design in giving these commands (i. e. commands to the unregenerate) are indeed
different from theirs in obeying them;' and represents every unconverted man
'held by Satan, under his dominion,' and 'walking upon enchanted ground.' Ibid.
p. 63. Consequently they act for ends which ought not to be proposed,' and
cannot be obtained, according to his own account. To what then are they to be
encouraged? What duty do they do, while acting from those ends, which ought not
to be proposed, by which they are held under the dominion of Satan, and walk
upon enchanted ground? If we strip their actions of all ends, and consider them
as doing duty without motive and design, as he sometimes seems to affect to do,
we strip them of every thing that is either duty or sin, as has been observed;
and that only remains, to which there can be no encouragement; for to talk of
encouraging men to do that which involves no motive and design, is a
contradiction. When Mr. H -- y will make his own scheme consistent with itself,
and with his doctrine of encouragement, I trust all the difficulties he has
attempted to fasten on mine, will be easily removed.

ANS. 2. If it appears from scripture history, and experience, that they are
most likely to come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, with whom most
means are used, and who are most engaged to attend, in a sense of their undone,
miserable case; and have the clearest conviction of their true state, etc. Then
this is a motive and encouragement to men to attend on these means, so far as
future misery is an evil, and eternal happiness is a good in their view,
whatever may be their ends in other respects. And if this is all that is meant
by encouragement to attend on means, may not a man take this encouragement and
act upon it, without doing any duty? The encouragement in this case does not
turn upon the ends he has in view, or the goodness or badness of his exercises
and conduct; but upon this plain fact, that persons in such a situation are
more likely to be saved, than those in another. One takes the encouragement,
and is induced to attend, from bad motives, and for a wrong end; and does
nothing but sin; another is influenced by this fact from the best motives, and
does his duty; yet it is encouragement to both of them. It is certain, from
experience, this fact affords encouragement to the sinner, who dreads
damnation, to attend, though he is conscious he attends as a rebel, with a
heart wholly opposed to God and all his commands: And will it follow that God
encourages him in his rebellion!

Mr. H -- y says, It will be impossible to convince those, who view things in
any measure as they are, that such a conduct as is not their duty, has any
probable tendency to promote their final interest. P. 172. It is granted, such
conduct has no tendency in itself to promote their salvation. The ground of
hope, in this case, is entirely in what God does, many times overruling it so
as to issue in their salvation. It is impossible for Mr. H -- y to prove that a
person, sensible that he does no duty, whether he attends on means or not, may
not be induced to attend, as the only hopeful way of escaping the evil he
dreads; for this is not only contrary to reason, but to many known facts. Many
who are convinced they do no duty, but that all the exercises of their hearts
are a constant series of horrid rebellion against God, are engaged to attend on
means as the most likely way to escape the damnation they dread. And it appears
from fact, that the more fully a sinner is convinced that his heart constantly
opposes God, and the more he feels the misery of his case, the more engaged he
will be in attending on means. And if such could be made to believe that there
was no hope for them, but in the way of doing duty, they would sit down in
absolute despair.

His eighth argument, which he says is an important one, now offers itself. P.
165 -- 199. This is taken from 'the ends for which the ordinances of the gospel
were instituted.' He says, 'such an attendance to duties as unregenerate
sinners are capable of, may and does answer some of those ends for which these
duties were enjoined. Therefore such obedience is enjoined in and by them.'

ANS. 1. Though God's ends are answered by his commands, and the sinners
attendance on means; and it is sometimes made the occasion of good to him; yet
it does not follow that the sinner does any duty. He says the sinner is under
the dominion of Satan in all he does, and his ends are different from God's in
his institutions and commands. The sinner's exercises and exertions have no
tendency, in themselves, to answer any good end. They are all evil, and tend to
evil, being opposition to the divine authority and command. When they issue in
saving good to the sinner, it is wholly owing to the interposing, overruling
hand of God. The sinner in all his exertions under awakenings and convictions
of conscience, while under the dominion of Satan, is more like a wild bull in a
net, than a submissive, obedient child; and would get out of the hands of God,
if he could, and all his strivings are really strivings against God, as they
are utterly opposed to submission to him; like the exertions of a wild beast,
untamed, unsubdued, in the hands of him who is taking methods to bring him to
submission. God uses means with the sinner, suited to bring him to submission,
and is pleased to cause them to be successful in some instances; but till the
sinner submits he does not comply with God's design, but acts like a rebel in
all his exertions. This is the scripture account of the matter. 'The carnal
mind is enmity against God. Every one that does evil hates the light.' Joh.
iii. 20. 'He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad.' Matthew. xii. 30. Mr. H -- y speaks of the sinner's
waiting on God in the way of his blessing; and of his endeavors of obedience,
p. 169, 170. But surely the scripture will not warrant him to apply these
expressions to the doings of the unregenerate. They only tend to blind and
deceive. Endeavors of obedience suppose the heart is gained and friendly to
God and his commands: And to wait on God, does in scripture denote faith and
trust in him, and promises are made to this. Does the unsubdued rebel, the
carnal mind which is enmity against God, ever do this?


ANS. 2. It is granted that God's institutions and commands, have a tendency to
influence the unregenerate; and are designed and used to promote what is called
a preparatory work in them; but it does not follow that they, while
unregenerate, obey any of these injunctions and commands. Our author says, The
hearers of the gospel are to be immediately called to believe and repent; and
these commands and exhortations are to be enforced with a promise of pardon and
salvation, if they comply; and a threatening of damnation if they remain
impenitent. P. 191. And he adds, The inculcation of it, by the blessing of God,
is a means of good to sinners. The work of conviction and humiliation may,
through the influence of the holy spirit, be promoted in them. Hereby they are
led into a just view of the misery and danger of a state of sin; and are
excited earnestly to implore the mercy of God; -- and diligently to attend on
all the appointed means of conversion. -- If this is the tendency of
inculcating these commands, what need is there of preaching up any other duty
short of repentance, to promote a work of conviction, etc. and lead sinners
diligently to attend on means? This will answer all these ends to all intents
as well; and, I must add, much better than preaching up duties to be done by
them while in a state of enmity with God; for this has no tendency to convince
the sinner of his true state, of his sin, misery and danger, or thoroughly to
awaken him to an engagedness in this matter; but the contrary. I appeal to fact
and experience. What persons have appeared to have the most just view of their
misery and danger; and to be most in earnest in attendance on means? Are they
not such as have been convinced that they are wholly rebels; that they are so
far from doing any duty, that all they do is sin; and their hearts constantly
rise in rebellion against God? When sinners come to this conviction, you cannot
persuade them that they do any duty, or keep them from a constant attendance on
means. And where these doctrines are preached, and sinners are called upon to
repent, etc. and taught that they do no duty, while they refuse this, they are
as much disposed to be in the use of means, as they, at least, who have the
contrary doctrine preached to them.

But what is most to the purpose to observe here is, that Mr. H -- y has, in
this concession, given up the whole of this argument. His argument is, that
because the divine commands and institutions are designed to answer ends, with
respect to the unregenerate, to promote a preparatory work, etc. therefore they
must enjoin duty to be done by them while unregenerate. But he here says, all
these ends may be answered by calling on them to repent and believe
immediately, on pain of damnation. And by this has sapped the whole foundation
of his own argument.

ANS. 3. Mr. H -- y allows they do no duty, and have not 'a next power' to do
any of the duties he pleads for, who have not 'the inward influence of the
spirit of God.' P. 50, and in many other places. But the institutions and
commands of God respect these, as well as those who have the inward influence
of the spirit, and are designed to answer ends with respect to them; and such
attendance on means, as they are capable of, may, and does sometimes, answer
these ends, and proves the means of their awakening and salvation. Therefore
such obedience is enjoined in and by gospel institutions. This argument is
built on the same ground on which his stands: But he will not allow it to be
good: Consequently must allow us, and ought himself, to have as poor an opinion
of his own.

There is something to be done with a sinner, antecedent to his receiving 'the
inward influences of the spirit of God,' and as a means of it; and he may do
something, viz. read the bible, and hear the gospel preached. And why is not
this as much duty, as any thing the sinner does, who has the inward influences
of the spirit, according to his argument? Therefore it proves too much, even
what he says is not true; and so proves nothing at all.

He probably made this distinction, and expressly excluded all who have not the
inward influences of the spirit from doing any duty, because it would be not a
little shocking to represent the openly profane person as doing the matter of
duty, when he puts on a serious face for an hour in hearing a sermon, while his
heart is as much given to profaneness as ever, and his design is to improve
what he hears to the vilest purposes. But they who judge not according to the
appearance, but righteous judgment, according to the standard of truth, and
look on every unregenerate heart full of nothing but thoughts and imaginations,
which are wholly evil continually; of cursing and bitterness; of enmity against
God; deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; will be as far from
admitting that such do any duty, as he is that any duty is done by the secure
and profane. And though he may think it very uncharitable, I am confident that
if he had constantly viewed the unregenerate in this scriptural light, his two
books wrote to prove and inculcate unregenerate duties, never would have
existed. But it is to be observed, that he often forgets this distinction, as
well he might, since it is so arbitrary, and represents those as doing duty, who
can have no pretense to the spirit of God, more than all men on earth, even the
whole host of Israel, and the mixed multitude at the red sea, and in the
wilderness; though he says, God, at the same time, 'knew that they were a
rebellious generation.' P. 174. And he says the multitude of the Jews did their
duty in sitting down to eat, though they were a stupid, carnal generation, and
followed Christ, only for the loaves. And his description of the matter of duty
in many places is suited to the doings of the most profligate wretch in the
kingdom, though at other times, in contradiction to himself, he expressly
excludes such from doing any duty.

This leads me to observe, he says, when Christ directed the Jews to search the
scriptures, he must mean a study of the scriptures by the unregenerate, in
order to conversion, or their receiving the holy spirit in his sanctifying
influences, because they were then unregenerate. But upon the same ground I may
say, he means a search of the scriptures, which men may practice before they
have 'the inward influences of the spirit of God,' for these Jews had not the
spirit in this sense; and must they wait and do nothing till the spirit came
upon them? Was it not their duty to search the scriptures, in order to obtain
the influences of the spirit? And did Christ direct them to study the
scriptures, only on supposition they had the spirit. If he directed them to
that search of the scriptures, which they could not perform till they had the
inward influences of the spirit, which they were then wholly without; why might
he not as well mean such a study of them, as implied the holy spirit in his
sanctifying influences? Was not the latter as much in their reach as the
former? And are not God's institutions and commands as much calculated and
designed to bring men to the former, as to the latter? When he will solve these
difficulties, and answer these questions, on his own principles, we may safely
promise a full answer to all he says on this head, from this passage of
scripture, or any other. This, we trust, has been made already. Mr. H -- y
frequently represents that, upon our plan, the unregenerate are not to be
exhorted to do any duty, but only on supposition they are regenerated; and that
nothing is their duty in present circumstances. In this view, he says, p. 171.
'Why do any seek to persuade unregenerate sinners that these things are not
their duty?' This is a groundless misrepresentation. While we tell them they do
no duty so long as they are impenitent, we have duty enough to urge upon them,
and that without making any supposition; and which he himself grants is their
immediate duty.

But if this representation were just, it might be equally applied to him, and
it might be said, he find no duty for them to do, who have not received the
inward influences of the spirit; and they cannot be exhorted to any, only on
supposition they have these influences How they shall know when they have these
influences, he has not told, and perhaps if he should try, he would find it
much easier to tell, from the bible, how persons may know whether they have the
spirit in his saving influences, than that they have his influences, which are
short of it.




Mr. H -- y makes great use of imperfect holiness being prescribed as the means
of salvation; and seems to think this quite sufficient to prove his point, and
stop the mouth of most objections against him. His argument seems to be this:
If the best of men are imperfect, and do but part of their duty in this world;
and true repentance and faith, however imperfect, are the appointed means of
eternal life; then the doings of the unregenerate are appointed duties, as
means of their conversion.

ANS. 1. Real holiness is duty; and he who exercises this, though in an
imperfect degree, so far does his duty, and no further. But how does it follow
from hence that the unregenerate do any duty; or that unholiness is prescribed
as duty, or means of any thing? He has not yet made out this consequence, and
never will.

ANS. 2. They are required to be perfect in all things; nor is imperfect
holiness prescribed by any command. It is, through the grace of the gospel, made
a means of salvation, and interests in all the blessings of the covenant of
grace; but every injunction and command requires perfect holiness, as much as
any degree of it. The lowest degree of holiness is in some degree obedience to
the command, though it is not required as thus imperfect; and divine grace
pardons the imperfection and sin for Christ's sake, to whom the lowest degree
of true faith in him unites the believer. But still, how does it follow from
this, that what has no degree of holiness is any part of duty, or prescribed as
a means of conversion?

Under this argument he undertakes to correct ' a notable mistake,' which, he
says, I have made, in representing that some suppose, and argue from it, as an
undeniable maxim, That whatsoever is said to an impenitent, unregenerate
sinner, by way of exhortation or command, can require or propose nothing but
what he may do, and yet continue impenitent and unregenerate. See reply to Mr.
Mills, p. 133.
He says, he knows of none to whom this is applicable. And as, from some of my
words on this head, he has reason to conclude I had reference to his sermons,
he says I have mistook his meaning, and concludes I have also mistook the
meaning of others. P. 183, marg. 189, etc.

ANS. 1. I own that when I wrote what he refers to, I did suppose he had taken
this for an undoubted maxim in some things he said in his sermons, as well as
others in their writings: And I was not alone in this. I was led to this
conclusion from his building an argument, for the duties he was pleading for,
wholly on this supposition, as I thought. P. 130, etc. he undertakes to prove
that the things which the unregenerate may do, while such, are required of
them. And he does this principally by citing a number of scriptures, in which
there are commands to hear, search the scriptures, pray, etc. And all he says
to prove these scriptures are to his purpose, and require the doings of the
unregenerate, is to observe they were spoken to such. Now, if it is not true
that nothing but the doings of the unregenerate, or what they may do, while
such, is required of them; then these commands, given to the unregenerate, may
require not what they do, while such, but what the regenerate only do; so his
argument comes to nothing. If I should undertake to prove, from scripture, that
a profane drunkard was required to pray, while in the midst of his profaneness
and cups; and in order to this should produce a scripture requiring prayer, and
only observe this scripture was addressed to profane drunkards; would not every
one see I had not proved my point, unless it was certain that nothing is in
scripture required of such men, but what they may do while such? And would they
not have right to conclude I built on this as an undeniable maxim?

I knew Mr. H -- y offered other arguments, and said many things inconsistent
with what I supposed he took for granted here, as the foundation of his
argument; yet this was no evidence that he did not here build wholly on the
maxim mentioned: Nor am I able yet to make any thing of his argument on any
other supposition. But since he says this was not his meaning, it must be left
to the public to judge, who has made the greatest mistake, he, in writing as he
has done, or I, in understanding him as I did.

ANS. 2. Though he has undertaken now to 'state the matter plainly, as he
understands it;' I confess it is not very plain to me, though it may be to
others. P. 190, etc. For,

1. His argument, as he now states it, proves nothing. The argument is this, if
I now understand him. There are certain instrumental duties to be done by the
unregenerate, and means to be attended upon, in order to conversion. Therefore
the scriptures commanding these things, as what they have a next power to do,
bind these duties upon them. Here the whole thing to be proved is still taken
for granted, viz. that there are instrumental duties for the unregenerate to do.

2. If his argument proves any thing, it proves too much for himself. If
commands to the unregenerate respect all they may do, while such, in attendance
on means, etc. and make all this their duty, as they may do it; then they, who
have not 'the inward influences of the spirit,' are hereby bound to duty, which
they may do, while in this state, and the argument is as strong for these
duties as any other. But he himself grants such do no duty. If his way of
arguing does not prove they do, it proves nothing.

3. He, in explaining his argument, gives it all up, as has been observed, p.
188, 189. For if, as he asserts, commands which the unregenerate never obey,
while such, are suited to excute them to all those exertions and attendance on
means, and produce all those effects, necessary to take place in order to
conversion, and always do this, where they take effect; then the necessity of
their attending on means, etc. does not infer any command of these things, as
they do them; for there is no need of any such command, in order to their doing
them.

4. He has, I think, in stating this matter plainly, said other things plainly
inconsistent with themselves. He says repeatedly, it is the present, the
immediate duty of the unregenerate to repent and believe the gospel, etc. And
yet, in the midst of all this, he asserts God has not enjoined on any the
impracticable task of exercising supernatural powers or principles, before they
are furnished with them, as the means of obtaining any blessings temporal or
spiritual. To prescribe impossible means would be the same thing as to
prescribe none. Faith and repentance are means of salvation only to those who
are enabled to believe and repent. P. 191. Agreeable to this, he in his sermons
quotes with approbation the following sentence. God does not command
impossibilities; but in commanding, directs sinners to do what they can, and to
seek and endeavor to do what they cannot. P. 199. marg. i. e. God does not
command the unregenerate to do any thing, which they cannot do while such.


Perhaps I have made another notable mistake for Mr. H -- y to correct: But if
I have not, these are not only inconsistencies, but he has here asserted the
very doctrine I had said some hold, and was implied in the argument
abovementioned; which he represents to be a notable mistake. For according to
this, God does not enjoin any thing on the unregenerate in order to their
salvation, which they may not do while unregenerate. Upon this ground his
argument, from the scriptures above mentioned, stands good; and we may be sure
that whatever the scripture directs sinners to, in order to salvation, it is
something they may do while unregenerate. And I am yet perusaded he in his own
mind built on this as an undeniable maxim, when he wrote his sermons, though he
may now think he did not. His argument is conclusive, on this supposition: And
why should he not suppose then, what he has asserted now; and that even while
he is declaring he holds no such thing?

4. He here asserts a certain connection between what the unregenerate may do,
and salvation; which he had repeatedly said, we have no warrant to assert from
scripture, and has declared his belief of the contrary. His words are, God's
denying special and effectual grace to those who are favored with the outward
means, is a penal consequence of their neglecting to do what they had a next
power to do in a way or attendance on means. P. 193. If so, then none perish
who attend on the means as the unregenerate may do. But how does he know this,
unless he finds it asserted in the bible? But if it is asserted there, it is
the same with a divine promise of salvation to all who thus attend the means.
How then can he say, as he does repeatedly, it cannot be proved there are any
promises of salvation to the doings of the unregenerate? Mr. H -- y, in his
sermons, says, 'I do not plead for a promise of regeneration to the endeavors
of the unconverted.' Yet at the same time says the unconverted 'by improving
diligently the grace they have received, shall obtain further degrees.' And to
this purpose applies the words of Christ, 'Whosoever has (i. e. holds or
improves what he has) to him shall be given.' This is an absolute promise to
that improvement here intended. Therefore if it intends what the unregenerate
do, there are promises to the doings of the unregenerate. Moreover, he applies
one of the most express promises in the bible to the unregenerate. Matthew. vii.
7 -- 10. See p. 106, 107, 108. How these things can be made consistent, I know
not.


He concludes by saying, 'These observations, it is hoped, may help Mr. H. to
understand the principles on which our argument proceeds, better than he
appears to have done.' I confess I am not helped; nor does it appear to me that
he well understands himself. But perhaps it will be plain to others.

His last argument is this: 'The hearers of the gospel are commanded to repent
and be converted that they may be saved; and this infers an obligation on all
to attend the means of conversion. Such commands implicitly require whatever is
necessary to be done by us, in order to a compliance with them.' P. 199.

ANS. The command to repent does not infer an obligation to attend on the means
of conversion in an impenitent way, or with a heart wholly opposed to
repentance; nor is this necessary in order to a compliance with the command,
unless opposition to the command is implied in the command, and is the means of
obedience to it. But the doings of the impenitent are impenitent doings, and
wholly opposed to repentance and conversion: Therefore are not implied in the
command to repent, etc. so far from this, that they are altogether disobedience
to the command. This is, I think, sufficient to show I was not guilty of the
inconsistence he thinks he finds in what I have wrote on this head, p. 199,
200, marg. But this is left to the reader.


I know Mr. H -- y will come in here with his dividers, and say, impenitence
and unbelief 'are not required as adjuncts or qualifications of men's attendance
on means; but the attendance itself is absolutely required of men.' But when he
has separated the adjuncts and qualifications of their doings from the
attendance itself, there remains nothing to be required or forbidden, that is
duty or sin, as has been shown.

SECTION III. A brief reply to Mr. Hemmenway's answer to my arguments, proving
the unregenerate do no duty.
MY first and chief argument to prove the unregenerate do no duty was taken
from Matthew. xxii. 37 -- 40. and Romans xiii. 8 -- 10. Christ mentioning love to
God and our neighbor as required in the first and second commands, says, 'On
these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.' I thought it hence
followed that all required in the law and prophets is love: And that this
inference was supported and fully asserted by Paul, when he says 'love is the
fulfilling of the law;' and then enumerates a number of commands of the second
table, and says, all these, and every other command, are briefly comprehended
in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Therefore, since the
unregenerate do not love God or their neighbor, they do no part of their duty,
nor yield the least true obedience to any command.

Mr. H -- y is so far from admitting this argument to be conclusive, that he
takes much pains to overthrow it, and says these passages will prove directly
the contrary. His opposition to the sense I put upon the words of Christ, is
grounded on the words Mark mentions, as spoken by our Lord with respect to
these two commands, viz. 'There is none other commandment greater than these.'
He says this necessarily implies there were other commands, besides those which
require love.

ANS. He has not proved, nor will he ever do it, that these words imply there
are any other commands. Both may be true, that there is no other command
greater than these; and that there is no other command which is not
comprehended in these. If there is no other command, but these imply the whole;
then certainly there is none greater. And it appears from comparing the
evangelists, that our Lord asserted both. First, that there is none greater;
and secondly, that in truth these comprehend the whole that is required of man;
'On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.' As if he had
said, 'There is no other commandment greater than these; and indeed these are
the whole of the law and the prophets; all depend on these, and they comprise
the whole. It is said 'The LORD is greater than all gods.' Exodus xviii. 11. But
who ever supposed this implied that there were other gods besides JEHOVAH? Or
that this expression is inconsistent with its being said, 'There is no God
besides me. We know that an idol is nothing in the world?' Both these
assertions are true, though more is asserted in the latter, than in the former.

He says, 'A part of any thing cannot be called another thing than that in
which it is contained.' P. 122. ANS. This is a contradiction to his whole
scheme. For he says holiness is a compound made up of many parts; and that the
matter of duty is a part of holiness; and yet asserts, this is another thing
than that in which it is contained, viz unholiness. See p. 4. But it seems he
has now altered his plan on which he first set out. Then he allowed there was
no command that did not require holiness, and corrected me for stating the
question as if this was denied. But now he is proving there are other commands
than those which require holiness. 'Here I must refresh our author's memory,
which seems (not) a little to have failed him.'




But he further says, There is nothing in the expression used by our Savior,
'On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets,' that so much as
intimates that every command in divine revelation really requires nothing but
true love. P. 127.

ANS. 1. If there is any command which does not require love, and is not
fulfilled by love, it cannot be said to hang or depend on these two commands,
which require nothing but love. Whatever depends wholly on these commands,
would be wholly abolished, or cease to be a command, if these commands should
cease. But if love, and nothing else, is the fulfiling of every thing required
in the law and the prophets, these words are suited to express this. Therefore
this is the sense in which they must be taken; especially as the same thing is
asserted in other passages of scripture; and appears every way reasonable. --
When Christ says, 'Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye even so to them: For this is the law and the prophets.' Matt.
vii. 12. he expresses the same thing, with reference only to the second command
of love to our neighbor. What is here commanded, all grant, is to love our
neighbor as ourselves. And how is this the law and the prophets; unless it be
that this is the thing inculcated in the law and prophets; so that he who comes
up to this, does all required in them, so far as they respect our duty to our
neighbor?

And when Paul says, 'If I have no love, I am nothing,' 1 Cor. xiii. 2. he
expresses the same thing; for how could this be true, if the law and the
prophets were any thing aside from love? When Christ says, 'He that loves me
not, keeps not my sayings,' Joh. x^v. 24. what could be a more express
declaration, that there is no obedience where there is no love? Mr. H -- y, in
order to support his scheme, must prove that he who loves not Christ may keep
his sayings. I know that he can easily do this, in the way he proves almost any
thing, by his sensu composito, and sensu diviso. But whether he can do it
consistently with common sense, let them judge who are willing to make use of
it.

ANS. 2. Mr. H -- y says The love of God and our neighbor is spoken of in
scripture as a kind of summary of the duty of man. P. 35. He also says, We do
indeed allow that nothing is required as duty, but what is either implied in
the affection of love, or is a fit way of exercising and expressing it; nothing
which may not be considered as comprehended in love. Our author says, 'Had our
Lord thought that those two commandments contained all, he would have said,
there is no other commandment besides these.' P. 122. He here grants they do in
truth contain all; and I conclude he will not deny our Lord thought this to be
truth. And doubtless he expressed himself perfectly agreeable to this truth,
though Mr. H -- y thinks it 'a gross impropriety of language.
P. 125. In these words, I think he grants the whole he is disputing against.
For if love is a summary of the duty of man, then this comprizes the whole of
his duty, and he who does not love, does no duty. And if nothing is required as
duty but what is implied in love, or a fit way of expressing it, or
comprehended in it; then that which does not imply love, and is not an
expression of it; is not required, and is no duty.

ANS. 3. The apostle's words are so plain and express, that they cannot be
evaded. He says love fulfils the law; which could not be true if the law
required any thing besides love. He enumerates a number of commands, and says
all these, and every other command, is comprehended in that, thou shall love;
therefore love fulfils the law, does all that is commanded.

I have such an opinion of our author's abilities that I do not think he has
pleased himself in his attempt to evade the force of this passage. To me it
appears so futile and frivolous, as neither to need or deserve an answer. And
the boasting flourish he makes in the conclusion, p. 132, seems rather to be
the effect of the weakness of his argument, than the contrary. But of this,
'let such as exercise their reason judge.' He says, it plainly appears, that
there are other duties we owe to our neighbor besides love, from the apostle's
own words, 'Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.' Since 'the apostle
here distinguishes between rendering to all their due, and loving one another.
He compares and opposes these different duties to each other.' P. 130. I
believe none ever before heard of duties which oppose each other. If there are
any such, it is certainly impossible to do them both at the same time; as the
one must be a holy duty, and its opposite a sinful duty. The apostle says, the
command, Thou shall not steal, is fulfilled by love. If by this we are
commanded to pay our just debts, then it requires us to owe no man any thing;
consequently this is fulfilled by love. How then can these be distinguished as
different and opposite duties! This I mention as a specimen of his way of
arguing on this head. I think we may borrow his language with propriety here
(p. 34) 'Such metaphysical flights are, I believe, beyond the reach of most.'


He says, It does not appear that love is ever used in so extensive a sense in
the scriptures, as to include all those acts of external obedience which flow
from it. P. 126.

ANS. Paul says it includes all that is commanded in the divine law, as this is
all fulfilled by love; and none, I suppose, will deny that acts of external
obedience are commanded. Yea, he particularly mentions a number of commands
requiring external obedience, and expressly says, love includes all this
obedience. And does not John speak of love as including external acts when he
says, 'Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth?'
1 John iii. 18. Is not to love in deed, to love in external action, i. e. in
doing acts of love and mercy? Again, he says, 'This is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments.' Chap. v. 3.

As a further evidence that he who does not love, does no duty, nothing that is
commanded, I observed, that when the people of Israel appeared by their openly
wicked conduct to have no true love to God, they are represented as doing
nothing that was required of them, while they attended the temple service,
offered sacrifices, etc. God calls all their offerings vain oblations, and
says, 'Who has required this at your hand, to tread my courts? Isai. i. 12, 13.

To this Mr. H -- y says We have no reason to think that their attendance on
the externals of religious worship is here called an abomination, and what was
not required of them, merely or principally because they were unregenerate. P.
203.

ANS. We have reason to be certain this was because they appeared to have no
love to God or their neighbor, and discovered themselves to be his enemies,
which is true of all the unregenerate, and of no other. -- To support his
observation, he says, At other times, when the Israelites attended the
ordinances of divine worship, there is no hint that what they did was not
required of them, but the contrary, it is repeatedly said they did according to
the commandment of the Lord, though they acted not from a principle of true
holiness.

ANS. At these other times, they put on the appearance and profession of God's
people and servants, and were visibly holy; for though they were guilty of
gross, open sins, they professed repentance, and reformed, and were again
restored to good standing, as in the case of making and worshipping the golden
calf. But the people to whom Isaiah speaks, refused to reform, though God had
been using means with them to this end; therefore appeared to be impenitent
enemies to God.

He thinks I have here fallen into a contradiction to myself. I had said, 'God,
in his conduct toward the people of Israel, and in what he says of them, acted
not as the searcher of hearts; but has respect only to their external
appearance and conduct.' Upon this he observes, It so, it was not the want of
inward holiness that was the cause why their religious performances are
declared to be an abomination, and not required at their hands; but it was the
irregularity of their outward behavior.

ANS. God spoke of them and treated them, as being his friends or his enemies,
i. e. regenerate or unregenerate, according as they appeared in their external
conduct. Their outward behavior was not an abomination any further than it
proceeded from a wicked heart. Their attendance on religious worship would not
have been represented as an abomination, and what God did not require of them,
had they not by their wicked works appeared to have no love to God, and to be
his enemies, i. e. unregenerate. Had Mr. H -- y understood me, or the text
under consideration, would he have thought of finding a contradiction here?

But he himself does not seem to be satisfied with what he has yet said; and
therefore proceeds to observe, that the sacrifices and offerings which are said
not to be required, were free will offerings, which were not commanded. With
these they 'overcharged God's altars,' and for this they were reproved.

ANS. This is a mere conjecture, for which there is not the least foundation in
the whole passage; but much to the contrary, as any one may see who will read
it. Would any one think of such an expedient to get rid of the text, were he
not driven to a strait?

Mr. H -- y has an answer to my other arguments; but as most he says consists
in making and keeping up his favorite distinction, between matter of duty, and
the manner, end and design; and duty in a compound sense, and in a divided
sense; which distinctions are, I think, at best unintelligible, and tend to
darken, rather than give light to the subject: And if this were not true, they
are not to the purpose, if self-love is opposed to duty, as has been observed:
I say, since this is the case, I shall not trouble myself or the reader with a
particular reply; concluding that every one who will attend, will see that what
I have said is a full reply to all he has offered in answer to these arguments.

SECTION IV. Brief remarks on what Mr. H -- y says of the INABILITY of the
unregenerate.
HE says, I agree with our author that the inability of the unregenerate is a
sinful defect, nor have I the remotest view or desire to weaken the foundation
of this important truth, but rather to confirm it. P. 82. I have no disposition
to call in question his sincerity in this declaration; but I must take leave to
think, however, that he has not made it understandingly, and is so far from
establishing this important truth, that he has not only weakened the foundation
of it, but taken it wholly away, if what he advances be just. Did it not appear
in this light, it would not in the least affect the matter in dispute between
us; nor should I think it worth while to take any notice of it, in any other
view. And it is difficult, yea impossible, to conceive how he should think his
representation of this matter was any thing to his purpose; and that he should
make the use of it he does, through his whole book, unless he thought the
inability of the unregenerate did excuse them, in some measure at least, from
obligations to holy exercises, and rendered them less sinful than if they were
not the subjects of this defect. He indeed declares he cannot tell or conceive,
how or why this should be a sinful defect; and that the unregenerate should,
notwithstanding their inability, be held bound to do the duty they are unable
to do, 'is a point attended with vast difficulty; and is perhaps the Gordian
knot in revealed religion.' However, since God in his word declares it to be
so, his faith (...) rests satisfied upon this testimony, without pretending to
see through those difficulties.' P. 29, 30. If this declaration is not, in some
measure at least, opposed to that mentioned above, I am much mistaken. And how
he, or any one else, can, in this view and sense of this matter, feel guilty,
and justly condemned to destruction, for not obeying God's law perfectly; and
heartily repent, of all such defect, as utterly vile and inexcusable, is quite
inconceivable. But of this more hereafter.


He says, the unregenerate are under a natural inability to embrace the gospel
and be holy, in distinction from a moral inability, it being much more properly
called natural than a moral. That it is an inability of a different kind from
that which consists only in the want of a willingness to do a thing, or
opposition of will to it, when this may be removed without putting any new
principle into the heart; as in the case of the reformation of a profligate:
Though he is now unwilling to reform, he may be made willing by persuasion,
applying to the principles which he now acts from. Whereas the unregenerate
must have a new principle put into their heart, in order to their loving God,
embracing the gospel, etc. and their inability consists in their want of this
principle, and not properly in the want of a will, and the opposition of their
heart to holiness. See p. 10 -- 30.

I take leave to make the following observations upon this.

1. If we consult common sense, and the sentiments and feelings of mankind in
general, we shall find they make no such distinction between want of a
principle or disposition, by which they are prepared and prompted to will and
do any thing, and their unwillingness, or opposition of will to it. If persons
have natural capacity for any thing which is looked upon in itself right and
reasonable, and nothing is wanting but a will, or a compliance of heart, they
are always looked upon bound to do it, or to have such a will and choice; and
wholly inexcusable for all defects of this kind. And the further they are from
such a choice, and from having any thing in their mind that will be influenced
by the motives set before them, the more they are blamed. Nor are mankind wont
to form any notion of two different kinds of difficulty or inability in such
cases; one consisting in not being willing, while there is a promptitude, or an
habitual readiness to will, or a good principle; the other in being wholly
without any principle or promptitude to the thing proposed. But when the
difficulty lies not in the want of a will, but is such as can not be removed by
any good inclination or choice, and is consistent with having a good will, it
is always looked upon to be of quite a different kind, and opposite to the
other, as it wholly excuses a person, so far as he is under this inability.
Therefore to call them by the same name, would be highly improper, and contrary
to common sense. He says this inability 'is termed by divines, and has not
unfitly been called Ethico-physical.' P. 78, 80. But he has given no
instruction by this hard name, as he has not attempted to explain it. He will
not surely pretend it is more scriptural or intelligible than the word moral.


2. We do not find the least hint of any such distinction in divine revelation;
but this matter is there represented agreeable to the common notions and sense
of mankind. There, as he allows, the unregenerate are represented as being as
much bound to perfect holiness, as others. Every thing is required of them,
that is required of others, without making the least allowance for any
inability they are under: Which could not be, if they were under any natural
inability to holiness; or if any thing was wanting but a willing heart.

And the scripture represents the wicked as under no kind of inability to
repent, obey God and embrace the gospel, different from that which they are
under to do the common actions of life, when their hearts are opposed to them.
Therefore their readiness to do the latter, is often mentioned to show their
utter inexcusableness and crime in opposition of heart to the former. God sets
before the Jews, the Rechabites obedience to the command of their father, to
illustrate and convince them of their great and inexcusable folly and
wickedness in not obeying him. Jer. xxxv. And our Lord says to them, 'the Queen
of the south shall rise in judgment with this generation, and condemn them; for
she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and
behold, a greater than Solomon is here.' 'Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the
face of the sky, and of the earth: But how is it, that ye do not discern this
time? Luke xi. 31. xii. 56. If they were under a different kind of inability to
obey God, repent and believe the gospel, from that which men are under to obey
men, etc. when they have no will to it, how could these similitudes and
representations be just? Might not they who were reproved justly reply? 'The
cases are not similar, the Rechabites had natural principles which being
applied to, they might be induced to obey their father: And the Queen of the
south acted from principles she had: And men discern the face of the sky, etc.
without having any new principles given to them. But we are wholly without any
principles by which we can discern spiritual things and obey the gospel, which
must first be implanted in us before we can feel any motive to this. They
needed nothing but a will, in order to do these things; but we want a power to
repent, etc. being under a natural inability. Were it not for this, we would as
readily believe and embrace the gospel, as men pursue the affairs of this
world.' Mr. H -- y says, to represent the inability the unregenerate are under
to holiness, as consisting in nothing but the want of a will; or to be of the
same kind with that which consists only in the want of a will, when they have
principles in their hearts, by application to which they may be made willing,
is contrary to the language of scripture: That 'the inspired writers assert not
only the want of a will, but of power to that which is holy,' which is denoted
by cannot. Christ says 'no man can come to me.' And he does not remember that
the mere want of willingness is ever signified by such words. P. 20.

ANS. Peter and John said, 'We cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard,' when they mean nothing more than want of will, or the opposition of
their will to the contrary. Solomon speaks of men to whom God has given
riches, etc. but has not given them power to eat thereof, meaning by want of
power, nothing but want of a will. If he had remembered such passages as these,
he must have been sensible that it is agreeable to the language of scripture to
speak of want of a will, and want of power, as the same thing; and that cannot
means no more than a strong and fixed opposition of will to a thing, when
nothing is wanting but the consent of the heart. The scripture constantly
speaks of sinner's destruction as owing to their will, or not willing. 'Way
WILL ye die!' 'Whosoever will let him come.'




3. As Mr. H -- y grounds all he says, on this head, on the supposition that
there is a holy principle, distinct from all exercise of the heart, and
necessary in order to all holy acts of the will, and the cause or ground of
them; and that unregeneracy, and the inabiliy of sinners to holy acts of will,
consist wholly in the want of this inactive, dormant, holy principle; he ought
to have offered some proof of this, on which his argument wholly turns, and
which he has taken for granted. Though we should not dare to deny this doctrine
of principle, we must not be blamed for not admitting the force of an argument,
which is built wholly on this, without some positive proof of the existence of
such principle, which he has not yet produced. Perhaps it will be thought he
has proved the necessity of such a principle in order to holy acts in the
following words. 'The words power and inability, have relation to acts. And in
order of nature, power is necessary in order to all acts flowing from it; even
as the cause is necessary prior to the effect. To talk of power or inability,
whether natural or moral, in any other sense, is unintelligible jargon.' P. 17.
In answer to this, and all he says about power, I refer him and the reader to
Mr. West's late essay on moral agency, sect. ii. Perhaps when he has well
considered this, he will give his own 'talk of power' as hard an epithet as he
has here used.


It seems to be impossible to have any conception of such a principle: And we
seem to run into contradictions, in our attempts to describe it. Thus he speaks
of it as that by which the mind is biassed to act wisely; and he calls it a
propensity and promptitude to holy action and the cause of it. P. 22, 23, 24,
etc. At the same time it is to be distinguished from all acts or exercises of
the mind, as being perfectly inactive. But how that which does not act, can be
the cause of action; and how there can be propensity and promptitude to act,
while there is not the least activity, or inclination one way or the other,
cannot be told, it is likely, by any divine or philosopher; and will, after all
that can be said, look like a contradiction.

And if the holy scripture, when examined with this view, shall be found wholly
silent about this principle, nothing being there said that expresses or implies
any such thing, it is thought it will be difficult to find any good medium of
proof. I am sensible I shall, by calling in question Mr. H -- y's doctrine
about principle, expose myself to his censure, as denying original
righhteousness and sin. See p. 33, 34. But if it cannot be proved to be
inconsistent with scripture and reason, to believe that Adam's holiness first
began in holy exercise: And that corrupt exercises take place in his children,
as soon as they exist as his posterity, of the same nature with those which
took place in him, when he first sinned, though differing in circumstances; he
will not be able to support his charge.


4. Mr. H -- y's account of the nature and kind of man's natural inability to
exercise holiness, and embrace the gospel, is not consistent with his being
under any obligations to this, or in the least blamable for not being holy. How
can he be obliged to do that which he is under a natural inability to do; which
defect is not properly a want of will, or opposition of will to holiness; but
is what the will has no concern in? He says it is most properly called natural
inability. That it is blamable because man has brought this inability on himself
by his sin; i. e. Adam had ability to be holy, but lost it for himself and his
children: And because he had it, and lost it, they ought to have it, and are
now as much to blame for not being holy, as if they had this natural power. But
it is impossible to reconcile the reason of a man to this, or to make him feel
himself blamable for not doing that for which he has no natural power, even
though Adam, or he himself, once had it. All the blame there can be in this
case, lies in doing that by which this power was lost, and not in not being
holy, after he lost his natural power to be so. Mr. H -- y owns he cannot
account for it, that it should be so, and speaks of it as one of the greatest
mysteries in all the bible; but thinks he is obliged to believe it, because it
is revealed. But this is a mystery of his own making. Blessed be God! there is
no such thing revealed in the bible. Men are there blamed only for that which
natural conscience will make them feel they are wholly blamable for, when
properly awakened. And there is no mystery in it: Persons of the lowest
capacity, and children, may understand it, condemn themselves and repent. But a
person never repents of neglect of that which he thinks he had no natural power
to do, and while he can have no conception how or why he should be blamable.
While he views things in this light, and his heart is answerable to his
speculations, he will not, he cannot, feel himself guilty, even though he
thinks divine revelation declares him to be so, and he says he therefore
believes it. Our author will perhaps think this an uncharitable censure of him.
It would be so, I confess, if his heart necessarily agreed with his doctrine*
But as his heart may be, in this respect, better than his head, nothing is
censured but his doctrine.

This leads me to take notice of a remarkable instance of my uncharitableness,
mentioned by him, p. 215, etc. I had said in my reply to Mr. Mills, The only
reason, I conceive, why any have run into this notion of God's appointing
duties to the unregenerate, to be done by them while such, and have not rather
been shocked at it, is, that they look on them as in some measure, at least,
excusable for not loving God and embracing the gospel; this being above their
power, and what they cannot do while unregenerate. And I had before published a
sermon, in which I said, They who have not been brought to see and feel
themselves wholly inexcusable for not being perfectly holy, have not been
convinced of sin, as God's people are. These two passages put together, he
says, condemn all without exception as unconverted, who think God has appointed
duties to be done by the unregenerate, while such.

ANS. In my sermon I address myself to my hearers in a use of examination,
desiring them to consider what are the exercises and feelings of their own
hearts; whether they have been brought to feel themselves wholly to blame for
the neglect of every thing God's law requires; or whether they are wont to
excuse themselves, as not wholly blamable? And I represent the former, not the
latter, the character of the Christian. -- In my reply, I am not attending to a
person's sense and feelings of heart of his own blamableness for not loving
God, etc. but the views he has of others in a state of unregeneracy. He may, by
the influence of education, etc. imbibe wrong notions respecting the
blamableness of the unregenerate, and hold principles inconsistent with their
being in the least blamable for not being holy; and be led by this to think and
talk of the unregenerate, as in some measure excusable for not loving God, etc.
And yet, when he consults his own heart, and his views and exercises with
respect to himself, may find be has no excuse for himself, that he is not
perfectly holy. This, I charitably believe, is the case in many instances; and
in how many, I don't pretend to say. I hope therefore to be acquitted from the
charge Mr. H -- y has laid against me here, of the 'uncharitable judgment
expressed concerning all differing from me in sentiments on this point,' of
which he says, ' I do not remember ever to have met with so hard and extensive
a censure.' And adds, 'This is a sample of the spirit he shows toward all
differing from his opinion. The lump is thoroughly fermented with the same sour
leaven.' Hard, severe, extensive censure! Not of my sentiments, but of my
spirit.

He says, 'That there are some who hold to this notion on reasons different
from what is here assigned, he may now inform himself.' Where shall I go for
information? Not to Mr. H -- y; for he declares he cannot see how the
unregenerate are blamable for not loving God; as they cannot, being under a
natural inability: Of which sentiment he makes great use through his whole book.

He does not conclude his note without expressing his charity, as a contrast to
my uncharitableness, in the following words; I can say, with sincerity
concerning him, (though he may hereafter twit me with it, as he has done by Mr.
Mills, in the like case) I charitably hope that he is a true servant of Christ:
Though I must add, that Christians would regard him with more complacency, if
his discourses favored more of that meekness of wisdom, recommended by the
apostle. I may not imitate him in his hard censures, for I fear God.

I hope I shall be acquitted from this charge of hard censures by the reader;
or, at least, that what I have said will not be looked upon to be inconsistent
with my having the fear of God before my eyes, though Mr. H -- y, it seems,
thinks it to be so.

The following observations offer themselves upon reading this sentence. -- A
true servant of Christ, who does not fear God, if this were possible, is not a
character very honorable to him or his master. If it is a hard censure to rank
a person among those who do not fear God, and such censures are inconsistent
with fearing God; then Mr. H -- y, while he is expressing his charity, does
pronounce a hard censure on him toward whom he is so charitable; and while he
is declaring that he fears God, is doing that which he at the same time
intimates is inconsistent with it. -- But all this is left to the reader,
wishing there had been no occasion for any thing which is in such a degree
personal.

I acknowledge myself greatly defective in meekness of wisdom, and doubt not my
discourses would favor more of this, had I more of it. Where this defect
appears, or that which is contrary to wisdom and humility, as it doubtless
does, in some instances at least, I ask the candor and forgiveness of the
offended, Christian reader. With how much meekness of wisdom Mr. H -- y has
corrected my pride, I cheerfully leave to every reader's judgment, as others
are better judges of this, than I am, and this saves me the trouble of
remarking on any thing of this kind; and if I should, different readers will,
after all, judge differently: And the point in dispute turns not at all upon
this.




Mr. H -- y, being sensible that the account President Edwards gives of natural
and moral inability, in his treatise on the will, is opposed to his scheme,
attempts to confute this great author. P. 11 -- 22.

He professes to give Mr. Edwards's definition of natural and moral inability;
but has not done it fairly. He says the first is defined to be An inability to
do a thing, because what is most commonly called nature, does not allow of it,
or because of some defect or obstacle that is extrinsic to the will, etc. This
he cannot understand, because he is 'utterly at a loss what is commonly called
nature; a word which is observed by a philosopher to bear about a dozen
different significations.' If, instead of consulting his philosopher, he had
read the page preceding Mr. Edward's definition, where he particularly shows
what is commonly meant by nature, he could have been at no loss about the
meaning. This looks like perfect quibbling. Besides, he has left out of the
definition, the words of Mr. Edwards, which are most plain, and serve to fix
the meaning beyond dispute. Mr. Edwards's words are 'We are said to be
naturally unable to do any thing, when we cannot do it if we will, because what
is most commonly called nature don't allow of it, etc. i. e. when the
difficulty don't lie in the heart or will, but in something else; so that if
there was a willing mind, the difficulty would not be removed. What can be
plainer than this? And as plain is the following definition of moral inability.
'It consists in the opposition or want of inclination,' i e. all the difficulty
or inability lies in this, and nothing is wanting but a willing mind.

Mr. H -- y accuses Mr. Edwards of reasoning about moral impotency in a dark
manner; but I humbly conceive no more need be said, in order to the judicious
reader's having full evidence, that the darkness lies wholly with him, and that
his inability to understand Mr. Edwards is of the moral kind; therefore think
it needless to attempt a more particular answer. Our author's treatment of what
Mr. Edwards says on this head, leads me to take notice of something of the same
kind in his remarks on a passage in my sermon on Romans vii 7. p. 6. I had said,
The authority of a legislator is exercised and expressed in the threatening to
the disobedient, and cannot possibly be expressed in any thing else, or any
other way. And in the next paragraph say, The authority of a law lies wholly in
the threatening, or appears and is expressed only in that, as has been just
observed. Mr. H -- y, to answer his end the better, puts together part of two
sentences, taken from two different paragraphs; and then understands the words,
'The authority of a law lies wholly in the threatening' as meaning, 'that the
threatening of the law is all that obliges the subject to obedience; and
consequently, if the threatened punishment could be avoided, it would no longer
be our duty to obey the law.' And this, he says 'is indeed gross hobbism; the
very dregs of antinomianism.' P. 31, 32.

When I say, 'The authority of a law lies wholly in the threatening, or appears
and is expressed only in that,' I meant by the last part of the sentence to
explain the former, and express the same thing in other words. However
inaccurate the expression may be, I believe no intelligent, candid reader, who
attends to the whole passage, will be likely to mistake my meaning, viz. that
the authority of a legislator appears and is expressed, in his law, in the
threatening only. -- But he disputes this too* and says, 'Nor is it true that
the authority of the law appears only in the threatening.' His reason is, 'For
then the most unrighteous laws may appear to have as much authority, or right
to command obedience, as any.'

ANS, What I assert is, that the authority of a legislator cannot be expressed
and appear in his law, unless there be a threatening to the disobedient. I
grant that unrighteous laws may have this appearance and expression of
authority: But it does not follow from this, that there is any other way to
express authority in a law. He who has authority to make a law, must express it
in the same way in his law; yet there are mediums aside from the law, in itself
considered, by which it may be known whether this expression and appearance of
authority, in a law, is according to truth or not.

He says, 'The authority of a lawgiver consists in his right to require
obedience under penalty.' I ask, how this right, to require obedience under
penalty, can be expressed in a law which has no penalty, or does not require
obedience under penalty? When this question is answered, it will perhaps appear
that he has not granted all I have asserted.




SECTION V. On the evil tendency of Mr. Hemmenway's Book.
MR. H -- y has waved the mention of 'the intolerable consequences' which
appeared to him to be inseparable from my doctrine; because it might look too
much like uncharitableness to dwell on these things.' P. 202. But it may be
questioned whether his charity, in this instance, is according to knowledge.
Charity is indeed tender of the person, character, ease and happiness of every
man; but it loves the truth so well, and is so friendly to the general good,
that when any one publishes sentiments contrary to important truth, and of a
fatal tendency to the souls of men, it will do its utmost to detect the error,
point out the danger and evil tendency of it, and give warning to all, how much
soever the author's performance and character may suffer by it. Not to do this,
would be uncharitable and cruel. I shall therefore think I am obeying the voice
of charity itself, in the attempt I am now entering upon. But before I proceed,
I give notice that I design not the least intimation that Mr. H -- y saw the
evil tendency of his scheme, or would desire to promote what I think is the
unavoidable consequence of it. But this is so far from being a reason for
silence on this head, that it offers a sufficient motive to attempt to open his
eyes, and the eyes of all others, who are as far from perceiving the danger, as
the author.

I. I think what he has said tends to keep out of sight, and hide from men,
their real sinfulness and guilt; and therefore opposes one great end of the
gift of the holy spirit, viz. to reprove or convince the world of sin, as
necessary in order to understand and embrace the gospel.

He insists 'That sin consists formally and essentially in defect or
privation.' P. 8. That this defect, or want of holy principles, is the true
cause of the sinfulness of men's actions. P. 64. 'The corruption of human
nature consists essentially and radically in a defect or privation of a
principle of true holiness. P. 83. If sin consists originally and essentially
in defect, and this defect is the cause of the sinfulness of men's actions;
then this defect was the cause of Adam's first sin. I ask, by what means did
this defect take place in Adam? Not by his sin; for this defect was the cause
of his sin. But he gives a different account of Adam's sin elsewhere. P. 27,
28. According to him, it consisted in a voluntary act, by which he cast away
the perfection and glory of his nature, and 'the habit or principle of
righteousness was lost,' and a usurper was placed on the throne. No sinful
defect in his nature, or privation of a principle of holiness could be the
cause of this positive, sinful act, because this act was the cause of this
defect, and the loss of the perfection of his nature. And this was a strange
usurper, if it was only negative, a defect or privation, that is, nothing. I
think he ought to have given a more clear and consistent account of that
sinfulness which consists wholly in defect and privation (which I take to be
the same with its consisting in nothing at all) and is the cause of the
sinfulness of men's actions, before he had made such great use of it as he does
in support of his scheme.
He says, the principles and exercises which are naturally found with men, are
not in themselves sinful, but the sin consists in the want of something else or
their corruption consists in not having supernatural principles joined with
them. That self-love, love, is innocent and good in itself, and men never love
their own selves too much, or in too high a degree; Our author says, No action
is the worse for being interested, or or the better for being disinterested.
Disinterested mischievousness imports the utmost wickedness. And it was no ways
derogatory to our Savior's submission to the will of God in his sufferings,
that he endured the cross for the joy that was set before him. P. 98. These are
three as remarkable sentences, perhaps, as were ever put together. Nothing can
be more contrary to truth and holiness than the first. The second supposes what
is impossible. And so does the last; and is most dishonorable to our savior,
if his pleasing not himself, and his disinterested love, was excellent and
honorable. For this, the reader is refered to the preceding inquiry;
especially, p. 28 -- 31.
and 'the viciousness of selfishness consists not at all in the love of
ourselves; -- but wholly in the exclusion of love to others.' It is never in
any degree sinful, unless when want of love to others has influence in men's
actions. Mr. H -- y says, It may seem strange to those who are unacquainted
with methaphysics, that a defect or privation should be spoken of as a formal
principle, which has an influence in it is kind into an action. P. 71. If he can
by his metaphysics prove this, he will at the same time prove what has been
often asserted, viz. that men by metaphysics can prove any thing, even the
grossest contradictions, to be true. He adds, what all his readers will
doubtless believe, 'To open this matter fully would carry us too great a length
into some abstruse disquisitions.'
i, e. When a man is induced by self-love to 'do that to promote his own
interest which is in his apprehension inconsistent with the interest of
others.' So that if a man has no design to injure others, to answer his own
ends, and does the matter of duty, his self-love and all he does is as innocent
'as the action of a sucking infant that reaches earnestly for the breast.' P.
71, 95, 96. Therefore all that men are blamable for, is want of a principle of
love to God and their neighbor. And this being a natural defect, and they
under a natural inability, independent of their will and choice, to act from
higher principles, and love God, etc. their sinfulness does not lie in this
defect, in itself considered, or in any of their neglects or doings; but in
their loosing their power in Adam: For, according to him, if Adam had not
possessed this superior principle and power, and cast it away by his voluntary
act, his children could not be under the least obligation to holiness. But that
men should now be bound to love God and be perfectly holy, when they have no
principles, or natural power to do this, merely because Adam had them, and cast
them away, he says, is the most difficult to be understood and accounted for,
of any thing contained in the bible; and if it is believed, it must be merely
because it is revealed, and not from any inward consciousness we have of our
sinfulness and blame, from any inward sense or feeling, or from our seeing the
reason of it; for these unitedly declare, under all imaginable convictions of
conscience and illuminations of the mind, there is no sinfulness in that, in
which all sinfulness and blame do consist, if they are to be found in man.

This scheme ot our author does almost, if not wholly, exclude sin and blame
from man, in his present state. He whose heart is formed on this plan, will
feel himself in a great measure innocent, and have little sin to confess and
repent of. This is very agreeable to unsubdued, impenitent, secure sinners, and
answers to their views and feelings, and the very scheme they naturally fall
into, to excuse and justify themselves. But when the law comes, sin revives,
and they die. They find that every imagination of the thoughts of their hearts
is only evil continually. That they are abominable and filthy, drinking in
iniquity like water -- That their heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked -- Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues
they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; their mouth full
of cursing and bitterness: Their feet swift to shed blood; being abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate; and their heart full of enmity
against God. The carnal mind is enmity against God. This seems to be a
difficult text with Mr. H -- y; and no wonder, since it is opposed to his whole
scheme. He refers to it, p. 20, and there understands it as meaning a state of
unregeneracy, or depraved nature. But in express contradiction to this, in p.
97, he says, 'That which is here called enmity is not the carnal heart or
depraved nature; but the actual exercise of the heart as depraved.' And here, I
think, he runs into another inconsistence. He says, p. 95, 96, the exercises of
self-love, in the unregenerate sinner, in which 'his design is not to hurt
others, but to advantage himself, can, with no propriety, be called exercises
of enmity to God or man; the action of a sucking infant, that reaches earnestly
for the breast, might as properly be called an exercise of enmity to being in
general.' And yet in the next page he allows the 'exercises and actings of
natural principles, as corrupted by sin, are unconformable to the law of God,
and so are constructively, at least, enmity against God, since they are at best
destitute of that rectitude and holiness of principle and end which the law
requires.' Thus that which in one page is perfectly innocent, and cannot be
enmity to God, is in the next page constructive enmity at least. But no one has
any reason to be frighted with this constructive enmity; for he goes on to say,
'It does not consist in exercise, but in privation of right principles and ends
in acting. Take this exercise of the natural principle entirely away, and the
sinfulness of the person remains undiminished.' So the enmity of the carnal
mind turns out a mere nonentity at last; such enmity as a beast or tree may
have.


It is doubtless impossible to reconcile this scriptural representation of
man's sinfulness, with Mr. H -- y's scheme. Indeed, he has, through his whole
book, kept the sinfulness and guilt of man very much out of sight; and the
whole is suited to sooth and please the impenitent, unconvinced sinner; and is
opposed to that conviction of sin and humiliation which are implied in a man's
knowing his true state and character, and necessary in order to embracing the
gospel. It is probable Mr. H -- y did not view his own scheme in the light in
which I have here set it. And if he should think I have made a representation
injurious to him, I can only appeal to his book, and say I have been careful
not to misrepresent any thing, and really think the judicious reader of what he
has wrote, will see much more opposed to a proper conviction of sin, than I
have mentioned. And since I have not injured him, in my own apprehension, he
must, I think, on his own principles, consider me as quite innocent.


II. Mr. H -- y's book tends to give sinners ease short of Christ; to prevent
that humiliation which is implied in embracing the gospel; and flatter and
confirm them in that self-righteous way, which is most pleasing to their
hearts, and in which we have reason to fear multitudes are perishing.

This appears from what has been just observed of his hiding from the sinner
his true sinfulness and guilt: For nothing will humble the sinner, and strip
him of his confidence in himself, and his self-righteous pleas and attempts,
and bring him to feel the utterly helpless, lost state he is in, while his true
sinfulness and guilt are hid from his eyes. But our author does more than this.
He tells the awakened sinner, he is not wholly a rebel and an enemy to God; but
is obeying him, and doing his duty in some measure, by which he obtains God's
approbation and favorable notice. This is what the sinner, when he is first
awakened, desires above all things; and so long as his heart does not fail him
here, he will take courage in his opposition to Christ, in attempting to obtain
a righteousness of his own. And nothing will drive him from this refuge of
lies, this self-righteous bottom, but a conviction that he is so far from doing
duty, and obeying God, that he is continually, with his whole heart, opposing
God and the gospel, and that he never shall do any duty, till his heart is
subdued, and he is willing to embrace the gospel. This is the voice of
scripture and reason. And for the truth of it, I might appeal to the generation
of God's people. How many are there to witness, that so long as they could
flatter themselves they were doing duty, they had ease and self-confidence. But
while they were attempting in this way to save themselves, they were
disappointed and confounded: Their sinfulness was so brought into view, that
their hearts failed them, and they saw they were not obedient, but rebels in
all their exercises and doings, sin revived and they died. And how many are
there, who have never come to this conviction; but are going on, as they think,
in the way of duty, doing all they can, or what they have a next power to do,
compassing themselves about with sparks that they have kindled! These will be
greatly comforted and strengthened by what Mr. H -- y has wrote.

In the scripture, a different method is taken with sinners. Our author has
not, I think, found one exhortation there to any duty short of faith and
repentance, after all his search and attempts; nor one word that implies that
the unbeliever does any duty: But there is much there to the contrary. They who
are not turned to God, are not spoken of as obeying and doing duty; but are
treated as wholly rebels, altogether disobedient. 'To turn the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just.' Luke i. 17. ' Children of disobedience.' Ephesians. ii. 2.
'Being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.
Disobedient, serving diverse lusts, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another. Tit. i. 16. ii. 3. I therefore think I have warrant to say,
in my turn, 'If he could have submitted his reasonings to the wisdom of God
speaking in the sciptures, great part of his peformances would never have seen
the light.' P. 148.

It is to be wished and hoped, however, that what he has wrote, and all these
disputes, though in themselves disagreeable, will be the means of detecting
hurtful error; and discovering the true character of sinners, given in the holy
scripture, and the way of treating with them, there pointed out. So far as this
shall come to pass, man will be abased, and God alone will be exalted, and have
all the glory.

AMEN.

