The General PRACTICE of the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, Relating to BAPTISM,
FURTHER VINDICATED; In ANSWER To Mr. ROBBINS'S REPLY.

The General PRACTICE of the Churches of NEW ENGLAND, Relating to BAPTISM,
FURTHER VINDICATED; Containing an ANSWER to the Rev. CHANDLER ROBBINS'S REPLY,
Relative to this QUESTION, Whether the Practice of persons owning or renewing
the Covenant, and having Baptism for their Children, without coming Immediately
into Full Communion, be Warrantable? Wherein the Affirmative is more Fully
Confirmed. Together with some Further Remarks on Mr ROBBINS'S injurious
treatment of the Author.

In THREE PARTS.

BY JOHN COTTON, A. M. of PLYMOUTH.

Isaiah XL, 11. He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms and carry them in his
Bosom.

Matthew XVIII, 5. Whosoever shall receive one such little Child in my Name,
receives me.

Mandatum de Baptismo Universale, ac ad Totum Ecclesiam pertinet.

CHEMNETIUS de Baptismo. BOSTON: Printed for Joseph Greenleaf, and sold at his
Printing Office, in HANOVER-STREET, 1773.

PREFACE.
PLYMOUTH controversy has made a great noise in the country: It has been of
long standing, and very various have been the reports about it: That people
might have right conceptions of the matter, I published my Essays. They have
now met with an answer; whether it be full and sufficient, must be left to the
world to judge. What assistance Mr. R. had in the affair, I am not able with
precision to determine; but there are evident traces of another hand in several
parts of his reply; the natural effect of his famous journey by night. But
whoever was concerned, since he is pleased to father the whole, I shall treat
it as his general offspring. It has been long a preparing; the reason of this
delay I know not: Word was given out in mid-winter (after a certain packet was
received) that it would soon be ready; but it appeared not upon the stage, till
late in the spring. One would naturally think, that after so long a time it
would come forth more perfect, and be a thorough answer to every thing that I
had alleged: But this is not the case; several things of great importance are
left almost wholly unnoticed, and sentences and scraps of sentences are picked
out here and there, and mangled at a strange rate, and the misrepresentations
are innumerable: A method of proceedure tending to bewilder the reader, and
perpetuate the controversy: Instead of throwing light, it only throws darkness
on the subject. It may perhaps gain the applause of the vulgar (for whom it
seems especially calculated) and raise their indignation against me; but men of
learning and penetration will easily see, that the merits of the cause are not
touched.

The cause indeed, that he is pleading, looks with a good face: The purity of
churches, keeping out unregenerates, etc. are sounds pleasing and captivating
to serious souls, and they will be ready to rise in arms against any one whom
he represents as making the church (which is an enclosed garden) a mere common,
or a cage for every unclean and hateful bird. By the like sounds, the separates
ensnared many zealous and godly people in the late day, and gained great
advantages against the established churches. And will he tread in their steps?
For my part I am as much for a godly discipline as he (which is much wanted;)
but at the same time am for allowing all privileges to "proper members" of the
church whenever asked for, if they are not guilty of censurable evil. And as
for practice, is he more strict than his brethren? BE IT KNOWN UNTO ALL MEN,
that Mr R. has been, ever since his settlement, as large in his admissions or
in his practical charity as I could desire or any minister I know, and perhaps
larger in some instances than I should have been. And even now I have reason to
think, that he would exclude none that should apply (if they would come to full
communion) whom Mr. Stoddard would have received. At least it is evident from
his piece (as well as practice) that he would receive them at second hand, if
any such should remove into his parish, or be occasionally present on communion
days; and that he is even willing to hold communion in all other ways, with
such churches as are built on Mr. Stoddard's plan; (see p. 63.) which is a much
greater inconsistency than any he endeavors to fasten on me.

Having mentioned discipline, let me drop a tear that it is so much neglected.
It is lamentable to think, that the church membership of children is looked
upon as such a little thing; they seem to be left by the church as lambs in a
large pasture; little or no care is taken of them; all proper restraint seems
almost at an end. And even when such are spoken of by others, they are treated
as no part of the church; or if as really without, and communicants only were
members. Hence how frequent the language, "such a one was admitted into the
church at such a time; such a one is not a member, etc." when in reality they
were complete members before. This by custom is so riveted in the minds of
many, that they cannot get rid of the notion; hence naturally arise prejudices
against the practice we are pleading for, as if it was a prostitution of
ordinances to those that do not belong to the church. But this is not the case
in other churches at a distance, neither was it so with us from the beginning.
Our fathers always treated baptized persons as members, as I have noted in the
Essays, and exercised discipline over them as much as over communicants. And
why is it not so at this day? Surely, if primitive discipline were revived and
kept up with rigor, and ministers would duly discharge their duty in training
up the baptizati for the Lord's-table (as the two Mr. Henrys, Mr. Havel and
others have done) there would soon be little occasion for the present
controversy.

It is further matter of grief and lamentation, that there are so few proper
subjects of discipline; I mean that there are such an amazing number of
unbaptized persons among us. For (surprising to tell) it is affirmed by some
who best know the circumstances of the town, that there are at least two
thirds, if not three quarters, of the children in this place, who remain
unbaptized. And is this a proper season to lay still further restrictions on
the ordinance of baptism? What shall we then come to (according to an ordinary
course of providence) at last? In what situation will the next generation be?
And what is as surprising to tell, I never heard one whole sermon since my
return to the town, reproving this neglect: But it has only been touched upon
two or three times in some transient expressions, and blended with other
particulars. The most that he ever said on this head was in those sermons he
mentioned p. 2. and then he stood upon it but a few minutes: His strength being
chiefly exhausted on the head of qualifications; and coming without gracious
sincerity, appeared in a much more awful light, than not coming at all
(directly contrary to Genesis xvii. 14.) In other places, I think all over
Christendom, it is common to compute the number of inhabitants, by the number
of christenings: From whence we may infer what their general practice is. But
if such computation should be made in the public prints respecting us by the
number of christenings, we should appear a place diminutive indeed (though the
first in New England) and hardly worthy of the least public notice.

But not to enlarge further. I shall close this preface with observing a few
things relative both to his and my reply.

As to his -- The reader cannot but take notice how he, every where, both in
his letters and book, links in the brethern with him. He seems only to stand
forth in their behalf and to plead their cause, and speaks of himself as but
one of many who were dissatisfied with the practice; withal insinuating, that
all the strokes I had against him were aqually leveled against them. This
method he takes (out of policy) to ingratiate himself, and to fasten them the
more to him. Whereas in fact "it is he alone, that is the source and spring of
all; and if he should once cease his opposition, I doubt not the rest would do
so too: If he should tell them (as Roger Williams did his hearers,) "that he
had misled them, that he was now convinced that he was in an error, and that
prayer and study had brought him to be of another mind." There is not a man of
them, I believe, but would acquiesce, and be entirely easy with the continuance
of the practice. I would further notice his frequent phrase, my scheme, my
plan, etc. as if I was singular in my opinion, and differed from all the world
besides. Whereas in the main I agree with my fathers and brethren in the point:
But we, enjoying their light and standing on their shoulders, may possibly make
some improvement of things they did but just glance at: As Dr. B. and Mr. H.
have made great improvements of some casual hints thrown out by Mr. Edwards.

And now in regard of the answer here exhibited, I have completed it, without
taking a journey by night. And I have presumed to make it, although some of his
chief men have given out, that his piece was "decisive and unanswerable;" and
although he himself has said, "that Plymouth controversy, he believed, would
"be a means of banishing the halfway practice out of this part of the
country;" as much as to say, that his book would produce this mavelous
effect. Whether it will or no, time must discover: But there seems little
prospect of it at present; for I have heard it observed by several, that in
less than a week after his books came up, they seemed to be as dead almost as
if they never had a being; no exultations, no triumphs, no congratulations,
etc. were heard of, and indeed but little discourse about them. So that it
seemed to some almost unnecessary to make a reply: But upon several accounts,
it appears to me (as well as to others) absolutely necessary: And the reader
will perhaps be of the same mind, before he has done.

But to come to what I more particularly intended to observe.

In regard of the general controversy, I desire it may be remembered, that all
my pleas go upon this supposition, that there will be unregenerate persons in
the church: And the same supposition must be made upon his plan, or any plan
whatsoever. According to the standard Christ gives his church, they cannot be
kept out: And if they are in already, they must not be cast out, without plain
proofs of their unregeneracy. should this be the case of any, they must be left
to God and their own conscience. In the mean time, the church ought to treat
them as regular members, and grant them the privileges they ask for: And if
they (or the pastor alone) upon conjectures and suspicions go about to exclude
them, they act an unwarrantable part, such privileges being their proper
birthright by divine grant, till such time as an absolute forfeiture be made,
and full conviction takes place. And this I desire may be kept in mind.

And with respect to the particular controversy -- I am really grieved, that I
am obliged to continue it. Mr. R. might have prevented it with three or four
words speaking. But he was too haughty and grand to make the least concession.
And he must take the consequence. I am sure I take no delight in exposing him:
But a regard to truth, my own reputation, and even the interest of religion
obliged me to clear myself of his aspersions: I say, the interest of religion.
For who will regard any thing I advance in the general controversy, if they
think me such a man as Mr. R. represents me to be? I am astonished, that he
should take the liberties he has done; that he should give such scope to
misrepresentation and abuse, when he could not but know how easily he might be
detected: But I suppose he thought, that either his great name or popularity,
would bear down all before it, or that I should be incapable of answering the
argumentative part of his book: And if so, that it would be an idle attempt for
me ma^ely to endeavor to rescue my name from personal invective or abuse; and
of consequence must necessarily bear the load for ever. But perhaps in both, or
either, he will find himself disappointed. In the following reply, I have
endeavored to treat him with moderation and temper, and to avoid personal
reflections and recriminations as much as possible: However, the charges he
has brought against me (many of them unnecessarily, merely to load me with
obloquy and reproach, without the least advantage to his cause,) render it
necessary for me sometimes to touch on that string, though in very gentle
degrees, considering the occasion. He observes in his preface, That his people
judged it needful for him to vindicate himself from the unkind aspersions I had
cast upon him, least his character and usefulness should be hurt among
strangers. But if what I have heard be true, this was judged needful merely by
a junto of them, and that the major part were rather against his writing, and
would have been glad if he had forbore, lest it should make matters more
desparate than ever; as appears now to be really the case; for he has managed
in such a manner, as to render a reply absolutely needful, least those who are
"unacquainted with affairs in this place" be misled by wrong and ungrounded
accounts and misrepresentations. This is not only my opinion, but the opinion
of many others, even of some that Mr. R. reckons among the number of his
friends.

I leave the whole to the readers animadversion, begging them to weigh matters
in an impartial balance (even the balance of the sanctuary) and not be swayed
by personal regard either on the one side or the other. And may the God of
truth lead us into all truth. AMEN.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Robbins's REPLY, etc.
PART I.
IT is a true but melancholy observation, that the ordinance of the supper,
which is an ordinance of peace and love, has been the occasion of more feuds
and animosities in the christian world, than almost any other thing whatever.
The contentions about the ordinance of baptism have neither been so frequent
nor long continued; I find little traces of them till something above 200 years
ago, when the sect of the anabaptists arose in Germany. Since which time, the
poedo-baptist controversy has subsisted, and a small number have ever appeared
in opposition; but other controversies in relation to baptism have been rare.
The controversy in which we are at present engaged, seems to be unknown in
other parts of Christendom; it scarce reaches beyond the confines of
New England. Other churches seem agreed to allow church-privileges to members
baptized whenever asked for, if of sober and regular lives; and the generality
of our churches have long been in the same sentiments. But of late there seems
to be a disposition in many to lay a restriction on such members, and to
exclude them from any privilege without they see their way clear to ask for
every one; all or none are the terms insisted on. Whether this be right or not
is the present question?

It would surely be happy, a thing very desirable, if all in visible covenant
were fully disposed to discharge every duty of the covenant, if they had
generally such a heart in them as to give up themselves and their's entirely to
God, not only in private, but also publicly, and to walk in all the
commandments and or finances of the Lord blameless, and so to have all occasion
of dispute removed out of the way. But since this cannot be expected in this
imperfect state, since there are such different degrees of knowledge and grace,
and all professors do not see their duty in the same point of light, or have
not equal capacity to discern what is duty in their present circumstances, and
what is not, it would not surely be amiss to grant some indulgence to
scrupulous tender consciences, and to allow them to go on in the path of duty
as far as their present light leads them, without strictly obliging them to
that, from which doubts and fears keep them off, hoping and praying, that God
would in his own time and way scatter their doubts and dissipate their fears,
and give them such a sense of their duty and clearness of evidence, as would
embolden their access in full with comfort and joy. Whether such indulgence or
connivance be warrantable or not is the point in debate. Mr. Robbins holds the
negative. I the affirmative.

In discussing the subject, for the more clearness I propose this method.

I. I shall make some general observations on the state of the controversy,
with remarks on Mr. Robbins's manner of managing it, and the arguments he makes
use of in support of his opinion. II. Take particular notice of some of his
main objections, especially those contained in the first part of his reply.
III. Consider his manner of treating me both in relation to the general and
particular controversy. Under which I shall endeavor to obviate the objections
more particularly levelled against my principles and conduct in the latter part
of his book.
To make the way more plain,

1. I shall begin with OBSERVATIONS. etc. And the

1st. Thing I shall observe is, That the dispute between us is not whether
unregenerate persons ought to be knowingly admitted, but what evidence of
regeneration the church ought to act upon. Since it will be the necessary
consequence of any plan whatsoever, that many unregenerate will in fact be
admitted not only to own the covenant, but also to full communion; I
interspersed a passage here and there to abate Mr. R's horrors at the very
thoughts of an unregenerate person's coming. And now instead of making such use
of the passages as I intended, he carefully culls them out to prove that I
hold, the church ought knowingly to admit unregenerates, or that baptized
persons have a right to church-privileges, let their lives and behavior be what
they will. Whether this be fair or manly let the world judge. I say with him,
if the church can certainly prove unregeneracy upon any (which must be done by
the life and conversation) let them be excluded from any privilege although
baptized. But what is to be done with those against whom no such proof can be
exhibited? Of whom the church knows nothing amiss, whose lives are inoffensive.
etc? How must these be treated in case they apply for church privileges? This
is the question. -- Here I asserted, that such negative evidence was sufficient
with respect to those already in covenant; that nothing further was required of
communicants; why then of other members? That if the church went further, they
must necessarily run into the plan of the separates, who are for purging the
church, etc. Mr. R. spurns at all this; but how does he disprove it? I find
nothing but his bare affirmation. "Negative evidence, says he, is no evidence
at all." "Here is a negation or want of that, which is a proper ground of
charity in this case." And again, "A baptized person's being free from open
known sin is no proper evidence that he is a saint; or upon which, the
scriptures will warrant such a presumption of it, as will make it LAWFUL for us
to treat him as such." p. 59. But pray what right has he or any of his party to
call his fellow members unregenerate, or to treat them as unregenerates, if
they know nothing amiss in them, if inoffensive in their lives? Every baptized
person has a right to be treated as a christian, if their general conduct be
not inconsistent with christianity. The church ought in duty to suppose every
member to be regenerated, till they prove themselves to be otherwise; or in
other words, the church have no right to suppose any of their body unconverted,
till it appears by their conversation. This is a christian law or rule. Dr. C.
Mather says, Many baptized in infancy, when grown up do prove by their
apostacies that they are not real saints. A judgment of rational charity may be
left for others. And it is a rule to be kept in the proceedings of the church,
I am to judge as charitably of the infant as of the parent (that the grace of
God is in their souls) until there appear a reason to the contrary. Mr. R.
indeed seems to have found out a reason to the contrary, that such are guilty
of "habitual wickedness" in not coming to the Lord's table, p. 57. But yet in
other places he says the direct reverse. Concerning this I shall speak
elsewhere.
( C. M. infant bapt. p. 18)

If there be any weight in this sort of reasoning, then surely baptized persons
of regular conversations cannot justly be excluded from owning the covenant,
and bringing their children, whenever they desire it; they have a right to
demand it as members, and none have a right to deny them.

As for those without, if they apply, something more positive is necessary; and
Mr. R. greatly injures me by suggesting that I hold negative evidences are
sufficient in both cases, or that baptized and unbaptized persons were to be
received on equal terms (see p. 6.7.). Surely more strictness is necessary in
receiving heathens than christians, or those that are already members; or in
other words, there is more necessary to entitle a person to admission, than to
a continuation of membership: And I think him much out of the way in every
where putting these two different sorts upon a par, unless he held that
baptized persons were no proper members."

This makes way for a

2d. OBSERVATION, That I did not particularly treat the subject as a case of
conscience, what the candidates ought to do, but what the church's duty was in
case they did apply. -- The question in controversy is not so much, who ought
to come? But if they do come, what the church ought to do, whether to exclude
or receive them? If I had treated the question in any other light, he might
have justly accused me of "rambling." But this is a fault, that he is guilty of
in a high degree. What is it but rambling to treat the affair almost wholly as
a case of conscience, and not what was the churches duty in case of actual
application, and no sufficient objection against the canditates etc.? Is not
this running off from the point in debate with a witness? If he had kept close
to it, it would have reduced his book to a much narrower compass.

The chief that I said in the other view of the question was, that if
candidates acted conscienciously in what they did, if they come out of a sense
of the command, and if (as far as they knew their own hearts) they were sincere
in what they professed, though they could not say it was a gracious sincerity,
that was sufficient, etc. And must he not of necessity go upon the same plan,
if certainty be not required? But he will object here, that I handle the
subject in such a manner, as will necessarily encorage unregenerate men
(knowing themselves to be such) to apply. But how groundless is this? I was not
directing myself to them, but to the church. And while I was doing so, how
preposterous would it have been thought, if I had made a large digression,
exhorting such not to come in an hypocritical manner? If I had been preaching
indeed to a promiscuous congregation, it would have been proper; and I should
in that case have exhorted them to come not only to that, but to all other
duties with real sincerity, if they expected acceptance with God. But this
would have been a mere wandering, a rambling in the present case. How unjust
therefore is he in saying. p. 41. "The grand point Mr. C. is aiming at is to
prove, that it is lawful for baptized persons not scandalous, to own the
covenant, and have baptism, etc." How could he say, that this was my grand
point, when I meddle little with it? All I had to prove was, that it is not
only lawful, but the church's duty to admit unexceptionable candidates whenever
they applied, etc. I never held, that it was lawful for any person whatsoever,
regenerate or unregenerate, to do any duty in an unlawful (i. e. hypocritical)
manner; although he seems to do it in several places. He in effect grants, that
a person may pray, read, hear in an hypocritical manner. For he says, an
unregenerate man cannot possibly perform a duty in any other manner. p. 10, 11.
And yet they must do their duty. p. 11, 12. They must not omit it in any wise:
Yea, they may lawfully do it. p. 44. Thus he gives open toleration to hypocrisy
in one duty, while he bears so hard against it in another.
And with equal injustice he says, p. 29. "Mr. C. supposes, that it is lawful
for graceless persons as such to come, etc. I utterly deny it; I never,
directly, or by implication asserted, any such thing. They come as members, and
not as sinners; and as such and while such are quite different things: And does
not he himself suppose it lawful, yea their duty to come, if they have
"prevailing hopes?" or "if they do not know, that they are unregenerate?" p.
12. etc.

3d. I observe, That it is necessary to make a distinction respecting persons
right in the sight of GOD. This right is to be taken in a twofold sense. 1st.
A right to outward privileges. 2d. A right to saving blessings. Mr. R. denies
the right of unregenerate persons in the sight of God in any sense. And says, I
contradict myself in implicitly intimating that they have. But in this I think
he goes too far. As to saving blessings we certainly agree; but with respect to
outward privileges, I see no absurdity or contradiction in asserting, that they
have some right to them in the sight of God; I mean a right so far at least,
that he would be offended with his church, if they should exclude them without
full evidence of their unregeneracy. The case is plain with respect to infants;
God knows that many of them are not regenerate, yet if children of the
faithful, they must be baptized upon pain of his displeasure. And even in
regard of the children of unregenerates, God calls them my children, the
children that were born unto me. Ezekiel. xvi. 20, 21. which implies some right in
the sight of God to visible privileges, if the parents were in visible covenant
and not regularly cut off. This suggests to me a thought of weighty
consideration. What one instance of reproof do we find from Genesis to Malachi
to any individual for bringing their children to circumcision, even in their
most lapsed and degenerate state? And does not this prove to a demonstration,
that all visible members had a right in God' sight to circumcise their
children, or that he approved of their administering the rite to them, though at
the same time he disapproved of their formality and wrong ends in this and
other duties? Further, may we not justly ask, Had not Judas a right to outward
privileges in the sight of Christ, as well as Peter? Would he have otherwise
admitted him to the passover, and it is thought by most divines to the Lords
supper too? And would he have been offended with the other apostles, if upon
suspicion they had endeavored to exclude him till by some overt act he had
plainly discovered himself, or till full proof appeared against him? And would
God himself have baptized the Israelites of old in the cloud and in the sea, if
they had not some right to the visible mark, as being a people whom he had
taken into covenant with himself? 1 Cor. x. Yea and does not Mr. R. himself
assert in his surprising comment on Jer. iii. 14. That God treats the church of
the Jews as visible saints, because of their covenant relation to him, (when in
fact there was scarce a real saint among them?) p. 55. And would he have done
so, if they had not some right in his sight to visible privileges and favors?
Mr. R. then must have recourse to this distinction of a twofold right, or he
cannot solve his own concession here; though he every where else heedlessly
confounds and blends these two rights together. And the like not attending to
this distinction by others, has been the source of bitter contentions. But if
men would but duly consider, I think none will be so absurd as to assert, that
they have no right in the sight of God to that which is given them by the
church in direct consequence of his commands. The sowing of tares in the gospel
kingdom is indeed said to be done by an enemy, i. e. the devil. Matt. xiii 28.
But this cannot he applied to those that were baptized in infancy, of whom I am
specially treating, because they were not planted or sowed in the church by the
devil, but by God's special appointment, as being children of the faithful. And
I hope they will not charge laxness on their maker. This makes way for a
notable observation, that if those even of the devil's sowing, viz. Those that
come at adult age merely for secular and carnal ends; I say, if these must not
be gathered or plucked up (without full proof appear against them.) v. 29. How
much less must they be so, who are of God's own planting, and were admitted by
his direct order? And if they must be continued still in the church, then
church-privileges must necessarily be their's too; and it will be right in the
sight of God and man to put them in possession of them, whenever asked for.
Their right indeed in the view of the church goes further than this, and is
more extensive than their right before God; for in the latter case, their right
is confined merely to things outward and visible; but in regard of the church,
they have not only a right to outward privileges, but to saving blessings (in
the judgment of rational charity.) Here I apprehend lies the proper difference
between their right in the sight of God and the church, or in soro ecclesiae.

But if they have such a right in the sight of God, does not this militate with
what is said under the last head? I answer no, because though they have a right
to come as members, yet they have no right to come in a wrong manner: And as
far as they are destitute of gospel principles and ends, so far they offend God
in this or any other duty. But then it must be remembered, that this offense is
no so great as a total neglect, if a man acts conscienciously in the affair.
Jehu was commissioned, yea commanded by God to root out Ahab's vile race; I
Kings xiii. And he did right in doing it; yet he had no right to do it in a
wrong manner, i. e. with a murderous heart; and therefore while he is rewarded
for the act, he is punished for his evil intent, Hos i, 4. But it is evident
his sin would have been greater if he had wholly forborne to act. This may serve
as an illustration in the present case. My

4th. OBSERVATION or remark is, That several material things in the Essays
remain untouched. I observe,

1st. That his scheme was encumbered with the same difficulty as mine. He had
proposed this expedient, namely, to admit candidates under scruple to full
communion, and then to dispense with their immediate attendance at the Lord's
table, till their scruples were removed. This I said was a halfway practice, a
dividing the seals, a tolerating persons in living in the neglect of the holy
supper, as much as the other practice. And if the one was unwarranted by
scripture, the other was equally so. And what does he say to obviate the
difficulty? Why nothing, or worse than nothing. "Let us wait on them, says he,
as members in covenant, and not as half members." p. 74. A most surprising
speech! as if there were some members not in covenant, or that being members
and being in covenant, were not synonymous terms. What is the plain import of
his words (saving the nonsense) but this? "Let us wait on them as perjured
persons, that having covenanted or promised to come imediately, yet stay away;
and not as persons that have made no such promise." A notable solution truly! I
leave it to the readers animadversion, with adding, that it appears to me
impossible, a man should conscienciously scruple the present practice, and yet
come into Mr. R's expedient. There is no real difference between the one and
the other; all the difference lies in names and forms only, not in essentials.
This leads me to observe,

2d. That all my arguments against his dispensing scheme, are not taken the
least notice of, (except one sentence in one of them, which is quoted only to
be wrested) so that they all yet stand in full force.

3d. Another thing left unnoticed is, That explicit covenanting in baptized
persons is a prudential of the church, and not absolutely necessary by divine
institution. I would observe here, the question between us is, not whether all
profession whatsoever is needless with respect to baptized persons; but whether
such an open, explicit or large and ample profession, as is required, be
necessary by scripture warrant: Whether we ought to be altogether as strict
with them as with a new converted heathen, etc. And that it is essential, that
they pass through all the formalities as are required of the worst of pagans or
jews. The French churches thought a confession of faith sufficient. See Quick's
synodicon.
Here I expected, that he would have attempted to prove that it is necessary,
but I find nothing of this. And yet all he says, is founded upon the
supposition of such necessity; and if the supposition be not supported, all his
superstructure must f^ll. The chief he says here is, "That the Synod makes it
necessary." p. 6. But this is a mere human authority, which in other instances
he rejects with contempt. Yea, he in effect grants, that explicit covenanting
is not necessary: For in one place he seems to dislike any thing, that "looks
like a double admission into the church of Christ." And in another tells us,
"that when persons are admitted into the church of Christ, they are admitted
once for all:" Which if it be the case, what need they be admitted over again,
after they have been actually received into the church in their infancy? Ursin,
one of the authors Mr. R. quotes, says, To be born in the church, serves to
the infants in stead of their profession p. 414. and again, To be born in the
church is to infants instead, and in place of profession. p. 420.

Mr. R. indeed says, p. 17. "That the Isarelites were required to make a public
explicit profession, or to renew covenant in a public manner every seven years:
So that none could have children to circumcise, who had before made a public
profession of religion." But he says this without proof. The whole law (and not
merely the ten commandments, as he insinuates) was indeed to be read every
seven years in the audience of all the people. Duet. xxxi. 9 -- 12. If hearing
the law read be covenanting, then his congregation covenant every sabbath; for
the law or scriptures are read to them each day. How can he endure this? How
does it consist with his principles to suffer such abusive covenanting, as it
must be on the part of many? This of consequence must exclude the scriptures
from being read in the public assemblies, if his position be true: Which is the
best argument against the public reading of the scriptures, that ever I heard
of.
But nothing is said about their covenanting: And if there was any thing of
that nature, it was merely implicit. As is the case, when we hear the word read
in our public congregation. Suppose Christ had commanded, that all the
new testament (or the four evangelists) should be read at once every seven
years in his church, that his people might better know and understand their
duty, could it be inferred from hence, that he instituted a public renewal of
covenant every seven years? It would be a very strained inference indeed, and
"unworthy a Logician."

But supposing such a public explicit covenanting was required of the jews
every seven years, what does it prove? Not that individuals should renew
covenant alone or singly, as they happen to be satisfied of their gracious
state; but that the whole church (consisting of all baptized persons) should
renew the covenant in a body every few years. Thus it was in the days of king
Hezekiah and Josiah; and thus our fathers did; and this we have be^n asking
for: And if Mr. R. would allow of it, he might properly (in his own sense)
"wait upon scruplers as members in covenant, and not as half-members." But this
it seems will not go down with him, neither is it consistent with his plan.
Such general covenanting according to them being stark naught, unless, every
individual be in some measure persuaded of their regenerate state; which never
was, nor ever will be the case.

Besides this general covenanting of the Israelites (if there was any such
thing) was not previous to their first receiving the passover, as is the case
with respect to the gospel-passover or Lords supper. For all the members of the
jewish church, were admitted to the passover from their infancy; and so owning
the covenant was not necessary, in order to their coming. I observed

4th. That relations were absolutely necessary upon their scheme. "The original
plan of the churches," which he speaks so often of and urges in other
instances, renders them essential to communion, so essential, that none in any
case were to be admitted without. And they are alike essential on his scheme; I
do not see how it can otherwise be supported, as I have frequently noted
heretofore. And yet instead of pleading and proving the necessity, he in effect
gives them up, granting that they are not necessary to "the right or regular
constitution of a church." p. 63. And if that be the case, what evidences of
regeneration has he more than others? or what is he contending about!

5th. I observed, that renewing or owning the covenant did not make them
members or any addition to their membership: that membership was a thing, that
could not be increased or diminished: That a man was a member or no member, and
that there could be no medium or halves in the case, etc. That their capacities
of acting might indeed be widely different, but yet no inequality in their
membership. And for illustration I might add, that my young son of three years
of age, was as much a member of the town of Plymouth and of the province of the
Massachusetts Bay. as I myself; yet he was not capable at present of acting in
that relation as I did; but might justly claim the privilege as soon as his
capacity allowed of it. This position Mr. R. does not so much as look in the
face: He durst not assert in direct terms, that there are degrees of
membership. That a m^n might become one quarter, one half, two thirds or nine
tenths of a member, etc. till at last his membership arrived to maturity or
completeness. But yet in many places he says, that which implies degrees of
membership: Yea, he actually asserts (though without proof) that baptized
persons, after they have renewed covenant, are but half members. But what
confusion of thought does this betray? He grants, that infants baptized are
"proper members;" yet when they grow up and declare that they stand to their
parent's act, they are but half-members: So that it seems by renewing covenant,
they lose half their membership. A poor encoragement truly to the renewing
covenant, and they had much better let it alone. Or if he supposes this
half-membership to commence from their infancy; how could he in any sense call
them "proper members?" A half-member, is not a proper member, but a monster.
And for a church to bring forth half-members, would be as monstrous in the
ecclesiastical, as for a woman to bring forth a half child into the natural
world. And such births, I believe, would never have been heard of in the
christian church, had it not been for Dr. B -- y's fertile invention. Upon the
whole, here, I think I have a a right to demand of them, either to prove that
membership is a gradual growing, increasing thing, or to lay aside this absurd
way of expression of half-members, etc. If they will continue it without such
proof, can it be any uncharitableness to say, that they do it to mislead the
vulgar, and to impose upon them with sounds instead of substance?

6th. I observe, That infant baptism must be given up, if this way of arguing
be not conclusive, They that are visibly in covenant, have a right to the seal
of the covenant for themselves and children. This is indeed taken notice of,
but in what a strange manner? p. 47. "Mr. C. says he, strenuously and
repeatedly insists, that infant baptism cannot be maintained on the plan he is
opposing, etc. But this he asserts on supposition that we deny
infant-membership." I did not assert it on any such supposition, but entirely
on the contrary supposition, namely, that they owned infant-membership. The
ground I went upon was so plain, that he that runs might read. The main
argument for infant baptism is this, that the parents are visibly in covenant
with God, and that God grants the same right to their children in the grand
charter, Genesis xvii. So that if the parent be in covenant, the children are so
too, and consequently ought to have the seal of the covenant. This I applied to
the present controversy; the parents in question are in visible covenant; and
if so, the children are so likewise; and consequently ought to have the seal.
If the argument was conclusive in the one case, it was certainly so in the
other. And therefore to deny the validity of this way of arguing, was to
undermine the very foundation of infant baptism. To this nothing is said,
neither is the baptism of infants accounted for, on any other footing, which he
ought to have done if he designed to invalidate my argument. It is an
acknowledged point with all paedo-baptists, that infants are always members
together with their parents; that there is a necessary connection between the
membership of the one and the other: Therefore none can justly deny infants the
seal in the present case, unless they deny infant-membership, or the
continuance of it at adult age.

Here is a proper place to remind him of Mr. Mitchel's argument, with which I
begin my ^^ssays, and which he does not think proper directly to contest. viz.
1st. The whole visible church under the new testament is to be baptized. 2d. If
a man be once in the church (whether admitted at age or in infancy) nothing
less than censurable evil can put him out. 3d. That if the parent be in the
visible church, his infant child is so also. The first and last of these
propositions Mr. R. dare not deny. He nibbles a little here and there at the
second; but says nothing effectually. The amount of what he says is, that if
any "habitually neglect" the ordinance of the supper, they are guilty of a
censurable evil, consequently ought to be excluded. I grant it. But how can he
prove this habitual neglect on the candidates I am pleading for? They profess
the highest esteem for this ordinance. They think, with Mr. R. that the command
to attend it is directed to true believers. They doubt whether they are such,
though they have some hopes. They fear they shall profane it, and drink
judgment to themselves, if they immediately approach it. They think it better
to seek clearer evidences before they venture. This is certainly the case of
many: And how dare he say, that it is not the case of all, unless they discover
an habitual neglect by their profanity? If he will say it of others
(notwithstanding their professions to the contrary) is not this judging the
heart ^i^a a witness? which the scripture gives him no warrant to do; yea,
which he himself sometimes disclaims.

7th. I observed, that the repealing this practice would be a virtual
excommunication or unchurching our children. Mr. R. disclaims this with
indignation, and is very angry with me for using the words, delivering to
satan, which is the scripture expression for excommunication. But does he clear
himself from it? in no wise. He rather fully confirms it by his frequent
expressions of their having "forfeited their right" "forfeited the character of
visible christians." "Their visible discipleship good for nothing" -- "no right
to be treated as disciples" -- "Not a right to so much as the name." Yea. "that
there was a rule or pattern in scripture for denying them all privileges, if
not for casting them out," etc. p. 17. 32. 33. 34. etc.
Let us calmly consider the matter To deprive members of all privilege, is it
not synonymous or the same thing with excommunication? if I should be deprived
of all the privileges of an Englishman, I should be outlawed or excommunicated
from the civil society with a witness; that is, as really as if a sentence of
outlawry was pronounced. And why is it not so in the other case? When persons
have been received as members and acknowledged as "proper members;" yet
afterward to be treated as no members, to be denied every privilege, if this
be not an ipso facto excommunication. I know not what words mean. There is no
essential difference between this, and what is commonly called excommunication:
All the difference lies here, that in the one case a formal sentence is
pronounced, but not so in the other, which is but a circumstance. But does not
this assertion carry in it a great reflection on our fathers of this church,
and all the other churches that never came into this practice. Is tnot a direct
condemning them as guilty of excommunicating all the children of the church? I
answer, no; such churches cannot be justly taxed with this fault: They never
acted any thing in a formal manner about it: None ever applied and claimed
their right, and were refused; so that these churches seem rather passive in
the affair. But where a door has been opened, and baptized members have been
expressly declared to be entitled to this privilege, and have long enjoyed it:
for such now to be shut out, and declared incapable of any privilege, and
treated really as no members, if this be not excommunication, what can be
called so? And must our children be thus treated, when no just objection lies
against them? unhappy case then of these poor lambs of the flock! The church
must cast them out, if they do not come; Mr. R. would not receive them if they
do; what shall they do? and will they tamely submit to this? will they
contentedly rest under such an excommunication, because Mr. R. tells them it is
right? (as well as put up with all the hard names he calls them?) who could
have thought it? but it is verily the case with many, who seem almost ready to
throw dust in the air, and cry, away, etc. because I plead their cause, and
stand up for their just rights and privileges. Who ever heard before of such
treatment of an advocate? if the advocates for our civil liberties and
privileges should be treated thus, we should find but few to stand in the gap
in this day of difficulty and danger.

8th. I observed, that he must necessarily run into the plan of the separates,
if he treats those whom he acknowleges proper members in this manner. (See at
large in the Essays. p. 7. and elsewhere.) And does he clear himself of this?
not a word tending that way.

Lastly, I find he takes not the least notice of my "long string of arguments"
for infant membership in one view of them. p. 53. They were calculated to
prove, not only that they were proper members when first baptized, but that
they continued such when they grew up. That they did not grow out of the
church, but that their infant membership remained in full force, till regularly
cut off: and that of consequence he was wrong in denying them the privileges
belonging to members as such, whenever asked for. With respect to this there is
a deep silence. I now proceed to a,

V. General observation, that he makes such concessions as destroy his whole
scheme.

1st. He grants, that baptized persons are members, yea "proper members." Why
then will he not treat them as members? why will he not allow them the
privileges of members? Membership and privilege are inseparable; being in
covenant and the privileges of the covenant always go together, as far as the
capacity of the subject will allow, and they ought to be granted as far as they
are asked for. There is no way to get over this but by saying, that their
membership is wholly lost; that it is forfeited some way or other; and that of
consequence they are as much without, as if they had never been baptized.
Indeed he sometimes hints, that this is the case: but why does he not directly
speak out, if he be of that mind? and why does he not call the church together
to discipline them and pass sentence against them in form, as he ought to do,
if their membership be wholly sorfeited? but it seems he rather chooses to act,
as if they were neither within or without; he will neither receive them nor
cast them off: but leaves them as it were, suspended between heaven and hell,
as if they belonged to neither; or if (as half-members) half of them belonged
to God's, and half to the devil's kingdom.

2d. He grants, "that real good christians may be under scruples of conscience
about the Lord's supper." And that these scruples may be lawfully indulged. p.
38.41.74. And if they may be indulged in one case, why not in another! if on
his plan, why not on ours?

3d. He grants, that baptized persons are the subjects of discipline, and that
they are "under the special watch and care of the church, entitled to their
prayers in a more peculiar manner, etc." And that these are "great advantages"
or privileges. p. 54. Well then persons baptized may partake of some privileges
without coming to the Lord's table. And of of some, why not of others? if they
may claim the church's watch for themselves, why not put their children under
the same watch? if they have a peculiar right to the church's prayers, why not
rightfully ask the same prayers for their children as being part of themselves,
etc.? Mr. R. it seems divides privileges, and we have as much right to do it as
he; and he is self-condemned, if he holds the unlawfulness of it.

4th. He grants, that a baptized person (if he lays no bar in his own way) may
demand rightfully one privilege, viz. the Lord's Supper. And why may he not as
well demand another privilege, viz. baptism for his children? what ground is
there to make the Lord's Supper the only standard? why must admission to or
exclusion from the rest be wholly regulated by this? it is not coming to this
feast, but being in covenant that gives the right.

VI. Another thing observable is that his plan necessarily runs him into
several absurdities. Dr. I. Mather observes of the opposite party in his time,
"that to maintain their scheme they are forced to run into several
absurdities:" from whence he justly infers, that it could not be of God: for
"truth is always consistent." The same I observe with respect to Mr. R. I shall
now mention two or three, leaving the rest to be taken notice of elsewhere.

1st. That there are some in covenant, that have no right to the privileges of
the covenant, when as they are inseparable, as I have already noted. How absurd
would it be to say, that an incorporated member of civil society had no right
to the privileges of the society? such right is essential to the very idea of
membership. The same absurdity they are guilty of in the present case.
According to them there is very little or no difference at all between a
baptized and unbaptized person: they can claim no more privilege than the
unbaptized; they must be as strictly examined; they must pass through all the
same formalities, in order to be received into the church, or to enter into
covenant (as their pharse is, not renewing covenant, which way of expression
they carefully avoid) as the other. They have no more ground to expect or hope
for divine influence (at least if their parent be unregenerate) than the other.
Well therefore may we put the question, what advantage of circumcision? or what
privilege accrues to them by being baptized?

2d. Another most gross, glaring absurdity is, that the baptism of the children
of unregenerates is "a MERE NULLITY." p. 48. -- I was astonished when I read
this: it is a position I believe that was never before heard of in the
christian church, except from professed anabaptists. What! was the circumcision
of Asa, Hezekiah and Josiah (the children of unregerate men) a mere nullity? I
know they did not think ^o; neither (to speak with reverence) did God himself
think so.

If this extraordinary assertion be true: then 1st. All distinction between the
visible and invisible church is distroyed; yea, the former is entirely
annihilated; nothing done in it being of any real validity, as it stands
contradistinguished from the latter; nothing is left but a heap of nullities
from the beginning to end. This confounding all distinction between the visible
and invisible church I formerly noted in the Essays. And now he is pleased to
confirm it: and that not only in this passage, but in what preceeds. There he
utterly denies any promises made to the visible church collectively considered,
and consines them only to the believing part of the church. The promise is to
you and to your children, the apostle tells us, Act. ii. 39. i. e. (says Mr.
R.) "To you who are the children of Abraham and have THE FAITH of Abraham; and
to your children, as parts of your selves." p. 47. What a strange and new
construction of the text is here? what business had he to apply these words to
true believers, invisible members only? was not the apostle preaching to
unconverted jews? and did he not address them merely as members of the visible
church? as such he tells them, that the promise was to them and to their
children: and in the same manner it belongs to the visible church to the end of
time, and not to the believing part only. The ^ike address we have Act. i^i.
25. And to the same purpose St. Paul says, Romans iii. 2. To them pertain the
adoption and the glory and the covenants and the promises, etc. And yet Mr. R.
boldly asserts, that "there are no promises in the book of God" to the visible
church, but that they all belong to the church invisible, and to that only.
"And on these principles, he says, some rational as well as scriptural account
may be given of infant baptism." And on these principles I say, not only
infant, but all baptism is impracticable and without foundation; it being
impossible to tell who are members of the invisible church, real believers,
without an immediate revelation from heaven. 2d. If this assertion be true,
what a dilemma are all baptized in infancy brought into? in what inextricable
difficulties are they involved? who of us can say, that our baptism was not a
mere nullity, a nothing? we may indeed have c^a^^ty for our parents, and verily
hope they were c^^v^rted: but how can we certainly know it? and without such
knowledge, how can we plead for covenant blessings on their account? how can we
use it as an argument for special grace, as Ephraim did? Jer. xxxi. 18. What a
mockery to plead a mere nullity? or must we come with an if; "if they were
converted, Lord, grant us these blessings, etc. If not, we have no more to say;
we ask only for uncovenanted mercies?" 3d. Upon the same principle, it will
follow, that the baptism administered by unregenerate ministers is a mere
nullity: as spiritual fathers they have no more right to administer the
ordinance, than the natural parents have to bring their children to it. The
right on both sides must be merely visible and nominal, not real. And what a
wilderness will this lead us into? 4th. According to this principle, the
baptism of Luther, Calvin and all the other first reformers, received in the
church of Rome, was a mere nullity; consequently they ought to be looked upon
as unbaptized persons. How then can our baptism received from them be of any
validity? for no unbaptized person can baptize another. Well then it is come to
this at last, that there is no true baptism in the protestant world. Why then
do we so earnestly contend about nothing. 5th. If this be the case, baptism
ought to be reiterated upon parents discovering their unregeneracy, as is often
the case. If it be a thing of naught, a mere nullity, it must stand for naught,
and re-baptization is necessary. Or if Mr. R. has a faculty of turning nothing
into something, the world would be obliged to him for the discovery.

Upon the whole here, if this position be true, infant baptism is a matter of
such uncertainty viewed in every light, that I should think it best for every
one to be rebaptized at adult age: or rather, that no infants should be
baptized at all. For there is no possible way to ascertain it to them, that
their baptism was not a mere nullity, i. e. a nothing, a shadow, a vanity -- of
no more real validity, than the baptizing of bells or a piece of wood in the
Romish church.

3d. His reasoning about baptisms alone not intitling, or "not being of itself
a sufficient qualification," appears to me very absurd. p. 9. etc. We had much
more of it in the piece he read to the church.
It is an old maxim of divines, baptism gives a right to all ordinances: No,
says he, unless they have other qualifications. I might as well say, he holds
coming to full communion gives a right to all ordinances; no, say I, they must
have other qualifications; they must be blameless, etc. How absurd would such a
way of reasoning appear? it is certain, that in both cases, they may forfeit
their right. And till such forfeiture be made, their right remains in full
force, and their membership continues one and the same without addition or
dimmution. But according to this notion, viz. that such and such things are
necessary besides baptism to make a complete member, every new act of duty that
a man performs, serves to increase his membership: so that even a communicant
becomes more and more a member every day, while he goes on in the path of duty:
membership must necessarily be a growing thing, as long as a man's life lasts:
and to what an enormous bulk would it arrive in forty or fifty years? what new
nonsense is this? QUERY, whether one of these grown members ought not to have a
dozen or more voices in our church-meeting, seeing his membership is of a bulk
so vastly exceeding that of others? I pass to a

VII. General OBSERVATION, that really after all this bustle about evidences;
what has he more upon his plan than mine? if he differs from me about
evidences, he ought to have ascertained particularly wherein the difference
lies and set down with precision what evidences were absolutely necessary, and
that in the low^^^ degree, and not have muffled himself up in shade and
obscurity, and lest the matter in such uncertainty and confusion as he has
done. This general loose handling the point has a tendency to make common
people think, that he is more for purity and holiness than others: whereas if
he had come to particulars, it would have appeared that he contended about
nothing. But what evidences are to be had in the case? is it profession or
asserting to the covenant? the evidence is equal on both sides. Is it
relations? these are cast out by some leaders in his plan; and he himself
acknowledges, that they are not necessary to the right constitution of a
church. p 63. Though he herein departs from the original plan, upon which these
churches were founded, which he imputes to us as a crime. But what, though
relations be not absolutely necessary, yet they are still used among us; and as
long as they are so they will be some help to the church in forming a judgment
of charity. What always? are not these relations sometimes weak and imperfect,
and contain little or nothing of experimental religion? are they not at other
times such ostentations things, as serve rather to prejudice than help forward
christian charity? what must be done in this case? would not he be thought a
strange member that should object merely on such an account? must he not have
something to allege against the life and conversation, or his objection would
be taken no notice of? well then it is plain that the life and conversation is
the grand criterion the chief evidence after all to regulate the church's
proceedings. But how much of this must be known before I can list up my hand
for a p^^son's admission! respecting some, the church in general may have full
knowledge; their lives are so exemplary, as carries full conviction in the
consciences of all. But how often is it otherwise in regard of others? how
little is known of many candidates by the generality of the church? especially
in such great towns as this? and must they not of necessity go upon negative
evidences in many cases? at least many individuals of the church must
necessarily do so. The most they can say is, that they never heard any thing
amiss of the candidates. And sometimes they cannot say so much as that, having
heard-several things amiss, though for want of proof or not looking upon it as
a censurable evil, they do not think proper to allege it as a bar. I am sure,
that as to half that have been admitted into our communion, I have had nothing
but negative evidence, except their relation or consenting to the covenant. And
the same may many others say. And what had Mr. R but negative evidences about
us when he first settled here? and yet he ventured to covenant with us i e. to
receive us as christians, as well as we him. Now if negative evidences be
sufficient with respect to communicants; why not sufficient likewise for his
other "proper members?" are greater evidences required of these minors, than of
grown members? but these were once admitted upon a profession of grace or
relation of experiences. What in those churches, that were founded upon Mr.
Stoddard's plan? and yet he owns he will receive such to communion if they be
occasionally with us or should settle among us. p. 63. But have not these
persons something more than negative evidence, if that be requisite? do not
they offer to renew covenant publicly? and is not this the main evidence they
build upon? is not this profession the all in all with them? (See Mr. Green)

But this they do not do understandingly, believingly, if they will come no
further, this is all hypocrisy if they do not come in full. How dare he say
this, when at the same time he grants, it may be the case with some sincere
souls? did he find it so with those whom he admitted? then he is
self-condemned. Is it the case with other ministers? they will not own it. Upon
the whole here, will he, dare he say, "that negative evidence (that the church
knows nothing amiss of them) is no evidence at all" with respect to
communicants: what more is necessary in order to the continuation of their
membership? and may not the same be said of other members, that if the church
knows nothing essentially amiss of them, their membership still continues, and
they ought to be treated as members: there is no way to get rid of this way of
reasoning, but by acting upon the separates plan. Or must we do as he proposed
at our meeting with some brethren last year, namely, "for every member to go
and discourse personally with candidates upon their being propounded, in order
to obtain full satisfaction: this, he said, was our express duty." But I
believe he will find few of his mind in the country: such a laborious task
being incompatible with our other duties, as well as absurd in itself. My

VIII. And last OBSERVATION is, that his book abounds with blunders and
mistakes, with inconsistences and contradictions. I have already taken notice
of some of them en passant under the foregoing observations. I shall now put
several of them together, leaving others to their proper places.

Mr. R. stumbles at the very thresh-hold; even at first setting out, before he
had got three pages there are three notable mistakes, if not more. In p 1. he
tells us, that he always had scruples about the practice; or, to use his own
words. The practice has EVER appeared to me attended with some difficulties,
which I could not easily get over; however, not attending so thoroughly to the
arguments that were used in support of this scheme, as I endeavored to do
since, and being educated in the practice, I did submit to it here for a number
of years after I was ordained; though still not without some uneasiness, etc.
How will the reader be astonished when I tell him, that previous to Mr R's
settlement, he was discoursed with by a number of the brethren (and they were
the more critical with him, because he came from a colony where their
discipline somewhat differs from ours) and he was told the constitution of the
church step by step, and he appeared cordially and fully to join with us in
every thing; and particularly as to this practice he expressed the fullest
satisfaction (and if he had not done so, he would never have been settled here)
saying, "that he looked upon it as scriptural, that his father was in it, that
he thought it entirely right, etc." But now it seems he scrupled it ever, and
submitted to it with uneasiness for a number of years, even from the very time
of his ordination. How can these things be reconciled? could a man of sincerity
say, that he was entirely satisfied with a practice, when he had latent
scruples in his mind, whether it were lawful or no? how needlessly has he here
exposed himself? I am sure it affords not the least advantage to his cause to
tell the world, that he always had doubts about it; he had much better have
kept them to himself. But I suppose he does it to avoid the imputation of
fickleness, or toward off the charge of arminianism I had brought against him
for holding to this practice for his first nine years. But, incidit in scyllam,
qui vult, etc.

But how comes he finally to get rid of his doubts, and to be fixed in the
negative side of the question? here is another stumble. He tells us, "such
force his scruples had upon him, that at length he determines to study the
point more closely, and for that end procured what authors he could on both
sides, etc." A good method surely, but how does he manage in it? he first
manifested his dislike of the practice to one of our deacons, as he transiently
met him on the road, the same day with our sacramental lecture; and appeared
fully determined telling him in express terms, that he would never baptize
another upon the old plan; and was all on high to stop the church after
lecture, to have the practice cast out at once. The deacon with much difficulty
dissuaded him from such a rash and precipitant procedure. In further discourse
on the subject, Mr. R. owned it was Dr. B -- y's dialogue that had convinced
him, and withal said that there was an answer published, but he had not yet
seen it. He also owned, that he had not read the synod's result, and indeed
seemed to know nothing about it, when the deacon recommended it to his perusal.
And as for other ancient authors on the subject, it is manifest from his book
and otherways, that he never read Mr. Davenport, which even lay in his way: and
the authors on the other side, as I. Mather, president Wadsworth, Mr. Stone,
etc. I know he had never seen them, till long after the matter was brought into
public. I put the two first of these authors into his hands, and desired him to
read them attentively: he took them with much seeming indifference* and carried
them home. Sometime after being at his house, I found, instead of giving Dr.
Mather a diligent perusal, he was only turning over the book, to cull out
passages that he thought favored his scheme; so he declared himself. And
whether he ever read the other at all, I can not say. Is this the man that had
so carefully (as well as prayerfully) studied the point "for many months?" he
could read Mr. B -- y's dialogue in half an hour. I know he has since procured
the Connecticut writers on both sides, but he was, it seems, settled before,
and declared himself to be so, upon the bare perusal of the dialogue. A book
that appears to me the least calculated to bring conviction, of almost any that
ever I read: it must be the outhor's name, and not his arguments that gains
proselytes. The whole piece being founded on these two suppositions 1st. That
the candidate himself knows that he is not converted. 2d. That he makes open
profession of unregeneracy; which is equivalent to a bad life. Besides his
making his parishioners talk like fools, etc.
The deacon told Mr. R. he wondered how he could be convinced by so week a
piece, which he thought he could fully answer himself.

He again stumbles and blunders strangely in p. 2. He appears very angry at me
about the word strenuous. How in the name of common sense he could mistake me
thus, "I cannot imagine." All I asserted was, that he was strenuous on the
negative side of the question. (Essays, 1st leaf.) And if he was not so, what
means his book? -- What means all his management for two or three years past?
but he turns it, contrary to all the rules of reason, that I charge him with
being strenuous to have church-meetings. I never thought him so; but rather
believe he either designed to lay aside the practice by his sole authority, or
expected the church would give it up at a word's speaking out of complaisance
to him. This perhaps he would have thought "polite."

Another blunder exactly of the same tenor is about the highest evidence, p.
59. I was speaking of the highest sort of evidence before the church, he turns
it the highest sort of evidence in a persons own breast.

A like gross mistake he makes about the word unsatisfied. p. 75. I said, that
he was as much unsatisfied with the practice as ever. He turns it thus (even
making a lie of it) that I said he was unsatisfied with the meeting's being
dissolved. How could a man in his senses mistake me thus? is he so barren of
matter to load me with reproaches, that he will even strain a point for it! I
knew he was so far from being unsatisfied with the dissolution of the meeting,
that it was what he labored for with all his might; and that not only
personally, but by his emissaries, whom he sent about to put the members into a
flame in order to effect it; they infusing into people that it was not
conscience that actuated us, but that all our aim in our opposition was to get
away Mr. R.

But to return to the beginning of the book -- it is certainly a mistake, not
to say worse, to tell the world, that his book is but "a brief sketch of the
arguments he made use of in support of his opinion." p. 3. All the church know
the contrary. Here is much more delivered than ever the church heard before,
and drawn up in a more copious and masterly manner. In fact, all the real
arguments he brought before the church might be contained in a nutshell; he
never attempting to give a direct reply to any of my Essays (though he had a
copy of the first, and the second I sent him above a week before it was read in
public;) but the chief he did wa^ to read to us a long collection from
Messieurs Edwards, Bellamy, ^^^on, etc. principally about qualifications. But
to as little purpose almost, as if he had read Mr. Edwards about the
Lord's Supper solely and verbatim. If he thinks it was to the purpose, let him
print it: I promise him to be a subscriber, if he will make no alterations or
additions.

And as to his sermons or "discourses in public" mentioned p. 2. He handled the
point merely in a casaistical manner, and did not so much as touch the case as
it was a matter of church consideration. And even this he managed in such a
manner, as gave almost general dissatisfaction: people then (being free from
prejudice) not being so ready to swallow every thing he said as gospel.

Let us now touch a little on inconsistencies and contradictions.

And here more generally we may observe, that in some places of his book
baptized persons are proper members, in others but half members, and in others
no members at all, having forfeited all their right by their wickedness in not
coming to the Lord's-table. p. 57. etc. And yet they may be good persons
notwithstanding, and deserving the churches forbearance. p. 38. Sometimes they
are members, but not members in covenant. p. 74. As if being members and being
in covenant were not words exactly of the same import. Pray what is it makes
them members but their being in covenant?

But to be more particular. -- The gentlemen in Connecticut express themselves
in such a manner as this, that they are in some sort members, members in a
sense, imperfect members, etc. But Mr. R. who has a better talent in
reconciling contradictions, expresses himself without boggling, that they are
"proper members;" and yet denies them every privilege, that belongs to members
as such. But these have forfeited their right by their disobedience in not
coming to the Lord's Supper. How so! when they may be real good christians at
the same time, and ought to be used with all possible tenderness? what bitter
water and sweet does he pour forth at once? to the same effect we find that for
6. or 7. pages together he endeavored with all his might to prove, that it is
impossible for a person to be a true christian without coming to the
Lord's-table. ( p. 31 -- 37.) And yet he kicks it all down at one stroke, even
in one line, by granting, "that it was often the case of good christians to be
kept away by scruples." Yea, he actually canonized one of this sort in a
funeral discourse, since his change of principles.

This leads me to take notice of a cluster of contradictions blended or jumbled
together. He says repeatedly, that persons who have only owned the covenant are
but half-members. We have a number of such, that owned the covenant either in
his or Mr. Leonard's days, who have never yet offered themselves to communion.
How does Mr R. treat them? as half-members? as guilty of habitual continued
neglect? as wilful renouncers and refusers? as wicked persons etc. No; instead
of this, these are all at once turned by him (without their asking, without the
churches consent) into members in full communion; and as such he baptizes their
children without boggling or scruple. This suggests to my mind a lucky
expedient, that may perhaps reconcile all. If Mr. R. can get over the
difficulty about those who have already owned the covenant, by saying, he looks
upon them as members in full communion. Why can not he get over the difficulty
the same way in futuro, by admitting persons to own the covenant, and then
saying they are in full communion! thus he and the church may jogg on together
in harmony and peace.
And to render the inconsistence more complete, when these new sort of members
in full communion apply to be received to the Lord's Supper (of which there has
been two instances very lately) does he immediately receive them without
further ceremony, or ask the church to do it? no; they must needs be received
in common form; be propounded for a fortnight, bring a relation, covenant anew,
etc. Here is a double, treble, yea, quadruple admission into the church of God.
All wrong according to him: and yet he the chief actor in it. But as if all
this were not enough, there must be another circumstance added, to render it
compleater still which is the "crowning cut of all;" and that is, Mr. R -- s's
chief champion, the man of his right hand (whom he most employs to propagate
his cause) is one that has actually owned the covenant among us in former
years, but has never yet asked for an admission to the Lord's-table. Here is
confusion upon confusion. Let us now attend to other instances.

We have often observed, that Mr. R. calls them "proper members" that have been
baptized in infancy; yet of late he carefully avoids the old expression of
renewing covenant, when such apply at adult years; always using that of
entering into covenant, as if they were never in covenant before. See all over
his book; and this is his general language in public, when any are propounded.
I beg to know how they can enter upon a thing which (according to his own
concession) they entered upon or were in possession of long before. This
language imports, that they were never really in covenant till now. And there
are many other passages in his book, that import the same thing, or that they
were never members till this entrance we are speaking of. The fourth argument
p. 6. goes wholly upon this supposition. He appears to dislike "any thing that
looks like a double admission into the church of God." p. 3. He says, persons
"are admitted into the family of Christ once for all." p. 6. How can this be
till this entrance? he seems to fault me for calling baptized persons real
members, complete members. p. 9. 42. He mentions these phrases with a sneer. He
speaks of them as not of the church. p. 74. And frequently calls their owning
covenant an admission, as if their membership did not commence till now. How
can all this be, if they were proper members when first baptized?

Again, he says. p. 3. "God's covenant people both under the old and new
testament had no warrant to make any exceptions or limitations, under any
circumstances or upon any pretense whatever." And again, p. 16. "no person,
church or power on earth, can lawfully dispense with such an attendance." viz.
on the Lord's Supper. And yet he offered to make exceptions and limitations.
Yea, he proposed to the church to pass an actual vote to dispense with
candidates in case of scruple, if they would verbally consent to be called
members in full communion. What a direct inconsistency is here? yea, he further
supposes, that persons in the dark may lawfully stay away. And yet at the same
time calls them renouncers, refusers, habitual neglecters, etc. and not to be
tolerated, lest we be partakers of other men's sins, etc.

Again, he supposes all over his book, that those who act upon my plan, are
unconverted; he taxes them with " habitual and continual disobedience to the
express command of Christ:" p. 57. and yet says, the command was never given to
them, but to others, viz. "to true disciples" or believers only. p. 45, 6. --
Query, how can persons be taxed with disobedience to a command, that was never
given to them? is it not an eternal rule, that where there is no law there is
no transgression? those indeed to whom the command is given may be guilty of
disobedience, but those to whom it is not given are no more concerned in it
than if there was no command at all. How does he here relax the bonds of duty
from the neck of sinners? if the command indeed were given to the visible
church, then all neglecters are guilty, but if the command only reaches
invisible members, then it is they only that must plead guilty or not guilty,
all others have nothing to do with it. He may as well say, that infants are
guilty of the breach of this command.

Again, Mr. R. asserts, that saving blessings are no more (no not so much as
conditionally) sealed to the children of the faithful, if unconverted, than to
jews, deists and mahometans: p. 43. and yet he owns that there are gracious
promises all over the bible concerning such. p. 48.

Further he says, "that owning the covenant is one of the greatest and most
solemn transactions on this side death," and that "coming to the Lord's table
is a lesser transaction:" p. 36. and yet, that persons equally own the covenant
every time they come, as much as they did at first. The same he says of other
covenant transactions. p. 6. How then can there be any greater or lesser in the
case? or is it a lesser transaction to own the covenant in deed than in words?
would it be deemed a greater thing to accept a prince's invitation to dinner,
than the actual dining with him?

Again, Mr. R. says, that baptized persons have forfeited their right, if they
do not come to the Lord's-table, and that they ought to be censured; and yet
will not suffer them to come, if he thinks them unqualified, let them be ever
so inoffensive. unhappy case, that they must neither come nor not come.

Again, he durst not defend Dr. Bellamy's doctrine, "that for a natural man to
pretend to own the covenant, was to sin against God in a more provoking manner,
than if he had committed drunkenness, fornication, and adultry." (Essays, p.
68.) I say, he durst not defend this in direct terms, because he knew it would
render him obnoxion to his own party: yet he holds the same thing in effect all
over his book. Why will not men honestly speak out, but conceal themselves in a
shade?

Again, he prayed against me and preached against me for the exposition I gave
of the text; Jer. iii. 14. and seems still surprised at it: while at the same
time he expounds the text exactly as I did, namely, that it was an address to
the whole visible church collectively considered, without any regard to their
inward gracious state. p. 55. This is the very thing I aimed at, and indeed all
that was necessary to establish my point, though perhaps not so fully expressed
as it might have been. The address for certain included both regenerates and
unregenerates, though very few of the former sort among them at that time: they
were generally corrupt; yet had not lost their membership received in infancy.
This Mr. R. would not then allow of, but led his people to think by his prayers
and preaching, that the words were directed to true believers and to them only,
and not to the whole church in general including unregenerates. But now he
turns directly about, and fully joins with me, and yet continues to fault me.
How surprising is this?

Further, he taxes me with leaving the original plan of the fathers; and yet
dissents from them as well as we: he pretends to honor them, yet leaves them.
He differs from them in several particulars, two especially. 1st. In not making
relations necessary. 2d. In implicitly bearing down the practice of general
owning the covenant, which is certainly destructive of his scheme.


Lastly, he taxes me with using passionate exclamations to gain my point. And
has he not passionate exclamations all over his book! Are they not
interspersed everywhere? see particularly from p. 23 -- 26. and p. 32 -- 35.

Thus I have presented the reader "with a brief sketch" of the blunderata and
inconsistencies that abound in his book: "it would be endless to follow him in
all." May I not justly then conclude the head with his own words, which are
much more applicable to him than to me. p. 41. Truth is always consistent;
therefore when a person advances any scheme or position, and in his arguments
to support it, is inconsistent with himself, it affords, at least, a strong
presumption that his scheme or position is not true. Whether Mr. R. has not
fallen into this difficulty in attempting to support his scheme, I do, after
pointing out these things (with others elsewhere) leave the reader to judge.

I now proceed to the

II. General HEAD, namely, to consider and answer his objections, especially
those contained in the first part of his reply. I would observe here in
general, that I do not find any new objections in this place, which I had not
before considered, but only the old expatiated and recited at greater length,
but not with more clearness than before. His policy here is remarkable in
treating the subject in a large declamatory diffusive way in order to captivate
the vulgar, and even using "passionate exclamations." But this method will not
take with men of thought and penetration. Such upon the re-perusal of my book
will find the main objections fully obviated already. But yet for the sake of
others. I think it necessary to take some notice of his main pleas. His

1st. Objection is, "that there is no text in the whole word of God to justify
the practice, nor any example to warrant it." p. 3. How exactly does this tally
with the words of an anabaptist writer quoted by Ursin? no opinion is to be
received, whereof we have neither express commandment or apparent example in
the scripture: but there is no commandment or example extant in scripture for
baptizing infants: wherefore the baptizing of infants is not to be permitted in
the church." To which Ursin answers, "God commands that all be baptized of
what age, sex, condition or state soever, which pertain to the covenant and the
church, etc. p. 419. This is full to the point; and it coming from one of Mr.
R's authorities (though it seems at second hand) I hope it will have the more
weight with him. Can he then say, that there are no texts to justify the
practice? are not those sufficient for that purpose, that prove the membership
of the persons in question? for if members themselves, their children are
certainly so too, (according to the divine constitution, Genesis xvii.) and so are
entitled to the seal. This is as strong and conclusive a way of arguing as we
can possibly have for infant baptism; and indeed it is the main ground. And if
he rejects it as insufficient, he must necessarily become an anabaptist; not
only joining with them in requiring an express text, but in all parts of their
scheme.

Further, he says there is no example. I think we have a direct example in the
case of lepers, which were (in most cases) excluded the passover for life, were
they ever so gracious inwardly; yet their children were not excluded
circumcision. And whenever a person was otherwise legally unclean, his
attendence on the passover was dispensed with; but still his children were to
be circumcised. The case is plain, the first seal was never to be omitted on
any account whatever, where the parents were in covenant; but the other seal
was often omitted or dispensed with upon incidental accounts, and the two seals
were frequently divided. An example that I do not think unlawful for us to
follow. If Mr. R. should say, that this legal uncleanness (which is excluded
from the passover) typified moral uncleanness under the gospel; which ought to
exclude equally now. What would be the consequence of such an assertion? why,
that moral uncleanness is a sufficient bar from coming to the Lord's Supper,
but not from bringing their children to baptism, if they are visibly in
covenant; as legal uncleanness debared from the second seal, but not from the
first. And let them take the consequence to themselves, if they argue thus, (as
Mr Edwards and Dr. Bellamy actually do) It is their's, and not mine, though I
can not see how they can get over it.

Another objection is, the indispensibleness of the command, do this, etc. This
is repeated over and over, and seems his all in all, though I cannot see with
what face he can plead it, when he actually offered to dispense with the
command upon certain conditions. A dispensation is as allowable upon our scheme
as his. And for my part I must acknowledge, that moral and positive precepts
always appeared to me in a very different light. The latter have been often
dispensed with, but the former never. The scripture abounds with instances of
such dispensations. Suspending the passover and circumcision in the wilderness
seems only a prudential of the church, upon the account of their traveling
circumstances, as divines think. If God had particularly commanded it, it would
no doubt have been recorded, as Moses sets down commands for very minute
things, as about fringes, the paddle, etc. And if churches may upon occasion,
and as particular circumstances occur, suspend a general attendance, they may
as well suspend a particular one. Instances of such general suspension of the
Lord's Supper has been known in our days even for years, not only when a church
has been without a pastor, but also when in divided broken circumstances.
And if particular persons, through mistakes or scruples, deprive themselves of
the benefit of positive institutions, I dare not condemn them to the pit of
hell upon that account. St. Austin's saying is most true, not the want, but the
contempt of ordinances condemns. And that saying of other divines is equally
true, that these special ordinances serve not for the being, but the well being
of a christian. The habitual wilful neglect of them is certainly a very heinous
sin; but if persons having a due value for such institutions, are kept away
merely from fears that they have not the befitting and requisite
qualifications, this I look upon rather as an infirmity, than a damnable
offense.

Again, it is objected, "that this practice is of a very bad and dangerous
tendency," and that it particularly, "tends to promote a careless secure spirit
in candidates." p. 8. -- QUERY, whether those places where the practice is not
allowed, have fewer in propotion of this secure careless spirit than the places
where it is received? let him ask the ministers, and they will tell him the
reverse: the prevailing security then must not be ascribed to this practice.
And let him ask them further, whether they have not reason to think, that many
whom they have not over great charity for, have upon this very account come up
in full, that otherwise would not, merely to get their children baptized.

I observed in my second Essay, p. 20. That ministers refusing to receive them
upon this plan, and yet urging them to come in full, had a much greater
tendency to promote this secure spirit. To this he deigns not a word of answer.
I would now observe further, that in the course of my ministry, I never found
one under conviction (among the many scores I conversed with) whose conscience
pricked them merely for not owning the covenant, but it was for their neglect
of the Lord's Supper; and to that many seemed earnestly desirous of flying as
an asylum, to get ease to their wounded spirits. And if they are admitted to
that, there is much more danger of their resting there, than if they had only
owned the covenant. In short, this objection and what is said under it, bewrays
to me too much unacquaintedness or experience of the workings of the human mind
under conviction, and is rather matter of theory than reality.

Again, he says, that John's baptism was not of such latitude as we plead for;
but was confined to professing penitents. I answer, if he will be as large in
administering baptism, as John was, there are none I believe but would be
content. The text says, all Judea and Jerusalem went out to him, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. Matt. iii. 5, 6. Will Mr. R.
baptize any merely on such confession? no, says he; promises of amendment are
implied, through the assistance of divine grace. Well, let it be so (though the
words do not directly imply it) all would be content still. Would he baptize
them or their children now? no, they must make a profession of saving
repentance. Well, but how can they profess it without they knew they had it!
would he have them lie, or declare more than they know? no; it is sufficient
for them to say, that as far as they knew their own hearts they were sincere in
confessing their sins, etc. If he would receive them now, where is the
difference between him and me? It appears to me, that all John holds forth when
he preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, was, that
repentance was necessary in order to partake of the saving mercies of the
covenant, or to obtain the spiritual good held forth in baptism; and that it
cannot be justly inferred from anything that is said, that he thought they were
all real penitents whom he baptized: yea, the direct contrary appears, for he
himself intimates, that many of them were but cha^fy professors (as afterward
appeared). And therefore he exhorts them to exercise gospel repentance, and not
to rest merely in the outward privilege, lest their baptism should be of no
avail. I would observe further, that John does not erect a new church (the
gospel church was not erected till some time after) but seems to baptize them
as members already, or as part of the standing church of the jews: and it does
not appear, neither is it probable, that he rejected any that came, though he
gave a severe reproof to some sorts.

Further he objects, that we place too great a distinction between baptism and
the Lord's Supper. I answer; this, the other side are especially guilty of, who
would not allow baptized persons any privilege at all; whereas if they will but
come to the Lord's Supper, all privileges are their's and their children's
forever.

A like objection is, that "I make lower qualifications necessary for baptism
than for the Lord's Supper, which is quite wrong." p. 48, etc. He ought rather
to have said lower dagrees of the same qualifications. And is not this
reasonable? certainly stronger language may be expected from grown men than
from mere babes; from those that have had some experience, than form those that
are just come to the birth. To be sure they can give a more full and
satisfactory evidence of their being in Christ after some experience, than when
first born into the world of grace. And in some cases their lives have been so
notorious, that though baptism cannot be denied to them when they come to us,
as they did to John, confessing their sins; yet it would not be proper
immediately to receive them to the Lord's-table. And the same may be said
respecting persons grossly ignorant; when they come to know the fundamentals of
religion, that there is a Savior, and justification through him, etc. and
appear to receive it cordially, they are entitled to baptism: yet they ought
not to be received to the other ordinance, till better and more fully
instructed, etc.

We find a plain distinction made between the spouse and the daughters of
Jerusalem. Cant. v. and 6. though both within the pale of the church. The one
were admitted to full privileges, the other not so -- which seems to give a
direct warrant to our practice.

Further, it is said, what signifies it to be so strenuous in the affair? what
good will baptism do their children, if they be not good themselves? it may be
of some advantage indeed as to this world; it may take away their reproach. But
of what advantage in the sight of God? as they come without his leave, so they
will be sent away without his blessing; the baptism of such being a mere
nullity with him, p. 48. This objection suggests a question of weighty moment,
what the real situation of a baptized child is, whose parent is unregenerate
let him be a communicant or otherwise? I have already endeavored to disprove
such a baptism's being a mere nullity. But of what real advantage is it? I
answer, much every way; if it be not a nullity it must be something, i. e.
answer some valuable end, and be of real use to the child. Supposing Mr. R.
were right, that the promises were made only to the invisible church; yet God
may fulfill them to the child for their pious grand parents sake, or for the
sake of some other godly progenitor (as was the case of king Josiah) for the
promise runs to a thousand generations. But if Mr. R. be wrong, as I think has
been proved, and the promise mentioned, Act. ii. 39. respects the church
visible, it may reach such a child as much as if his parents were really godly;
and he has as good a right to plead it, as an argument for converting grace, as
the child of the best saint living. He has been received into the church
according to divine rules, and therefore has ground to ask for divine
blessings, as one of God's covenant children. Yea, I may add, that God may, and
no doubt often does, bless the ordinance to a child, as being his own
institution, though not for the parent's sake; as common means are often blessed
to sinners that use them, as being means of God's appointment, though not for
the sinners sake. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord, be ashamed and
confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel, but for my own name sake.
Ezekiel. xxxvi, 22, 32. i. e. He does it for his own honor, and that he may grace
his own institutions, without any regard to the sinner.

Again, he objects, that both ordinances are equally solemn; and asks upon it,
why fears and scruples do not operate as strongly to keep from the one as from
the other; especially since owning the covenant (which is previous) is a
solemner thing than both. p. 36. The absurdity of the latter clause of the
objection has been already taken notice of. Let me answer to the first part;
supposing it to be the case, that the two ordinances are equally solemn, is
there not something in human nature, that often reluets (or is terrified) at
one duty, yet not at another, though equally solemn? and is Mr. R. so little
acquainted with the workings of the human mind, as not to know it? it is really
as solemn a thing in itself considered, to approach Gord's throne in secret of
family devotions, as at the Lord's Supper: And yet Mr. R. would not himself
wonder, that some will venture to pray, and yet not venture to the
Lord's Supper. An unaccountable fear, which they cannot shake off, may often
prepossess the mind, and sway it to forbear in one instance; yet have no effect
in another case, though nearly parallel. It is a minister's duty to endeavor to
dispel such fears (if groundless) in the course of his ministration in the
pulpit, and not to knock them down at one blow by votes and prescription and
penalties, which certainly never yet enlightened one soul.

Again, it is objected, that if we plead the example of the jewish church it
proves too much, that scandalous persons ought to be admitted, etc. which we
will not allow of. p. 19. -- I answer, it does not prove too much; for
scandalous persons are allowed privileges now as well as then if in the same
circumstances, that is, supposing those that are acquainted with the scandal do
not complain of them, and get them regularly convicted: for the church ought to
look upon none of their members as scandalous, till such conviction takes
place. All are innocent in the eye of the law or gospel, till guilt be proved
upon them; and if those who are witnesses of the guilt will not appear against
them, the f^ult lies at their, and not at the church's door. The church must
receive them still and allow them privileges, whether they be communicants, or
only owners of the covenant, etc. This observation enervates several of the
arguments of those on the opposite side of the question.

Again, he urges very strenuously, and for many pages, that it is much better
to have the greater part of the country unbaptized, yea, and brought into a
state of perfect heathenism, than to have this practice continued. p 22. etc.
In answer to this, I would desire him to read once more my quotation from Mr.
Mitchell, (^ssays, p. 4, 5) and to do it prayerfully and with attention; and if
it does not make his heartake; I would have him for the future forbear to tax
his neighbors with callous consciences ( p. 59.) And to what he has said I
would add, that we have all the reason in the world to think, that christianity
would have been long since entirely rooted out of the Greek churches (which
have been groaning so many hundred years under the mohammedan yoke) had it not
been for these external badges. But the use of them has kept it alive, no
doubt, to the benefit and salvation of many souls: But says Mr. R. (or rather
Mr. Edwards) "we must not do evil, that good may come." I answer, neither he or
Mr. Edwards have yet proved it to be evil. I would also subjoin. Dr. I.
Mather's weighty words in his first principles of New England, relating to this
point. ( pref. p. 4.) Brethren, one word let me in the bowels of the Lord say
to you, and I speak it not with a desire to grieve or offend any of you, but if
my heart deceive me not, love to Christ and to you, and to the succeeding
generations in New England, causes me to speak it; it is only this, Oh
tremble! lest this very error of yours prove the breaking and the ruin of your
poor posterity. Truly, when I think (and I often think of it) seriously and
sadly with myself, that in a plantation of religion (for such New England was)
the generality of the inhabitants should be in the condition of infidels; that
the posterity of a people professing godliness, yea, of the most eminent
professors in the whole world, should in our age be as infidels, even not so
much as within the compass of the visible church, or have the livery and
character belonging to christians upon them, whereby such are distinguished
from the infidel, and pagan world: what it has to others I know not, but to me
it has a most formidable appearance.

Again, he lugs in the doctrine of human depravity as overthrown by this
practice, and makes great use of it in his letter and elsewhere. This shows
what shifts they are reduced to, to support their scheme. I boldly assert, that
it is a barefaced imposition. But of this, more elsewhere.

Another objection or imposition near a kin to this is, that it must "surely be
a bad cause that is defended with such weapons" as I use. p. 51. But what are
these weapons? why Arminian ones. This is not true, (as will appear presently:)
but supposing it was, are not arminian weapons as good as immoral ones? is the
cause of Christ to be supported by scandalous advertisments in the public
prints? by malicious scurrilous libels posted up at marketplaces or droped in
the streets? by the most ungrounded misrepresentations? by all the low arts and
methods of artifice that could be devised? and even by ransacking the graves of
the dead, etc. If Mr. R. can (either in whole or in part) clean himself from
these, can he clear some that he looks upon as his best friends and the
greatest promoters of his cause? I dare say the whole town are convinced from
what quarter these must come. And the handwriting of one of them (however
disguised) can be produced against him. But enough of this for the present.

Lastly, another objection of the like sort is his outcry. p. 32. "That it was
as dark a day with respect to religion as almost ever was known in this town,
when this practice was brought in," etc. Such a dark time it seems was the
properest to introduce such a dark practice. But was it such a dark day, when
the Synod introduced it, most of the first fathers of the Massachusetts being
then alive; and when some of their churches were in the practice before? And as
for the time he speaks of, let him ask the elderly people, and they will all
tell him, that it was not near so dark a time in regard to religion as it is
now: there was much more vital piety appearing; there was more religious
conference and exemplary walking; religious meetings were frequent, the
minister almost constantly attending; there was a standing society of religious
young people: (how do all these fail at present!) family religion and
government much more prevailed, and immoralities did not so abound as at this
day. And how comes it to pass, that in these darkest of days, more light should
spring up than in the former period? or does the light all center in Mr. R --
's breast? for the people were generally easy under the practice, till his
attempt to supersede it. Here we see what mean and low methods he takes to
prejudice the present generation against the cause, as also in the rest of the
paragraph, which I shall not transcribe. A report has been raised and
propagated by some of them, that Mr. Leonard in his "lively days" (there spoken
of) repented that he had ever brought in the practice. But Mr. R. durst not set
it down (whatever private use he make^ of the report) lest he should be put
upon to prove it.


In contrast to this, I would set what Dr. I. Mather says, pref. p. 2, 3. It is
a good observation. says he, which Mr. Cotton has in his letter to Mr.
Williams, where he argues, that the way of the rigid separation is not of God,
because those who in simplicity and tenderness of conscience have been drawn
into the error of that way; yet when they have grown in grace, they have also
grown to discern the error of the separation. The same (says Dr. M.) we may say
in this case, some who did once conscienciously and humbly, according to their
present light, dissent from the late Synods, yet as they have grown in wisdom
and grace, and ripeness for Heaven, the Lord has given them for to see, that
their rigidity in this particular was a failing. And particularly as to
himself, how does he intimate the same thing in that pathetic address to other
dissenters? Brethern (says he) I was once of your persuasion; but study and
prayer and much affliction has brought me to be of another belief than once!
was. ( preface. p. 1.)

Thus ^ have considered several of his objections; and for a conclusion would
just observe, that his chief argument or plea taken from the nature of a seal
is in a manner left out of his book and no stress laid on it. And does not this
evince, that notwithstanding his affecting to laugh at my observations about a
seal; yet that it had such an effect upon him, as to prevent his urging it any
further?

PART II.
I now come to the

III. Gen^^al HEAD, to consider his manner of treating me both in relation to
the general, and particular controversy.

IN general we may observe the method of his book. He first lays down arguments
in proof of his plan; then considers them in objections, taking but little or
no notice of me all this while, as if none of these objections were found in
the Essay, but were found out by his own sagacity. And when he comes to speak
of the Essays, it seems he finds nothing in them but a heap of ra^^bles and
inconsistencies, of misrepresensations and unjust charges, scarce worthy of his
notice. In this contemptuous manner he treats me. And with the like contempt he
has treated me in his letters and otherwise during this controversy. And the
same sort of treatment I had much experience of, during the first seven years
of his ministry, as the whole parish do know, if they would testify, which gave
great offense in the time of it. Of these things more hereafter.

But with respect to the general controversy. Here are three sections, which I
shall consider distinctly. I begin with his 4th SECTION from p. 28, to p. 41.

He first says, p. 28. "I stated the question rightly, whether the half way
practice of admitting, etc." I never stated the question so It is an
abomination to me. The phrase half practice, half members, etc. is entirely his
own, and what he imported from Connecticut. It was never known or thought of in
these parts, till he introduced it. And the first coiners of the phrase (who
they were God knows) did it out of politic views: it being a common method,
when any have a mind to run down a cause, to brand it with some odious
nickname. This is the (...) here. The phrase in my apprehension involves so
much venom and malignity in it, that it is strange any christian should use it.

"The question being thus rightly stated (says he) I quickly ramble from it,
and endeavor to establish another point." But how does he prove it? not by
following me argument by argument, but by culling out a passage here and there,
without regarding what preceeded or followed. First a short passage (Essay 1st)
p. 2. and then flying to p. 12. (Essay 2d.) I desire the reader to look into
both those pages, and they will plainly see how he abuses me. These passages
are, "neither does Christ so much as intimate that they were gracious thereby
letting us know, that it is visible membership gives the right." "From whence
we may infer that it is not contrary to the mind of God, that the children of
persons unregenerate should have this ordinance administered to them, if their
parents be in covenant relation to him." What do these expressions import more
than this, that God expects and requires that his church treat all those that
are visibly in covenant with him as proper members of his church, whether
regenerate or no, as long as they behave well. Does not Mr. R. hold this as
well as I? and has he not several passages to the like purpose? for he
acknowleges, that we have nothing to do with the heart. This first passage then
being the only ramble he accuses me of in the 1st. Essay, and the second the
only one in the 2d. Essay, (all comprised within the compass of 5 lines:)
surely all the rest must be to the point. Why then does not he attempt to
answer it? as surely he has not done. For my part, upon reviewing the piece, it
appears to me, that instead of flying from the point, I stick closely to it.
And here by the way, I would observe how easy it is to answer any book
whatsoever, if it is sufficient to pick out a passage or scrap here and there
(leaving out what preceeded or followed) and then rack and mangle it to speak
what they please. A man may go on answering to eternity at this rate.

P. 30. He states the question anew for me "whether it is warrantable from
scripture for persons to own the covenant, and have baptism for their children,
while they neglect to attend the other ordinance" This is as wrong a stating it
as the other. If he can prove, that the candidates neglect, i. e. slight and
contemn the ordinance of the supper, let them in God's name be kept off. This I
observe is his common phrase, not only in his title page, but throughout his
whole book, to inflame people against me; sometimes the word neglect only is
used; sometimes habitual neglect (which is stronger still;) sometimes renounce,
refuse, etc. Sometimes it is allowed neglect and violation, a continued neglect
How can he tell that it will be a continued neglect, when first admitted? most
of those at Halifax, that owned the covenant, soon came into full communion.
And as for those that have long continued in this neglect among us (some of
them for many years) why does not he preach to them? why does he not call them
to account? why does he not treat them as wicked persons? (as he must do
according to his principles.) So far from this, that he calls them members in
full communion, baptizes their children; yea, gives them the character of
exemplary christians; (justly I trust as to most of them, but inconsistently as
to himself.)
(always the strongest expressions he could invent) Yea, it comes at last to be
downright wickedness. p. 57. Thus blinding people with a notion, that I was for
opening the door to the worst of sinners. But how does he alter his tone, when
he comes to speak of his candidates whom he would dispense with. There he can
suppose, that the persons have a high value for the ordinance even too high;
and that all the difficulty lies in their doubts and fears whether they are
duly qualified for so sacred and solemn an institution. What partiality is
here. What business has he to treat candidates upon my scheme as neglecters and
contemners, and the others as overvaluers of the ordinance. Is this the charity
that believes all things, hops all things. etc. Is there not as much ground
to treat the one gently as the other.

P. 32, 35. He has "a long string" of Texts to prove, that universal obedience
is necessary in order to denominate a person a disciple, a friend of Christ, a
christian or believer, etc And therefore if they do not come to the
Lords-table, they cannot, and ought not to have any of these denominations
however regular in other respects "If any, says he, teaches that such are
visible friends of Christ, they teach for doctrine the commandments of men."
"This is the test, the touch stone, the mark. by which you are to ground your
charity." "Without this, says Christ, you are none of mine." "To assert the
contrary is to oppose and contradict Christ." "The obedience of such persons is
but a pretense, their discipleship good for nothing." "They have no right to be
treated as disciples." "These words will forever stand as a bar against
admitting persons, who walk not in all the instituted ordinances of Christ."
"We have no right to call persons visible christians, If baptized persons are
not so much as visible christians, why is he so offended at calling the
unbaptized, heathens? he taxes me with wickedness on this account. See Essays.
p. 37.
or grant them special privileges, but those that obey that positive command of
Christ, do this, etc." And innumerable other passages of the like nature. And
yet, to our amazement, after all this group of expressions; and after he had
further declared, "that we find no warrant for any exception in the word of
God, let the plea for it be what it will," he comes at length to grant, in
direct contradiction to all he had said, that it is " often the case that real
good christians may be under such scruples, under such doubts and fears, as to
deter them from the Lord's Supper, and yet see their way clear to offer their
children to baptism. p. 38. And all possible tenderness, he grants, is to be
used toward such." And what do we desire more? if he would act accordingly
there would be an end of the controversy.

But such scruples are not to be indulged. Why? because they arise from wrong
notions. p. 38. For my part, I think in many cases they are justly grounded, if
our opponent's plan be right. What can be more natural than such reasonings as
these? "it is a plain command it is true, do this, etc. But to whom is this
command given? to believers, real disciples, not to sinners while such. p. 46.
Am I then a believer? it is true, I have some hopes; I have had some experience
of a law and gospel work upon my soul; I have seen something of the evil of
sin, and my need of Christ, and my soul longs for an interest in him. But may
not this be only a common work? have not sinners great convictions and
illuminations? do they not cry out with Pharaoh and Saul, I have sinned? do
they not so hunger and thirst as to cry, Lord ever more give us this bread?
give us of the waters of life? have they not tasted of the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come? do they not hear the gospel calls with
joy? I dare not upon any account say, that my experiences are of a saving kind;
I rather fear, that I am only a stony ground hearer. What shall I do? if I
come, and am really such a one, I shall only profane the ordinance; I come as
an unbidden guest; the ordinance is not for me; I shall be "guilty of a greater
sin than drunkenness, fornication and adultery. It is much better therefore for
me to stay, till I have clearer evidences. This is certainly safest; as coming
in hypocrisy (as must be the case if I be unregenerate) is worse than not
coming at all." Such reasonings as these, I do not see how the best casuist
among them can get over, or duly solve, without warping and bending their plan
to suit every case.

As for the intimation, "that such scruples chiefly arise from this halfway
practice." p. 38. It is entirely groundless. It is the natural consequence of
the plan. And it is certain, that such scruples as much or more prevailed, when
what Mr. R. calls "the original plan" was in vogue, than even at this day. For
if they had not been generally prevalent in the days of our fathers, the genera
court would never have called a synod to consider what was to be done in the
case.

As for the supposition, p. 37. of a person's coming demand the Lord's Supper
before he was baptized; it is so absurd and weak, that I am almost ashamed to
mention it. It is like a person's demanding meat and drink, ^^fore he was born,
or before he had a being. The one supposition is as natural as the other. But
if he must be argued with, let me tell him, that text would forever stand as a
bar. Exodus xii. 48.

P. 38. Mr. R. accuses me of "frequently appealing to the decisions of men."
The occasion of it was, because I had said, "The Church has in all ages been
larger in admitting to baptism than to the Lord's Supper." I think there is
somewhat in the observation, though we are not to be certainly determined by
their opinion; but must go to the law and to the testimony. But if I was to be
swayed by human authority, I had much rather make the universal church my
standard, than either Dr. B. or Mr. R. especially since they are so fluctuating
in their opinions. I would observe here, that Mr. R. is quite as ready to fly
to human authority as I, when he thinks it makes for him: the instances of it
in his book are numerous; and even in his letter, does he not have recourse to
human authority? what a stress does he there lay on the authority of the WOMEN?
It seems to be the chief argument in that epistle; "I question, says he,
whether you have 4 women in the whole church with you;" and this he "thinks
matter of weighty consideration in the affair." (Essays, p. 35.) I never-knew
before but that the authority of men, was as decisive as that of women,
especially of women the most part of whom had never heard or read any thing
about the affair. But to leave trifting, I doubt not but that he thinks it
somewhat in the ante-poedobaptist controversy, that their opinion is novel, and
was never heard of in the christian church till about 200 years ago. So that
even according to him, it is lawful to mention human authority, or "the
decisions of men" sometimes, in way of illustration or collateral proof. As for
the piece of history that follows, (for he must show himself an historian as
well as divine) I am certain he is mistaken: in the primitive church, they were
admitted as catachumens, long before they were baptized; and they were for the
most part baptized (especially if gentiles before) sometime before they were
confirmed; though in several instances, where the candidate appeared a great
proficient, as in the case of Ambrose and others, baptism and confirmation
immediately followed one the other.

In p. 38, 9. he says, "That I certainly intimate in many places, that the same
essential qualifications were not necessary for the one ordinance as the
other." Where this certain intimation appears, I know not: all that they can
justly infer from my words is, that the church need not be so strict respecting
candidates for baptism as for the Lord's Supper; but if there be the lowest
degree of probability, or but a possibility of their being gracious, though
they have many fears about them, they ought not to be excluded, in case they
ask this privilege for their children. The one is a sacrament of entrance, the
other of growth, etc. The worst of sinners, if they appear penitent to the
church, ought to be immediately baptized. But in some cases it would not be so
advisable to receive him directly to the Lord's Supper. The most ignorant of
heathens may be taught enough in an hours time, and he may appear to receive it
so cordially, that he may be entitled to baptism; yet not have knowledge enough
to be received immediately to the Lord's Supper.

In the next page, he observes that "the first settlers in New England allowed
this privilege to none but the children of communicants." And in many other
places he says, that "this practice is contrary to the original plan upon which
these churches were settled." p. 1. 53. etc. How he durst so boldly affirm this
I know not: I am sure with respect to Plymouth church he asserts it entirely by
guess; for there are no church records extant but what were written after my
grandfather's settlement in 1667. And no account of their practice in this
particular in their early days; nor any account of their sentiments at all
except what makes against Mr. R. The ministers and elders weekly catechizing
and instructing, putting questions, and preaching or expounding the principles
of religion to the children of the church, and training them up for the
Lord's Supper; their dealing with them as members as much as the communicants;
their admitting them to covenant more than once, in a body, etc. are all
contrary to modern example, and inconsistent with present principles or
practices. It is certain there is nothing in the church records, that directly
militates with this practice, and we may with great propriety put the question
here, that has been so often put at this day, "who was ever denied?" can he
produce an instance of one baptized person that applied, and was refused,
either in a general or particular manner? nothing surely can be inferred from a
church's forbearing the practice, what their real principle was about it; it
might be owing to none's applying, and not to principle. I might add, that
there are some passages in Mr. Robinson's (their first minister's) writings,
that look favorably toward this practice.

And as to the first settlers of the Massachusetts, he cannot but know what
were the sentiments of almost all the first fathers in the point. I having lent
him Dr. I. Mather's book entitled, " the first principles of New England, etc."
whether he thought it worth reading or no, I cannot tell; but if he did read
it, I am amazed he should talk as he does. The fact was this, the first comers
were generally communicants, so there was no occasion to discuss the point: but
when grandchildren were born, and the country increased, after a due
consideration of the point, most of the first settlers (being then alive) fell
in with the practice. But I have spoke enough upon this head in the Essays,
which it seems he deems unworthy of the least notice; except to speak in direct
contradiction to part of it.

As to "the melancholy prostitution of this ordinance" by their posterity, so
contrary to the original design of the synod, which he tells us of in the same
page, whether he accuses himself or others, I know not; I leave his own
conscience to judge: but I would tell him this, that I am far from pleading
guilty to the charge, while I was in the ministry: and I do not doubt many
other ministers can say the same.

I now come to his fifth Section, from p. 41. to p. 51.

Wherein he endeavors to show, that my book contains little else but a bundle
of inconsistencies and contradictions, or else is very erroneous and weak, and
betrays great confusion of thought. "It would be endless, says he, to follow
Mr. C. in all his contradictions and inconsistencies." Therefore it seems he
only selects a few.

In his first entrance on this Section, p. 41. there seems to be as many
misrepresentations almost as lines: he entirely mistakes " the grand point I am
aiming at." "It is, says he, to prove that it is lawful for persons that have
been baptized and are not scandalous, to own the covenant and have baptism for
their children though they neglect to come up to the other ordinance; and that
churches ought to admit them to the former, though they refuse the latter."
This I have already disclaimed: I say with him, let all neglecters and refusers
be excluded, if he can prove them such.

The first instance of inconsistence that he alleges is, that I charge him
"with proposing a popish dispensation, and yet my whole book is wrote to
establish the lawfulness of such a dispensation." I deny the charge: I made a
distinction between a mere sufferance or passive connivance, and an actual
allowance. The former I said was the case according to the present mode, and
the latter according to his scheme. There must be an actual vote in the case,
after the candidate had promised to come immediately. He himself once saw the
force of this distinction, when I discoursed with him in private, and
endeavored to contrive methods to obviate the difficulty. But now the scale is
turned, and he endeavors to involve me in the same difficulty. I know no way to
account for it, but by supposing his assistant wrote this part, who did not so
much consider. But supposing the dispensation on both sides were of the like
tenor, all that can be said upon it is, that this argument of mine must stand
for nothing, but does not in the least invalidate my other pleas against his
expedient.

The second instance of inconsistence is, that I call "baptized persons real
members, complete members, visible chrstians, etc. yet in effect call t^em
elsewhere a carnal generation, etc." I would ask him, whether the prophets,
John the baptist, yea, Christ himself, have not frequently done the like? and
does not he and other ministers often do the same in their preaching? we may
certainly express our fears in a general way, that there is too great reigning
carnality among professors, whether communicants or others; and yet not do
right in rejecting individuals when they offer themselves against whom we know
no just objection. And it is certain, if baptized persons should generally come
to communion, we should have a greater number of carnal communicants than we
have now. As for that expression, "that the church would willingly admit these
candidates in full; but the difficulty lies in their own breasts, not in ours."
I speak not here of baptized persons in general (as he intimates) but only of
those who actually apply, against whom is no just exception.

The next inconsistency ( p. 42.) is already obviated under the observations,
etc. And here I cannot but observe what a captious disposition it shows, to
repeat over and over detached shreds and passages, which appear quite harmless
and natural, as they stand in connection.

He here seems to have done with inconsistencies for the present, and next
musters up a number of particulars, to make me appear ignorant and weak, or
very erroneous.

In p. 43. He taxes me with gross error in asserting, "that children's
membership is a distinct thing from that of their parents, though coming
through their means; and that to punish them, because their parents do not
immediately approach to the Lord's-table, is hard and injurious." But where
does the error lie? is it in the first part? dare he deny, that their
membership is distinct? are they not distinct parties in the covenant! Genesis
xvii. Does not their membership remain, when their parents are dead, and their
relation to the visible church wholly ceased? Dr. Mather remarks, that some of
the opposers of the synod were so absurd, as to make a serious question of it,
whether men ^o not remain members of the visible church after they are dead?
But can any man (says the doctor) in good earnest think, that an hypocrite when
he is dead and gone to his own place, is still a member of God's church? yet
his infant child is so: therefore the membership of the child does exist after
the membership of the parent is extinct; therefore it is really distinct from
the parents membership. Subjects of bapt. p. 64.
And do not the children of offenders, though ever so young, retain their
membership, after their parents are excommunicated? which could not be, if
their membership was not distinct. But it is perhaps the inference that offends
him, "to punish children, because their parents do not immediately come to the
Lord's-table, is hard and injurtous." I think so still: for if they are in such
a ^^^^ation, as to be real members of the church as being children of members
(which way of arguing he has not yet disproved) they ought to have the seal.
But will it not follow from hence, "that the children of all baptized persons
however scand^lous, ought to have the seal?" I answer, no; if parents have
actually forfeited their membership, their children cannot properly be called
the children of members. Or if they have not forfeited it, the church ought not
to force the privilege upon them, without asking. But if they come and ask for
it, and no proper objection made against their conduct, who dare deny them?

He next accuses me of great confusion of thought in that expression, "baptism
seals saving blessing to the unregenerate, conditionally." It is an expression
of Mr. Stoddard's, and let him fight it out with him. However, I must tell him,
that I see no impropriety in the expression. Suppose there should be a covenant
wrote between him and me, and I should sign and seal it, but he by reason of
absence or otherwise should not sign and seal for weeks and months, it may
properly be called a sealed covenant on my part, but yet conditionally; it
takes no effect till he has sealed it likewise. The same may be said in the
present case. But what advantage would it be to suppose such a conditional seal
on God's part? what benefit does it convey any more to the baptized than
unbaptized? I answer, great benefit, even according to him. For he says a few
pages after, "there are promises all over the bible to the children of
believers." And is it no advantage to have such promises sealed to them, though
at present in a state of unregeneracy? I make no doubt but Ishmael, whom I
there mentioned by name, found great benefit by this conditional seal. For from
some passages in the old testament, we may infer that he died a good man,
however bad in his younger years.

Another instance of "the same confusion, says he, appears in my idea or
description of a seal." p. 43. I had said and I think fully proved, that
prayer, hearing, reading, offering sacrifices, etc. were seals, always seals of
the covenant of grace, when properly used. And I would now further tell him,
that the saying of the Lord's prayer (which is the pattern of all true prayer)
from the heart, is as much a solemn covenant transaction as if any person
should stand in the broad alley, and should have the covenant in form
propounded to him. True prayer is a covenant transaction always; there is a
promise on God's part, and there is a seal on our part in pleading and laying
hold of it. In answer to this, he seems readily to grant, that prayer, hearing,
reading, etc. are seals, if used in faith. And surely baptism and the
Lord's Supper are seals in no other sense. A conditional seal he has been just
laughing at. So that all the ordinances in this respect seem to be upon a par.
Hence I argued, that if unregenerate men may lawfully use some of the seals
(considered only as seals) he may upon the same ground use the other, yea all,
and that there was nothing in the nature of a seal to hinder him. Consequently,
their argument taken merely from the word seal (which they laid so much stress
upon) was of no force. However, that there were some other considerations which
rendered it not proper, that baptism and the Lord's Supper should be made as
common as the other ordinances, though this from the nature of a seal was given
up. Of this latter clause he takes no notice; and as to the other part of the
argument, he seems not to have the least idea of what I ^imed at; which was not
to prove (as he asserts) that all sorts, good and bad, even the most
scandalous, have a right to baptism; but that the restrictive use of this and
the other ordinance could not be argued merely from the term seal (which was a
common name for all the ordinances) but must be taken from other topics. As
much as to say, that a barrier ought indeed to be set round the ordinances of
baptism and the Lord's Supper; but that this could not be proved barely from
the word seal (this being a common term) but must be taken from weightier
considerations, namely, the express declarations of God in scripture. This
gives me occasion to caution him not to mistake me again, as he has done above
twenty-times in my book, I hope not wilfully.

Next, he animadverts upon "my strange notions about assurance," and wrests my
words in a strange manner. It appears to me the unavoidable consequence of
their doctrine, that full assurance is necessary in order to coming to the
ordinance: so far as they doubt of their state, so far they must doubt of their
right; and no man ought to come to it with a doubting conscience, especially if
the sin be greater for an unregenerate person to come than to stay away, (as
some of them expressly teach.) Now if full assurance or an assurance that
excludes all doubt be necessary, it must be attained before they come; and if
attained, what need they come to attain what they have already? as it is not
necessary for a man regenerate to come to the means to obtain regenerating
grace, which he is already possessed of. But yet in both cases, they ought to
come for other ends: the assured christian ought to come to get his assurance
confirmed, habituated and preserved, which may be lost many ways; he ought to
come to have his graces increased and strengthened, for certainly they are not
come to their full strength, although his evidences are; there being no higher
pitch than full assurance attainable in this life: he ought to come to testify
his love and respect to his gracious Lord and master, and for many other
valuable ends. These I thought needless to set down, because not to the point
in hand. How injurious then is Mr. R's representation of the matter, as if I
held that the ordinances were instituted only or principally "to ascertain to a
man his own safe state:" But it is his way to take all opportunities to
represent me weak or wicked.

As to his assertion, that my scheme necessarily involves me in the same
difficulty they are under, or "that the dead weight I mention lies full as
heavy upon me as on them," I see no just grounds for it. I have already noticed
a twofold distinction relative to our right in the sight of God, which I think
sufficiently clears me. And then further, Dr. B. holds. that it is a greater
sin for an unregenerate man (however sincere or whatever his hopes are) to come
than to stay away, (which doctrine he no where disavows, though I rendered it
necessary for him to do it, if he was of another mind) which certainly is a
sufficient bar against any one's coming upon uncertainties. Whereas if they
incur less guilt by coming than by absenting, though uncertain and even under a
mistake, they had better come than not, in hopes divine mercy will bless the
ordinance for their spiritual good. This leads me to take notice of his
surprising argumentation (taken from Mr. Edwards, although he gives him not
credit for it.) p. 46. If the Lord's Supper were only a privilege, which I am
allowed to take, upon certain qualifications in me; and forbidden, if I had not
those qualifications; in such a case, it would certainly be safest for me to
abstain, till I know I have the qualifications. But supposing I am strictly
commanded and enjoined by God, to take, if I have those qualifications then it
is EQUALLY dangerous to neglect on uncertainties as to take on uncertainties.
What, equally dangerous, when the sin is greater on the side of coming! what,
shall I be guilty of a greater sin in coming than "drunkenness, adultery, etc."
and yet had I best come after all, though I do not know but that I may involve
myself in such heinous guilt? surely such sort of reasoning will convince no
body but such as believe with their wills, and not with their understandings.
But supposing the guilt equal on both sides, as the words in this place import,
then it seems the scale is even: a man in doubt must neither come nor stay
away: there is nothing to preponderate on the one side or the other; he may
choose either, and not be more guilty. And yet notwithstanding this even
balance, the inference is, that he ought to come. "An inference truly worthy a
logician." It would not avail them here to say, that a man has prevailing
hopes in the case: for what good will these prevailing hopes do him, if he be
really mistaken after all? such hopes do not abate, but rather aggravate his
guilt. So that these ought not to turn the scale in favor of coming. Nothing
but absolute certainty will do. This is so plain a case, that when one of his
intimates in the ministry (of one soul with him in this dispute) was lately
pressed with my dead weight, and when beat out of their common place
subter-fuges (such as Mr. R. uses) he at last openly declared, "that he did not
care if this consequence did follow from their doctrine, it was true doctrine,
and none ought to come without they had assurance."

In the next paragraph. 46. I scarce know what he is after. I had said, "if a
man declares on oath more than he knows, he is guilty of perjury, though it
happen afterward to appear true, etc." Does he deny this? no, not in direct
terms. But he endeavors to make it a contradiction to another passage of mine,
namely, "that if a person offers his child in baptism he must say, that as far
as he knows his own heart he is sincerely willing to give up himself and his
children to God." Does this man declare more than he knows? are these
expression as far as he knows, and, more than he knows, synonymous? what
trifling is here?

Further, he says, "that if there be any validity in my way of reasoning here,
all the forms of covenanting used all over the country must be abolished." I
answer, it is high time they were abolished, if they oblige men to say upon
oath more than they know; or to declare that to be true which they do not know
to be true; or in other words, to tell their maker and the church in the most
solemn manner, that they have saving faith, when they do not know whether they
have it or not. I never put any such construction upon the covenant, nor I
believe any one else before this day.

In p. 47. he taxes me with "a very great mistake (not to call it worse) in
asserting, that he denied infant membership." And to the same purpose he speaks
more largely in his marginal note, p. 30.31. I never asserted, that he held
baptized infants stood in no sort of relation to the church: but that he denied
their membership in any proper sense, if I can understand language, he did do
it, and that in the plainest manner: and this not by a transient expression; it
was a point talked of near half an hour; and this was all we could bring him to
own, after all possible canvassings and endeavors to make him speak out, that
they were laid under bonds, etc. Upon which one of the members said, "that if
this was all that was imported in infant membership, i. e. that they were only
laid under bonds, but entitled to no privilege, then they were mere bond
slaves;" which occasioned a sharp reproof. And presently after, upon my
mentioning that passage of the catechism, the infants of such as are members of
the visible church are to be baptized, he readily granted it. Which implied
that the persons in question were not members. How could we understand him
otherwise than that he denied their membership in any proper sense? But the
truth of the matter is, he has shifted so often, when pressed closely, and
sometimes owned and sometimes denied, as suited the present purpose, that we
scarce know how to take him. However, if we may judge by his book, comparing
one passage with another, his present opinion seems to be this; when they are
first baptized they are proper members, but when they grow up, their membership
wears off by piecemeal or they gradually lose it, till at last it is quite
gone, unless they come to the Lord's-table; and this without the churches
setting a mark on them, or any chargeable irregularity. But if they go so far
as actually to own the covenant, half of their (proper) membership remains, the
other half is lost. How reasonable this is appears elsewhere.

Next he observes, "that this halfway practice tends to bring infant baptism
into disgrace, and that nothing in the world has contributed more to prejudice
many against infant baptism, and to increase the number of anabaptists among us
than this." p. 48. For this we have only his ipse dixit. I never heard or read
of any, that made this their main plea; yea, I never heard it pleaded at all by
the favorers of anabaptism (though I have conversed with several.) And plain
fact proves, that this assertion is not true. For let us look all around us,
and we shall find, that the places where the anabaptists have most generally
increased, are such places where this practice is shut out. And indeed the very
shutting it out, affords them a good plea, (which they do not fall to use:)
"for here, say they, are some whom you have received as members, and acknowledge
as members; and yet actually treat them as no members; you will not baptize
their children, nor exercise any discipline over them, but let them run as
lambs in a large pasture: what is their membership good for, if they are
allowed no privilege, nor any care taken of them? it were much better they had
never been baptized at all." This pleasurely carries great weight with it. The
only way to disprove it, would be to treat them as members, and to revive a
godly discipline over them (as strict as that over communicants, which was
practiced in the days of our fathers) and then their prejudices would gradually
vanish.

I must just take notice of his marginal note here ( p. 48.) because he has
accused me of sewing pillows, etc. dawbing, etc. and would ask, whether there
is no appearance of it here? I would not be understood, says he, by any thing I
have said to impeach the characters of any in this place, who have owned the
covenant. It must be acknowleged they are, to all appearance, persons of good
characters and exemplary conversation. If this be true, it is surely a good
encouragement to proceed in the practice. But can he say upon his conscience,
that he never heard any thing amiss of one of them? and yet is he caressed. as
one of the dearest and most bosom friends and companions?

I now come to the grand point, the proton-pseudos of all. p. 49. Mr. C. says
he, in defending this practice (as many others have done before him) has
naturally, and I think, upon his plan necessarily, warped off from Calvinism,
and run into sentiments respecting men's natural depravity, exactly agreeable to
arminian writers. When I first read the charge of arminianism in his letter, I
was astonished, and could not imagine from whence it took it is rise: but since
I have had opportunity of reading several connecticut writers on the subject,
which unfolded the mystery. The charge it seems was brought by Dr B. against
his antagonists on the same side of the question with me in that colony, and
that perhaps not without some foundation: Mr. R. took it from him as it were by
rote, and thought the charge was calculated for the meridian of Plymouth as
well as Connecticut, without being able to comprehend the different plans we
went upon; and therefore in a random confused manner he has exhibited it
against me; and through me against all that ever were in the practice. And
having once brought the charge, he thinks himself obliged in honor to defend
it, though it would have been much more to his honor to have retracted it, and
not have needlessly exposed himself. But how does he defend it? Why, by
alleging some passages in my Essays, which he says are of arminian sound. Here
I would desire the reader to turn to his letter, and they will find that this
charge is not founded on such passages as he here produces, but on "the
practice itself and the arguments made use of" (Essays. p. 35.) whereas these
passages are no necessary part of the argument, but are mere transient
expressions, and might as well have been left out, and my arguments would have
remained in full force. But this is a fetch that he has thought of, or was
suggested to him by some friend when he came to study and answer my piece after
printing. If he had thought of these in the time of writing his letter, instead
of founding the charge upon the general scheme and run of the arguments (which
he is careful not to call my arguments, lest he should give me too much credit)
he would have expressed himself thus that in such and such expressions I
arminianized, and not that the general scheme was incumbered with this
difficulty.

But let us now look into those dangerous passages, and see what he can make of
them. First, says he, "he frequently represents natural men as truly desirous
of avouching the Lord for their God." I flatly deny the charge; there is not
the least foundation for it in my Essays. Next, says he, "he frequently
represents natural men as sincerely entering into covenant with God, and giving
up themselves and their children to him in covenant." This is as groundless as
the other. Is there no difference between a man's prevailingly hoping he does a
duty sincerely ( i. e. graciously) and his really doing it in that manner?
those that have been long under conviction must certainly know, that they pass
through such a variety of dispositions, as that they are exceeding apt to take
it for saving grace: sometimes mourning and great relentings for sin, it
appearing to them the most odious thing in the world: sometimes great pangs of
affection; sometimes great joy at some imperfect discoveries of gospel grace,
or upon viewing gospel encouragements; sometimes all these streams are dried
up, and they appear to themselves the most hardened wretches in the world; and
then they flow again, etc. And thus it may be alternately for years. And during
the continuance of such operations, they may be (at times) as fully satisfied
of their sincerity as that they have a being (whether it be a gracious
sincerity they know not). And in such a case, may they not justly say (say it
without lying) "that as far as they know their own heart they are sincerely
willing to give themselves and their children to God? Mr. R. art thou a MASTER
IN ISRAEL, and know not these things? if not, it is high time you should:
and for that end, to read Mead, Allen, Guthry, and such experimental writers;
if it be not beneath you to read such low authors as these. It is plain, the
Israelites were under such religious impressions at Sinai, that they verily
thought they spoke truth and acted with sincerity, when they said, all that the
Lord has commanded us, we will do, etc. And the same is the case frequently
with sinners, when under conviction. Mr. Robbins's mistake, whenever he is
speaking of the unregenerate, seems to arise from his considering them in their
mere naturals (in which nothing but hell is breathed forth) wholly destitute of
the common influences of the spirit, or of those divine afflatus's which the
unregenerate are capable of; such as Balaam was under when he talks so
divinely, or Saul when he had another heart (though not a new heart) given him;
or the divine impressions the stony ground hearers were under, though the stony
heart still remained. In which case, not only outward acts of sin are
restrained; but the inward motions of sin are pent up; so that their
inclination to them seems to be gone, and their hearts rise within them with
indignation against themselves, whenever they think of their old ways. This is
a common case. And whenever it is so, it is natural for men (who are
unacquainted with the real operations of divine or sanctifying grace) to think
themselves sincere, and that these impressions will forever remain. It is a
frequent observation of divines, there is such a resemblance between common and
saving grace, that not only the church, but the person himself may be deceived
by it: and when this is the case, according to Mr. R's own principles, a man
ought to come. -- I would query here, whether he had not as much charity for
one he propounded, in the time of it, as for any that ever he admitted, who
made a relation very particular indeed. But has since given too much reason to
think, that there was nothing saving in it. To which I add, if it is such an
easy thing to come to satisfying conclusions about a man's regenerate state, as
Dr. B. holds, what need of so many volumes to satisfy the doubting conscience?
"He must sit down and count the cost and come to a peremptory resolution," says
he. Alas! how many have done so in their own apprehension; and yet when
temptations came, what wythes have they proved?
This observation I desire the reader to carry along with him, whenever the
unregerate are spoken of as acting with any degree of sincerity: and not to
imagine that I hold, or that it is the natural consequence of my doctrine,
"that there is really some good thing in them toward the Lord;" as Mr. R.
represents in his letter (Essays. p 36.) and in his book.

He next quotes that passage, "as for those that grow up, it is a seal at least
that they shall not only have the offer of Christ, but the strivings of his
spirit, which, if not resisted, will prove effectual to their conversion." Does
the arminianism lie in the first part of this passage? then Dr. C. Mather was
an arminian; for he says, their baptism is to seal the engagement of God to
them, that when they are of age to choose and to act for themselves, they shall
at least have some offer of the gospel, with some striving of the spirit, etc.
(Infant bapt p. 6.) Or does it lie in the words not resisted? supposing I had
used the words not quenched, it would have as fully expressed my meaning. And
is not this an apostolic expression? 1 Thessalonians. v. 19. He must then fight it out
with the apostle, as using a phrase tending to arminianism. I never scrupled to
tell sinners under evident convictions, that God's spirit striving with them
was a token for good; that when he begun to strive in a soul, he never left it,
unless wilfully resisted; that therefore it was their duty to cherish his
motions, and not to stifle them, as too many did, by company, by drink, by
neglect of the means, by unwatchfulness, etc. Not that God was tied by promise
to give them special grace; but that, seeing he in sovereign mercy had begun to
work in them (when he knew their natural contrariety and opposition to hun)
they had reason to expect the continuance of his motions and influences, till
he had wrought saving effects in their souls, if not with violence drove away,
etc. see Act. vii. 51. and Isai. lxiii. 10. Mr. R's blunder here seems to arise
from his not distinguishing between wilful resistance and the natural
opposition there is between corruption and divine operations: or it arises from
the bare sound of the word resist which is much used in the quinquarticular
controversy.

As for spelling out the denial of the doctrine of irresistible grace in
conversion, because I suppose the sinner may resist the motions of the spirit
previous to conversi^n, it is so weak that it is unworthy of the least notice.
I might as well spell out arminianism from his exhorting sinners to cherish the
influences of the spirit, whenever striving; as if he held that the
unregenerate soul was not wholly depraved, or that it was capable of
cooperating with the spirit of God in the work of regeneration: for certainly
cherishing is an act.

Next, he falls soul upon me for some "quotations from a writer," who he says
is "not the most noted for Calvinism. It is surprising, that Dr. B. and his
disciples talk so much about Calvinism, when it is notoriously known, that he
brands all those that are real and thorough Calvinists, (or that hold the same
principles Calvin did) with the name of antinomians.
[As much as to say, that he was a halfway Calvinist, a proper advocate for a
halfway practice.] If it be bad to speak evil of things we know not, it is
equally bad to speak evil of persons we know not. I am certain he never read
this author, on whom he lays such a stigma, and that in fact he knows nothing
about him. It is the pious and learned Edward Leigh, Esquire a man as famous for
soundness in the faith and vital piety as judge Hale himself, or Mr. Polhill.
And his systim of divinity contains but little of his own composure; it is
chiefly a collection from the old puritan and calvinistical writers, such as
Perkins, Twiss, Ames, Pemble, Calvin, Ursin, and scores more; and is filled
with an elaberate confutation of all the arminian doctrines. He might with as
much truth have fixed such a brand on Calvin himself.

But what are these quotations! The first is, "The Lord will as assuredly
ingrasse us into Christ and cloache us with his righteousness, as we have the
outward washing, if we deprive not ourselves thereof by our own carelessness."
And is not this the very doctrine that he implicitly teaches, when he says, p.
48. "There are promises all over the b^ble to children of believers;" promises
of what? not of outward mercies only, but of spiritual blessings also: for
"otherwise there is no sense or meaning in the words." But setting this aside,
what is the plain meaning of the quotation taken in connection; but this; that
when God's spirit is striving in a soul, nothing but their own carelessness
will deprive them of the benefit of them? or prevent their ingras^ure into
Christ? or in other words, that sinners are the only faulty causes of their own
destruction? that it is owing to their own carelessness, ne^ligence and
wilfulness? as Christ says, John v. 40. Ye will not come to me, etc. in which
words there is as much arminianism as in the passage under consideration.

The next quotation which he endeavors to wrest is, "one end of this ordinance
is to quicken our dullness, and excite our diligence in performing gospel
duties, viz. our endeavors to believe, repent and obey, in confidence of God's
help and assistance." His ^ine reasoning here w^ll be spoiled by adding two
words. Let it run thus, (...) end of this ordinance is to quicken our dullness
and excite our diligence in performing gospel duties, viz. to excite our
endeavors to believe, etc." The word excite is necessarily understood, and it
would have been but tantology to have repeated it; and none but a wilful
wrester of words would have put such a construction on the passage as he has
done; which was, that what Mr. Leigh meant by performing gospel-duties was, the
ende^^ors of sinners and not believing repenting, etc. He adds, "according to
this, graceless persons (for he is speaking of those that are destitute of the
spiritual washing) do with diligence perform gospel duties." Mr. Leigh was not
speaking particularly of those destitute of the spiritual washing, but in a
general way including all baptized persons, whether believers or sinners. But
supposing it meant only of sinners, is there no difference between having our
diligence excited to perform gospel duties, and the actual performance? is it
any sin for unregenerates to ende^vor to perform gospel duties, to believe,
repent, etc. although they cannot do them without special grace? is it not in
the use of such endeavors, that they come to feel their own impotency and want
of strength, and the necessity of divine help, and so are brought to look to
God for all? But then these endeavors must be "in confidence of God's help and
assistance." This confidence it seems is another arminian phrase. Not so I hope
with respect to the believing part of the baptized (of whom Mr. Leigh is partly
speaking). But it must be so only with respect to unregenerates. Why? because
it implies " a promise of assistance" " a promise of saving blessings to such,"
which is rank arminianism. But can there be no confidence without an express
promise? had not the woman of Canaan a strong confidence respecting her
daughter, and yet no promise in the case? had not King Abijah (a graceless man)
the strongest confidence without a promise? 2 Chronicles. xiii. 12. If he should
say, this confidence was built upon the promises to David and Solomon. I
answer, these promises might have been fulfilled to his pious son Asa, though
he and his present army had perished.
And may not confidence arise from the general encouragements of the word,
without an express promise? Mr. Vincent says, "baptized persons may address God
with confidence. (see Essays. p. 58.) and dare Mr. R. deny him to be a thorough
Calvinist? but suppose a promise was wanting to found this confidence upon. Mr.
R. tells us, "there are promises all over the bible concerning the seed or
children of believers," though unregenerate themselves. And are not these
promises a sufficient foundation for confidence? I may well then retort. Mr. R.
"espouses the doctrine of promises, of saving blessings to the unregenerate."

The last instance of arminianism is, that I assert, "that in infants there is
no resistance or opposition to God's grace: for speaking of infants, Mr. C.
says, concerning most of them, they have not the grace of the covenant, though
there be no resistance or opposition on their parts." W^^ then, infants are
capable of resisting God's grace. And resistance is an ACT. Then consequently
they are capable of actual sin, which doctrine is neither Calvinism, nor
arminianism, nor the tenet of any sect that ever I heard of. I should be
reckoned two sarcastic, if I called it by the name of Robbinism for it is
singularity, though I know not what other name to give it. Mr. R. surely
forgets (when he accuses me of denying the doctrine of depravity) that if they
were not "depraved creatures," they would stand in no need of regenerating
grace, or the grace of the covenant. And passive resistance is a thing that I
can have no idea of, if it be not a direct contradiction in terms. Upon the
whole, let me ask him, is this a christian way of treating a brother? what if I
should criticize upon his sermons in this odd manner, I should surely spell out
arminianism in almost every sermon he preached. And is he willing to pass
through the ordeal or fiery trial in print?

Having thus done with particular instances, he in the close laments my unhappy
fate "in falling into such bad company," and "sinking so deep into the mire
before I was aware:" and is so kind as to offer his helping hand to lift me
out, advising me "to look around me" and consider and stop in time, before I
was wholly swallowed up in the dreadful whirlpool of error: for "that in
reality the dispute was more about doctrines than discipline, and the whole
cause of Calvinism was verily at stake, etc. Agreeable to this it is a notion
diligently propagated among us, that none but arminian ministers approve of my
book.
This brings to min^ a story I lately heard; one of his warm adherents, with
another, not long since falling into company with a minister of a neighboring
county, the minister enquired of them about the controversy at Plymouth, which
they gave him some account of. Upon which he expressing some wonder, that Mr. R
should manage as he had done etc. The warm disciple turned quick upon him, and
said Mr. B^ do you hold to this practice? then you must certainly have
self-righteousness. The minister smiled, and his companion was so ashamed, that
he soon shrunk away, and carried off this notable headpiece with him. This
leads me to take notice, that Mr. R. endeavors to affix the charge of
arminianism, not only on me particularly (upon the account of the passages
above) but also on the pactice itself. It is a necessary warping off, says he,
from Calvinism, and running into sentiments exactly agreeable to arminian
writers. Arise ye ghosts! of Shepard. Cotton, Hooker, Norton, Wilson, Mather,
etc. and hear the charge, that this man of yesterday brings against you! do you
plead guilty or not? it is strange, that none of our fathers, that none of the
synod, that none of the ministers for 140 years ever found it out: that the
great Mr. Davenport the chief opposer of the synod, never dreamed of any such
thing: but that this wonderful discovery should be reserved till this present
age, and that Dr. B. and Mr. R. should be the sagacious persons that spelt it
out. But it is an old proverb, that every generation grows wiser and wiser;
though here I must a little suspect their wisdom, and profess myself still so
pu^blind as not to see the necessary connextion between this practice and
arminianism; and hope that he, in his next answer, will render the matter more
plain, or there will still be many unbelievers, who will look upon it as a
scarecrow, set up to amuse or affright the populace.

For my part I never desire better company than the vener^^^^ persons above
mentioned, and would say, let my soul (...) gathered with them. And as for "the
bad company I am (...) present fallen into," I must tell him it is below a
gentleman to make such reflections, and hope upon further consideration he will
be ready to make all due acknowlegements. What if I should in return, lament
the bad company he is fallen into, namely, anabaptists, bad advisors,
counselors, etc. (even such counselors, as s^a^e of his great friends have
said they fear will prove his overthrow;) would he not think himself abused!
and yet I may more justly do it, than he in regard of me.

I now proceed to his sixth section from p. 51. to p. 60.

Wherein he endeavors to show, that I have misapprehended him in some things,
and misrepresented him in others. Some of the instances, he alleges I have
either already, or shall hereafter consider; and therefore shall pass them here.

The first instance is, "that I represent it as his opinion. that a man must
know he is in a gracious state, must have assurance before he come, etc." p.
51. "This is unfair, says he, we never held any such doctrine." To this I
suppose he refers in that passage of his letter. "You, sir, do certainly know,
that neither I nor the brethren hold such things as you there advanced as being
our sentiments." (Essays. p. 34.) Whether he holds it or no, I am certain it is
the necessary consequence of his principles, as I have often noted. But where
can we find that I directly charge him with this? he refers for proof to some
passages in the Essays, the first is p. 6. "if the knowledge of a man's good
estate (as they hold) is a necessary qualification for the Lord's Supper," etc.
And to the same purpose, p. 7. But is there not such a thing as a conjectural
as well as certain knowledge.? and do not I make an evident distinction between
these two? p. 9. (which is one of the pages he refers to): and is not the
latter there charged only as the necessary consequence of his doctrine? I am
sure Dr. B. makes use of the word knowledge or knowing in the case. And Mr. R.
has several times, either in his sermon or otherwise used such high
expressions, as his hearers took to purport a certain knowledge. But yet I never
directly charged him with this. His usual phrase I know is, that prevailing
hopes are sufficient. But is not even this carrying the matter too far? there
is no essential difference between the first coming to ordinances, and the
after-coming (they renewing covenant as really each time); and if the first
coming must be with prevailing hopes, then the after coming must be so too:
consequently persons must never come when they are under prevailing fears. And
is this right? must this door of consolation be shut? must christians be
excluded from ordinances when they stand in most need of them.

He next taxes me with treating him hardly and unjustly in that passage of the
Essays. p. 26. "It has been once and again said, that the purport of the new
scheme is to enlarge, and not to curtail and diminish their privileges. viz. by
obliging them to come immediately into full communion." And is not this an
obligation with a witness? and designed as such? for how could their privileges
be enlarged in any other way but by coming? if they stayed away, he would allow
them no privilege at all.

In the same page, he taxes me with mistake (if not falsehood) in the account I
gave of Mr. Leonard's introducing the practice. But which is most likely to
know the truth of ^acts, whether Mr. R or I who lived upon the spot in the time
of it, I leave the world to judge. And my account is confirmed by an ancient
deacon of the church, who was present at the meeting, and actually voted in the
affair. But it seems Mr. R. will not believe any thing that comes from our
quarter, if it does not suit him. This is not the only instance of his
infidelity. It is certain matter of fact, that Mr. Leonard had the majority
with him long before the point was brought to a public decision. That the
practice was received by a unanimous voice I never asserted; but that there was
a general acquiescence I have the utmost reason to believe. As to some ( i. e.
two or three's) objecting, mentioned in the record, that was previous to the
vote, and is no ways inconsistent with their declaring they would acquiesce, if
the generality of the church were for introducing the practice; and "the
calmness" with which the meeting was carried on and concluded, shows it to be
the case. And if it had been otherwise, is it not strange that some or other
should not remember it, besides the "aged member," mentioned by Mr. R. (it
being transacted but about 41 years ago) As to the account given by said aged
person (if I am informed right) it so directly militated with the record, that
Mr. R. (though he made use of it in his private visits, to prove the deacon and
me, liars, yet he) was afraid to set it down in full in his book. But if the
record had not providentially stood in his way, how unmercifully would he have
triumphed over us, upon this single testimony? and indeed he can scarce help
doing it notwithstanding. I do not intend hereby, to cast any disparagement
upon this aged member (I reckon him a worthy one as well as Mr. R.); but age
and infirmity may make him forget.

As for the charge of "innovation" ( p. 53.) I never brought it against him. He
has a right to propose an alteration, if he be conscienciously persuaded. But
I should have been glad, if he had been as prudent in the management of it as
Mr. Leonard was. If Mr. Leonard, instead of taking the steps he did, had wrote
two such letters either to elder Faunce, or old deacon Foster, as Mr. R. has
done to me; instead of bringing in the practice, he would have outed himself
(without a very humble acknowlegement indeed), and brought such a stain upon
him as he could never have got over. And as to the "alteration's not
originating from him," but that numbers of the brethren were dissatisfied with
the practice previous to his appearing against it, I have reason to think he is
mistaken. It was not so much the practice itself as the abuse of it, that gave
ground of dissatisfaction. If only persons of serious characters had applied, I
believe none would have been uneasy; but that some (whose real characters were
better known to them than to the minister) should stand up in the congregation
and covenant in such a solemn manner, this filled them with trembling: and it
would have been just the same, if they had applied for full communion. This was
really the case, as I have heard some of the brethren declare, whom I suppose
Mr. R. refers to.

It makes me sick to hear so much of "the original plan of this church and of
all the churches in New England." ( p. 53.) They had really no plan about it;
it was a point not thought of, till the third generation came upon the stage.
And then as soon as there was occasion for it, the matter was discussed; and
not long after the practice was almost ganerally received.

In p. 55. He "takes notice of a very cruel instance of misrepresentation," as
he calls it, namely, my setting down that expression of his, what signifies it
to have an infant sprinkled with a little water? this expression, he says, or
something like it was brought in in the midst of an elaborate speech, which he
sets down. p. 56. But how was it possible for him to make such a speech, while
I was actually reading my Essay? Could we both speak at once? in fact, this
expression stood singly and alone, and was blurted out in the audience of some
that stood near him in the time of my reading, and not spoken in the hearing of
the whole assembly, when I had done, in a set answer to me. And indeed he never
attempted a direct answer to any of my arguments in one of the church meetings,
as I or others can recollect. The truth is, that when he uttered this sentence,
he was "under such great perturbation of spirit" (of which hereafter) that I
believe he scarce knew what he said; and if he had alleged this in excuse, it
would have served much better, than to have entertained his reader with a
romantic speech that no body ever heard before. It is certain, there is
nothing contained in my third Essay, that gave proper foundation for such a
speech. He says, Mr. C. had then been insisting ^n the great privilege of
infant's baptism; and had carried the matter too far; even so far, that people
would be in danger of thinking that they were actually regenerated by baptism;
and therefore all that were not baptized must consequently be lost. Where can
he find one passage in that third Essay tending that way? (or indeed in any of
the Essays?) And I did not otherwise utter one word about the point in
controversy during that whole meeting; but studiously avoided it, being then
very unwell. (This then is all a mere fiction of his own) Again, he says, "Mr.
C. then insisted, that all baptized persons had a right to this privilege,
whether regenerate or not, if they were free from heresy or scandal, etc." But
where can he find any thing of this in that third Essay? is there one word in
it about heresy or scandal? or about the right of unregenerate persons? his
foundation and speech then must both fall together, and pass with the reader
for a mere nonentity. I am sorry I am obliged to say this; but must I not
speak the truth? does he not enforce me to it in my own defense? and will he
venture to call it cruelty again?

In p. 58. he expressly asserts contrary to several former concessions, that
all the baptized, who do not come to the Lord's-table, are wicked persons. He
had before mustered up all the hard terms (or names) he could think of, calling
them, neglecters, habitual neglecters and violaters, renouncers, refusers,
etc.etc. (These phrases occur above 50 times in his book.) But here is the
crowning cut, it comes at last to be "open wickedness." This they "live" in,
and this they are likely to dye in, for it seems as "the neglect is continued,"
and like to be so to the end. And being so bad, they have it seems "justly
forfeited the character and privileges of disciples, or visible christians."
What man or what woman of feeling will bear all this? and how is the bruised
reed broken to purpose? did he think of this, when he preached his funeral
sermon? or did it come in mind, when he passes such a compliment upon "the
continued and habitual neglecters" (as he calls them) among us? p. 48.

Upon the whole here, I would observe, and it cannot but be obvious to every
learned reader, what immense pains he has taken to pick out ^hreds and scraps
of my discourse, to wrest my expressions, and misrepresent my assertions, etc.
to make me look inconsistent and ridiculous. If he had taken half the pains to
have studied and answered my arguments, he would have done a much more
acceptable service to the church of Christ. What good will it do his cause to
make me appear weak and low, or even vile and bad?

PART III.
I come now to his last Section. p. 60.

In remarking upon which, I shall consider his manner of treating me in
relation to the particular controversy.

HERE a dark scene occurs, which I am sorry he has obliged me to bring into
light. It really pains me to enter upon it; but how can I do otherwise, after
such innumerable misrepresentations? and when he has had recourse to so many
evasions to hide the truth? perhaps he thought by the number of his charges to
lay me under a necessity of writing so largely in order to clear myself, that
the book would be of such bulk as none would subscribe for it or buy it, so
that I must of necessity lay under the weight of them and be silenced forever.
^ut I trust providence will order otherwise, and that there will be some way
for the relief of injured innocence. Perhaps some may think I take delight in
the subject, and that I mustered up every thing I could in my first piece to
expose him; but it is far from being the case. What I then wrote was but a
small sample of his management, (which, not a principle of revenge, but
necessity did dictate:) and I suppressed a multitude of things (directly in
point) that were as derogatory to his character as those I mentioned, and that
out of tenderness to him. But now by his imprudent and unguarded manner of
writing, he has necessitated me to enter upon a larger field, and to relate
several things (though not the one half that might be told) that I had much
rather have buried in oblivion. My end in it is not to expose him, but to clear
my own character; which I am the more solicitous to do, least a good cause
should suffer for my sake: for if I am so bad as represented, who will think my
Essays worth reading?

He first attacks me about publishing his letters, that passed between us; he
begins with it in his preface, pursues it in his book, and repeats it over and
over. He calls them "private letters:" but how could they be private, when all
the town and country (where the public controversy was known) had heard of the
letters long before their printing? he tells us "that the publication of them
was kept a profound secret from the subscribers." The undertakers tell me the
direct contrary; they never made a secret of it: but openly declared, that not
"what was read," but the whole affair should be brought into public. "Some, he
says, would never have subscribed, had they known of the printing of the
letters." I never heard of but one that declared so; and he, after the book
came out, and had the opportunity of perusal, said, he now saw the absolute
necessity of printing the letters. But, "what have the public to do with
private letters? what concern with matters merely personal? or that relate to
some difference between two persons at Plymouth?" But how could they be called
merely personal, unless they were written merely to vent his spleen against me?
Did they not relate to the question in debate? was it not the only answer he
had ever given directly to my Essays? and was it not natural to expect to find
something in them edifying and instructing, tending to illustrate the
controversy, and to bring conviction both to me and others? what a reflection
does he cast upon himself, by supposing it to be otherwise? by calling them
merely personal? by intimating that they contained matter foreign to the point?
and that they were really nothing to the purpose? why did he write them then?
"But I did not ask his leave to publish them." What reason had he to expect
this, after he had abused me as he had done? But "I published them without his
knowledge, he did not so much as suspect it, till after they were gone to the
press." How could this be, when he declared to one (if not more) of the members
several weeks before they were sent to the press, "that he understood the
letters were to be printed, but did not ca^e upon his own account, but should
be sorry for me, because he thought it would hurt me? This seems to be a common
expression with him both before and after the letters went to the press; and I
suppose was chiefly spoken before those, who he thought would tell me of it, to
discourage my proceeding. I heard it at several different times.
And how came it about, that some of his most noted intimates were up in arms
about printing the letters, and took such pains to prevent it near 2 months
before they were sent, viz. by posting up at the market place, a most virulent
libel, containing not only invectives, but threatenings in case I proceeded? and
dropping another of the same import in the streets? perhaps he thought these
would make such impressions as to prevent my going on, and so did not "
suspect, etc." I know no better way to account for his peremptory denial, or to
save his veracity. But "I myself was the faulty cause of their being made
public; they were indeed soon in every one's mouth, yet it was not through his
means, but my own." How could this be, when he read my letter openly in a
neighbors house presently after he received it? "But I never showed them, says
he, to four persons in the world, till I heard he had given off copies." This
cannot be true; His second letter perhaps he did not show, but the other he did
frequently. This I guess is his salvo, to prevent the impeachment of his
veracity.
but suppose it was, did he not do what was worse? the same week and the week
after he received my letter, he visited most abundantly, and in all places the
letters were the subject of conversation; mine he represented in the most
heinous light, as a mere heap of " scurrilities, etc." reading scraps of it for
confirmation, or reciting them memoriter; and his own he explained away to
nothing, In general, by saying, "that he did not mean so and so," though he
could put no other meaning. Or more particularly, "that by the most godly, he
chiefly meant women," though he expressly mentions men, and though he speaks of
those "that saw the bad consequences of my arguments (Essays. p. 35. 39.) which
the women could not do, most of them having never heard the arguments. Further,
that "by seeming affectionateness," he had no design to impeach my sincerity.
That he had no intent to tax me with arminianism, "though I hold exactly the
same sentiments with arminian writers," (p. 49.) that he had no thoughts of
forbidding my preaching; that by instructions he did not mean preaching, etc.
And as a crowning cut, take this specimen of his art. A good woman was grieving
to him, that he should call me an arminian, etc. He told her, "it was no such
thing, Mr. C. was as sound a man as any in the world; all he meant by it was,
that I was in a legal frame when I wrote my piece," thus he suits his answer to
the several tastes of his hearers.
endeavoring to make it appear altogether harmless and innocent. In consequence
of this, the cry was from all quarters, how I had abused him, calling him
schoolboy, etc. and that without any just provocation. And at the same time
his emissaries were indefaticable in trumpeting it about to people in town and
country, and even in the streets, that my letter was a most spiteful,
malicious, scurrilous thing, and Mr. R's a harmless, just, and handsome letter.
These things I had information of from day to day. In the mean time, I only
read his and my letter in my own house to such as asked the favor, and never
went about publishing them at all. How could I otherwise account for my
withdraw from the sacrament, but by reading his letter? where is the man that
should have received such a letter from his minister just before the sacrament
but would have absented? and upon such absence, would not every one be upon the
enquiry what was the ground or cause of it? (as was really the case here). And
was I not necessitated to tell? and must I not read the letter to justify
myself? must I not show, that I was ineffect laid under admonition, as far as
his authority reached? and so an effectual bar laid in the way of my coming?
and indeed I was unfit for communion, if his letter was true. And besides, how
could I get witnesses to clear me of his aspersions, but by communicating the
letters to those that were at the church meeting (both of the church and
congregation) who heard what I said and read as well as he: and by
communicating them to them, did not the matter become fully, a public affair?
"But I gave copies." No; there was no copy taken of his letter till above
three weeks after it was sent, and after he and his friends had managed as
above, and the whole town wrung of the affair; and that copy was taken without
my knowledge, but if I had known it I see nothing faulty in it. The other
letters were not copied till long after. I would here observe, that if Mr. R.
had dealt fairly and ingenuously about the letters, and had read the whole
every where, both in town and country, and, without commenting, had left every
one to judge for themselves about the contents, I should never have had a
thought of printing them. But it seems it would not answer his end, to have
either his or my letter read in full; but they must be mangled and distorted in
such manner, as to set people in a rage against me.

At length, after so much talk about private letters, he seems finally to give
up all, and to grant that they were of a public nature p. 61. "What then, says
he, does this give him a right to publish them without my consent!" Yes, say I,
because he and his adherents endeavored "to palm it upon the world," that they
were just, good and necessary, yea, even meek letters, and that mine were bad
and abusive to the last degree. "But what right had I to publish his letters
any more than his sermon without his consent?" I answer, the case is vastly
different; but if they were exactly parrellel, there are many cases wherein it
is necessary to publish the whole or part of minister's sermons, particularly
when they preach false doctrine, and persist in it after due admonition. It is
an old saying that a minister's sermon is no longer his own when he has
preached it. His hearers then have a right to take notice of it when, and how
they please, especially if he has delivered any thing that is wrong, and will
not confess it, after proper means have been used to bring him to confession.
Upon the whole here, what means all this heat about the letters? either they
were just and good, or they were bad: if the former, who ever made such an ado
before about having their good deeds published to the world? ought he not
rather to thank me for it? if they were bad, why did he not confess it, and so
put an end to the controversy? I had left the communion (though not the
meeting) upon the account of the letters, and was aspersed for it with the
utmost diligence, as having done it without sufficient grounds; Mr. R.
justified his conduct in every part, and endeavored to prejudice people against
me all manner of ways; he even cried out of persecution in the pulpit. What
would I then do? what remedy had I left but to publish the letters, and let the
church and world know how injuriously I was treated? I know it will signify
nothing with those that will not so much as read my book; but I trust the
impartial world will weigh things in an even balance, and that they will
acquit me from the heinous charges he brings against me as having acted
"contrary to all the rules of politeness, humanity and christianity;" and "
below the character of a man of benevolence and uprightness." Yea, must he not
acquit me himself? for if "I had wronged him 30 times more by my letter than he
had me (as he has declared over and over) I had exposed myself 30 times more by
the publication than I did him. If he believes himself, believes his own
declarations, how can he justly fault me for what I have done? at lest how can
he cry out of wrong and injury, when I had been only wronging myself? is all
this concern manifested merely out of regard to my reputation? I think it
unnecessary to say any more about the publication of the letters, though I
could add many other particulars, if it were needful, in my own vindication. I
would only further notice, that the design of this fearful outcry seems to be
to divert people's minds from the merits of the cause, and to turn their
attention from the abuses I have received, that I might have none to aid and
assist me in seeking relief; as a subtle bird will flutter and cry and run on,
in order to draw people further from their nest.

Having thus chastised me for the publication of the letters, he next proceeds
to consider the contents of them. He first tells us, "they contained his real
sentiments, and that he had never seen cause to alter them." p. 61. Pray then
what did he confess at our meeting? for he would bear the world in hand, that
he offered me all proper satisfaction: but this now appears by his own words to
be nothing at all. Alas! what a cheat did he design to put upon me by a few
doubtful words artfully put together? he then gives his grounds for writing.
1st. "That I had delivered things of VERY dangerous tendency." Let the reader
look into my 3d. Essay, and he will see that this is without foundation. 2d.
"That I had grossly misrepresented him." How? by saying that he "was for
obliging persons to come immediately into full communion." (Essays. p. 26.)
This could not be a ground of his writing, because this expression was never
read in public, but was afterward added, when I transcribed the Essays for the
press, by way of explanation. But however the thing is true; he is for obliging
them two ways. 1st. By denying them any privilege, if they will not come
immediately into full communion. 2d. By intimating frequently, that the church
ought to call them to an account, if they do not come.

He adds as another ground of his writing, "that I had charged him with
speaking slightingly of relations." p. 62. How short is his memory? this
passage was not contained in any of my Essays, but is only to be found in my
answer to his letter. And how could he tell without a prophetic spirit what I
would write beforehand? or how could that be a ground of writing his letter,
which was not wrote till after I had received his letter? this shows in what a
careless random manner he makes his remarks. Other instances will occur
presently. As for the other things that I charge him with, respecting
relations, he plainly owns them to be true. p. 63. And as to the phrase
speaking slightingly etc. the chief I meant by it was, that he slighted the use
of them, by holding them unnecessary, etc. which he plainly confesses.

Another instance of misrepresentation he says is in p. 32. of the Essays,
wherein I assert, "that the new plan supposes it necessary that candidates have
a certain knowledge or assurance of their gracious state." My words are, "the
new plan supposes it necessary, that all candidates should have clear evidence,
if not assurance of their regenerate state" As much as to say, that if they do
not hold assurance, yet at lest they hold clear evidences to be necessary. And
is not this the case? surely he does not hold that dark evidence is sufficient.
Again, under the same head, I use the term good evidence; and does he think,
that bad evidence will do? he then goes further than I. What little ground then
had he for that exclamation in his letter; "you, sir, do certainly know, that
neither I nor they hold to such things as you there advanced as being our
sentiments?" which is founded upon this passage of the Essays.

Another misrepresentation is, "that he was for driving on with violence. p.
63. Let any one read over his letters again, and they will find violence
enough. In what a jehu-like manner does he drive on? what method does he take
to terrify me and others from free-speaking and opposing him in public any
more? besides many other proofs, that might be mentioned, but I must not write
a volume.

A third reason of writing his letter was "the unfair methods I took, working
upon people's passions instead of reason, etc. p. 63. -- In his letter he
represents the whole of my piece to be of this teno^, but now it seems it was
only two or three short passages. The rest then must be addressed to "their
reason and judgment." And why would not he allow me to mix a word or two of the
pathetic with this? it would be a dry piece indeed, if there was nothing said
to move the affections in such a concerning point, no less than the unchurching
our children. And that it was really an unchurching or excommunicating them, I
think has been fully proved; so that I appealed to men's reason and judgment,
as well as passions in the case. I must add here, if these baptized childred
are lambs (as he seems to grant, p. 64.) they ought to be treated as lambs, not
as dogs only to be whiped. Whipping is indeed sometimes necessary for children,
but only to be whiped is to treat them worse than dogs. For he seems to
suppose, that they are the subjects of discipline, in some parts of his book
(though I can not find that he directly asserts it) when he laments the want of
discipline. etc.

As for the expression "sprung from hell" p. 65. Do not all practices that are
"wrong and erroneous" spring from hell? And must not the brethren necessarily
say, this practice sprung from thence, if they voted it out? must I then be
faulted for speaking of things as they are? or for representing the truth in a
strong light? is he afraid of the light?

The next "unfair method I used, was, quoting Isai. lxvi. 5." p. 62, 5.
Concerning this I think I have said enough in my letter, which he takes not the
least notice of, but goes on to represent things in the worst colors. If he
will have it after all that I pronounced curses upon him; let me tell him, the
curse seems already come, upon him in full weight and measure, and I hope and
pray that he never may feel it in higher degrees: the curse is shame. And is it
not evident from his conduct, that he is really and greatly ashamed of his
letters, though he be too haughty to own it? how comes he else to call me
"unpolite, inhuman, and unchristian" in publishing them? and why such a noise
about it for many months together? I wonder he had not brought a new charge of
cursing upon my reminding him of that text, Matt. xviii. 6. in my letter. (See
Essays. p. 43.) He has such a knack at commenting, he might have made it
appear in as hedious a light as the text under consideration. As to my pointing
at him when I read the text, I have no remembrance of it. I have a common
motion of one hand when speaking in public, which he might take for pointing,
as I stood facing him. As for addressing the baptized in general, as he
represents both in p. 62, and 65. it is utterly unfair to give such a
representation to the world. I only spoke to those of "good conversation:" many
of whom stood ready to renew their baptismal covenant, as he himself tells us,
p. 65. but were prevented by his shutting the door against them. And I thought
I ought to give them a word of comfort under the dark cloud that was hanging
over them. And as I had then, so I have still a strong faith, that this
practice will never be wholly banished out of this church, though it may be
suspended for a while. Perhaps after I am dead and gone, these words may be
remembered. The promise is sure. Isai. lvii. 17. 1st. cl.

With this text, he couples a sentence belonging to another head "the plea or
pretense is grace." But is not the word pretense or pretension sometimes used
in a good sense? but if it be taken in the worst sense, is there no grounds for
it? no doubt many act sincerely and conscienciously in the affair: but can it
be deemed any other than pretense in those that take the most ungracious
methods to propagate the cause? filling the whole town and country with lies
and false representations: dropping the most notorious libels in the streets,
or posting them up in public places; printing a most infamous advertisement, to
blast the credit of my book and the author? endeavoring to get the book
suppressed or burnt, by carring the most barefaced falsehoods to the printer!
and many other such like things? but who has done this? none I believe doubts
but that some of the warmest zealots in the affair had a principal hand in the
whole. And what can it be but pretense in one of the hottest advocates for the
new scheme, who in former years actually owned the covenant among us, but has
not as yet come to full communion? can a man be sincere in fighting against
himself?

He concludes about his letter with observing, "That all the while I was
treating of this affair at the church-meeting, I appeared to be in as great
heat and vehemence of temper, as ever he saw a man, on any such occasion in his
life. And that this was the observation of multitudes, as well as his own." p.
65. But there was not multitudes there, how then could they observe it? I am
sure I never heard of such an observation made by the spectators before. I have
been informed, that the few indifferent spectators from other parishes,
universally observed after the meeting, that the anger and vehemence was all on
the other side.
And is not this observation utterly repugnant to the tenor of his letter? we
hear nothing there of anger and bad temper, but only of "passionate
exclamations and pathetic addresses, and seeming affectionateness, popular
harangues, and appeals to men's passions, etc. Even such an artful method in
general, as tended to gain the populace and to fill their minds with prejudices
against his." But now it seems nothing but tempest and hurricane, or violence,
heat and anger appeared in me, and that through the whole meeting. A sur method
not to captivate and charm the hearers, but to ruin myself and cause. And with
what an ill grace do angryness and affectionateness seem to be coupled
together? If I was in such a passion as he tells of, I think he ought to have
reproved me for it in a friendly manner, either by word or writing; this would
have afforded sufficient ground for a letter of castigation: but not a word of
this in his letter, but quite reverse: which shows, that the account he now
gives is but a late invention, to serve a present turn.
But if I was in such a heat and passion must there not be some cause for it?
and why does he not set that down? was it because he overcame me in argument?
no; he never pretended to give a direct answer to any of my arguments. Was it
because the church were not willing to hear me? no; many of the church pushed
me forward to speak, and there seemed a general disposition to hear me in all
the meetings, except the last. Was it because the major part of the church
appeared disposed to cast out the practice? no; the contrary appeared in all
our meetings; and I much question whether he could get a vote for it even now,
when he has put the generality into a flame. Why then should I manifest such
heat and anger? for my part, I am not conscious of much anger at that meeting;
(nay rather too little, considering my provocations.) I am sure I did not read
my piece in an angry tone and accent, (of this he himself clears me in his
letter: I was silent the much greater part of the meeting, being not well: I
^at with patience to hear him read his collection (though I thought it not much
to the purpose) which lasted about an hour and a quarter or more. And when he
hist or pished at my Essays (which he did several times and at great length) I
manifested not the least resentment. Although it be the highest indignity, that
can be offered to a man in the literary world, I did not so much as let him
know I heard him; which shows, that I had some command of my passions. And the
only times I spoke with heat was, when he broke in upon me and interrupted me
in reading my piece, endeavoring to hinder my going on, (which he did
frequently:) and I think this was a just ground of resentment; especially when
I had patiently and without interruption heard his piece, which was more than
as long again as mine. At these times, I claimed my privilege with some warmth;
and told him, that as a member I had a right to speak, and would speak, etc.
And by this means I at last got through, though with much difficulty.

If he should say, he interrupted me, because I would not give others
opportunity to speak, and because our side monopolized most of the talk to
themselves. This could not be the case; for none of his side of the question
ever attempted to speak to the merits of the cause in any of our meetings,
except he himself: (so that, although "the most godly," they did not manifest any
super-eminence of knowledge.) we should have been glad to have heard them, if
they had had any thing to say, and would readily have given way: but they
seemed all to depend upon him, and implicitly to receive what he said for
truth. And as for himself, he argued as much and as long as he pleased, without
interruption.

In something the like sort, (though not so grossly) he treated deacon F. The
deacon in the preceding meetings had said but little; but was now determined
to speak his whole mind, and argue the point at some length. He began -- but
had scarce uttered a sentence or two, before Mr. R. (who stood facing him)
attempting to answer, and so kept doing as fast as the deacon uttered any thing
new, (though he begged not to be interrupted) that after a few minutes he was
forced to desist. And has had no opportunity of declaring his full sentiments
to the church to this day. Of this the deacon much complained the evening
after. And another of the deacons he endeavored to stop in the same manner
while speaking; but when that would not do, he (with a peremptory tone and with
a slap of his hand on the seat) bad him sit down; which the deacon readily
obeyed.

But was there no passion on Mr. R's side at this meeting? we hear not a word
of that. Though as soon as I had mentioned that text in Isaiah, he appeared all
in a flame: His repeated hissing or pishing was previous to this, when he
appeared otherwise to be in a perfect calm, namely, while my 2d. Essay was in
reading, which was done by one of the deacons at the beginning of the meeting,
I being too much indisposed to read both Essays. But the 3d. Essay I delivered
myself, toward the close of the meeting, when he was too angry to hiss. I
would here mention a curious anecdote about this hissing: when my book first
came out, he said, "that was a lie, for he did not hiss, but only pished;" as
if pishing was not a species of hissing. But if my cars deceived me not, there
was hissing in more senses than one. This lie he has not seen meet to record
in his book, but seems to have reserved it for the private use of his own
auditors; It was they alone, that were to be entertained with this curious and
notable distinction.
and it continued all the remainder of the meeting; and the reader will easily
see, that he had not got over it, 4 days after, when he wrote his lettter; yea,
it is evident by his book, that he has not got over it to this day, although I
made him something of a confession in my letter. (Essays. p. 39.) But how did
his passion manifest itself at the meeting? why he appeared to be in the
greatest agitation; sometimes sitting down, then suddenly starting up, then
sitting and rising again, etc. talking to himself, blurting out short sentences
to those that stood near him, shaking his head, scowling, (not to say grinning)
stamping, frequent interrupting, etc. In short, he appeared to be in as great a
tempest of passion, as ever I saw a man in my life, (and so but an ill judge of
other's passions). And his whole deportment during the two last meetings was
unbecoming a moderator, (not to say more:) insomuch that I have frequently
said, that if the moderator of a town-meeting, or the speaker of the general
assembly should behave in such manner, they would be in danger of being thrown
off the bench with violence, etc. For such reasons as these, the deacons asked
the advice of an ordination council at Middleborough a few weeks after, whether
it were not proper for the church to have another moderator (viz. a neighboring
minister) at the next meeting. They did not indeed give a particular detail of
their reasons, out of tenderness to Mr. R. but only in general, that Mr. R.
being one party and the church the other, whether it would not be advisable
upon this ground? But Mr. R. who was present, would not hear a word of it,
though, as I am informed, the ministers advised to it; which advice Mr. R.
wholly denied in the face of the church, when reminded of it at the next
meeting.

I now come to his animadversions on my letter. And here upon entrance I must
note, that he wholly omits one thing with which he inflamed common people as
much as any thing; my calling him "schoolboy." (Essays. p. 41.) This was long
in every one's mouth, but it seems it would not bear publication. Another thing
omitted is, "the glaring inconsistencies in my letter, which he forebore
pointing out, least it should put me to pain." (See his 2d. letter. p. 49.) We
hear not a word of this in his book. Perhaps he still forebore, out of
tenderness to me, least he should "give me some pain and uneasiness." He
likewise omits remarking about "his provoking letters to the precinct
committee." This was too tender a string to touch upon. I believe they would
have proved fatal to him, if they had been brought into public; but we of the
committee endeavored to stifle them: so far were we from seeking his hurt;
though we were censured by many for it.

The first thing he animadverts upon is, that it is intimated in the Essays,
"he had turned away or refused some who had offered to own the covenant." p.
65. It is amazing to me, that such stress is laid upon this. The question I
believe has been put scores of times, both in church-meeting and out, by
himself and others, "who was ever denied?" and withal added, that it is time
enough to complain, and to have church-meetings, when instances of refusal
appear, and individuals enter complaint of being debared. But is not a general
denial equivalent to a thousand particular ones? has he not denied them in his
sermons, in all his discourses public and private, for above two years past,
yea, and in his book, p. 2. "I thought it my duty (says he there) to desist the
practice?" And yet he still dins us with this question, who was ever denied? it
makes me perfectly ^ick to hear so much of it. He tells us, p. 65. " many have
frequently discoursed with him on the affair, and wished that it might be
peaceably settled, that they might bring their children." i. e. They wished
that he would take off the bar he had laid in their way, and allow them to
come. And is not this all the application, that persons can well make under the
present situation of things? but the particular person he refers to, went much
further than this; he discoursed with him no less than 3 times on the affair,
with direct design to have been admitted, if he would have suffered it; nay, he
went so far as to tell him, that if he could not have his children baptized, he
would apply to Mr. T -- n, the church minister, though he did not indeed in
terms ask him to propound him the next sabbath. Mr. R. would no doubt have been
affronted if he had gone so far as this, after he had so fully declared his
principles.

The next thing is, "that I give a wrong turn to that expression of his, the
most godly among us, both men and women, are on his side." p. 65. The
expression is so plain in itself, that it is incapable of a wrong turn, though
^^e endeavors to give it, but in vain.

He then faults me "for expressing my fears, that he converses too little with
his flock to pass a judgment, who are the most godly, etc." p. 66 For my part I
never heard of any pastoral visits, except to the sick or bereaved. But I have
frequently heard complaints, that he visited but little, except a few
individuals. How then could he know much who "lived nearest to God, or who
enjoyed most of the life, power and sweetness of experimental religion?" He
has indeed visited greatly, and almost universally for about fifteen months
past. But I am apt to think that the discourse has been generally taken up
with something else besides experiences. And I suppose the real foundation he
goes upon in asserting, that he has the most godly on his side, is this, the
brethren with him, several of them, were received by himself, and so he had
particular occasion and opportunity to discourse with them about their
acquaintance with experimental religion. But as to the members received in Mr.
Leonard's days, I believe he scarce knows any thing about them, except such as
have particularly applied to him under distress of conscience. "I utter this
with christian temper," and as my real persuasion: perhaps he would not believe
me if I added, "that I felt good natured" too, and heartily pitied him that he
was left to give such wrong accounts to the world.

"As for his being more a favorite with the women than I am," p. 66. He himself
acknowleges, that he could see nothing amiss in the expression. But some elbow
friend has suggested, that I had a bad design in it. And he seems ready upon
it to "demand an explanation." All the explanation I shall give him is, that it
is his voice and nothing else (nihil preterea) that has produced this effect.
It is surprising that he should take such notice of this passage as he here
does, or indeed any notice of it at all. But what opportunity does he miss to
bring an "odium" upon me among his more thoughtless hearers? can not one man be
more favored than another, even by women, without "some reflection on his
character?" it would then be a dangerous thing to be a popular preacher.

P. 66. He apears "greatly surprised at that group of extravagant expressions,
thundering anathema, authoritatively denounced for advancing such pernicious,
soul-damning destructive doctrines." But why this surprise? I appeal to the
whole learned world, whether I don't give a just and natural paraphrase upon
the passages of his letters. What more or worse could he have said to Arius,
Socinus, Pelagius or Arminius, if they were now living? The preamble is awful,
the sentence se^ere, the grounds of it most striking and terrible: no less than
"the subversion and overthrow of the grand doctrines of the gospel. This is the
direct and unavoidable tendency of my opinion. The things I advanced of
dangerous tendency to the souls of this people, etc." So that he is "
conscience-bound not to encourage my instructions," but to keep me out of the
pulpit. He could not mean, that he would not let me read my Essays in the
pulpit, or any thing of the like tenor, as he seems to intimate. This I believe
no body ever thought of: but he certainly means my instructions in general, let
them be over so sounds i. e. my ever preaching for him any more. And what is
this but "a thundering anathema?" an excommunication from ministerial communion
with a witness? I appeal to every minister in the land, whether the term was
too harsh. And this anathema he has never yet offered to take off: so that if
I had consented to his proposals of accommodation at our meeting, I must have
laid under the weight of i^ accursed still, though other preachers of the same
principles are freely admitted.
And "should be guilty of the GREATEST unfaithfulness to God and his people, if
he did not oppose me with all his might, or to the UTMOST of his power." (See
Essays. p. 36, 48.) How then could I express these things in too strong a
light? "This is all," says Mr. R. and a great ALL it appears to be.

As to "the brethren's being involved in the same doom," it is as evident as
the light, that all that hold the same principles as I do (whether ministers or
brethren) are as guilty as I am, and must necessarily stand or fall with me.

As for the expression, "especially those of note." p. 66. I had grounds for
putting it in, but I must not particularly explain myself. The reason is
obvious to a thoughtful reader

He next attacks my postscript, ( p. 67) which he calls "a most peculiar one
of it is kind. I misquote him, says he, and pervert his meaning in almost every
passage." Let the reader compare the quotations with his letters, and they will
find it otherwise. I do not indeed exactly quote his words, (that would have
made my letter too long) but I endeavored to collect his evident meaning into a
narrow compass, using chiefly his own expressions. "But he will not own the
letter in this dress." Why then does he not give it another dress, and tell us
his meaning? why did he not paraphrase his letter particularly, and show that
the passages import something else? and not think to come off by saying in
general, "he did not mean so?" How easy is it to get rid of the blackest
charges, if this be sufficient? That Mr. R. intended to carry matters as far as
I have represented, appears from a passage that I have never yet particularly
noticed, viz. Those words of his letter "it appears to me when you come calmly
to reflect upon it, it must excite penitential shame, and be matter of DEEP
humiliation before God." (Essays. p. 34.) If so, it must be a DEEP crime that I
was guilty off! a crime of a most aggravated nature, (of a scarlet color and
crimson dye:) for there must be a proportion between the crime and penitence.
Deep contrition pre-supposes deep guilt.


Well, but what was the effect of my "dressing up his letter in a garb of my
own manufacture?" How did it is "ugly hue" or appearence operate upon me? why it
seems it sets me "a raving." p. 61. "It puts me out of all patience, so that
unable to contain, I cry out, thundering anathema, soul-damning doctrines,
etc." There is not such a word in all my postscript. They were contained in
the body of the letter, and relate to another matter. "But what was the
occasion of all this vehemence? why, because he had said, "my doctrines were of
an arminian tendency, and that he could not encourage my instructions." p. 68.
I think such a representation is "enough to put one out of all patience." I was
not speaking of doctrines and instructions, but of his charge of deceit and
hypocrisy and crafty management, which he that runs may read, in the first part
of his letter. And my account of this I think is just. (See Essays. p. 45, 6.)
And what will the reader think of a man, that will thus in open light endeavor
to impose upon him, when he may be so easily convicted? and what stress can be
laid upon his representations in other matters? certainly he takes his readers
to be as careless and inadvertent as himself. He here indeed designed to be
witty, but his wit comes at the expense of truth.

P. 67. He says, "I charge him with breaking open a letter." How carelessly
does he write? I charge him with no such thing. I supposed at the time, that
the letter came to him enclosed and unsealed. But what I taxed him with, was,
erasing part of a letter. This he acknowleges, but endeavors to excuse it. But
this I observe, that nothing appears, even from his own account, that his
father commissioned him to expunge any passage of the letter; but only left it
to him, either to send or not to send it, as he thought best. He has told what
the erased passages were, and I believe told me right. And I cannot help
observing upon it, his haughty mind could not brook any thing, that looked like
entreaty. He scorned to have thought, that either he or his friends had any
apprehension of it is being in my power to do him the least hurt. I would add,
that it was these very erasures, that made me misunderstand his father's intent.

He appears next to be mightily offended at the intimation, "that he had been
obliged to retract some opinions which he had learned from Mr. B." p. 68. By
being obliged, I meant obliged in conscience and from conviction. And that he
had learned them from Mr. B. I had reason to think, because we had none of
these doctrines in his first years, but immediately after the publication of
several of Mr. B's books. The doctrines were such as these, "that men are
regenerated without the word of truth; that they love God, love his law, and
repent of sin, before they have any true knowledge or discovery of Jesus the
mediator, or of God in Christ as reconcilable to sinners; before union to
Christ, faith in the atonement and justification in the sight of God, etc."
These and the like doctrines were preached for years, and inculcated with the
utmost earnestness, which caused almost a general uneasiness: insomuch that
some have told me, "they wondered how I could sit with patience and hear him,
and not immediately rise up and oppose him." But a reverend and worthy
gentleman coming from Connecticut, on a visit, he preached a sabbath in direct
opposition to Mr. B.'s doctrines. With which Mr. R. was gratified; and he told
me himself the same week, "that Mr. H -- t's sermon and discourse after
meeting, had given him a new train of ideas, and things appeared to him in
quite a different light from what they did before." And since that, his
preaching has been generally in quite another strain and tenor; and people I
believe have universally thought, that he was come off from his former notions.
But now it seems, "he has never retracted or seen cause to retract any
sentiments in divinity, which he formerly held, but still thinks them agreeable
to the word of God." Hear this, O people and consider. Mr. R. still holds the
same principles (he tells you so himself) which in former years filled you with
grief and uneasiness, and caused many tears. And may you not expect they will
be revived upon you in full weight and measure, as soon as the times will bear
it? we had a specimen of it some little time after he received my letter; which
I took to be occasioned by this very passage of the letter, to let me know that
he still held Messieurs B's and H -- n's doctrines as much as ever. He preached
from Luke xv. 24. and advanced, that the begetting spiritual life or
regeneration was an immediate act of the spirit without the word. And that
faith, repentance, love, etc. were the fruits and effects of regeneration, and
no essential parts of it, etc. These sermons were disgustful to several, and
three of us the next morning sent him the following script. PLYMOUTH, May, 18.
1772. Sir.
WE think it our duty to testify our dislike of the doctrine delivered
yesterday. It was then advanced, that regeneration was wrought by a divine^
act, without, and independent of all means, and previous to faith, repentance,
etc. Which we apprehended contrary to the scripture. For 1st. the apostles over
and over assert, that regeneration is wrought through means. I have begotten
you, says Paul, through the gospel. Beholding as in a glass (i. e. the word
applied) the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image, etc. Of his
own will begat he us with the word of truth. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God. By the great and
precious promises, we become partakers of the divine nature, etc. 2d. The
doctrine advanced makes union to Christ no part, but an effect of regeneration,
whereas it is an essential part of regeneration. If a man be in Christ, says
the apostle, he is a new creature, newborn, 2 Cor. v. 17. and regeneration is
described by this phrase, Christ lives in me. Gal. iii. 20. He that has the
son, has life, says St. John, and he that has not the son of God, has not
life. 1 John v. 12. 3d. This contradicts the apostle, when he says, faith comes
by hearing: according to this new doctrine it comes from regeneration, and not
from hearing and applying the word. All the proof you brought for your new
doctrine was from John i. 12.13. which is nothing to the purpose: for receiving
Christ is in the pra^ter-perfect tense, as well as being born, etc. which
implies that they are coeval, or really the same thing in other words. Whereas
according to you; receiving Christ must be in the present tense, and being born
in the praeter perfect, contrary to the very letter of the text. Upon the
whole, we apprehend your notion of regeneration to be a mere chimera, and that
it never had an existence but in the brain of Mr. B. and his followers. We rest
your dissatisfied brethren.


This, though a private letter, and designed as such, Mr. R. immediately
published (without returning us any answer either by word or writing) presently
after taking horse, and communicating it about the town; and in his return
reading it at the water side in the open air to a company gathered round him.
And the next sabbath, the whole affair was carried to Plimpton upon a change.
And the sabbath after we were lashed to purpose, he endeavoring to refute our
paper; though by the way he said nothing about the instrumentaliy of the word.




He, in fine, appears much chagrined at a paragraph in my letter, which he
still says was "wrote on the sabbath." p. 68. It is strange he keeps insisting
on this, when I had told him it was wrote in the evening (when according to his
principles) the sabbath was ended. The paragraph related to that passage in his
prayer, let them not shun, etc. (Essays. p. 47.) And this was spoken, I am
persuaded, when he was under an impressive sense of something else besides
divine things;" for he spoke in an angry tone and with vehemence, "as his
manner is," when he is preaching against lay-teachers, or those that tax him
with false doctrine. As to what follows, "that he had omitted many heads of
divinity in his preaching," I am really sorry for his sake that I sat it down.
But it came in so apprope, that I could not well omit it. But alas^ it is too
true. He confines himself chiefly to affectionate subjects, and neglects
explaining doctrines, and the nature of ordinances too much. (Which I have
heard observed and lamented by others as well as myself. Behold the man, that
cries out of the publishing private letters!
) So that I fear ignorance will greatly prevail in the next generation: and
indeed some have occasionally observed to me, that it does so too much already;
more than ever was known before in this town: (one proof of it is their
readiness, yea, even fondness to be unchurched or excommunicated, upon Mr. R's
bare word, without exhibiting any valid evidence; as sure there was none before
his book came out, whatever there is now.) On this head of preaching I could
say much more, but my heart recoils at the thought. I would gladly have omited
this and several other paragraphs in printing the letters out of regard to him;
but I knew what a fearful outcry (worse than "cants") would have been raised,
that I had altered the letters, etc. So that I sat down every iota. I should
have freely told him my thoughts upon this and several other heads "in a
friendly manner," if he had given opportunity by frequent visits and an
unreserved intimacy; but it seems he thought it best to keep at a distance
(except in his distressing hours.) And if I had gone to his house to have
talked of such things, such is his temper, that he would have been apt to have
construed it insult, and I might have expected to have heard it proclaimed (as
he is little capable of keeping secrets, to my disadvantage. I have had
experience of something of this kind, and so have others. Upon the whole here,
if instead of taking offense, and turning it into a jest, he had reformed and
enlarged his plan of preaching, etc. it would have been much better. But I am
informed, he still goes on in the old track, chiefly, if not wholly, confining
himself to affectionate subjects and herein even abounding more and more, which
seems calculated to retain the affections of his hearers. And further to
captivate, he preaches of late much without notes, by reason of which much
crude matter (I hear) is poured forth as well as repetitions, the same thing
recurring over and over.

Having done with the letters, he comes to what he calls "my catalogue of
charges." p. 69. The reader will observe, that they are bare facts, set down
without the least comment. How far is this from his treatment of me?
ill-natured comments, and the worst constructions occurring every where. These
charges were, it seems "a potion as bitter" as aloes. Yet have they not had
"salutary effects?" Have they not in a great measure prevented irretating
things being brought into the pulpit, which were so frequent before? but being
pent up there, he gives himself the more vent in his book, and in his abundant
visits. But how does he clear himself from these charges? some are not
mentioned, therefore stand confessed, as that of hissing, etc. "Pointed psalms"
he denies; and says, "the psalms were sung in course." But did he sing the 12th
psalm in course? this was sung the sabbath before the last church-meeting; and
it would have come in course in about 3 weeks or a month: but it seems he skipt
over 4 or 5 psalms to come at it: and then returned back. When this psalm was
read, those that were in the secret of that meeting were variously affected,
several were upon the ti^ter, and one man was observed to bow down his head,
and thrust his handkerchief in his mouth, that he might not be seen to laugh.
This was in the forenoon. In the afternoon, the psalms are not sung in course;
so that he is at liberty to suit all occasions. And whether he had not these
debates sometimes in mind, the reader may judge by omitting that stanza, Psalm.
xviii. 17. when he came to it in course, wherein are these words, "the weak
defense that I could make." (Tate and Brady.) Which might be passed least
profane wits should burlesque and scoff. Sometimes some of his strong adherents
have observed after meeting, that he suited the psalm to the times, or "that
there was a psalm for us."

As for the sermon of triumph, he tells us, "It was made above a month before
the church-meeting, and therefore he could not possibly know, or even suspect
what would then be done." I never heard before, nor I believe any one else of
his making a stock of sermons beforehand. How comes he then so often to preach
old sermons? But to let that pass. How various have been the reports about this
sermon? Sometimes it was said, that it was made a fortnight, sometimes 3 weeks
before the meeting, sometimes that he had only begun it, etc. But be that as it
will, how can he say "that he did not even suspect what would be done at that
meeting, when it was determined in the conclave what should be done? for one of
his privy council told about publicly, near two months before the meeting,
"that they designed to have no more debates on the affair, but that the meeting
should be dissolved." And an agent or agents were accordingly secretly sent
about to get the major part of the members to sign for a dissolution; so that
the sermon might be made in prospect of such an event; which I doubt not they
deemed as certain. Here I would observe, that he preached 4 sermons from that
text Isai. live. 17. So that it was not a single sermon we controvert about. The
first sabbath he carried the matter so far, that he seemed to make us all open
enemies and adversaries of the church, seeking it is destruction by promoting
false professions, etc. But this making a great noise, and producing severe
reflections, even from some of his own side, he found, no doubt, that he had
carried the matter too far; so that when the text came next under
consideration, a fortnight after, he seemed to make a sort of retraction,
re-assuming the first head (which to appearance he had finished) and showed how
even good men might, through ignorance or mistake, do that which was prejudicial
to the church's welfare, and were so far enemies, etc. To which we may add,
that the first sabbath he preached from the text, the congregation seemed all
alive, and such whisperings there was after the conclusion of the services, as
I scarce ever saw before; or such discoursings on both sides, after people had
got out of the meeting house; some saying, "they hoped deacon F. Mr. C. etc.
had got their belly full, etc." And will he after all bear the world in hand,
that he had "no design" in those sermons, "and that the thing was too low and
ridiculous to mention, being founded on nothing but surmize and jealousy," and
that "he always studiously avoided every thing that might be looked upon as
pointed, or tending to irritate?" Upon the whole, whether these sermons were
"sermons of triumph" or not, whether they had a retrospect, and looked backward
or forward, or whether they are rightfully or wrongfully named in the Essays,
these things are not material. It is certain the situation of the times gave
birth to them, they were designedly and evidently pointed, and of this we
complain.

As for the phrase "my friends and my enemies," the town can better judge of
the truth of it than those that live at a distance (except the ministers of his
acquaintance) and to them I leave it.

I come now to the cruellest part of his whole reply, it is filled with untrue
suggestions and surmises, calculated to represent me as one of the worst of
men, having a heart fraught with malice and revenge, and bearing old grudges
from year to year, and wanting nothing but an opportunity to manifest and vent
itself, and all without the least grounds, and even in such degree as he could
not have thought possible before. p. 70, 71. "But pray let us get away from the
noise of a torrent, and calmly enquire what it is that occasioned all this
vehemence." Why, it seems chiefly founded upon a letter I sent him many years
ago. But this he will not publish, being of a private nature, least he should
follow my bad example. But did he not publish it in the time of it all over the
parish, and even carry it to the association? and does he not worse than
publish it now, giving hints that it contains something very bad, even so bad
that it would not bear the light? and all this he has done, without ever
answering the letter, or exchanging one word with me about it from the time it
was wrote to this day. I have had frequent intimations coming directly from
him, that he designed to publish this letter at full length in his reply, but
it seems some friend has dissuaded him from it, lest it should expose him
after his great outcry of publishing private letters. But he has taken a
method ten-fold more injurious. But what dreadful things were contained in that
letter? the case was this; he has discovered a disposition for novelty, and
arbitrary management ever since he came to the town: the instances are
numerous; among other things he propounded a baptized person for full
communion, that lay sick of a deep consumption, and was never like to go abroad
again: this he did in the usual form, but without bringing a relation, or the
least intimation that he designed to bring one; and proposed, that after the
usual term of propounding was up, a number of the church should go with him to
the house and actually receive her. I was dissatisfied with the thing itself,
and the manner of his ushering it in; having heard more than once before, that
he was grown weary of relations, and wanted them laid aside; and I really
thought he took this opportunity of feeling the pulse of the church, how they
stood affected to relations; and if they bore this well, we should hear no more
of them, but he would lay them aside by his own authority. Upon this I wrote as
follows.

MARCH 26, 1764. Sir,
I THINK it my duty to bear testimony against despotic and absolute power in
the church as well as the state. I never saw a more flagrant instance of it
than yesterday, in your propounding a person for full communion, without making
any sort of relation, contrary to the practice of this church for above 140
years, and in direct opposition to the vote of the church, of which you could
not be ignorant. If you dislike the practice, this is not the right method to
get it superseded; for surely the church will not be treated as a cipher, and
suffer their votes to be trampled under foot without notice. I am sorry to see
such stretches toward arbitrary power His disposition to arbitrary power
appeared early, from his erasing out of his father's ordination sermon, when he
transcribed it for the press, a passage wherein his father earnestly recommends
it to him "to consult the elder brethren or fathers of the church in all
affairs ^^^^noment." such it seems was his self-sufficiency, that he thought
such advice needless.
in this and other instances, but I advise you as a friend for the future to
consult your church more than you have hitherto seen cause to do, otherwise,
without a spirit of prophecy, I dare venture to say, it will prove bitterness
in the latter end.

I rest yours, etc. John Cotton.


The consequence was, he soon brought a relation, and the church having
sometime after considered the affair, they appeared generally dissatisfied with
the method proposed, looking upon it as a bad president, and as really
answering no end, unless a private communion had followed, which does not well
consist with the principles of dissenters: and they would vote no further, than
that in case providence should restore her so that she was able to appear in
public, they were ready to receive her; being in the mean time fully satisfied,
etc. Mr. R. merely upon this, baptized her children after her death; so that he
does not look upon explicit covenanting any more necessary, than I do.
If Mr. R. should say, he always designed to bring a relation, but had not time
to pen it down, she living at a distance, why then did he not tell us so? this
would have been fully satisfactory, the time of reading it, whether at first
propounding, as the custom is, or afterward, being immaterial. As for his
intimation, "that none faulted him but I," it is wrong, I know of others that
were uneasy, and the church in general disliked his proposal.

If any should think the letter was wrote in rather too sharp a style, they
will not so much wonder at it, if they recollect what has been said about his
treatment of me in his first years. That treatment naturally produced
uneasiness. But upon Mr. R's altering his conduct at and after the time of his
great concern, all resentment subsided, and I was as fully reconciled as if
nothing had happened. He acknowleges, "I had showed him instances of kindness
and friendship, since the letter." And in the same breath says, that at the
very instant I bore him "a rooted prejudice." What a wretch, an hypocrite, does
he make me? Even my very acts of kindness turn to my reproach: these it seems
all come from a cankered invenomed heart. Alas! this is the effect of doing
kindnesses for the UNGRATEFUL! "How discouraging to be always exposed to such
CANTS!"
And I might well say, "we hold a good correspondence" (which expression he
mentions with a sneer and "with inverted commas.") I am sure it was so on my
part. And if any "root of prejudice" remained, it must be on his side: and it
appears too plainly that there was, by his raking up this letter at this day:
and by the great use he has made of it, in the present controversy. For it was
represented all over the town after the late letters passed, that it was I that
wrote the first letter and was the beginner of the strife, and people were in a
rage at me for it; and it was sometime before we could undeceive them about it.
And the like report was carried to other towns. When the news reached me of my
writing first, I could not imagine what it meant or whence it sprang; and it
was sometime before I could recollect that I had ever wrote him any offensive
letter at all; so far was I from retaining it in my mind, or bearing him any
old grudge or prejudice upon the account, or indeed on any other account. How
ungrounded, and very injurious then is his representation of things? but he
seems resolved to ruin me if possible, or to drive me to desperation. To this
end he and his 2 emissaries have made it their business for a 12 month past to
represent me every where, "as an implacable, malicious, spiteful, revengeful
man: one who, if once offended, will never forgive or be reconciled, etc." This
is their constant theme in the house and by the way, where they think it will
make impression. This they utter in discourse. This they write, and this they
print. But God knows, and my own conscience knows, and the people lately my
charge do universally know, that this is not my disposition, or turn of mind. I
know I am naturally hasty and passionate: but rooted enmity and malice, and
implacability are the remotest things possible from my natural temper. I dare
appeal to his own father (a former intimate acquaintance) for the truth of
this; who I believe if he really knew how his son managed, would be far from
countenancing him: the grieving of whom is what goes as near to me as almost
any thing in the present controversy.

But why then am I not reconciled to Mr. R? has he not said and done enough to
satisfy any reasonable man? but do not I remain inflexible? obstinately
standing out against the advice of ministers, and brethren, and others, who all
with one voice cry out, that the satisfaction he offers is sufficient? thus he
has represented the matter to the world: how truly will presently appear.
Reconciliation was what I had at heart, and truly sought, and was the first
mover in it. At my request, deacon T. proposed a meeting to him with some
brethren, he seemed not much inclined to it, and the deacon was forced to go
backward and forward several times before the matter was fully settled: at
length he complies upon these terms, "that there should be an equal number of
the brethren on both sides, that the brethren should say nothing, but that all
the talk should be between him and me, The chief reason of this restriction I
suppose to be, because he thought by his voluble tongue, and great flow of
words to obtain an advantage against me, and so to drown and confuse me, if
left alone: and that he took the advantage, appears from the narrative of the
whole conference drawn up by a brother present. Mr. C. says he, often desired
time to speak, told Mr. R. you break in upon me when I attempt to speak, and
confuse me; but it signified no great matter, it appeared to me he did it on
purpose. I should be glad to insert the whole narrative, by which it would
appear how unchristianly I was used; but it would lengthen out the book too
much. If Mr. R. should say, that he had another reason for this restriction,
namely. "because I insisted upon a particular brother's being present, who he
did not want should speak." This no way militates with the reason I give,
because that brother was the most capable of helping and assisting me, if there
had been occasion; and perhaps he thought he could do well enough with the
rest, if he was absent. If he should say, "it was not upon this account that he
was for debarring that brother, but because of his unplacable turn of mind, and
that his presence would rather hinder than promote a reconciliation." Such a
suggestion would be unchristian to the last degree; and contrary to truth; none
being more tender and helpful on such occasions (in which he had been much
used) though I do not think he would have suffered me to have been trampled on.
And besides, if Mr. R. was personally offended with him, there was more reason
for his being present, that the reconciliation might have been complete. I
could not consent, that such a slight should be put upon one of the principle
members of the church; and then I wanted him as an evidence to some
particulars, in case I could have brought Mr. R. to have talked of them. And
surely it did not show much of a disposition for peace in Mr. R. to cast such
contempt on a fellow-member, and a fellow sufferer with me, especially when I
did not object against any brother of his choosing, though I had much more
reason for it.
and that there should be no discourse upon any particular on either side, but
that we should make up in a general way." I thought the terms hard; but rather
than not meet, I complied; hoping to convince him of the unreasonableness of
the preliminaries, and to bring him to allow the brethren to speak and mediate,
Two of the brethren that went with me have declared since, that if they had
known of the terms beforehand, they would not have gone.
and to a free discussion of particulars, without which no good end could be
answered by the meeting. Well, we met, I carried; brethren with me, and found
that he had invited 4, contrary to agreement. I objected not, but presently
proceeded to the business of the meeting. Having lamented the difference, and
expressed my hop^s of its being peaceably healed, I endeavored to draw him into
a discourse of some particulars, telling him that deceit lay in generals, and
that it was necessary to discourse on some things more particularly, or an
amicable agreement could not be expected. But he utterly refused, and insisted
on a general making up, and then declared the terms he would consent to, and
nothing else; namely, "that as many things had been said on both sides that had
better have never been said, he was willing to make mutual concessions to each
other, and to bury the hatchet, and that we should both forget and forgive all
that was past, and for the future live together in love." He expresses the
terms rather more largely in his book, but I am satisfied this account comes
nearer the truth; and so say the brethren that were with me; the words being
exactly cited from the narrative mentioned in the margin. I expressed my
dissatisfaction with this, and told him I did not think this a proper way of
healing the breach. Upon which he replied very quick, and with a great deal of
warmth, "you think I have injured you, I think you have injured me 30 times
more by your letter, and I think it a piece of condescension in me, to go so
far as I have offered." Which expressions were repeated in the course of the
conversation. I think, more than once. After this I did, with difficulty, force
him to discourse a little on 3 or 4 particulars. One was about "the most godly,
being on his side." This I thought hard and uncharitable. He denied the charge,
and insisted that he allowed those on our side to be equally godly, and
referred to the poscript for proof. I told him he spoke of the one in the
positive, and the other in the superlative degree, which was an evident
preferrence. But still he kept denying, and so I left it, and let him have the
last word. Another particular was about arminianism: he told me he did not call
me an arminian, but only taxed me with doctrines tending to arminianism. I
answered, I cared not for the name: whether he charged me with arminianism or
not, he certainly charged me with dangerous and destructive doctrines, such as
rendered me unfit to preach, and read part of his letter to prove it. This he
answered with a shrug. -- Another thing discoursed of was, about his asserting
before the council at Middleborough, when he found he could not support the
charges in his letter from any thing contained in my 3d Essay, which was read
there, "that his letter was founded more on what I said at the church-meeting
than on what I read, and that I said a great deal, turning myself round, and
swinging my hands, etc." And that he stood to it (before the ministers) in
opposition to the declaration of three of the brethren, then present, when in
reality I had said nothing during the whole meeting, relative to the point in
controversy. His answer to this was a mere evasion, namely, "that he did not
know but that while I was reading, I might put in something here and there
memoriter:" though he did not pretend to recollect any thing omitted in the
manuscript. This falsity then, was by no means cleared up. Another thing I
mention^d was, his reporting about, that I never preached for him without pay.
He denied he had ever so reported, and owned that the report was groundless, I
having preached several times without, to his knowledge. During this discourse,
he would frequently call me to order, and to an observance of the
preliminaries, and finally refused to go any further into particulars. And as
to generals, he never so much as offered to acknowledge that his letters were
hasty and severe, or rash and unguarded, or expressed any sorrow or concern for
the writing of them. If he had gone so far as that, I would have acquiesced,
rather than have continued in a broil. Nay, he was so far from it, that in 3
hours conversation, he did not so much as hint that he though it himself wrong in
the letters, either for matter or manner, either in general or particular,
either in part or in whole: but appeared to justify the letters, and every
thing relating to them, from beginning to end, as he does now in his book. The
brother in his narrative says, I do not believe one of the brethren will say,
they heard him speak one word in the whole of their confer^ing together, as if
he thought he did the least amiss in what he had charged Mr. C. with in his
letters. Upon the strictest recollection I cannot remember one word from Mr. R.
that looked that way. It appeared to me, that Mr. R. designed to have it said,
or to have it to say himself, that he never did say any thing of this kind, i.
e. that he was wrong in writing as he did to Mr. C.
How then could I make up? Alas! I was forced to come away with a sorrowful
heart. And thus ended the meeting.

The account he has given of the affair is full of gross errors, tending to
mislead the reader greatly. 1st. He says, "a number of the brethren met at his
house, in order to confer, and endeavor to heal the breach." p. 71. The
brethren did not meet to confer and use endeavors, but to set as mum-chances to
hear us jaw, and contradict. If a free conference had been allowed, it is
likely something might have been brought to pass. But this was strictly forbid,
though two of the brethren on his side spoke several times, without control,
either from him or me; but when one that went with me once attempted to speak,
his mouth was stopped immediately before he could bring out one sentence. (
"You are not to speak one word," says Mr. R. to him) The end of my having
brethren with me was in pursuance of Christ's rule, Matt. xviii. 16. and I
suppose their business was, to interpose when either party carried matters too
high, and to mediate and propose terms of accommodation, etc. But the door was
effectually barred against this. My end also in this meeting was pursuant to
the same rule. Matt. xviii. to tell him his fault, i. e. the particulars I was
offended at. But neither was this suffered: and the reason he gives is, because
it would not make for peace. Who ever heard of such a reason before, why a man
must not be told of his faults by a brother offended? but this by the way. 2d.
He attempts to make the world believe, that he made me some confession, or at
least offered to do it conditionally. The brethren that went with me, say, he
made me no confession at all, but rather insulted me. But what does he confess?
the book says, being sensible that it has been a day of temptation and
controversy among us, we had both, no doubt, said and done many things which
are wrong, and which at another time we should not have done. The expression I
never heard before, as I can recollect; I dare say none of the brethren present
(no nor Mr. R. himself) will venture to give their oaths, that these were the
individual words. But suppose they were, did he design to confess any thing
that I wanted him to confess? I dare put it to his conscience, whether he
designed in those words to confess, that he had done me any wrong or injury by
the letters. And indeed the words do not import, that he had any sense of his
having wronged me personally at all. They may refer to any other wrong step
that he was conscious of, in the management of the controversy, that had no
relation to me. Yea, they may mean, that he had only wronged himself, and not
others, by something he had said or done.
was it not rather a general expression devised to make the hearers think, that
he confessed something, when really he confessed nothing? that this was the
case, appeared by the whole of his conversation then, and by his book now. My
first letter, says he, contained my real sentiments upon his conduct and
principles; and I have never yet met with any just cause to alter my
sentiments. p 61. How then can he fault me for not accepting his confession? he
tells us, that he meant nothing by it; and yet I am blameworthy in his and the
brethren's opinion, for not taking up with it. How unreasonable is this? and
besides, was I not to have joined with him in the confession? was not the
acknowlegement to be mutual? the same terms he used, was I not to have used?
and how could I do it without a consciousness of guilt? if I had been guilty,
why did he not tell me wherein? why would he not come to particulars, and point
out my faults? I stood ready to hear him, and upon conviction, would as readily
have acknowleged. But as things then appeared to me, how could I do it? and I
would observe further, that if he was conscious he had wronged me, he ought to
have confessed whether I did or no; and if he was not conscious of it; how
comes he to offer any thing that looked like confession? in short, this whole
affair of confession I would observe here, that Mr. R. carefully avoids the
term confession, in all his account of the affair; he scorned to have it
thought, that he had made me any confession at all. Some months before the term
of general amnesty seems much more agreeable to his idea of the ma^ter. ^ut how
could he content himself with that, if he really thought at the time, that I
had injured him so much as he now represents to the world? perhaps he would
have it pas^ as an instance of his great "condescension, and meekness and love
of peace."
appears to me to be a mere farce, a designed imposition upon me and others. If
I had accepted the terms, how would he and his party have laughed in their
sleeves? telling all about, "that Mr. R. had confessed nothing: that after
making a great stir, I had given up all for a song; that being conscious of my
own guilt, I durst not prosecute the affair any further, but was glad to come
off so, etc." And he would have gone on justifying his letters and conduct to
the end of time. 3. He says, "the major part of the brethren thought the
satisfaction he offered, reasonable and sufficient, and that they should desire
no more, had they been the offended." p. 71. But how could they know that,
without they heard the particulars I had against him? will they fall under the
condemnation of judging a matter before they hear it? "but they knew the
particulars." No, they did not know all. And as for those they knew, how could
they tell but that they would have appeared to them in quite a different light,
if I had had liberty to have spoken to them particularly? I am satisfied that
some of these brethren had not then heard the whole of the three letters. Or if
they had, how could they pass a proper judgment of them, upon hearing them once
transiently? his first letter appeared to me ten times worse in the after
deliberate perusal, than it did at first; and so it might to them, if they had
heard it deliberately a second time, and the particulars of it closely
canvassed.
They had previously heard Mr. R's explanation and defense, but not mine.
Whether they ever declared to Mr. R. that they thought the satisfaction
sufficient or no, I cannot tell. I am sure they never told me so, either at the
meeting or since. By the way, he would not have been able to say, that the
major part of the brethren gave their voice in favor of his proposals, if he
had not broke the agreement, and invited one more to the meeting than I. Two of
which number were as great sticklers in the affair as himself, and I would
rather have left the whole matter to him alone, than to them. And the 3d in the
number was wholly under his influence. And the 4th (who had never heard my
account of the matter) seemed, by what he said at the meeting, to go upon this
principle, "that as no body thought the worse of me for his letter, it would be
best to pass it lightly by:" being a man of peace, he would have been glad of
peace at any rate. Upon the whole here, let me observe, both with respect them
and others, that if they are among those who justify the letters, it is no
wonder they think the satisfaction sufficient, for in that case no satisfaction
was due; but confession ought to come from me, as having charged him unjustly,
and withdrawn from his communion without grounds.

Again, he says, "ministers as well as brethren advised to such a general
making up as he proposed." He means the ministers of Middleborough council: I
have asked 3 of them, and they tell me they never gave such advice. That there
was indeed a transient expression of one of the ministers present about burning
the letters, and so finishing the controversy -- and that was all.

Finally, he says, "that I pulled out 3 or 4 confessions for him to make." p.
72. This conveys a wrong idea. I made a few memorandums in short hand on the
back of his letter, running in these terms. 1st. As to the charge of
insincerity and deceit. Mr. R. says in his last letter, "that it was far from
his intention." I expect he will add further, that he disavows all such
expressions as look that way, or carry such an implication in them, in the
apprehension of any. 2d. As to the charge of arminianism, I expect he say thus
much at least, that he did this without sufficient grounds, and that it arose
from mistaken apprehensions of what I read. 3d. That the expressions were
uncharitable and improper, wherein he asserts "that the most godly among us,
were all on his side of the question." There were 2, or 3, other articles set
down, that did not relate to the letters. But these were all I read to him. And
I thought it impossible to propose more moderate terms. But he would scarce
give me the hearing, and rejected the whole with disdain. As for my refusing to
answer a question. p. 72. I think I was quite right in it, unless he would go
into particulars, and tell me wherein I had offended. Thus the meeting
terminated. And by this account, which is just, does it appear, that he was any
ways disposed to peace? The brother, mentioned in his narrative, says, "I am
much surprised Mr. R. should say "he endeavored a reconciliation in the
presence of a number of the brethren." It appeared to me, and so it did to
others present, that there appeared no disposition in Mr. R. to take one proper
or christian step for a reconciliation; for no person could be more deaf to any
proposals made by another, and more fixedly to appearance settled in the matter
not to hear any thing Mr. C. offered, and often spoke of his own proposal, as
if it was going further than was needful, but that he did it for peace sake,
etc." Again, he says, there appeared to me from the beginning to the end of
their conference, that there was no disposition in Mr. R. to make up the matter
in any shape, unless he could lay Mr. C. under such a disadvantage as no
christian ought to consent to. He says further, "that captain C. deacon T. and
I (the three brethren present) have diverse times since said to one another,
that it appeared to us, that Mr. R's treatment of Mr. C. at that time was
rather an insulting of him, than showing any real desire of settling the affair
in a friendly and christian manner." And since that time what has he done
toward reconciliation? he indeed goes about every where crying, "how much he
is for peace; that he longs to have the matter settled, that he is willing to
do any thing," etc. By this means his hearers are induced to think, that he is
all made up of love and peace: but let any one touch upon particulars, he will
justify all as much as ever, and misrepresentation abound more and more.
And yet what one step has he taken toward it? I was indeed a little in
hopes, that he would have laid some foundation for a reconciliation in his
book, or made some concession, after so long time of deliberation: but in stead
of that, he aggravates matters to the utmost, and has widened the breach
ten-fold more than ever. Which gives a specimen of what he would have done at
this meeting, if we had come to particulars. Who then can blame me for not
accepting his proposal, or agreeing to his offer of a general oblivion? which
is the utmost that can be said of it, and really all he intended.

I come now to the article of his "giving me the lie in the face of the
church." p. 73. I had disavowed in the most solemn terms any direct design of
getting him away, and declared that our opposition proceeded solely from
conscientious motives. He presently starts up, and tells the church in effect,
that he did not believe one word I said, but that "he was now confirmed in it,
our whole design was to get him away." But what were the grounds of his
disbelief? or what gave him confirmation? he tells us, "it was a matter much
talked of, in the town." I dare say, it was never talked of, till he and his
two emissaries infused it into people. Not so, says he, "I suppose they formed
their opinion from the whole tenor of his conduct toward me of late." I
challenge him and his whole posse to allege one speech or overt act tending
that way, (except my public writings have that tendency.) But what, though it
appeared so evident to the whole parish, that I had a design of getting him
away; yet he seems still to hesitate and doubt about it: how comes he at length
"to be better satisfied, that the reports were true?" why, by the matter and
the extraordinary manner, in which my last piece was delivered?" this gave full
proof and "confirmation," whatever I could say to the contrary. But why does he
put in the manner, except it be to impose upon the public? what could there be
extraordinary in that? if it was delivered with "unchristian heat," as he
intimates, p. 75. had that a tendency to get him away? should I not defeat my
own end by taking such a method? in truth I had such a bad cold and cough at
that time, and for above 3 months before, that I believe I delivered myself in
a very ordinary manner, and not with much pathos. As for the matter, that
appears from the print, to be worse than it was, the church appeared to be in
such extraordinary agitation upon the account of a paper clandestinely signed,
and brought in (of which more presently) that I though it I would not aggravate
matters. And accordingly in reading my Essay, I omitted that paragraph about
infant's being sprinkled, etc. p. 62. And also the whole of the 10th and 11th
heads, p. 70. and the whole of the conclusion about his expedient, p. 73. which
seemed to have a personal reference; and Mr. R. never saw or heard them, till
they appeared in print. There was likewise another article omitted both in the
reading and in the printing too (least I should load him too much, and which
unless remedied, there will be no peace, to this church;) and that relates to a
record he made (after the 2 or 3 first meetings) which he calls stating the
arguments on both sides," and which was made of his own mere motion without the
knowledge and consent of the church. It is among the proposals toward the
latter end of my last Essay, and runs in those terms. "3d. I would propose,
that the church record relating to this point may be erased or amended. It is
the duty of a clerk to record the transactions of the society he belongs to,
and not his own fancies and opinions. If the clerk of the general court, or of
a town, should take liberty of stating cases, reciting arguments, and giving
preference to which side he pleases, and making it part of the public records,
without the knowledge of his constituents; how would it be resented? but if a
clerk should go further still, and draw up such a state of the case, as
evidently condemned the court or town, and brought a slur upon their former
practices (upon their own records) what a stigma would he bring upon himself?
it is certain, that the account set down on the church records does not contain
a full and complete state of the arguments on both sides; some of the arguments
are wholly omitted, others (...) and some things are added, which I never heard
at any church-meeting. In short, the account is imperfect from beginning to
end. But if it was ever so perfect, it ought not to have been made matter of
record, without the church's knowledge and order. I would therefore move, that
the church would order it to be erased from the records. Or if this will not
pass, I move that a committee be chosen to (...) such addition to the
church-records, as may leave a fair state of the case to posterity; who will
have strange ideas of the present generation, if it should stand as it now
does."
So that there was scarce any thing except general matter left. And how could
he from that infer, that I had a design of getting him away; yea, and be
absolutely confirmed in it too? but still says he, "actions speak louder than
words;" and from them it was evident, that I had such a design. But what were
these actions? why a series of wrongs, or "injurious treatment frequently
given." p. 72. I had said and done things (to his prejudice) which he could not
have thought possible before," they were so very bad. p. 70. "By all that
appeared of late, it was evident I had LONG some root of prejudice against him;
and that nothing was wanting but opportunity, for it to manifest itself. But
that now opportunity being given by this controversy, I had used it to
purpose." p. 71. And that all the while "my conscience was so perfectly CALLOUS
and insensible, that I would not own I had wronged him at all." p. 59. And to
the like purpose in several other places.

Thus has he clothed me "in a garb of his own manufacture, terrible eno'l
acknowledge," and much like the dress of victims devoted to destruction by the
Spanish inquisition, all painted with devils; yea, and exactly in the same
strain and language of a late printed advertisement. But to strip myself of
this awful garb, let me observe a few things. 1st. That at the time of this
meeting, our division was comprised in a narrow compass. It was in a manner,
all contained in the letters that passed between us: he did not so much as
hint, that he had any thing further against me at the meeting with the
brethren, that followed soon after; no, nor at any other time has he intimated
to me, that he took offense at any thing else. But now it seems there was a
series of other injuries. How unjust and unchristian are such representations?
as for my letter, the world has that before them; and they may judge, as well
as we, whether it gave foundation for all this outcry. 2d. The suggestion is
utterly groundless, "that nothing but opportunity was wanting for me to revenge
myself, or to manifest the rooted prejudice or grudge I had long bore him." For
never man gave more opportunities, if I had been disposed to embrace them. His
imprudent management was such from year to year, that the parish was frequently
in a flame about it. At some of these times, I myself heard one of his present
prime pillars allege in his excuse, "that we must consider that he was but a
child; and that when he had more years over his head, he would behave with more
prudence and caution."
But how did I behave at such times? why, instead of taking the opportunity, I
was either silent, or endeavored to smooth over his conduct. And even when it
was proposed to print my first Essay, I declined it chiefly on this ground,
lest it should bring on a personal contest between me and Mr. R. And previous
to this, when I have been blamed for not preaching in his absence, or for being
so loath to preach, I have rather bore the blame than tell my reasons publicly,
lest it should hurt him. And when he sent the provoking letters to the precinct
committee about his salary, I, with the rest, endeavored to stifle and suppress
them, because I knew how much the precinct would resent it, if they were
communicated (as he designed they should be) though for this, many much blamed
us. Yea, under all the flights and neglects, or ill-treatment in general, I
received from him in former years, Perhaps he will here retort, that this is
only a general charge, and utterly deny any such treatment. To prevent which,
let me subjoin one instance among many. When he knew, that 3 quarters of the
parish or more would gladly hear me preach, and (being about to take a journey
to Connecticut) was earnestly urged by some of the principal men to invite me
to supply the pulpit, and told, that it should not cost him a farthing; he
rather than do it, chose to ride above 40 miles to get a young preacher, who
when he came no body liked, and I was forced at last to preach part of the
time, at the invitation of the deacons and precinct committee. And (strange to
tell) though I preached so frequently* he never once heard me till the time of
his great concern about 4 or 5 years ago, although he has been in the town ever
since the year 1759. He indeed never went so far as (he has now) to forbid my
preaching; he knew that would not bear; however he discouraged it as far as he
durst, all the while declaring to some that were then closely attached to me,
"how he longed to hear me preach and what a value he had for me, etc." but to
others he talked otherways; and to justify himself, told about town, "that the
association advised him not to ask me to preach; which I cannot think true,
most of them freely and repeatedly asking me into their own pulpits. Nay, to
such a height did he carry his dislike, that when once he was obliged by his
people to invite me to preach upon his being suddenly taken ill, his wife went
to the other meeting, though there was no ministerial communion between him and
the other minister. This could not proceed from any distaste to my manner of
preaching for she had never heard me. Many other slights there were, besides
those on the article of preaching. Let me particularly mention one; when I was
chosen town clerk anno 1766, he was pleased to say after the meeting, in a
large and promiscuous company, respecting me and my competitor; "he wondered
that they should chose Mr. C. Mr. S -- r would have made a charming clerk."
Here observe, a meddling with town and precinct affairs; which I and others
have had ten-fold more experience of the last March.
I bore it with patience, and would not so much as hint any thing to his
disadvantage. Here, by the way, I cannot help observing, that if he had not
been conscious of ill-treating me in former years, he would not have suspected
I bore him an old grudge. I should surely have been one of the worst of mortals
to bear resentment against any one that never injured me, but had always
treated me with kindness and respect. I would observe further, that after the
church-meetings upon this affair had been discontinued for about a 12 month, I
had no hand in their revival; I knew nothing of the 3 deacon's making the
motion, till after it was done; I was not consulted upon it; if I had been, I
should have advised against it: so far was I from pushing it on, to get him
away. It struck me with consternation when I first heard of it, as partly
seeing the event. I knew Mr. R's natural disposition, that he would be
strengthened by opposition, at least from such minute beings as he apprehended
us to be; whereas by longer forbearance he might fall off from his new notions
of his own accord, his native sickleness and instability giving some ground of
hope. I could see no other consequence resulting from a new meeting, but that
Mr. R. must leave us, or the church give up the practice to gratify him: to
prevent either, I set myself to study for some expedient, in which both might
agree, and at length thought of a neighboring minister's coming; which I
accordingly proposed: how Mr. R. received it, the world has heard. And even
after he had given me offense by his letters, I made another proposal (Essays.
p. 73.) even giving up the point of qualifications. But it was not taken the
least notice of. This was the case. And yet now one of these very persons, that
petitioned for the meetings being revived, and was as earnest in it as the
rest, joins in the cry of a design of driving Mr. R. off, when I did all I
could to prevent it; which I think very hard: when he had laid me under a
necessity of going on with my defense (I could do no other, when the meetings
were once revived). That yet he should tax me for it, and impute it to bad
designs, even without once discoursing with me upon the affair: Is this
brotherly or christian! Alas! how far will affection sometimes lead good men!
To sum up all in a word, if such prejudice subsisted in my breast, as Mr. R.
here suggests, if I retained an old grudge against him, is it possible it
should lie dormant? could I help manifesting it some way or other, in such a
long course of years? and I appeal to the whole parish, whether by word or
action, I have tried to hurt him. But to pass on, 3d. His charges, the reader
will naturally observe, are all of a general nature, except the letter in 1764,
nothing particular; much like the charges of Tertullus against Paul. Act. xxiv.
5. And how easy is it to asperse the best man alive in this manner? and who
could escape? if I was guilty of such acts of injury, and that so frequently,
why are they not particularized? why does he not tell the world what they are?
I challenge him to do it; I demand it of him, as a man, as a christian, as a
minister, that he bring them forth: I will turn the whole cause upon it, if he
can produce so much as one, except he raises up false witnesses against me, or
except he accuses me in the matter of my God, i. e. for my defense of what I
think a truth, an important truth of Christ. And must I leave this undefended?
must I give it up, for fear of getting him away? let me be first cast to the
lions. Dan. vi. It is true, in the present situation of things, no body can
imagine that I should much grieve if he was gone, without there appeared a
great change in him. But as for saying or doing any thing previous to or at the
church-meeting, with design to get him away, I utterly disavow it. And even
since the church-meeting, I have taken no measures or steps for such a purpose;
but have been much upon the reserve, saying or doing nothing, except by way of
self-defence; which I think is my bounden duty, and none can justly blame me
for it. And so far am I from being implacable and unforgiving, that if there
appeared any hearty concern in him for his mis-management, and the injuries he
has done me, or if he was in the same temper and disposition he was about four
years ago, I could freely pass by all, and receive him as cordially as ever.
But till this appears, christianity itself does not oblige me to forgive,
except so far as not to bear him ill will, but to wish and pray for his
spiritual welfare, that his eyes may be opened, etc. Here for a coronis on this
head, I hope it will be a warning to the reader, in case he should return an
answer to this book, not to give heed to general charges and accusations. If
this subterfuge should fail him, I know he would have very little left. I hope
also, it will be a warning to his parishioners, not to regard such general
outcry "of injury, abuse and persecution," which I expect will be more abundant
than ever, and that he will ride all over the town for that purpose. To show
any regard to them, would manifest to the world, that they are more swayed by
affection than by judgment, and that the prejudice lays wholly on their side
and not on mine; and that the grieving the good Mr. R. (as the phrase is) lies
nearer their hearts, than justice, truth and the spiritual good of their own
dear offspring, Some there are, that declare, "they are in my sentiments, and
that they think the practice right;" yet will give it up, for fear of grieving
or offending Mr. R. which shows, that they are man-pleasers; and that they
prefer peace to truth; and that present ease is better in their esteem than the
spiritual advantage of their children, etc.
which I think closely connected with this controversy. Which God forbid.

Well, Mr. R. having cleared himself from the heinous charge of giving me the
lie, he next proceeds to retort the charge. It seems "I gave him the lie too,
in the face of the church." After much study, he has hammered out something,
that he thought would carry such an appearance. p. 74. But as it happens it
wants truth to support it in every part. First he says, "he told me and the
church publicly, that some churches had practiced agreeable to his expedient,
both in this province and connecticut, one in the former, and another in the
latter, both of which he named." It makes me sick to hear so much of things
said in public, which were never said, (I believe I could mention near a score
of instances, which were only the fruit of after study). This expedient of his,
was never proposed in a formal manner in public; but only to the members
^everally in a private way in their own houses or as he had opportunity; thus
he proposed it to me at my own home. But finding it would not bear, I suppose
upon this account he forebore offering it in public. For which reason when my
2d. Essay was read at the meeting preceding the last (which was done by one of
the deacons, as I have noted, upon the account of my indisposition) I stood up,
when he came to my observations about the expedient, and said, "that inasmuch
as the proposal had never been made to the church at any of our public
meetings, I though it it best he should omit reading that part, and that it was
time enough to read it when the proposal was brought into public:" it was
omitted accordingly ( viz. from p. 21 to 26. of the Essays,) and the church
never heard it at all. Mr. R. was in too great ferment, to make such a
deliberate proposal in our last meeting. However, I recollect, that when one of
the deacons then expressed his wishes, that he would come into our expedient of
a neighboring minister's coming, he turned it off slightly, and said, he
thought we might as well come into his expedient: and so the matter went off,
without being particularly urged and enforced. To be sure, there was no
particular mention of other churches in the practice, as I, or others of good
memories, can possibly recollect. However, if there had been, this does not
prove I gave him the lie: for I did not thwart or contradict him at that time
in the face of the church; neither saying or reading any thing relating to the
expedient.
And as for what he puts in contrast to this, and which makes the lie, namely,
my saying, "no church in the province practices any thing like it, and that we
could not tell whether the report about the Connecticut church was true or no."
( p. 73. Essays.) This was not read at the church-meeting, as I have observed
before; no, neither was it so much as wrote; I adding that part, when I
transcribed the Essays for the press, upon hearing that after the dissolution
of the meeting, he still urged the members to come into the expedient. So that
his assertion and my denial in the face of the church publicly, must both fall
to the ground; there never was any such thing on either side. And as for his
telling me of it in private at my own house, I am certain he never did; we
talking only of the propriety of the expedient. I had the account of the
practice of the Connecticut church from another quarter. And as for the church
in this province that is in the practice, I know not what he means; I cannot so
much as guess even now what church he refers to. I have heard since my Essays
were in the press, that this expedient was in common use among the Connecticut
churches in Dr. B's scheme. Why did he not tell us of this! had he a mind to
appear among us as one of the prime leaders in this new device? and so be
handed down to posterity on the list of fame?

I pass over the rest of his 74th p. though it justly deserves castigation. And
proceed to his account of the last church-meeting, p. 75. with which he
finishes his book. I had prepared a particular account of this meeting to be
added to my Essays: but fearing to bring discredit on the church (which was my
alma matter) I erased it; and only concluded with a general and short relation,
which I thought impossible any should be offended at. But it seems Mr. R. has
taken great offense. And by his random and imprudent manner of writing about
it, has necessitated me to be particular in the affair, which I am really
sorry for. He says, "I represent him, as unsatisfied with the dissolution of
the meeting" I never gave any such representation, as I have noted before; it
was what he wanted. He tells us "the church were not willing to hear me any
more, having seen the sad effects of my Essays in former meetings, etc. What an
idea does this carry with it, as if I had forced my Essays upon the church in
former meetings, (so that they were wearied out with them) and urged the matter
even to nauseousness? when in fact the church appeared always desirous to hear
me till now, and many actually put me on to speak. The more their ingratitude,
that they now give me up a victim to Mr. R's resentment! they cannot but know,
that I am suffering for pleading their cause and the cause of their children:
and why will they not see me righted? how cruel and unbrotherly to leave me
thus in the lurch? But why were they not willing to hear me now? because Mr. R.
and his seconds had told them, "that it was not conscience, but revenge that
influenced us, and that our only motive was to drive him off:" and they had
previously determined to bar any further process, and to dissolve the meeting
at all events. But what were the sad effects of my Essays formerly? why, it
prevented his gaining his ends, and getting the practice cast out, and he had
unjustly picked a quarrel with me for it. He could not brook opposition. "I
could not have believed it possible, says he, some years ago." p. 70. Believed
what? why, that I should be so presumptuous as to rise in rebellion, and dare
to defend a practice, that he had stigmatized. This was the whole that he could
object against me. He tells us further, "that there was more warmth and
unchristian heat in this than in any of our meetings before, and that we had
all reason to be ashamed of it." It is well he takes himself in; it is the
first time he has done it throughout his whole book. But what was "the
occasion of this heat?" why, "our opposition to the dissolution of the
meeting." Here he skulks out again, and lays all the blame on us. But was this
fact? no; it was not the dissolving the meeting (this we would have consented
to on proper terms) but the paper that he immediately mentions, which caused
all this heat and warmth. A paper had been drawn up (not "a day or two," as he
says, but) several days before the meeting, and put into the hands of a proper
instrument, who, carrying it about, ployed his game so well, as to get near
half the church to sign. But "this they did willingly, says Mr. R. and not by
constraint or persuasion." How could this be, when he went to one member no
less than 3 times, persuading him to sign, but he finally refused? and was not
the utmost art, or rather artifice, used with the rest? did he not tell the
members applied to, "that this was the only way to keep Mr. R? that there was a
plan laid to get him away? that this was all we had in view in our opposition,
etc." or such like suggestions. And was it not such considerations as these,
that induced them to sign? I appeal to the members signing, whether this was
not the case. This paper was kept a profound secret, till the opening of the
church-meeting, and then was presented: Mr. R. was in a great hurry to read it,
and stopped one of the deacons for that end who was beginning upon the merits
of the cause. But previous to the reading of it, he told us. "he had no hand or
concern in it." Some folks had need have good memories. For some time after, in
the course of the debate, he said in his haste, "(...) (including himself)
expunged some passages out of the paper, which WE thought would give offense."
So that he had the correcting, if not the first draughting the paper: and yet
it seems by his first declaration, he had no concern in it at all. It was a
mere free will offering of others, to which he was an entire stranger.
And then read as follows.

"WE the subscribers, brethren of the first church of Christ in Plymouth,
taking into serious consideration the unhappy difference subsisting in the said
church, relative to the subjects of baptism, and being of opinion that the most
effectual method to restore peace and harmony to the said church, would be to
drop the affair for the present. We would therefore hereby signify our earnest
desire, that the church-meeting, which stands adjourned to Tuesday the 30th
instant June, be dissolved, without entering into further debate on the affair:
the church to reassume the further consideration thereof when they shall think
proper. In the mean time to leave the CONDUCT of the affair under consideration
to the WISDOM and PRUDENCE of our pastor. May the great head of the church lead
and guide us in this and in all our other affairs, so as shall tend most for
his glory and our good, and at last bring us to that blessed state, where love,
peace and unity reign in perfection."

Signed by about 22 members.

The reading of this paper put us all in confusion; and such a ferment
followed, as I never saw ^n any public assembly before. The MANNER of it ^ave
offense in the greatest degree: that a paper should be carried about in that
clandestine manner and by one that was no communicant too) and the whole
business of the meeting settled beforehand, appeared to us highly preposterous
and unchristian, "it was such a juggle as would have brought an everlasting
disgrace on a town or precinct, much more on a church meeting," as a gentleman
of note (living at a distance) justly observed upon it. And the MATTER of it
was equally offensive: that Mr. R. was to be clothed with sovereign authority;
that it was to be lest to him to do or forbear at his pleasure, and to be
accountable to none: in short, that the whole power of the church relating to
this affair was to be wholly deposited in his hands; so that the church's
constitution became essentially altered: Query, supposing Mr. R. had suspended
every one of us who opposed him from communion, whether this paper and the vote
that followed upon it, would not have bore him out? or whether the church had
not given him sufficient authority for it? if he had power to exclude baptized
persons, why not communicants? might they not be dealt with alike, the one as
claimers, the other as upholders and abettors? equally involved in error?
these things, together with the suddenness and unexpectedness of it, set us
all in a flame; When I consider my natural temper and disposition, and look
black, it is matter of wonderment to me, that I kept my temper as I did at this
and other meetings, considering his numerous provocations. N. B. I find no
charge of temper or heat at our meeting with the brethren, p. 71, 2. though we
conversed 3 hours, and he provoked me greatly, treating me with real contempt.
A charge of this nature would be much more easily believed of me than of Mr R.
Upon seeing his soft smiling way, a stranger would be apt to think that he was
almost incapable of human passions. But we must not always judge by appearence.
It is certain, that he is a man of like passions with others. A minister of his
acquaintance observed several years ago, "that he was a knotty piece, and that
one had need take heed how they offended him, for if once offended he would not
get over it very soon." Which I suppose is one main reason, why some particular
ministers appear so afraid (...). The like observation I have heard has been
made by some of his contemporaries at college. Exactly corresp^nding to this,
is his raking up at this day my letter of 1764. Who could have thought, that he
had bore resentment so long a time for this, especially since I had "shown him
acts of kindness since" by night and day? but so it is. Having mentioned
ministers, I cannot help querying a little with the ministers of the
association respecting the affair. Supposing one of their body at their
meeting, had disputed with Mr. R. on the point, and used the same arguments I
did (the rest sitting by consenting;) and Mr. R. after he got home, had wrote
such a letter to his opponent as he did to me, taxing him "with injurious,
unchristian, ungentleman-like treatment; charging him with giving false
representations of his principles, contrary to the light of his own mind, with
deceit in managing the controversy, with wresting the scripture to serve the
purposes of a party, with dangerous destructive doctrines of an unavoidable
arminian tendency." etc. And withal, "renouncing ministerial communion with
him." Whether they in general would have silently bore it; and whether the
party charged in particular would have ever sit with him in association again,
without a very humble acknowledgment? I should be glad, if they would make the
case their own. If I had been of their body now (as I was once) I dare say I
should have had ample reparation long ere this, or Mr. R's face would never
have been seen in the association again. Every one would have rose up in arms
in my behalf. And why will they be silent now, when they see an old brother
suffering? especially since the cause is their own? for if the charge of
dangerous error and arminianism be true of me, it is equally so of most of
them; and I may justly say, mutato nomine de^^e narratur. I am satisfied, if
ministers had fully spoke their minds from the beginning, Mr. R. would have
been brought to something before now. But their silence hardens him; and he
persuades his people, that the association justify him, and that it is none but
arminian ministers that approve of my Essays.
I acknowledge I was angry to purpose, and it was the only time that I was
thoroughly angry at any of our meetings. We protested against the paper; we
desired to be heard upon it, and insisted upon our right to speak: but all in
vain. A vote was hurried on, (Mr. R. the ringleader in it,) and it passed in
the very words of the paper. After the passing of it, the opposite party, who,
all the while appeared to be in as great agitation as we, became so far calmed
as to suffer us to speak, before the sentence of dissolution was pronounced,
though Mr. R. appeared utterly averse to it. We then argued and remonstrated,
showing the impropriety of the measure, and the bad consequences that would
result from it; and withal claiming it as our right and privilege to deliver
our whole minds on the affair, and showing the injustice of stopping our
mouths, etc. Mr. R. and M -- w were our chief opposers all the while. But at
length (with much difficulty, and after a struggle of 2 or 3 hours) the church
re-considered their vote, and liberty was granted to speak to the merits of the
cause. One of the old members saying, " come let us hear Mr. C. perhaps after
all this noise, the mountain will bring forth a mouse It seems he could not
hear me long with patience; for he kept altering his posture, rising and
sitting, shifting seats, walking in the alley, running out of doors, and then
returning; and sometimes speaking and objecting, trying to stop me, etc. For
which management I gave a stamp at him, and kept on reading. This I mention,
lest Mr. R. (as he never misses an advantage) should make a formidable story of
it in his next piece and leave out the provoking circumstances. It was the only
method wherein I could well testify my dislike of his behavior; for my breath
and strength was nigh spent with speaking and reading (being not well) and then
a verbal reproof would have engaged me in a dispute, and diverted and stopped my
reading in the midst, which was what he wanted. And besides, we had a
moderator, that would keep no sort of order; on the contrary, he was most
unorderly himself, and encouraged the like in others, ( his friends, as he
calls them.)
I took no notice of the speech, but proceeded to read my last piece, leaving
out the parts most offensive. After this, others spoke to the point in
controversy, (the meeting not being immediately dissolved, as he asserts, but
continuing near an hour after) and pleaded for the continuance of the practice.
But not expecting it would have any effect, the brethren with me finally
offered to consent to the dissolution of the meeting upon proper terms; which
were, that the offensive paper should be wholly laid aside: and, inasmuch as
the ^igners of it had with one voice declared, "that the intent of it was only,
that the affair might be dropped for the present, and that things should remain
in the same situation they were before we had any church-meetings." That the
vote should be drawn up accordingly. But this could not be obtained. Then it
was offered further, to join in the vote according to the terms used in the
paper, provided the latter clause relating to the pastor might be left out. But
neither could this be obtained: but the vote finally passed as it stood at
first. And then the meeting was dissolved. This was the true state of the case.
How unfair is Mr. R. then in telling the world, that I (with others) opposed a
dissolution of the meeting with vehemence? and that this was the sole cause of
all the unchristian heat appearing at that time? the real cause was the
unchristian paper, that was brought into the meeting. And this had such
effects, afterward, that several withdrew from the communion upon the account,
looking upon it that the constitution of the church was entirely changed; and
Mr. Robbins was obliged to have a church-meeting on the affair; which was held
on the sabbath! Mr. R. stopped the church after meeting, to get them to make
the following declaration (ready prepared to their heads;) namely, "That they
did not intend by the offensive clause to make any alteration in the
constitution of the church, or invest the pastor with any new power in his
office, which he was not possessed of before the vote passed; but that the
constitution of the church and the power of the pastor should be considered
just in the same point of light as before." And he took the sabbath for it, to
prevent any debate on the affair. However there was some debate, and the church
after deliberation were so wise (instead of making such a contradictory
declaration) as to strike at the root and to vote an erasure; to the apparent
dissatisfiaction of Mr. R. and 2 or 3 other zealous sticklers. Here I desire
the reader to recall to mind how his zeal was stirred at my writing remarks on
his prayer upon the sabbath; and how I am taxed with it even twice. Lo! here
are church-meetings (as well as weddings) on the SABBATH!
In which the church agreed to erase the passage most offensive in their vote;
namely, those words, "in the mean time to leave the conduct of the affair under
consideration to the wisdom and prudence of the pastor." So that Mr. R's
absolute power and reign was of short continuance; at lest in word and name,
though in reality it remains as much as ever; and perhaps more so.

And thus I have at length arrived to the conclusion of his book; having so
much rubbish to remove out of the way, I have proceeded the more slowly and
gradually; and yet have left unnoticed many articles less material and which
did not so immediately affect my reputation, which were as grossly
misrepresented as the rest. What I have taken notice of appeared absolutely
necessary to me: "they are facts (to use his own words, p. 65.) which should
never have been made more public by me, had not Mr. R. really obliged me to it,
to vindicate myself from those charges which he has thrown out against me in
his bitter remarks upon the Essays; which have made it necessary that I should
thus let the world know the particular (manner, as well as) reasons of my
conduct, especially in publishing his letters, which he has endeavored to
represent to his readers in such terrible colors." And upon the whole would
observe, that his talent seems to lie in misrepresentation, and in giving the
most odious turn to the most innocent actions. And if he would take such
liberty in a public piece, where I had opportunity of seeing and answering for
myself; how much more may we suppose, that he gave himself latitude in his
private visits (which were so abundant) where I had little opportunity of
hearing and knowing what he said? (in fact picking up all the tittle-tattle
that ever he heard about me from my childhood to this day, which received new
authority as it came from his mouth.) No wonder then, that he has wrought
people to so high a pitch against me, especially since I am such " a hermit,
and converse so little with people." (Essays. p. 49.) And so have no
opportunity of counter-acting his motions.

These things lie as a continued load on my spirits; they wear out my life,
depriving me of my natural rest, and rendering we weary of a vain world, where
friends and friendship and every thing are so mutable and uncertain. And what
will be the end of them is known only to the wise disposer of all things. To
whom I desire to submit in this and all his dispensations, for I suffer JUSTLY
from him, though UNJUSTLY from man. But whatever becomes of me, whether I stand
or fall; it is sure the gates of hell shall never prevail against his church.
His cause will flourish in spite of all opposition. The great head of the
church will carry the lamb^ in his arms, and be their defense in the time of
danger. And will let the world see, that his mark was not set on them in vain.

May God give a happy termination to these things; may peace as well as truth
flourish in our days; may we all have the temper of the gospel implanted and
cultivated in us; and may this church (the first in New England) be increased
with the increasings of God, and may all the members of it be found walking in
the ways of truth and peace, to the Redeemer's glory, the good of others, and
rejoicing of their own souls in the day of Christ. AMEN.

APPENDIX.
SINCE the finishing of this answer, something has occurred, proper to mention,
which perhaps the reader will look upon as a mere tragi-comedy. Mr. H. a
brother of the church being very uneasy at the present situation of affairs, of
his own mere motion went to Mr. R. and earnestly urged him to come and converse
with me alone, and endeavor to heal the breach between us: this Mr. R. utterly
refused. Mr. H. then proposed, that we should have another conference with some
of the brethren present, to see if nothing could be done. This Mr. R. conceded
to, and gave him leave to propose it to me; withal signifying, that he was
sensible he had been to blame in the affair. The proposition being made to me,
after due consideration, I wrote as follows.

Written to prevent mistakes, and as a help to the memory.

Whereas it has been proposed, that Mr. Robbins and I should have another
meeting, with a number of the brethren present, in order to adjust the
difference between us; and Mr. Ribbins having consented: being sincerely
desirous of peace upon proper grounds I also signify my consent thereto upon
these terms. 1st. That previous to said meeting, Mr. Robbins signify his
readiness to acknowledge, that he has greatly wronged and injured me by his
letters both as to matter and manner. And that this is a point, that shall not
so much as be brought into debate at such meeting. 2d. That as to all other
matters of complaint or grievance on either side, the particulars be freely
discussed and opened at said meeting, and an accommodation endeavored. 3d. That
there shall be an equal number, of brethren chosen on both sides, and that
their mouths shall not be stopped, as at the former meeting; but that they
shall have free liberty to speak, and mediate and interpose as they shall see
occasion. 4th. That if an accommodation be effected the terms shall be reduced
to writing, and signed by both parties. 5th. That in order the more effectually
to bring about an accommodation, whether it would not be proper and advisable
to have 2 or 3 neighboring ministers present? unless these terms be agreed to,
I am confident it would be to little purpose to confer in any shape. But if Mr.
Robbins concedes to them, I stand ready to meet him at any place that he shall
propose, although I do not think myself obliged by the laws of christianity to
take any further private steps, but the affair seems ripe for a public
cognizance. But for the sake of peace, I am ready to fall in with any thing
that is lawful and reasonable, and that has a tendency to put an end to this
uncomfortable affair. --

J. C.
PLYMOUTH, August, 26. 1773.

This I wrote to prevent wrong accounts of the affair, (well knowing the danger
of a verbal answer;) but I wrote not to Mr. R. because he did not write to me,
and because my last letter was sent back with contempt, unread as he says. p.
70. The whole was designed merely as a memorandum, and to help Mr. H's memory
in returning an answer. This script being communicated to a number of the
brethren and approved by them, I sometime after delivered to Mr. H. who upon
hearing it read, said, "he believed (as he gathered from Mr. R's talk) that he
would consent to every particular, except that about minister's being present."
I then directed him either to read the paper to Mr. R. or let him read it
himself, and even take a copy of it (if he desired it) but to bring back the
original. Mr. H. accordingly gave him the paper, which having read, he desired
it might be left with him for a while, as not having time to take a copy of it
then. It seems he was in such a hurry to communicate it, that he would not take
time, as he might well have done; and he could not so well represent it as a
letter to him if it had not been in my handwriting. He presently repairs to
his grand non-communicant counselor several times referred to in this piece;
and having consulted with him, he then flies about the town from house to
house, and read the paper (after his manner) to those of his favorers he met
with, communicants or non-communicants, old and young, (with large annotations)
spending the remainder of this and most of the next day in this exercise. So
that it was late the next day, and after going 2 or 3 times, before Mr. H.
could get back the original, and even then he appeared loath to part with it.
But he returned me no answer by Mr. H. either written or verbal, and signified
to him his dislike of the whole paper, and that he was generally advised to
take no notice of it, with intimations of my being implacable, etc. In the mean
time, the report flew like lightning every where, and even into neighboring
parishes, "that I had wrote another letter to Mr. R. and in it abused and
insulted him in a high degree, and in short had done worse than ever before." I
could not imagine how this could be; and the paper being returned, one or two
of the brethren traced, the reports, having the original in their pockets; and
the brethren to whom Mr. R. read it, appeared generally highly incensed against
me for my bad treatment of Mr. R. Upon which they read the paper to them. Most
of them seemed amazed, and said, Mr. R. did not read it so to them, and could
scarce believe it was the same paper, and some of them desired to hear it 2 or
3 times before they could give any credit to it, and most of them declared,
they could see no harm in the paper as it was read to them now. And some seemed
so uneasy, that they said they would go and discourse with Mr. R. upon it. But
how can this be accounted for? would even one of the worst of men have dared
thus to impose upon people, when he was so liable to detection? I answer, I
suppose the case to be this; that as he read the paper, he kept paraphrasing as
he went along, and keeping his eye upon the paper, they took his comments to be
part of the paper: and so were angry or pleased; just as he appeared to be
himself. However, this is not a full solution. It is evident by their several
accounts, that there must be some paragraphs omitted in reading: for it was
generally understood. 1st. That I wrote him another letter, and so was going to
create a fresh disturbance. 2d. That the motion for another meeting originated
from me and not from him. 3d. That I insisted upon his making a confession
previous to the meeting, and bringing or sending it to me in writing, or he
should not see my face (as he phrased it, or read it, as some say.) Whereas the
contrary to all this appeared plainly from the face of the paper. It was wrote
to prevent mistakes, and not directed to him. It is a declared answer to a
proposal of his; and all required was, "that he should signify his readiness"
to make such a confession: but the actual doing of it was to be part of the
business of the meeting. Thus they would have certainly understood it, if it
had been read as it ought to have been. As to the article of confession, I
thought it a necessary preliminary; for what signified it to meet, unless he
appeared disposed to do something? and this was the least I could accept of;
and it was in some sort a coming to his terms of a general making up, which (to
use his phrase) I thought even "a condescension in me." With respect to the
second article, he said, that his hands were to be tied, but I was to be lest
open and loose: Whereas I had several material articles against him, besides
that of the letters, which were left as much at a loose. The 3d. article he
read with an emphasis, and it was made criminal in an high degree. There was
nothing but shall, shall, shall. In short, I appeared as arbitrary and absolute
as the great Turk: it was nothing but SHALL and WILL with me. So that I SHALL
be almost afraid even to speak in the future tense again, at least in
addressing Mr. R. There was another despotical or dogmatic SHALL under the 4th
head. As to the 5th, I was for bringing a council upon him at once, and it
seems the words "proper and advisable," and it is being proposed by way of
query, were sunk in the reading. For the hearers took it, that there was
another SHALL here too. And to crown all, he denied that it was he who stop^ed
the brethren's mouth at the former meeting, and said, "it was my own proposal."
(Article 3d.) My PROPOSAL! where are we now? into what a world have we got? I
should as soon have expected, that he would have denied that we ever had any
meeting at all: however I am glad it is come out before my answer went to the
press. My PROPOSAL! the deacon who interposed between us, and the only witness
in the case, will give his oath to the contrary. And his management at the
meeting (which I have recited) proves that the restriction came from him, and
not from me. But it seems he is ashamed of it, and is going to father it upon
me; when as I ever abhorred it, being unreasonable in itself, tending to defeat
the whole design of the meeting, and repugnant to the example of all christians
in the like cases: (I dare say no instance of this nature can be found in the
annals of the church. Mr. R. must have the sole honor of the invention.) It was
nothing but absolute necessity, and my great desire of peace, that brought me
to submit to it. A meeting was to be had upon no other terms But did he not
offer other terms? and did not my refusal necessitate him to insist on this? he
indeed offered not to lay this restriction, if I would have excluded one
brother from the meeting. But this I could not consent to: it was as necessary
that brother should be present as I myself. Not only as an evidence, but as a
party offended; he looking upon himself as equally involved in the charge of
arminianism and dangerous doctrine; and there could be no thoro' making up
without him. As to the conclusion of my paper, that expression was very
offensive, "the affair seems ripe for a public cognizance." Here it seems I
threatened him with a council. But withal signified, that he would not join or
take notice of a council. He then thanks his mountain so strong, that it connot
be moved; and is resolved to brave it out against all the world, as long as he
can keep the majority of the parish on his side. But is this a christian
disposition? is it not his (as well as my) duty to use all proper means of
reconciliation? and is not the advice of ministers and churches one instituted
means for that end? and will he reject all? and make numbers his sole refuge?
Alas! what one single step has he ever yet taken for peace, since this
controversy begun? and he seems now to declare, that he never designs to take
any, but to leave me to my fate! (which sort of management seems to give full
confirmation to a report long prevalent among us, namely, his saying, that if
we had not got deacon T. with us, he should ca^e nothing about it) And his
principal adherents join in the same declaration, of taking no notice of my
efforts. These are the chief things, that have transpired respecting this
paper. His friends seem cautious of speaking, otherwise no doubt we should have
gathered up many more. One thing indeed I have heard further, that he gives out
"Mr. H. went beyond his commission;" whether in making the pr^position in his
name, or in signifying his consciousness of being to blame, etc. or in both, I
cannot say. Thus proposals of peace from me are turned into crimes: if I do, or
not do, speak, write, or sit still, people will be more and more angry at me.
If I had taken no notice of the proposal at all, I should have been represented
as implacable, and bad to the last degree, as refusing all overtures of peace:
and if I do take notice of it in the most modest and christian manner, it is
looked upon as criminal. What shall I then do? and what will be the end of
these things!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PREFACE, page 1. line 17 for general, read geauine. P. 9. l. 7. after
unbaptized, add, Though there be no quaker or professed anabaptist that I know of
living in the town. P. 10. l. 19. r. equally. P 13. l. 17. r. oblige. P. 19. l.
10. r. horror. P. 22. margin, l. 4. for their, r. the. P. 23. l. 17. from
bottom, r. would he not. P. 25 l. 16 r. observed. L. 19. r. scruples. P. 27. l.
14. r. congregations. P. 35. l. 12 for pharse, r. phrase. L 27. r.
unregenerate. L. 36. dele the. P. 43. l. 7. r. parishioner. L 8. r. a fool. L.
1. r. author's. P. 47. l. 22. r. scruples. P 48. l. 6 from b. r. obnoxious. P.
50. l 12. for place, r. piece. P 21 l. 24. dele is. P. 54. l. 10. from b. r.
from. P. 60 l. 8. r. synod P. 61. l. 10. r Essays. P. 72. l. 6. for and, r. or.
P. 78. l. 18 r. is he not. P. 85. l. 22. for two, r. too. P. 91. l. 24. for p.
58. r. p. 57. P. 94. l. 4. r. the letters. P. 97. l. 21 for were, r. was. L.
23. r. sermons. P. 98. l. 17. for would, r could. P. 103. l. 14. for his, r.
him. P. 105. l. 2. for deacon. F. r. deacon T. L. 7. r. attempted P. 106. l.
14. r. wholly unbecoming. P 112. l. 23. r. much gratified. P. 116. l. 27. r.
his omitting. P. 117. l. 2^. r. profession. P. 122. l. 2. from b. for
unplacable, r. unpeaceable. P. 126. l 18. r. supposed. P. 127. last line
margin, dele the words some months before. P. 128. magin, l. 5 from b. after
transiently, add, some months before. P. 129. l. 13. r. with respect to. P.
132. l. 6. after worse than it was, add, I mean m^re offensive. P. 111. l. 7.
from the bot. r. have it thought. P. 130. last l. margin r. misrepresentations.
P. 53. l. 20. r. inexperience. P. 149. l. 13 from b. for Ribbins, r. Robbins.


