OBSERVATIONS Upon the CONGREGATIONAL PLAN of CHURCH GOVERNMENT, Particularly
as it respects the CHOICE and REMOVAL of CHURCH OFFICERS, Supported by the
Testimony of the FATHERS of NEW ENGLAND, And Unanimously offered to the
Consideration of the CHURCHES, BY THE CONVENTION of the MINISTERS Of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, at their annual Meeting in Boston, May 26,
1773, and continued by Adjournment to July 23.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOIL, next Door to the (...) 1773.

INTRODUCTION.
PECULIAR Difficulties and Perplexities having lately arisen in some of our
Churches, which greatly threaten their general Peace and Welfare, the Ministers
of Religion, who ought naturally to care for their State, and are under every
Obligation to promote their Interest, have esteemed themselves called by the
great Head of the Church to inquire with particular Attention into the Plan
upon which our Churches were originally settled, and upon which they have so
many Years happily flourished.

And as the Effect of our serious, and we hope Impartial Inquiry, we think
proper to publish to the World the following Observations. This we do with a
View not to infringe, but to state and defend the Rights of the Churches;
fairly to represent that noble Plan of Order, so peculiarly friendly to the
Rights of Mankind, laid by our venerable Ancestors, after the most serious and
careful Inquiry into the sacred Scriptures. Our only design has been, to find
out its true Meaning; to compare its several parts with one another; to show
their consistency with themselves, with the Sentiments of the judicious
Compilers, expressed in their other Compositions, and with the Principles and
general Practice of our Churches and Pastors, from their first happy Settlement
unto this Time.

We have no Inclination to propose any new Canon, or to impose upon the
Churches any Opinion of our own. We only mean to aid the Inquiries of our
Brethren into the true Nature of our Ecclesiastical Constitution, and we submit
all to their candid and impartial Examination. Whatever they find, after a
serious and unbiassed Consideration, opposite to this, they have an undoubted
Right to reject. They will, however, allow us to entertain such an Opinion of
their Christian Charity, as to rely on their kind Acceptance of our sincere
Intention, in this Publication, to strengthen the Union of our Churches, to
promote their Peace, and to preserve the good Foundation upon which they have
hitherto had Rest and been edified, and which we hope was laid for many
Generations.

THE Compilers of the Platform of Church Discipline agreed upon Anno 1648 are
evidently of Opinion, that there are no Churches instituted under the
New Testament Dispensation, but Congregational, and expressly disclaim the name
of Independents. Plat. Cap. 2. Sect. 5.
Now the grand Distinction between Congregational Churches and those which are
erected on the Independent Establishment consists in this; The Independents
manage their Ecclesiastical Affairs solely among themselves, without supposing
they are under any Obligation to ask Direction or Assistance of any other
Churches: But the Congregational Churches, of which our Platform treats, are by
our Constitutions in all Cases of Importance and Difficulty, to invite the Aid
and Advice of neighboring Churches, which our Fathers held to be an "Ordinance
of Christ, though not absolutely necessary to the Being, yet many Times, through
the iniquity of Men and perverseness of Times, necessary to the well-being of
Churches, for the Establishment of Truth and Peace therein." Cap. 16. Sect. 1.


To suppose therefore that the Platform encourages the Churches upon its
Establishment to transact their Important Affairs, without consulting the
neighboring Churches, where this Advice may be obtained, is directly to
contradict the Judgment of our pious and learned Fathers upon this Point, to
annihilate the Distinction which they had established between the Churches of
the Independent and Congregational Persuasion, to represent the Platform as
inconsistent with itself, to destroy that Communion of Churches which they
supposed ought sacredly to be maintained, and to deprive the Churches of an
Institution of Christ greatly important to their Order and Safety.

Our Fathers were too discerning to contradict themselves, and overthrow that
goodly Frame of Church Government which they had erected with so much Wisdom
and Judgment, after their maturest Inquiries, on a Scripture Foundation.

They with great Propriety and Justice assert, Vid. Plat. c. 8. s. 9.
That neither Diocesan Bishops, or Lay-Patrons, or Magistrates, as such, have
Power to appoint Officers to a particular Church. This is the unalienable Right
of the Brethren by a Free Election: Yet they expressly declare, that, in the
Exercise of this Right, it is agreeable to Congregational Principles, "and much
conducing to well-being and Communion of Churches; that, where it may
conveniently be done, neighbor Churches be advised withal, and their Help be
made Use of." Vid. Plat. c. 8. s. 8.


As the Platform evidently maintains that every Church has Power, in the above
described Method, to elect and proceed to the Settlement of their Officers, so
it allows, that in Case of manifest Unworthiness, Delinquency or incorrigible
offending, they have Power to depose or remove them: But the Compilers of the
Platform are so far from supposing, that a Church should exercise this Power,
without the Advice of other Churches; that in express Terms they are directed
to proceed in so Important a Transaction by Advice from neighboring Churches.
-- This is plain from the very Words of the Platform, In Case an Elder offend
incorrigibly, the Matter so requiring, as the Church had Power to Call to
Office, so they have Power, according to Order (the Council of other Churches
where it may be had, directing thereto) to remove him from his Office. Plat. c.
10. s. 6.
These Words must convince every unprejudiced Mind, that the removal of an
Elder from Office, according to Order and the Method appointed in our Platform,
cannot be accomplished, but by the Council of other Churches, where it may be
had, directing thereto. Should a Church therefore of themselves, without asking
or receiving Advice in the prescribed Method, proceed to dissolve the Relation
between them and their Pastor, they would not only deviate from the
Constitution we profess to be under, but act in direct Opposition to it. And of
Consequence must be looked upon as irregular, and their Conduct must be in an
higher Degree culpable, when they proceed not only without consulting, but
contrary to the repeated Decisions of Ecclesiastical Councils regularly
convened.

In Opposition to what has now been said, it has been alleged, that the
Platform Plat. c. 8. s. 5.
declares "that if the Church have Power to choose their Officers and Ministers,
then in Case of manifest Unworthiness and Delinquency, they have Power also to
depose them." -- This we readily grant; and that this Power resides in them
only, and not in any Synod or Ecclesiastical Council, according to our
Constitution -- But then our Platform plainly points out on what Occasions, and
in what Manner, they are to exercise this Power, viz. in Case of manifest
Unworthiness and Delinquency -- a Council of other Churches where it may be
had, directing thereto, which is the only prescribed Method in which it can be
done according to Order. To whom is this Delinquency or Unworthiness to be
manifest? -- Is it to that Church only to whom the Person accused belongs? --
Alas! the unhappy Controversies which usually usher in every Attempt to remove
an Elder from his Office, render them too much a Party to be the sole
constituted Judges in this Affair -- The Delinquency must be manifest to the
Council of other Churches, who are appointed to be called upon this Occasion,
as well as to the Church more immediately concerned: Without this it would be
the greatest Absurdity for the Council to advise and direct to the Dismission.
-- This Advice and Direction being obtained, the Church proceed to the regular
Exercise of their Power, and dissolve the Relation between them and their
Elder. This is indisputably the Meaning of our Platform: And to take it in any
different Sense is to charge it with the greatest Inconsistency.

Upon this Point it is very observable, that the Platform makes Use of a very
different Form of Expression, respecting the Introduction and Deposition of
Church Officers: -- As to the former, the Words of the Platform are these we
judge it much conducing to the well-being and Communion of Churches, that where
it may be conveniently done, Neighbor Churches be advised withal, and their
Help be made Use of in the Trial of Church Officers in order to their Choice.
Plat. c. 8. s. 8.
But as to the latter, viz. the Deposition of an Elder, the Platform rises in
Expression, and uses a much stronger Term, -- The Council of other Churches
directing thereto; most evidently signifying it to be their Mind of the
Compilers, that a Church, even in Case of incorrigible Offense in an Elder, may
not, according to Order, proceed of themselves alone to his Deposition, but
that the Power they have, in so momentous a Matter, is to exercised under the
Countenance and Direction of a Council of other Churches regularly called.

Our illustrious Ancestors had too much Acquaintance with the Passions and
Prejudices incident to human Nature, and too warm a Zeal for the Safety of the
Churches, and the usefulness of the Ministry, to leave a Decision of so great
and common Concern entirely to those whose Minds may have been heated by
previous Contentions, and their Judgments biassed by various Prejudices and
Prepossessions.

If this be allowed, every Church will have a Constitutional Right, whenever
they see fit, under the Pretense of Unworthiness and Delinquency in their
Minister, after many Years faithful Service, to dismiss him from his Office,
and resign him and his Family to seek a Maintenance from public Charity.

What a Discouragement would this be to well-qualified Persons from entering
into the Ministry under such a Constitution -- Soon would our Pulpits be
vacant, or filled with men, no ways prepared for that important Service.

Upon the whole, We are fully of Opinion, that it is contrary to the Spirit and
Letter of the Platform, for any Church to exercise the Power of dissolving the
Relation between them and their Pastor, unless they act under the Direction of
neighboring Churches, regularly called and convened, where such Direction may
be obtained; and where a Church is rent with Divisions among themselves, and do
not consult other Churches, they neglect to make Use of the Remedy which our
Ecclesiastical Constitution has in such Cases provided and enjoined.

These are not merely our own peculiar Sentiments as to the meaning of that
Church Order, which is pointed out in our Ecclesiastical Constitution, but they
are confirmed by the Suffrages of the most eminent Divines of our Communion,
who lived at or near the Time when the Order of the Government of
Congregational Churches was established.

We have made a careful Inquiry into the Practice of the Churches, with Respect
to Church Order, which, if it has been uniform, must be esteemed a faithful
Exposition of the Sentiments of the venerable Synod who compiled the Platform,
and have the Satisfaction to find the Construction we have given of the
Platform abundantly confirmed by the Writings of those Divines who were present
at that Synod, and of the Ministers of the succeeding Age.

Before the Synod of 1648, the Churches of the Province had no Platform of
their Church Government. Magnalia, B 5. p. 20.
Till that Time, the venerable John Cotton's Book of the Power of the Keys, in
which the learned Author endeavors to lay out the just Line and Bounds of all
Church Power, was generally received as the Directory of these Churches in this
Matter. In this Treatise he says, he is for that great Work of Communion and
Consociation of Churches, p. 57. And speaking of the Liableness of Elders and
Brethren to abuse their Power, he asserts the necessary Communion of Churches
in Synods, who have Authority to determine, declare and enjoin such Things as
may rectify the Male-Administrations, -- which fall under their Cognizance: But
still, so as to leave unto the particular Churches themselves the formal Acts,
which are to be done pursuant unto the Advice of the Council. Magnalia, ut
supra.
Upon the Churches scandalous and obstinate Refusal to comply with the Advice
and Determination of Council, "The Council," says he, may withdraw Communion
from them, as from those who will not be counseled against a notorious
Mismanagement of the Jurisdiction which the Lord Jesus Christ has given them.
Upon these Citations we beg leave to remark, that, when the Disorders of Elders
or Brethren had been such as in need the Counsel of other Churches, it was the
Opinion of Mr. Cotton, that the Church was to act pursuant to the Advice given
them. It could not act contrary to it without destroying its Communion with
other Churches, even a Refusal to act agreeable to the Advice given them, if it
appeared to be scandalous and obstinate, was a sufficient Reason for other
Churches to withdraw Communion from them.

Dr. Increase Mather in his seasonable Testimony, p. 13.
speaking of Mr. Cotton's Book of the Keys, affirms that it has all along been
of high Account in the Churches of this Country; and that in that Book, (as
well as a the Preface to it written by Dr. Goodwin) there is a full Testimony
borne, to the Interest which Councils ought to have in ordering the Affairs of
consociated Churches. He has given us the following remarkable Citation from
it, which will help us to form just Sentiments of the Opinion and Practice of
our venerable Fathers in the early Days of this Country. It is an holy
Ordinance of Christ for particular Churches to join together, in a Consociation
among themselves, to administer their Church Affairs, which are of Weight and
Difficulty and common Concernment, not without common Consultation and Consent
of other Churches about them. Now Church Affairs of Weight and Difficulty and
common Concernment, we account to be, the Election and Ordination of Elders,
Excommunication of an Elder, or of any Person of public Note and Employment;
the Translation of an Elder from one Church to another. Upon which we observe,
That, in the Opinion of Mr. Cotton, Matters of Weight, Difficulty and common
Concernment, of which the Excommunication, and by Parity, of Reason, the
Deposition of an Elder was one, were not to be transacted by a particular
Church, till it had consulted other Churches; and that their Sentence of
Excommunication, and consequently of Deposition, was not to be administered
without the Consent of the Churches consulted.

The next Authority is that of the renowned Hooker, in his Survey of Church
Discipline. Preface, p. 1^.
He observes, That Consociation of Churches is not only lawful, but in some
Cases necessary. When Causes are difficult, or particular Churches want Light
and Help, they should crave the Assistance of such a Consociation. Churches so
meeting, have a Right to counsel, rebuke, etc. as the Case does require. In
case any particular Church shall walk pertinaciously, either in the profession
of Error, or sinful Practice, and will not hear their Counsel, they may and
should renounce the Right Hand of Fellowship with them. According to Mr. Hooker
it is the Duty of a particular Church, whenever it wants Light and Help to ask
the Counsel of other Churches, which when given, is not to be disregarded and
slighted. For refusing to hear Counsel so given, is, according to him, just
Cause for other Churches renouncing Fellowship with the Church so offending.

The next Father of our Churches, whose Sentiments we shall consider upon this
Occasion, is Mr. Davenport, Successor to the famous Cotton. In his Power of
Congregational Churches, he maintains, "That a Congregational Church is the
highest Ecclesiastical Tribunal, under Christ, in its own Matters." p. 134.
He asserts. That this chief Tribunal must have no Ecclesiastical Power above
it. p. 135.
And That it may not be judicially censured by any Power of the same kind."
That " Elders, as Officers, are above the Brethren, while they act according to
Rule: But if they become Delinquents, they are under the Power of the Whole.
The Church," he adds, "must submit to them as Rulers, whilst they rightly
exercise the Authority of their Office, etc. But they must submit to the
Church, questioning, or proceeding to censure them, with good Advice of
Neighbor Churches and Elders, who as they concurred in giving them the Right
Hand of Fellowship in their Ordination, so they should concur in approving this
Censure, as justly inflicted by the Church, from Parity of Reason. p. 13^
It is plainly the Opinion of Mr. Davenport, that no Censure ought to be passed
on a delinquent Elder without the good Advice of neighboring Churches: though
a Congregational Church is the highest Ecclesiastical Tribunal under Christ,
yet it ought not to exercise its Power in such a Case, till a Council of
neighboring Churches have advised them to do it.

Mr. Norton, who rendered himself famous by his Answer to Apollonius,
maintains, That a confederate Fraternity is the first, proper and immediate
ordinary Subject, that, from Christ, has derived to it all Ecclesiastical
Power, or the ministerial Power of the Keys. p. 57.
He insists upon it. That, in an organic State, no Ecclesiastical Act can be
completed, either by the Elders excluding the Fraternity, or by the Fraternity
setting aside the Presbytery. p. 67.
He allows Councils to be remarkably useful, and after a Sort necessary, so
that the Church cannot do well without them. p. 112.
He maintains, That particular Churches ought to subject themselves to the
lawful Determinations of a Synod from all the Churches, and further, That the
particular Churches ought to acquiesce in the lawful Decrees of a Synod, [or
Council] for Fear of incurring the Guilt of disturbing public Order, and
through the Fear of the Punishment of Non-Communion with other Churches. p. 118.
According to Mr. Norton, not to acquiesce in the lawful Decrees of a Synod, or
Council, would bring on a Church the Guilt of disturbing public Order, and
expose it to the Punishment of Non-Communion with other Churches.

Mr. Norton in one of his last Sermons has this remarkable Passage, Let us
acknowledge the Order of Eldership in our Churches in their Way, and the Order
of Councils in their Way, duly backed and encouraged; without which. Experience
will witness, that these Churches cannot long consist. Mather's Seasonable
Test. p. 14.


Before we proceed to the Synod of 1662, we shall cite a Passage from an
Election Sermon of Mr. Samuel Danforth, formerly Minister of Roxbury, which
throws great Light on the Practice of our Churches in early Times. This Sermon
was preached A. D. 1670. "In our first and best Times," says he, what pious
Care was there for Sister Churches, -- that in those that wanted Peace their
Dissentions might be healed? What Readiness was there in those Days to call for
the Help of Neighboring Elders and Brethren, in case of any Difference or
Division that could not be healed at home? What Reverence was there then of the
Sentence of the Council, as being decisive, and issuing the Controversy?
According to that ancient proverbial Saying, They shall surely ask Counsel at
Abel, and so they ended the Matter. Mather's Seasonable Testimony, page 15.


We come now to the Synod of 1662. In that venerable Assembly, we have
Authority from Dr. Increase Mather, who was one of the Elders in it, to assert,
that in Answer to the Question about Consociation of Churches, there was a
mavelous Unanimity; not one Elder, nor so much as two Brethren in all that
Reverend Assembly dissenting. In this Synod it was directed, that Churches do
seek and accept Help from, and give Help to, each other in Matters of more than
ordinary Importance, as Ordination, Translation, and Deposition of Elders.
Agreably to which, (says the Doctor) the Laws of the Colony once required the
Approbation of three, or four Churches, to every Ordination. Seasonable Test.
p. 10.
And those Divines who have seemed to be Pillars in the revived Congregational
Discipline, espoused by our Churches, have generally expressed the same
Concern, that the Usage and Honor of Ecclesiastical Councils might be
maintained. The Synod at the Savoy, earnestly asserts, That it is according to
the Mind of Christ, that Churches holding Communion together, do by their
Messengers meet in a Synod, or Council, to consider and give Advice -- on such
Occasions as the Churches in this Country have also thought proper to come
under such a Cognizance. The Deposition of an Elder is one of those Matters of
more than ordinary Importance, which this our New England Synod has determined
to require the Help of other Churches. In such a Case the Synod has also
determined, that it is the Duty of a Church, not only to seek, but to accept
the Help of other Churches. It does not appear that this Synod ever thought any
Church would proceed to depose their Elder, when a Council of Churches had
advised his Continuance in the Eldership. The Doctor goes on, The famous
Apologists, Dr. F. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr.
Bridge, assert an Obligation hereunto, in the common Law of Communion of
Churches. Yea, they profess, they look upon it as the most to be abhorred
Maxim, and the most contradictory and dishonorable to Christianity, that a
single and particular Society of Men professing the Name of Christ, and
pretending to be endowed with Power from Christ, should arrogate to themselves
an Exemption from giving an Account, or being censurable by Neighbor Churches
about them. So far (say these super-eminent Divines of the Congregational Way)
were our Judgments from that Independent Liberty, which has been imputed to us.

As we have now mentioned the Sentiments of these famous Apologists, who were
not of this Country, it may not be amiss to add the Opinion of the great and
good Doctor Owen, on this Occasion. We do it the rather, because he has ever
been held in high Estimation among us, and also on Account of his having
altered his Sentiments respecting Church Discipline, on his reading the
celebrated Cotton on the Keys. In several of his Treatises he has advanced
Positions of the same Aspect, on the Necessity and Authority of regular
Councils, for the Welfare of particular Churches, with those already alleged
by us. In one of his former, he says, Vid. Catech. p. 224.
Churches ought to preserve a mutual, holy Communion, and exercise it in making
Use of the Advice of one another. And in Case any Churches give Offense to
other Churches, other Churches may require an Account of them, admonish them
for their Faults, and withhold Communion from them, in Case they persist in the
Error of their Way; and that because in their Difficulties, and before their
Miscarriages, they were bound to have desired the Advice of other Churches;
which being neglected by them, the others are to recover the End of it to the
utmost of their Ability. In another of his Treatises Not of Chapter part 2. p. 251.
the Doctor has these memorable Words, No Church is so Independent, as that it
can always, and in all Cases, observe the Duty it owes unto the Lord Christ,
and the Church catholic by all those Powers, which it is able to act in itself
distinctly, without a Conjunction with others. And the Church which confines
its Duty unto the Acts of its own Assemblies, cuts itself off from the external
Communion of the Church catholic: Nor will it be safe for any Man to commit the
Conduct of his Soul to such a Church. -- Every particular Church, which extends
not its Duty beyond its own Assemblies and Members, is fallen off from the
principal End of its Institution. And every Principle, Opinion, or Persuasion
that inclines any Church to confine its Care and Duty unto its own Edification
only -- is Schismatical.

The Sentiment of Doctor Increase Mather, on the Subject under Consideration,
fully appears from the Conclusion he draws from the immediately preceding
Authorities, which he used on a special Occasion; as well as from some other
Declarations, which we shall hereafter notice. His words are these, Seasonable
Testimony, p. 15.
From whence it will follow, that if any Church presume to transact their more
weighty Affairs, and such as are of common Concern to the Churches in their
Neighborhood, with a Contempt of such Councils of them as ought to be advised
withal; or if they shall upon grievous Differences arisen among them, refuse
the Advice of those who urge them to make Use of the Remedy, which the Want of
Light and Peace among them calls for; And much more, if they shall proceed in
Matters after the neighboring Churches have signified that they cannot
countenance their Proceedings; these Churches will be far from expressing the
Wisdom which is with the well-advised, and will sin against the second and
third Commandments; and will practically go too far toward excluding
themselves from Communion with the Churches of the Faithful. Indeed, the more
Synods and Councils are disregarded and slighted, so much the more Disorder and
Confusion will (we fear) grow and prevail in all the Churches in the Country;
which GOD of his infinite Mercy prevent. -- The Doctor speaking of the Removal
of a Pastor, in the same Treatise, has this memorable Passage, fully expressive
of his own Sentiments. p. 3, 4.
It is requisite, that the Reasons of the Removal be laid before authentic
Judges; even such as may be most likely to pass an impartial Judgment upon
them; and by these be pronounced such, that the Removal thereupon may be justly
and wisely proceeded in. And, where it can be obtained, we think, that nothing
less than a Council of Churches in the Neighborhood, should have the Matter
laid before them. For, if such a Council be, according to the Order and
Practice of these Churches, always convened, for the Ordaining of a Pastor, it
stands to Reason, that there should as much be requisite for his Removing; it
being, as it was by a very considerable Number of eminent Divines on a great
Occasion in these Churches once pronounced. A very considerable Act of the
Kingly Government exercised by our Lord Jesus Christ, in his Churches. From
this Citation it is evidently the Opinion of the Doctor, that the Removal of a
Pastor, if it be only to the Charge of another Church, ought not, for the
Reasons given, to be effected, without the Advice and Consent of Neighboring
Churches. His Reasons more strongly conclude for the Necessity of such Advice
and Consent, in the Deposition of a Pastor.

Anno 1700 the Doctor published a Treatise, under the Title of The Order of the
Gospel. In this Treatise several Questions, relating to Church Discipline, are
accurately discussed. The tenth Question is in these Words, Is it expedient
that Churches should enter into a Consociation, or Agreement, that Matters of
more than ordinary Importance, such as the Gathering of a new Church, the
Ordination, DEPOSITION, or Translation of a Pastor be done with common Consent?
The Dr. in answer, replies, This is both expedient and NECESSARY: And he
assigns a Number of weighty Reasons in Support of his Opinion, which are not
necessary to be rehearsed. We do not produce this Authority, in order to show
the Dr's Sentiments on the Subject under Consideration, that having been
sufficiently done already: but we do it, on Account of the Attestation given to
this Book by the Reverend Mr. Higginson of Salem, and the Reverend Mr. Hubbard
of Ipswich, in a Testimony they published when they were just leaving the
World; which Testimony is annexed by Mr. Wise to his Vindication, and spoken of
by him with great Respect. The former of these Gentlemen had been 70, and the
other 60 Years in the Country when they left this their dying Testimony. They
must for this Reason have known the Practice of our Churches from the
Beginning. -- Their Words are these --

It was a Joy to us, to see and read a Book, which the Reverend President of
our College [Dr. Mather] lately published, under the Title of, The Order of the
Gospel, (...) and practiced by the Churches of Christ in New England: A Book
most highly needful, and useful, and (...); a most elaborate and well-composed
Work, and well (...) into these two worthy Designs; 1st. the (...)
Congregational Church Discipline; and (...), the maintaining the sweet Spirit
of Charity and Communion toward reforming Presbyterians, who are our united
Brethren. But we must here-withal testify, that in that worthy Book, there is
nothing obtruded upon the Churches, but what they who were here capable of
observing what was done sixty Years ago, do know to have been professed and
practiced in the Churches of New England; (except in one or two) THEN AND EVER
SINCE, until of late, some who were not then born, have suggested otherwise.
Yea, it is well known, that the Churches then publicly maintained these
Principles, in several judicious Discourses, which were never confuted by any
Man whatever, unto this present Time.

What were the Practices in which these one or two Churches deviated from the
rest of the Churches, these Gentlemen have not declared; neither have they
informed us what those things were which they speak of, as having been of late
suggested, contrary to the Principles and Practice of the Churches. But it is
certain, they neither of them respect the Power of a particular Church to
depose its Pastor, without the Advice and Consent of a Council of neighboring
Churches. For Doctor Mather, in his Disquisition concerning Ecclesiastical
Councils, speaking of Congregational Discipline, has the following Passage,
worthy the Attention of those who are desirous of preserving our ancient Church
Discipline. Pref. p. 9.
"It has ever," says the Doctor, "been their [our Churches] Judgment, that
where there is Want of either Light or Peace in a particular Church, it is
their Duty to ask for Council, with which Neighbor Churches ought to assist by
sending their Elders, and other Messengers, to advise and help them in their
Difficulties. And that in momentous Matters of common Concernment, particular
Churches should proceed with the Concurrence of Neighbor Churches. So in the
Ordination of a Pastor, MUCH MORE in the DEPOSING of one. THUS IT HAS EVER BEEN
in the Churches of New England."

It is evident from the preceding Quotations, that the venerable Fathers of
these Churches, agree in Opinion, that Matters of more than ordinary Weight and
Importance, and those of common Concernment ought not to be transacted without
Advice of Council. And many of them are express in asserting, that the
Deposition of an Elder, or Pastor, is a Matter of such Weight and Importance,
as to require the Counsel and Advice of neighboring Churches. -- We do not
find, on the most careful Enquiry, a single Instance of any Congregational
Church from the first Settlement of the Country to the present Day, which has
deposed or dismissed its Teaching Elder, or Pastor, without the Advice of a
Council of neighboring Churches; except when a Dismission has been effected by
the mutual Consent of the Elder and Church. And, even in this Case, it appears
from what has been before adduced, that such Dismission is irregular, and
contrary to the Constitution of these Churches.

We cannot forbear, on this Occasion, in the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ,
earnestly to advise these Churches, of our Lord Jesus Christ in this land,
attentively to consider the Noble and truly Christian Plan, upon which our
Fathers have placed us; and to preserve that Union, which they had so much at
Heart, as our truest Strength and Glory; and which is so necessary to preserve
the Purity of the Ministry, and the Privileges of the Fraternity, both of which
we are equally solicitous to support; and as a special Means of this, to seek
the Advice of neighboring Churches in all Matters of common Concernment, more
particularly those of peculiar Weight and Importance, and when it is afforded
them to receive it with Meekness, seriously and impartially to consider it, and
not lightly to depart from it, or pertinaciously to oppose it; reflecting how
earnestly our Fathers recommended this as a Gospel Institution for conveying
Light and Peace to the Church; and what fatal Consequences Inattention to, and
much more a Contempt of such an Institution is likely to produce.

From the same Considerations, we trust, the Churches will be ever ready to
afford their Assistance and Counsel to Sister Churches, in all Seasons of
Darkness and Perplexity, and to act on such Occasions with Deliberation,
Impartiality, and Solemnity, considering how much the Honor of Christ, and the
Peace and Welfare of his Churches may depend on their Results.

Lately Published, And to be Sold at JOHN BOYLE'S Printing-Office next Door to
the Three Doves in Marlborough-Street, BOSTON: The following BOOKS, Viz.
A VINDICATION of the Government of the New England Churches: Drawn from
Antiquity; the Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; Its Noble Nature; and from the
Dignity Divine Providence has put upon it. -- ALSO, -- The Churches Quarrel
Espoused: Or, a Satirical Reply, to certain Proposals made, in Answer to this
Question, -- What further Steps are to be taken, that the Councils may have due
Constitution and Efficacy in Supporting, Preserving, and Well-Ordering the
Interest of the Churches in the Country. By JOHN WISE, Late Pastor to a Church
in Ipswich.

A PLATFORM of CHURCH DISCIPLINE: Gathered out of the Word of God, and agreed
upon by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches assembled at Cambridge, 1648.

A CONFESSION of FAITH, owned and consented unto by the Elders and Messengers
of the Churches assembled at Boston, New England, May 12, 1680.

A TREATISE on CHURCH GOVERNMENT, in Three Parts: Being, I. A Narrative of the
late Troubles and Transactions in the Church at Bolton, in the Massachusetts.
II. Some Remarks on Mr. Adams's Sermon, preached there August 26, 1772. With an
Appendix, being Remarks on an Account in the Boston Evening-Post, Dec. 28,
1772, of the Dismission of a Minister at Grafton. III. On Councils, their
Business, Authority and Use. With an Essay on Ministers negativing the Votes of
the Church, and showing where the Keys of the Church are. By a NEIGHBOR.


