AMERICA Known to the ANCIENTS.

To the GENTLEMAN, who expressed his desire, that some Account might be given
of the knowledge, which the Ancients had, concerning America.
SIR,
THE last Time You favored me with a Visit at my House, You modestly
discovered an Inclination and expressed a Desire; I suppose from some
Specimens, which I might give of some small Acquaintance with Antiquity; that I
would show, whether the Ancients had any knowledge of America, and how they
might come to an Acquaintance with it.

Now, in Compliance with your Desire, and to gratify your Curiosity; I have
employed myself for a few Hours in collecting, and putting together, such
Testimonies, both sacred and profane, as will render it most highly probable,
if not certain, that America must be known before the modern Discoveries of it,
and even in very ancient times.

If this Essay should prove grateful and satisfactory to You, and afford
Improvement and Pleasure to any of Your more knowing and learned, and hence
more candid, Friends and Acquaintance; I shall not be sorry for my Care and
Labor in compiling it.

I wish You, Sir, continual Advances in Knowledge, Virtue, Piety and
Usefulness; and am,

Your respectful Friend, and most obedient, humble Servant. S. MATHER.
Bost. N. E. Dec. 31. 1772..
AN ATTEMPT TO SHOW, THAT AMERICA MUST BE KNOWN TO THE ANCIENTS; MADE AT THE
REQUEST, AND TO GRATIFY THE CURIOSITY, OF AN INQUISITIVE GENTLEMAN: TO WHICH IS
ADDED An APPENDIX, CONCERNING THE AMERICAN COLONIES, AND SOME MODERN
MANAGEMENTS AGAINST THEM.

By an AMERICAN ENGLISHMAN. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND.

Nescio quomodo plerique errare malunt; Eamque Sententiam, quam adamaverunt,
pugnacissime defendere, quam sine Pertinacia, quid constantissime dicatur,
exquirere.

CICERON. Academic. Quaest. lib. 2. Sed nec preteritis haec res incognita
Seclis.

CLAUDIAN. De Bello Getico. Nihil tam difficile quin quaerendo investigari
possit.

TERENT. in Heauton. Act 4. Scene 2. BOSTON NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J.
KNEELAND, in Milk-Street, for T. LEVERETT, and H. KNOX, in Cornhill. MDCCLXXIII.

An Attempt to show, That the Ancients must have the Knowledge of the Western
World, or America.
IT is well known, that, in the Year of our Lord 1492, Christopher Columbus, of
Genoa, discovered the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba and Jamaica; and that
Americus Vesputius of Florence, under the Direction and Encouragement of
Emanuel, King of Portugal, in the Year 1497, discovered the Continent of
America, which has been so called from that Time after his Name.

Now many have imagined, and even some of the Learned among them, that this
Western World was never known before these Discoveries of the Genoese and
Florentine Commanders. -- Thus the learned Panciroll in particular sees fit to
reckon the New World, or America, among the Things, which were unknown to the
Ancients. Parcirollus, De Novo Orb. Lib. 2. Tit. 1.


Americus Vesputius too, in his Epistle to Renatus, King of Jerusalem and
Sicily, and Duke of Lorrain and Bar, writes, as follows, We believe, that, as
our Ancestors make no mention of the Islands and firm Lands of America; so the
Ancients themselves had no knowledge of them. -- And the Publisher of this
Epistle, together with a Number of Tracts wrote by ancient Voyagers, Sebastian
Munster, observes, that Christopher Columbus and Albericus [for so he writes
it] Vesputius were the first of Mortals, who found out America, and other
unknown Lands.

However, the learned Keckerman, having well considered, whether America was
known to the Ancients or no, and weighed the most probable Arguments on both
Sides of this Question, has plainly given his Judgment in Favor of it is being
known to them.

But, if this Matter be examined with Judgment, and with proper Care and
Accuracy, we shall find Reason to believe, that this large Part of the World
was really known to the Ancients; and perhaps we shall see much more Reason to
believe it, than most Men imagine, and even many of the Learned themselves can
produce in opposition to it.

We shall take Leave to relate here; though we shall not lay any great Stress
on the Relation, as it may be called a too modern one; That, in the Reign of
Henry the Second, and in the Year 1170, which was 300 Years before Columbus,
One Madoc ap Owen Gwineth, not only discovered South America, but settled in
some Part of Mexico, and left Monuments there both of the British Language and
British Usages: Of which the Spaniards have taken Notice; and several Welsh
Writers, and other British Authors besides, have credited and confirmed the
Relation. -- How this honest Madoc came to take it into his Head to visit South
America, we know not. However we think it not irrational to suppose, that,
previously to his going there, he might have had some Account of the Country,
and the Way of getting at it.

There is also another still more modern Account, than that of honest Madoc's,
concerning the Discovery of America; which, although it be a little more
modern, it may not be amiss to offer. This may be found in Ortelius's Theater,
as follows: The Northem Part of the New World, which is especially extended
toward Europe, Groenland, Iseland and Friesland; and is named Estotiland by
some Fishermen of the Island of Friesland, who were driven by a Tempest to
these Shores: This, being of old viewed and observed, about this Year, that is
the Year of our LORD 1340, Nicolas and Antony Zenus, Brethren, noble Venetians,
under the Auspices of Zichmi, called King of Friesland, again recognized and
brought to Knowledge. And John Skoluo, a Polonian, in 1456, sailed to this
Country. If any should ask, what Place this Estotiland is? I can only answer,
that some Geographers take it to be New-foundland, or Cape Breton: But others
think it to be New Britain, and the Land of Labrador. However it is agreed by
all, that it was a Part of America.

But, instead of taking up Time about these or any more modern Relations, we
shall go back to more ancient Times and Things, which have Relation to this
Western World.

It is remarked by a learned Spanish Writer, Villalpandus, that his
Fellow-Citizen of Corduba, L. Annaeus Seneca, who was Nephew to that famous
Seneca, the Tutor of the Brute Nero; when the Form of the World did not yet
appear to be known, yet foretold, that another World should be found out:
Villalpand. De Magin Divinatrice, Lib. 1. cap. 4. p. 7.
It is true this L. Annaeus Seneca, in one of his Dramatic Pieces, says, that
in late Years Ages shall come, in which Ocean shall loose the Bonds of Things,
and the mighty Earth shall be laid open, and Thyphis shall discover new Worlds.
-- Venient Annis
Secula seris; quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingeus
Patent Tellus; Thyphisque novos
Deteget Orbs -- Senica Medes.

But although Seneca's Townsman hence affirms, that he foretold another World
should be found out; we need not be so unreasonably credulous as to believe,
that, when he wrote in this Manner, he was inspired with the Spirit of
Prophecy: No! For nothing of this Sort appears. It is much more likely, that,
either from some faint Apprehension of the Structure of the Terraqueous Globe,
or from some traditional Accounts of the Greatness of the Earth, and of another
World besides their old one, he might write after this seemingly Prophetical
Manner. -- But, if any think, that what he has thus written should be taken
only for Poetical Fiction, or fanciful Prophecy, we shall be contented: For we
do not build much upon it.

But there is an Historical Passage handed to us by Pomponius Mela, who lived
in the Emperor Claudius's Time, about the Year of our Lord 93; which, as it is
remarkable, is deserving both of a particular Recital and an attentive
Consideration: It is as follows; -- When Metellus Celer, who by the Way was
called Celer for his Quickness in preparing to celebrate the Funeral Obsequies
of his Father, was Proconsul among the Gauls, he received as a Present certain
Indians Pompon. Mela. Lib. 3.
from the King of the Suevians; who, being snatched away by the Force of Storms
from the Indian Shores, at length came out to the Shores of Germany. -- These
are the Words of the Historian: And this History, as Vadianus the Commentator
on Pomponius observes, fairly indicates, that there is a Sea which may be
navigated in the most distant Tracts. Vadian. Note in Pompon. p. 13:


Now, from this Historical Account, it seems probable, that these Indians might
be carried away from the Coast of Newfoundland, or Labrador, or some other
Place to the Northward, by a violent Gale of Wind of long Continuance with
them, until at length they arrived on the German Coast, and got a Shore there.
-- And the coming of these Indians might very well convince and satisfy both
the King of the Suevians with his People; and the Roman Proconsul, and from him
the whole Roman Empire, that there was another World, besides That inhabited by
themselves.

There was also in most ancient Times repeated Mention made of two Islands
called Atlantides, which were said to have been about 10,000 Stadia distant
from Libya: There were the Elysian Fields and the Dwellings of the Blessed,
mentioned by Homer, Horace, and other Poets. These Islands seem to be called by
Pliny the Hesperides: For he reckons two in the Atlantic Sea: and these, as he
says, beyond the Gorgons in a Navigation for 40 Days beyond the Atlantis. --
Now the learned Geographer Ortelius supposes it probable, that these might be
the Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba. -- But Diodorus Siculus tells us, that the
Atlantides, or the People of those Islands, as we have received, are inhabiting
Places near to the Ocean, and very happy indeed. Diodor. Sicul. De fabulosis
Antiquorum (...). p. 261.
And in Truth, if we suppose, with Ortelius, these Islands to be the same with
Hispaniola and Cuba, they must be near the Ocean indeed, as Diodorus says: For
they are surrounded with it.

But Plato, who lived about 400 Years before our Savior's Time, has given us
the most particular and full Account of the Atlantic Island, as it is called by
him, in one and another of his Compositions: And we shall endeavor, in as
clear and concise a Manner as we can, to give his Account from the Edition of
his Works published by Serranus. -- In one of his Dialogues, he says, that
Neptune had by Lot the Atlantic Island, and placed the Children he had by a
mortal Woman in a certain Place of that Island. -- It received, he says, its
Name from its first King and Lord, even from Atlas; and further adds, that the
extreme Part of this Island, which he had for his Lot, was at Hercules's
Pillars. Platonis Critias.
-- And, in another of his Writings, In Timaeo.
the following Passages may be found: In those first Times the Atlantic was a
most broad Island; and there were extant most powerful Kings in it; who, with
joint Forces, appointed to occupy Asia and Europe: And so a most grievous War
was carried on: In which the Athenians, with the common Consent of the Greeks,
opposed themselves; and they became the Conquerors. -- But that Atlantic Island
by a Flood and Earthquake was indeed suddenly destroyed; and so that Sort of
warlike Men was absorped. N. B. These Things seem to be related with Historical
Truth. -- And he writes further plainly and expressly, that That Atlantic
Island, being in Truth overwhelmed with the Waves of the Sea, altogether
disappeared: And hence that Sea is difficult to be passed; inasmuch as copious
Clay yet remained from the Relics of that Island. -- Moreover, he says, that
-- an Island, in the Mouth of the Sea, and in the Passage to those Straits
called the Pillars of Hercules, did exist; and that Island was greater and
larger than Lybia and Asia; from which there was an easy Passage over to other
Islands; and from those Islands also to that Continent, which is situated out
of that Region, etc.

Now Plato is not singular in this Narration: For both Strabo Strabo. Lib. 2.
and Pliny Plin. Lib. 2. Cap. 32.
have mentioned this Atlantic Island; and say, that it was of old in the
Atlantic Sea.

But as Plato says, that this greatest Island of the Western Ocean was lost; it
is probably conjectured, that it was situated between the Azores and Canaries,
as they are called: And, that These were formed, and remain, out of the
Relics of it, Becman thought; and he believed, as he says, that it might be
lengthily demonstrated. Becman. Hist. Insul. c. 5.


Hoffman has truly observed, that the Atlantis of Plato is to many America: And
the learned Bochart Bochart. Geograph. Sacr. p. 716.
appears to have been of the same Mind. And indeed, if this Island was larger
than Libya and Asia, as Plato has acquainted us, it looks as if it were really
America, or reaching so far as to be closely connected with it.

There seems also Reason to think, that there must have been in ancient Times
some Knowledge of the American Regions: Because we have credible Accounts of the
Passages of Vessels through the Atlantis Ocean both one Way and the other: --
We shall not insist on Pomponius Mela's Account of one Endoxus; who says, in
the Days of our Grandfathers, [and, as we noted before, he lived in the Time of
the Emperor Claudius] when he fled from the King of Alexandria, Latyrus, he
went forth from the Arabic Gulf through this Sea, as Nepos affirms, Gades usque
pervectus est, and was carried even to Cales. Pempon. Mela. Lib. 3. p. 191, cum
Notis Vadiani.
Nor shall we urge the Probability of it, that he might see, if not the
American Continent, at least some of the Islands belonging to Western World.

But we ought to take some respectful Notice of Hanno, the famous Cathaginian,
who wrote Periplum; in which we have a Relation of the Voyage prosecuted by him
around the Coast of Africa, and the Lands found by him in the Atlantic Ocean:
This Relation was written by him in the Punic, or Phoenician, Tongue: But it
was afterward translated into Greek, and it is still extant, as Hoffman gives
us to understand in his Lexicon at the Word Annon. -- It has not been the Lot
of the present Writer to meet with this Periplum yet; and therefore he can make
none of his own Observations upon it. -- But Coelius Rhodiginus has given us
this more express and particular Information of the Carthaginian's Voyage; that
Hanno, Cael. Rhodigini Lectiones antiquae.
departing from Hercules's Pillars, that is, from the Streights of Gibraltar,
into the Ocean, leaving Libya to the left, sailed out 30 Days, seeking the
Western Parts: But afterward, turning to the South, he met with many
Impediments. -- Now, if Hanno, leaving Libya, or Africa, to the left, sailed
seeking for 30 Days the Western Parts; it is most probable, that he found some
of the American islands, if not some Part of the Western Continent itself.
Columbus, as appears from his own Account, sailed with his Squadron but thirty
Days to the West, when he beheld certain Islands: And, coming nearer to them,
he found the Number of them to be six, whereof two were larger ones: But
Americus, after sarling nineteen Days from the Cape de Verd Islands, found a
certain new Land, which he thought to be firm: But it proved an Island. But we
may add, to this Account of Hanno, the Testimony of Diodorus Siculus, who lets
us know, that certain Phoenictans were cast on a most fertile Island opposite
to Africa: -- We may note here, that, if it was opposite to Africa, it must be
an American Island. -- And he further tells us, that the Phoenicians left no
Stone unturned, that this Region might remain unknown to the Europeans. Diodor.
Sicul. Lib. 5.
Here therefore we see one Reason, why the Western World was kept secret from
the Europeans by the Phoenicians: It was Regard to their own Commerce and
Interest, that led them without Doubt to conceal the new Places, at which they
traded.

Moreover; we may recite from Aelian, who lived and wrote after the Emperor
Adrian's Time, about the Year of our Lord 136, the Account, which he gives of a
Colloquy between Midas of Phrygia and Silenus: In which Colloquy, among other
Things, Silenus gave Information to Midas, that Europe, Asia and Libya are
Islands, and surrounded with the Ocean; and that one Continent exists without
this World; and he affirmed, that its Magnitude was immense and infinite.
Aelian. Variar. Historiar. Lib. 3. Cap. 8.
Now if this one Continent existing away from the old World, and of such an
immense and infinite Magnitude, was not intended and meant of this Western
World; we should be glad, that any one would be so kind as to let us know, what
Place or Country is intended and meant by it.

We have thus produced Authorities, and offered Reasons sufficient to render it
most highly probable, that this Western World must be known to the Ancients.

But here it may be demanded, if this Continent was known in ancient Times, was
it inhabited in those Times; and when was it first inhabited, and by whom? And
we shall endeavor to give some suitable Answer to the proper Enquiries.

Now it ought in all Reason to be thought, that, as America, upon the more
modern Discoveries of it and Acquaintance with it, was found to be well
peopled, and even stocked with Inhabitants, probably as much as Asia, Africa
and Europe; surely it must have been inhabited, not merely above five hundred
years; but above one, two, three and even four thousand years ago: And indeed
it was probably inhabited not long after the Dispersion of those numerous
Families, who were separated in Consequence of the unhappy Affair at Babel.

The learned Grotius conceived, that the Americans came out of Europe, passing
from Norway into Iceland; thence by Friesland into Greenland; and so into
Estotiland, which is probably a Part of the Western Continent. Grotius De
Origin Gent. Americanar.
And we most acknowledge, that the passing out of Europe into America by this
Routte is possible and not unnatural: However it does not appear so likely,
that America was, first of all, settled in this Manner.

But we are rather most inclined to think, that the primary Americans were the
Descendants of Magog from Japhet. And, when we say the primary Americans, we
mean after the Flood: For there is Reason to believe, that the People, who
resided in the Western World, as well as the other Continent, were swept away
from the Face of the Earth; because all Flesh had corrupted their Way. Both
Joseph Acosta and Antony Herrera acquaint us, that they found the Memory of the
Flood preserved among the Indians of Cuba and Mechoachan and Nicaragua: And
Coraca tells us, that, among the Peruvians, there was a Tradition, that all
their Lands were plunged and laid hid in the Waters. -- And if we mistake not,
all the Evidences in the natural World, which are commonly brought on the other
Side of the Water to prove the general Inundation over that Continent, may be
fairly produced to prove the general Prevalence of it over this Continent.

But, as we are now treating of the primary Inhabitants of America after the
Flood; so we say, that These appear to have descended from Japhet. As GOD, or
ELONIM, as it is in the Hebrew Text, i. e. the Covenanting Ones, or the
Interposers by Oath, had promised to enlarge Japhet; in which Promise there is
a plain Allusion to his Name, as indeed there is a like Allusion to Names very
frequently to be found in the Holy Scriptures; so this Promise was most
remarkably fulfilled: For there fell to Japhet's Share, not only all Europe, so
full of People, and Asia the less and Media and Part of Armenia and Iberia and
Albania; but also all those vast Northern Regions, inhabited once by the
Scythians, who descended from Magog, one of the Sons of Japhet, as he is said
to be in Genesis ^. 2. And probably this Western World, and that to a considerable
Degree, came to his Share: For it is most likely, that This was at first much
peopled by the Scythians: These, originally from Magog, were afterward called
Tartars; and so called, as some suppose, from the Name of the River Tartar or
Tatar.

As We find that the Earth was divided in the Days of Peleg; so we read, in
Genesis ix. 19, that as there were three Sons of Noah; so of or from them the
whole Earth was overspread or scattered. Nor is there any Reason to doubt, but
that this Scattering was according to the direction of Noah, and from a Divine
Warrant given him for this purpose: So then the Posterity of Japhet, by Magog,
according to the Will of Heaven, took the primary Possession of this new World:
And how greatly, how amazingly, was Japhet enlarged by this vast Acquisition?

But, after this first dispersion to the Western World, we readily grant, that
there might be various Removals to it from various Nations: For after the
Scythians or Tartars, were settled here; the Norwegians and Icelanders might
come; and so might some of the Sinensians from the East.

But some perhaps may say here, And how came they to this separate World? To
which we answer, that there was no need at all of any Navigation for it: For it
is apprehended by many, that the northern Part of Asia may be joined to
America; or if they be divided at all, it must be by a very narrow Channel,
which may be passed over easily in Boats or Canoes; or perhaps, as it is frozen
over for a great Part of the Year, they might have a Passage across on Foot.
Laet judged it most probable, that it was by the Straits of Anian, that the
Tartars in ancient Times passed out of Asia into America. But it is beyond all
doubt, that, from the northern Parts of Europe, there might be an easy passing
to America for at least three Quarters of a Year on a Bridge of substantial Ice.

Thus it looks as if the Northern Parts of America were first of all occupied
and improved; and the Inhabitants of These might probably remove both to the
Westward and to the Southward, as Occasion required.

Herrera says, as quoted by Laet, Laet. Descript. Americ.
that the Inhabitants of the West Indies came hither by Land: Which may be
true, if they be supposed to come from the Northern Parts of America. But, if
he supposed them to come directly from Europe, it will be difficult to make it
out. Nor can we find any Way for This, but by supposing the Atlantic Land,
which Plato represents to be bigger than Asia and Libya together, might fill
the Atlantic Ocean, even to the American Islands, if not beyond them: And, with
this Allowance, Herrera's observation might be true.

Besides what has been already observed about the peopling of the Western
World, it may be remarked, for the prevention or removal of Mistakes, that, as
Strabo has justly noted, there are many Places which were formerly Sea, that
are now dry Land; Strabon. Geograph. Lib. 1.
so we may justly note also, that there are now Seas, or Parts of Seas, where
were dry Lands in former Times. Vidi ego quod quondam fuerat solidissima Tellus
Esse Freiam: Vidi factas ex oequore Terras.
Ovid. Metamorph. Lib. 15.
Thus it has been thought by considerate and Judicious Persons, that Great
Britain was formerly united to France, and the Island of Sicily to Italy. But
all know, that they are not united now: For there are Parts of Seas between
them. -- And it seems not at all improbable, that America might formerly be
conjoined with Europe and Asia, if not to India, by vast Tracts of Land; which,
from the Prevalence of Earthquakes, have sunk into the mighty Abyss: And thus
has this Western World been disunited and separated from them. -- Nor is it at
all improbable, but that the great Atlantic Island of Plato; whereof one
extreme Part was at Hercules's Pillars, and bordering on Spain; and the other
extended near to the American Continent, might in general sink; and the
American Islands, if not those on the Coast of Africa, might remain out of the
Ruins of it.

We have no Reason to think, that, in ancient Times, there were any Removes
from Africa to America: For it is said, according to the ingenious Dr. Grew,
that all over America there are no Blacks, but only at Quaveca. -- And, if
indeed there are any there; perhaps they are not originally from Africa; but
from some Country in China under the Torrid Zone, where the People are of a
black Complexion.

Some have thought and suggested, but we think injudiciously, as John Lerius
and others, that the Americans were originally Canaanites, descended from Ham,
the Son of Noah; and the Descendants of those, whom Joshua drove from their
Seats in Canaan; who, being constrained to seek out new Regions, at length came
and sat down on this Continent.

Here we shall readily allow, that the Phoenicians, who were originally
Canaanites, in the Days not much later than Moses's, did sail into Spain: And
as Part of these dispossessed Canaanites fled thither, so a Part of them went
into Baeotia, and another Part into Africa: And Procopius informs us of the
Pillar to be seen about Tangier, which had inscribed on it, that they were of
the Posterity of those, who fled from the Face of Joshua the Son of Nun, the
Robber. And it is not at all improbable, that, as these Phoenicians, or
Canaanites, might mingle with Japhet's Posterity in Europe; so some of them
might in Process of Time come to America by the Way of the Sea and settle here:
For they were mightily for Navigation and Trade and Commerce.

But some may ask; Where learned They the Art of Navigation? And how came they
to understand the Use and Application of the Magnet? -- Panormitan indeed would
have it, that Amalphis first discovered the Use of the Loadstone to Mariners:
And there is a Latin Line made to record the Discoverer, Prima dedit Nautis
usum Magnetis Amalphis: -- By which we are to understand an Italian City, where
one John Goa, it is said, found out the Use of the Mariner's Compass, about the
Year of our Lord 1302. -- But the Phoenicians were generally thought to be the
Inventers of the Mariner's Art; and, from These, the Greeks received it; and,
of these, the Cretans first of all, as Pliny acquaints us. But as the
Phoenicians first tried the Seas among the Nations at Hand, and then afar off;
so Thucydides tells us, that the Corinthians were the first among the Greeks,
who performed Voyages: --

-- Primique per aequora vecti
Lustravere Salum; primum docuere, Carinis
Far cavis, orbis Commercia.
The Voyage of Hanno, the Carthaginian, round the Coast of Africa, has already
been mentioned: And surely This must discover no small Skill in Navigation. Nor
have we any Doubt, that many of the Phoenicians were well skilled in the
Mariner's Art: Nor yet is it any unreasonable Supposition, that they might sail
to America, and make Settlements here.

Thus it appears with sufficient Probability, that America not very long after
the Flood was settled; and that, after the first Settlement of it, there were
successive Removals to it, especially from the Northern Parts of Europe and
Asia: And then, after some Ages had revolved, the Phoenicians might arrive and
trade and settle here. And, by these various Ways, America became very well
settled; and vast Numbers of People were found in this Western World, when
Columbus, Americus and succeeding Voyagers came to it: And perhaps the
Inhabitants here might, for their Numbers, vie with those of the other
Continent.

But some may be ready to enquire, Whether we have any Proofs from the sacred
Writings, that this Western World was known to the Ancients? And what Evidences
can be offered from them, to show that it was so?

Now we do not presume to declare, that there is a clear, full and express
Discovery of this Western Continent in the holy Writings. -- But we may safely
venture to affirm, that there are various Passages to be found in them, from
which attentive and considerate Minds might form a Judgment, that there were
Regions and great ones beyond those, that were known to them in Asia, Africa
and Europe.

Not to mention again the ancient Prophecy concerning the Enlargement of
Japhet; nor to recite the Prophecy concerning Abraham, that in his Seed, the
Messiah, all the Nations of the Earth, and hence the most remote Posterity of
Magog, should be blessed; nor the positive and peremptory Engagement to the
Messiah Himself, in Psalm. xi. 8. that the uttermost Parts; or, as it is in the
Hebrew, the Ends of the Earth, should be his Possession; -- It is absolutely
promised to the Messiah, that, after his Humiliation, as in Psalm. xxii. 27, All
the Ends of the World shall remember and turn to the Lord! and all the Kindreds
of the Nations shall worship before Thee; or, as we may give the Verse more
exactly according to the Hebrew, All the Ends of the Earth shall remember and
be converted to Jehovah; and all the Families of the Nations shall incline, or
bow down, themselves to thy Face, i. e. to the Messiah, exhibiting the Face of
Jehovah. -- Should any one here suggest, that This may mean, that not only the
Hebrews, but the Nations around them, should believe and turn to the Lord and
worship Him in and by the Messiah: We reply, that, although This may be Part of
the Prophetical Meaning; yet the Sense of the Prophecy seems to be much more
extensive: -- All the Ends of the World and all the Families of the Nations: --
These Expressions must certainly signify the human Race wherever dispersed,
and even to the remotest Parts of the Terraqueous Globe: And, to These,
sensible and devout Minds might well stretched; when this Prophecy was read by
them with religious Care, Attention and Consideration. -- And it is engaged, in
Psalm lxvii. 2.5.7. To know thy Way in the Earth and thy Salvation, or thy
Jesus, in all Nations; i. e. not only known, but unknown. -- Let the People, or
the People shall, confess to Thee, Elohim; to Thee let, or shall, all the
People themselves confess -- And all the Ends of the Earth shall fear Him --
Surely neither the utmost Extent of Judea, nor the Extremities of the three
great Divisions of the old World, and the People thereon will comprehend in
them all the People of the World, and all the Ends of the Earth. -- It is
foretold, as if it were already accomplished, in Psalm xcviii. 3. All the Ends
of the Earth have seen the Salvation, or thy Jesus, our Elobi. -- So it is
predicted, in Psalm cxiii. 3. From the Rising of the Sun to the going down of
the same the LORD's Name is to be praised. -- Again, there is a Prophetical
Call, in Isa. xlii. 10. To sing a new Song to Jehovah; his Praise from the
Extremity of the Earth; ye, that go down to to the Sea and all that is therein;
the Isles and the Inhabitants thereof: -- And it is the Call or Prophecy, in
Isa. xlv. 22. Look ye to me, and be saved, all the Ends of the Earth, etc. --
So it is foretold, at the forsaking and punishing the Jews for their
Iniquities, in Isa. lix. 19. They shall fear from the West the Name Jehovah,
and from the East of the Sun his Glory: -- Which is a Prophecy, that not only
from the extremest Part of the East, but from the Western World, Jehovah, or
the Messiah, should be acknowleged and glorified in a religious Manner. -- But,
that we may not be too tedious; we shall only add further the Prophecy of
Malachi; in which, after the GOD of Israel had showed his Dislike of the
Israelitish Nation for their irreligious and profane Conduct, and his Purpose
to cast them off for another and larger People; He says, as in Malach. i. 11.
For, from the rising of the Sun even to his setting, great shall be my Name
among the Nations, etc. Could any of the Jews or jewish Proselytes, who lived,
or conversed for a Season, on the Western Borders of Arabia or Africa, and saw
the setting Sun, help imagining, from this Prophecy, that there were at the
setting Sun, Nations to be brought to right Worship and Religion; Nations, that
lived vastly beyond the old World, of which they were the Inhabitants.

Upon the whole; If these Passages, as well as many others amounting to the
same Purpose, be duly considered, it will in some Measure appear, that the
Nations, People and Families of this Western World are concerned in them. --
But, if any think otherwise, it shall be owned as a Favor, if they will tell
us, in what more full and expressive Words the Spirit of Prophecy could well
discover the divine Intention and Purpose, that these Western Regions of the
Earth, as well as the other Parts of the World, should be brought to the
Knowledge, Worship and Service of the true GOD, manifesting Himself in and by
the Messiah. -- And we have no Doubt, that the more penetrating and judicious,
if not among the Jews, who were of more narrow and contracted Minds, yet among
the jewish Proselytes, understood the Meaning of these Prophecies to reach
beyond the old World, which they inhabited, to the World then not generally
known, and the Nations and People inhabiting the same.

But at length the great Light of the World came to visit it; to give Light to
them, that sit (...) and the Shadow of Death, and guide their Feet in the Way
of Peace: And, when He had been obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross;
and had (...) been delivered for our Offenses, but raised again for our
Justification; He then declared to his Apostles, that all Power in Heaven and
Earth was committed to Him: And hence, in Virtue of his Divine Power and
Authority, He commission his Apostles to go into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every human Creature: And, without (...) Commission according to the
Intent and Meaning of it.

It is very difficult for us, at this Time, to show the Progress of the
Apostles. But there is Reason to think, that, according to the Mind and Will of
their Lord made known to them, they agreed among themselves, to which Parts of
the Earth each of them should go; and how they should each of then, employ
themselves within the Line, that was laid out for them.

Some have told us, that Philip went away to the upper Asia, and even to
Scythia: And Nicephores relates, that the Apostle Andrew is believed by some to
have been sent to Coppadocia, Galatia, Bithynia, and the Western Parts.
Nicephor. Hist. Lib. 8. Cap. 6.
But we place but very little Dependence on any such Accounts as these: --
Although we a low, that there are some Evidences, that Thomas carried the
Gospel to Eastern-India.

Some of the ancient Fathers appear to be full and strong in Favor of it, that
the Gospel was carried throughout the World by the Apostles of our blessed
Lord. -- Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, says, that it was so.
-- Tertullian observes, that the Places of Britain, which were inaccessible by
the Romans, lay open to CHRIST. -- And we may well ask, why might not other
distant Places and even these remote Regions do so too? -- (...) shows us his
Opinion, that the Doctrine of Salvation was by the divine Power and
Cooperation carried into all the World. Julius Firmicus Maturnus, who lived
above 1400 Years ago, affirms, had there was no Nation under Heaven, East,
West, North or South, unto whom the Sun of the Gospel had not shined. And
Gregory Nyssen says, that the Gospel had been spread not only in the whole
Continent, but in every Island also. And, in later Times, several Writers have
asserted to the same Purpose. Thus Osiander, writing of Vilagagno, and his
planting at Brasil, writes positively and confidently, without Doubt these
People received the Gospel of CHRIST by the Preaching of the Apostles 1500
Years since.

But, when we have better Proofs than merely human ones, it must certainly be
fit and right to give These the Preference.

Now the Evangelist Mark informs us, in Chap. xvi. 20. that They, the Apostles,
went forth and preached every where, the LORD working with them, etc. i. e.
They went, and performed, according to the Divine Direction. And the Apostle
Paul assures us, in Colos. i. 23. The Gospel ye have heard, which was preached
to every Creature, which is under Heaven, etc. And as He lets us know, in Romans
i. 8. that the Faith of the Romans was published in all the World; so He tells
the Colossians most plainly and expressly, as in Col. i. 6. that the Word of
Truth, the Gospel, was come not only to them, but in all the World, and
brings forth Fruit, etc. And our Apostle tells us, in Romans x. 18. that,
according to the ancient Prophecy of them, i. e. the Apostles, their Sound went
into all the Earth, and their Words to the Ends of the World. And indeed, if
one Apostle from Jerusalem and round about even to Illyricum, fully preached
the Gospel of CHRIST, or filled up the Gospel of CHRIST; so that all the Places
between Jerusalem and Illyricum, and round about them, were fully gospelized by
Him, as in Romans xv. 19; we may reasonably think, that the rest of the Apostles
with the Seventy Disciples, being alike industrious and faithful in the Work of
the Lord, must fully preach the Gospel even throughout the whole World.

But, if we think further with Eusebius, that, besides the Twelve Apostles, and
the Seventy Disciples; there were more Apostles and Disciples: Which he gathers
from that Passage of the Apostle Paul, in 1 Corinthians. xv. 6. After that, he was
seen of above five hundred Brethren at once; of whom the greater Part remain
unto this present; but some are fallen asleep: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 1.
Cap. 13.
Then there must be above two hundred and fifty Brethren, besides the twelve
Apostles and the Seventy Disciples, who had seen CHRIST, and could attest to
the Truth and Certainty of his Resurrection, and so to the Divinity of his
Religion: And a considerable Number of these might come to our Western World.
And so America must have been filled up with the Gospel, according to our
Apostle's Expression.

Some indeed have insisted on it, that the Passages concerning the Gospel's
coming in all the World, and going into all the Earth, and the like, only
intend and mean the Roman Empire. But if they will wrest these Passages to this
Sense; it seems hard to force that Passage in the Epistle to the Colossians,
above cited, to that Meaning that the Gospel was preached to every Creature,
that is, to every Man under Heaven.

We do not now therefore concern ourselves so much Who were the bringers of the
Gospel to this American World: But we think, that there is Reason to affirm
from Divine Authority, that it was brought here by one or more of the Apostles
and Disciples and many Brethren, and produced Fruit. And therefore this
Continent must be certainly known to these first Preachers of the Gospel in it:
And from them, without Doubt the Faith of the Americans was published in all
the other World.

There is then, alas! too much Reason to believe, that this Western World
sinned away the Gospel: And why should this be thought strange and incredible
with us; when Africa, which for several Hundreds of Years after our Savior's
Time, was enlightened with the Gospel and filled with Christian Societies, is
now involved generally in Mohammedan Glooms or Pagan Darknesses.

But however we have good Grounds for hoping, that the Gospel and Religion of
Jesus will recover their lost Possession, and gain a more wide and extensive
Spreading, than has yet been known in the later Ages and Generations: For it is
foretold by the Spirit of Prophecy, in Habak. ii. 14. which we thus read
according to the Original Hebrew, The Earth shall be filled to know the Glory,
JEHOVAH, as the Waters shall cover upon the Sea.

Now the LORD GOD ALMIGHTY grant, that this whole Continent, as well as the Old
World, may find the fullest and most perfect Accomplishment of this good Word,
on which He causes the Hearts of his People to hope and rest: And may all the
People of the World unite in saying, AMEN.

THE END.
AN APPENDIX; Concerning THE AMERICAN COLONIES, AND SOME LATE MANAGEMENTS
AGAINST THEM.
-- Regna, cum Scelere, omnibus
Sunt Exiliis graviora.
SENECA, in Theb. Act. 4. -- Nam ubi mores deteriores increbescunt in dies;
Ubique, Amici qui infideles sint, nequeas pernoscere;
Ubique eripiatur animo tuo, quod placeat maxim;
Ibi quidem, si Regnum detur, non est cupita Civitas.
PLAUTUS in Mercator. Act 5. Scene 1.
IT may be proper and advisable to add a few Things here, by Way of Appendix,
which could not be so properly and conveniently introduced in the foregoing
Essay. And indeed, as Divine Providence, without my seeking for it, has
furnished an Occasion for mentioning some fit and right Things, with regard to
these American Colonies, and some late Transactions to their Disadvantage and
Wrong; I cannot but think it my Duty to improve it; hoping, that none will be
troubled or offended with me for so doing. For why should any one be so, for
taking a fair Opportunity to show my Affection to my Country, as well as my
Good Will and Regard to the Rest of the Colonies?

Some have noted, and it is worthy of Observation, That Colonies, from the
Beginning of Things, after the Flood, to this Day, have been almost constantly
led forth from the East to the West, and not in the contrary Direction. And the
mentioning of This brings to Memory a Remark, that was made by the worthy Mr.
Jeremy White but a little while before he made his Exit out of the World. When
he was asked, What he thought of these American Regions? After a little Pause
he asked the Enquirer, Whence the wise Men came, who repaired to Judea, in
order to show their Respect and pay their Homage to the glorious King of the
World? To which Question it was answered by the Gentleman, at whose House he
then was, Why, Sir, from the East: Whereupon Mr. White remarked, And let me
tell You, Sir, They have been traveling Westward ever since: And then he went
on and gave it as his Judgment, that this Part of the World seemed to him to be
reserved in Providence for the great Seat of Empire and Religion and the
Theater of considerable Events before the End of the World.

In the published Account, concerning the Life of this learned and pious
Gentleman, it is related, that, although he lived to be near 80 Years of Age,
He neither survived his Reason, his Cheerfulness, his Memory, nor his Honor:
And we may fitly add here, that the Remark abovementioned, made by him toward
the Close of his Life, showed not only the Penetration of his Mind, but the
Soundness of his Judgment also: And, as Cicero says, Dies -- Naturae Judicia
confirmat; which we may render, Time confirms the Judgments of Nature, or the
Judgments formed from the Observation of Nature.

And now Things are tending apace toward the Completion of Mr. White's
Sentiments and Expectations; and, as we apprehend, to the Fulfillment of sundry
Predictions in the more sure Word of Prophecy concerning the Prevalence of the
Redeemer's Kingdom in the West and to the Goings down of the Sun, and the
filling of the Whole Earth with his Glory.

These Parts of the World seem to have been designed of Heaven for an Asylum, a
Place of Rest and Refreshment, to those, who have been oppressed and groaning
under the Tyranny of Political and Ecclesiastical Power: And as Thousands and
Thousands of These, have already escaped out of the Clutches of their merciless
and cruel Oppressors; and found Respite, Ease and Comfort in these fertile and
wholesome Regions; so it may be reasonably expected, that many Thousands more
will voluntarily and cheerfully resort here with the same Views and Intentions
and to good Effect; notwithstanding all the Lets and Impediments, which may be
thrown in their Way by oppressive, and therefore weak and foolish, Politicians
and Priests.

But there have been some Methods used, not only of low Art, but of rash Force
and Violence in later Times, to abridge the Freedoms, and cramp the
Improvements of these Colonies: So that, was the Old Latin Poet Ennius now
living, he would write as he did in his own Day, Tollitur e medio Sapientia: Vi
geritur Res:

Which may be thus translated for the English Reader, Wisdom is taken from it is
usual Course:
Things now are managed by ungrateful Force.


The Contriv^rs and Prosecutors of these Methods of treating free People, who
are entitled to all the Privileges of Britons, as much as Britons themselves;
and who, if I know them, will, at all Hazards, surely recover and retain these,
maugre all the Counsels and Attempts against them; the Contrivers and
Prosecutors of these Methods, we say, discover most egregious Ignorance of
their American Brethren and their Rights: And, if This were all, it might
easily be pitied and overlooked. But there seems at the same Time to be so much
Malevolence and Enmity manifested toward the natural and constitutional Rights
and Liberties of the Americans, as cannot well admit of any just Apology, or
fair Excuse.

We have no Inclination to concern ourselves so far as to treat largely
concerning the Legislative Authority of Great Britain. Let This be called
Supreme by its Favorers; and let it be magnified in all other Regards and to
the uttermost Degree by them, if they please: But, with their Leave, it is not
extended, nor can it constitutionally be, to the Affair of Taxation, as all
Britons know, or might know if they would: For the Commons of Great Britain
have the sole Right of taxing the People, whom they represent: This Right was
recovered upon the Revolution: And, ever since that Time, the Commons have
steadily exercised it. It is allowed, that, as Tax Bills are sent up to the
Lords and Crown, They accept of them, just as they are brought to them,
according to the Formality of Law: For otherwise the Moneys granted cannot be
had, and applied to the public Use and Service. -- But, after all, the Taxation
itself, and the Gift of the Moneys, is by the Commons, in the Name and Behalf
of the People of Britain.

Now the Americans, and their Commons, as Judge Blackstone calls our General
Assemblies, cannot see, what Right the Commons of Britain have to take their
Moneys from them, and apply them to such Uses as they judge proper. Nay they
have over and over again unanswerably proved, that they have not the Right to
do so: For indeed, if they have it, certainly we poor Americans must be
destitute of the Rights and Privileges of Englishmen, to which we are fully
entitled: And, if This be our Case, it must be disreputable and ignominious
both to them and their American Brethren: To them, that they deprive us of the
Rights and Liberties justly belonging to us; and to their American Brethren,
who have dearly purchased them, and never have yet forfeited them; but have
rather deserved an Addition to them by our Exertions.

And yet the Majority of a certain great Assembly have peremptorily resolved,
that They have Authority to make Laws binding on the Colonies in all Cases
whatsoever: So then They thus assert their Authority, among other Things, to
tax us when, and how, and as often and as much as they please.

Upon which, if it should be enquired, By what Authority they thus resolved?
And who gave them that Authority? It is probable, that they could give no
sufficient and satisfactory Answer. Certainly the Americans never gave them
such Authority; and the People of Britain never could give them such Authority:
For they never had it to give.

But it deserves some particular Notice here, that they were so cautious and
reserved as not to say, that they had the Right, or rightful Authority, to make
such Laws: And hence it may very fitly be presumed, that they knew in their own
Souls, that they had no such Right, or rightful Authority; and therefore they
would not declare, that it belonged to them.

Many judicious Persons here are of the Mind, and have often expressed it, that
it would have been better if the Majority had not boasted of their absolute
Authority, nor indeed resolved any Thing at all about it: For, in Truth, the
Saying and Resolving, that they have such Authority, is no Proof at all of
their being in the rightful Possession of it. -- And the Methods, which have
been taken for supporting their asserted Authority, have no Tendency to produce
any Approbation of it, or real Regard to it. But, as the Claim of such an
Authority by a British Senate must be deemed absurd and wrong by the most
understanding Britons themselves; so the rough Managements to support and
establish it are judged, by the Americans in general, to be contrary to Reason,
Right and Equity. -- And all the Military Force, which can be sent for its
Support, will only serve to confirm and establish these Colonies in their real
Apprehensions, that wrong and unrighteous, as well as weak and foolish,
Measures are used with them; and These, as they think, from such illiberal
Motives, as wise Men will find it very difficult to justify, or even to
palliate.

Although it has been readily and cheerfully granted, that the British House of
Commons have the undoubted Right and sole Power and Authority of taxing the
People, their Brethren, at Home; yet we conceive it to be a most unreasonable
and unrighteous Stretch of the Authority, which is claimed by them, to exercise
it in taxing the People of America: -- For it is most sure and certain, that
the Americans have never chosen them for their Representatives; and it is
reasonable to think, that they never will choose them as such: Because they
cannot well be accountable to them for their public Conduct and Managements;
nor can they well be treated by them according to their good or evil Deservings
from them.

The Americans consider it as very disingenuous to treat them in such an unfit
and severe Manner, by iniquitous Laws and rigorous Executions of them; when
They, especially of New England, have at their own Expense settled a great
Continent, so much to the Advantage of Britain, and to our Loss, in the Way of
Trade and Commerce; and by means of which Great Britain is made so wealthy at
Home, and so much respected and esteemed by her sorrounding Neighbors. -- Nor
have they only settled this vast Continent to a considerable Degree; but, by
the Expense of much Treasure and much Blood, they have maintained the
Possession to the Emolument of Britons: And why? It was all for the sake of
enjoying those Rights and Privileges, which are now scandalously begrutched to
them, and insidiously and wrongfully wrested from them.

The Colonists also think, that the Managements against them are impolitic and
imprudent, as well as disingenuous and unfair: For, it New England alone, by
Divine Providence favoring their Expedition against Louisburgh in the Year
1745, gave Protection to Great Britain and Peace to Europe; is it not highly
probable, that they, with the other Colonies, both may and will be greatly
serviceable in future to their Mother Country, unless they be discouraged and
hindered from being so by unkind and injurious Treatment? And must it not
therefore be for the Interest of Great Britain to lighten them of the heavy
Burdens put upon them, and not to leave so much as one on them? -- Certainly
then it must be their Wisdom to do this for them.

Besides, The Americans sincerely think, that the Imposition and Continuance of
such Burdens on them is a direct and continued Breach of the public Faith: For
the Americans, especially of the Charter Governments, were solemnly promised,
that they and their Posterity forever should enjoy all the Rights and
Privileges of Englishmen; upon Condition, that, at their own Expense, they
would settle and improve such and such Territories, as should be purchased by
them in America. Now it is beyond all Dispute, that the Americans have
fulfilled their Part of the Contract: And therefore the depriving of them of
the stipulated Rights and Liberties, and even the Abridgment of these, should
not be meditated, and much less resolved on and executed, by Christianized
Britons: For even Turks and Pagans would be ashamed to perpetrate such a
shameful Breach of public Faith: And therefore it may be well and reasonably
expected, that, wherein there has been any such Thing, or an Appearance of it,
there should be an honest and manly Resolution not to abide by it: For such a
Resolution, instead of dishonouring any Body of Men, would render them more
amiable, excellent and illustrious in the Estimation of the whole World.

Moreover; The Colonists judge, that the British Commons have dealt with them,
in their modern Managements, not according to the golden Rule of Equity: For
certainly the British Commons, were They in our Situation and Circumstances,
and We in theirs, would not think it just and right for themselves to receive
such Treatment from us, as they judge proper to give unto us.

The Americans therefore, upon such Considerations as have been mentioned, are
ready to exclaim with regard to the unfit, unkind and injurious Dealings
toward them by their Brethren: Oh! the Times! Oh! the Manners! For they think
it wrong, that any Men should exert, if they have it, such an undue Influence
as to remove the ancient Landmarks of English Freedom, as well as of Truth and
Righteousness: And they look on it as unaccountable and astonishing, that any
such Things should be acted, or tamely suffered, by Great Britain. Yea the
Colonists scruple not to speak out the Language of the Tragic Poet in the
Christian Hero:

O! Is it not, that Tyranny prevails,
And the true End of Government is lost!
That those, who should defend each in his Right,
Betray their Trust, and seize upon the Whole!
This, this is to rebel against that Power,
By which Kings reign; and turns the Arms of Heaven
Against itself.
Thus a few Things, of no small Importance, have been offered by Way of Apology
for the Americans: And where is the Hurt, or Impropriety, of my offering this
Apology for their Rights and Liberties; any more than in Justin Marty's,
Tertullian's, Athenagoras's, and other Writers in the primitive Church,
tendering their Apologies for their Christian Brethren to the Roman Emperors
and Senates? And, if this Attempt, in Conjunction with those of others, should
meet with Acceptance; and my Country, with the other Colonies, should fare in
any Measure the better for it, it will be a great Comfort to me at the Setting
of my Life, and cause me to quit the Stage with more Composure and
Satisfaction; because due Freedom is restored to America, and there is a
comfortable Prospect of its descending to our latest Posterity.

But, if notwithstanding all, that has been so clearly and fully, so rationally
and judiciously argued against the late Innovations, by particular Persons of
various Orders, and by such respectable Bodies of Men as Councils and
Representatives, Might must be still exercised for subverting and overpowering
American Right; We think, and are fully persuaded, that the generous and brave
Americans will be disposed and resolved to defend themselves and their Rights,
and prepare in the best Manner they can for doing so: And, if Things, from
unadvised and rash Measures still used, must be brought to a desperate Crisis,
the Colonists will make their Appeal to HIM, who is higher than the Highest, or
supremest, on the Earth; who, as He always judges righteously, always loves
Righteousness and hates Oppression and all Manner of Iniquity: And they will
hope and trust in HIM, as their Cause is just and right, to own and succeed it:
For JUST and RIGHT is HE.

In the mean while may an English American, suitably to his Profession and
public Business, be allowed to call upon all his American Brethren, while
endeavoring to do their Duty to their GOD and their King, as well as
themselves and their Country, in all Respects and Instances, to pray constantly
and most humbly and earnestly to the gracious Parent and glorious Lord of the
Universe!

O Thou most supreme Lover and eternal Doer of Right, and Avenger of Wrongs:
Shine forth, and arise, and stir up thy Strength, and come and save us:
Maintain our Cause against them, that would strive with us: Take hold of Shield
and Buckler, and stand up for our Help: For our Help is in the Name of the
LORD, who made Heaven and Earth: Wherefore help us, O our GOD, and save us
according to thy Mercy; and say unto us, I am thy Salvation: For we trust in
thy Power and Mercy through the only Mediator, our Strength and Redeemer: To
whom be Glory throughout all Ages: AMEN.

FINIS.

