A LETTER FROM An Eminent Minister of the Church of SCOTLAND; written to a
Minister of his Acquaintance, at some Distance, in the same KINGDOM.

GIVING AN ACCOUNT Of his CONVERSION and WONDERFUL Change in his PREACHING,
after he had been of some Years standing in the Ministry.

-- For if I yet pleased Men I should not be the servant of Christ.

Gal. i 10. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification.

Rom iv. 2. -- To have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men.

Acts xxiv. 16. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM McALPINE, about Midway
betwixt the Governor's and Dr. Gardiner's, Marlborough- Street, 1773.

A LETTER From an Eminent Minister in the Church of Scotland: written to a
Minister of his Acquaintance at some distance in the same Kingdom.
Reverend and Dear Sir,
MY desire and intension in this Letter is to inform you what the Lord has
lately done for my soul: In order to this, it may be needful to give you a
little previous information of my manner of life from my youth up, to the
present time.

When I was about the age of fourteen, God was pleased to show me that I was a
sinner, and that I must be born again before I could enter into his kingdom.
Accordingly, I betook myself to reading, praying and watching; and was enabled
hereby to make some progress in sanctification. In this manner I went on, though
not always with the same diligence till about half a year ago. I thought myself
in the right way to heaven, though as yet I was wholly out of the way; and
imagined I was traveling toward Sion, though I had never yet set my face
thitherwards. Indeed God would have shown me that I was wrong, by not owning my
ministry, but I had no regard to this for a long time, imputing my want of
success to the haughty hearts of my hearers, and not to my naughty doctrine.

You may ask, perhaps, What was my doctrine? Why, dear Sir, it was the doctrine
that every man will naturally hold whilst he continues in an unregenerate
(...), viz. that we are to be justified partly by our faith, (...) by our
works. This doctrine I preached for eight years, and though I took some
extraordinary pains, and (...) sanctification upon the people very (...) yet
they continued as (...) sanctified in their hearts, and unholy in their lives,
as before. There was indeed a little more of the form of religion in the parish
but not a whit more of the power Just after I had preached eight years in this
manner, I began to be discouraged; and now some secret misgivings arose in my
mind that I was not right myself. This happened about six months ago. Those
misgivings grew stronger, and at last, very painful. Being then under great
doubts, I cried unto the Lord very earnestly. The constant language of my heart
was this -- "Lord, if I am right, keep me so; if I am not right make me so Lead
me to the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus."

After about ten days crying unto the Lord, he was pleased to return an answer
to my prayer, and in the following wonderful manner. As I was sitting in my
house one morning, and musing upon a text of scripture, the following words
were darted into my mind with great power, and seemed, indeed, like a voice
from heaven, (viz.) Cease from thy own works, before I heard these words, my
mind was in a very unusual calm; but as soon as I heard them, my soul was in a
tempest directly, and the tears flowed from my eyes like a torrent. The scales
fell from the eyes of my understanding immediately, and I now clearly saw the
rock I had been splitting on for near thirty years.

Do you ask what this rock was? Why, it was some secret reliance on my own
works for salvation. I had hoped to be saved, partly in my own name, and partly
in Christ's name; though I am told there is salvation in no other name except
in the name of Jesus Christ, Acts iv. 12. I had hoped to be saved partly
through my own works, and partly through Christ's mercies; though I am told we
are saved by grace through faith, and not of works, Ephesians. ii. 7, 8. I had hoped
to make myself acceptable to God, partly through my own good works, though we
are told that we are accepted through the beloved, Ephesians. i. 6. I had hoped to make
my peace with God, partly through my own obedience to his laws, though I am
told that peace is only to be had by faith, Romans v.i. I had hoped to make
myself a child of God by [legal] sanctification, though we are told, that we
are made children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. iii. 26. I had thought
that Regeneration, the new Birth, or the new Creature consisted in this legal
sanctification, but now I know it consists in faith, 1 John v. 1. -- Compare
also these two passages together, Gal. vi. 15. -- and Gal. vi. 5. -- where you
will find that the new creature is faith working by love; the apostle adds
these words, working by love; in order to distinguish a living faith from a
dead one. I had thought that sanctification was the way to justification, but
now I am assured that sanctification follows after justification; or in other
words, that we must first be justified by faith before we can have any true
sanctification by the Spirit. When we are justified it is done freely, that is,
graciously without any the least merits of ours, and solely by the grace of God
through Jesus Christ, Romans iii. 24 -- 28.

All that is previously needful to justification, is this, that we are
convinced by the Spirit of God of our own utter sinfulness, Isa. lxiv. 6. --
Convinced that we are the children of wrath by nature, on account of our
Birth-sin, Ephesians. ii. 3. -- And that we are under the curse of God on account of
actual sin, Gal. iii. 10. -- And under these convictions come to the Lord Jesus
Christ, renouncing all righteousness of our own, and relying solely on him, who
is appointed to be "the Lord our righteousness," Jer. xxiii. 6. Again, Christ
says, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, (with the burden of
sin) and I will give you rest," i. e. I will take the burden away, I will
release you from the guilt of sin. Where you may observe, that the only thing
required of us when we come to Christ, is to come burdened and sensible that
none can remove this burden but Christ. Again, Christ did not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. See also Luke iv. 1^. Hear how he cries
out in Isa. lv. 1. "Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters and
drink, come buy wine and milk (i. e.) the blessings of the Gospel) without
money and without price." Where we are ordered to bring no money, i. e. no
merits of our own, we must not think to make a purchase of these blessings by
any deserts of ours. They are offered freely, i. e. graciously, and must be
received freely. Nothing more is required of us than to thirst after them. Why
was the Pharisee rejected? [Luke xviii. 10.] Because he came pleading his own
works before God He was devout, just, chaste and abstemious; and thanked God
for enabling him to be so. Very well; so far all was right. But then he had
some reliance on these works, and therefore pleads the merits of them before
God; which showed that he did not know what a sinner he was, and that he could
only be saved by grace through faith. He opens his mouth before God, and pleads
his own cause; though God declares that every mouth shall be stopped before
him, and the whole world brought in guilty before God, Romans iii. 19. And why
was the Publican justified? Not on account of his own good works, but because
he was sensible of his evil ones; and accordingly came self-accused,
self-condemned, and crying out for mercy.

And now dear Sir, hear what is the rise and progress of true religion in the
soul of man. When the Spirit of God has convinced any person that he is a child
of wrath, and under the curse of God, [in which state every one continues to
be, till he has received Jesus Christ into his heart by faith,] then the heart
of such a one becomes broken for sin; then, too, he feels what he never knew
before, that he has no faith: and accordingly laments his evil heart of
unbelief. In this state men continue some a longer, some a less time, till God
is pleased to work faith in them. Then they are justified, and are at peace
with God, Romans v. 1. i. e. have their sins forgiven them, for that is the
meaning of the word, peace. See Luke vii. 48, -- 50. -- When we have received
faith from God, [for it is his gift, Ephesians. ii. 8.] to justify our persons, then
we afterward receive the Spirit to sanctify our natures, Ephesians i 13. -- Gal.
iii. 14. And now the work of [gospel] sanctification goes forwards; now his
fruit is more and more unto holiness; now the love of God is shed abroad in his
heart by the holy Spirit, Romans v. 5. Now he walks in the comforts of the holy
Ghost, Acts ix. 13. Now he is filled with joy and peace in believing, Romans xv.
13. Now he rejoices with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. i. 8. And
now he has the Spirit of God bearing witness with his own spirit, that he is a
child of God, Romans viii. 16. 1 John v. 10. -- These are things which I was an
utter stranger to before, notwithstanding all my reading, watching and praying;
and these are things that every one must be a stranger to, till he is made a
child of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

But to proceed; though a believer is continually more and more sanctified, "in
body, soul and spirit," yet his hopes of heaven are not built on his
sanctification, but on Christ; he knows he is only complete in Christ, Col. ii.
10. And that the moment he seeks to be justified by his own obedience to God's
law, that moment he falls from Christ and ceases to have an interest in him,
Gal. v. 4. Accordingly, though he labors to abound in all the fruits of
righteousness, yet, like St. Paul, he desires to be found only in Christ, not
having [i. e. not relying on] his own righteousness, but on the righteousness
of God by faith, Phil. iii. 8, 9.

And now let me point out to you the grand delusion, which had like to have
ruined my soul. I saw very early something of the unbelief of my nature, and
the necessity of being born again. Accordingly I watched, prayed and fasted
too, thinking to purity my heart by these means, whereas it can only be
purifyed by faith, Acts xv 9. Watching, praying and fasting are necessary
duties, but I, like many others, placed some secret reliances on them, thinking
they were to do that for me, in part at least, which Christ only could. The
truth is, though I saw myself to be a sinner, and a great sinner, yet I did not
see myself an utter lost sinner, and therefore I could not come to Jesus Christ
alone to save me; despised the doctrine of justification by faith alone,
looking on it as a foolish and a dangerous doctrine; I was not yet stripped of
all my righteousness, could not consider it as "filthy rags," and therefore I
went about to establish a righteousness of my own; and did not submit to the
righteousness of God by faith, Romans x. 3 -- I did not seek after righteousness
through faith, but, as it were, by the works of the law. Thus I stumbled and
fell, Romans ix. 31, 32. In short, to use a homely similitude, I put the justice
of God in one scale, and as many good works of my own as I could in the other,
and when I found, as I always did, my own good works not to be a balance to
the divine justice, I then threw in Christ as a make-weight. And this every one
really does, who hopes for salvation partly by doing what he can for himself,
and then relying on Christ for the rest.

But, dear Sir, Christ will be either a whole Savior, or none at all. And if
you think you have any good service of your own to recommend you unto God, you
are certainly without any interest in Christ. Be you ever so sober, serious,
just and devout; you are still under the curse of God as I was, and know it
not, provided you have any allowed reliance on your own works, and think they
are to do something for you, and Christ to do the rest.

I now proceed to acquaint you with the success I have lately had in my
ministry. As soon as God had opened my eyes, and showed me the true way to
salvation, I began immediately to preach it And now I dealt with my hearers in
a very different manner from what I used to do. I told them very plainly, that
they were children of wrath and under the curse of God, though they knew it
not, and that none but Jesus Christ could deliver them from that Curse. I asked
them if they had ever broke the law of God once, in thought, word or deed? If
they had, they were under the curse: For it is written, "Cursed is every one
that continues not in all the things that are written in the book of the law
to do them." And again, "he that keeps the whole law, and yet offends in
one point, is guilty of all." If, indeed, we could keep the whole law, without
offending in one point; if we had done, and could continue to do all things in
God's law, then we might lay claim to eternal life on the score of our own
works. "But who is sufficient for these things?" If we break God's law, we
immediately fall under the curse of it, and none can deliver us from this curse
but Jesus Christ. There is an end for ever after, of any justification from our
own works. No future good behavior can make any atonement for past
miscarriages. If I keep all God's law to day, this is no amends for breaking
them yesterday. If therefore I am once under the curse of God, for having
broken God's law, I can never after do any thing of myself to deliver me from
this curse. I may then (...), "O! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
(...) from this body of sin?" And find none able to deliver, but Jesus Christ,
Romans vii. 24, 25. So that if I am once a sinner, nothing but the blood of Jesus
Christ can cleanse me from sin. All my hopes are then in him, and I must fly to
him as the only "refuge set before me."

In this manner, dear Sir, I preached, and do preach to my people, laboring to
bring them off from self-righteousness to a dependence on Christ's
righteousness only for justification, in the sight of God: laboring to show
them that they were all in a lost and perishing state, and that nothing could
recover them out of this state, and make them children of God, but faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ. And now see the consequence. This was strange doctrine to my
hearers. They were surprised, all armed and vexed. The old man, the carnal
nature was stirred up, and railed and opposed the truth. However, the minds of
most were seized with some convictions, and the hearts of some were truly
broken for sin, so that they came to me, as those mentioned in the Acts,
'pricked to the heart,' and crying out, "What must I do to be saved?" I then
laid the promises before them, and told them, if they found themselves under
the curse, Christ was ready to deliver them from it; if they were really weary
and heavy laden, Christ would give them rest; if their hearts were broken for
their sins, and they would look up unto Christ he would heal them. I exhorted
them also to thank God for these convictions, assuring them it was a token of
good to their souls. For God must first smite the heart before he can heal it,
Isa. xix. 22. I generally found that they received comfort from the promises of
God in his word; and though they complained much of the burden of sin, and of
an evil heart of unbelief, yet they always went away refreshed and comforted.
The good fruits begin now to appear, not a few rejoice in Christ and love him;
they love his word, and meditate in it; they exercise themselves in prayer, and
adorn their profession by a suitable life and conversation.

And now let me make one reflection. I preached up sanctification very
earnestly as (as above mentioned) for eight years, and never brought one soul
to Christ, never had success at all; but as soon as ever I preached Jesus
Christ, and faith in his blood, then conviction of sin took place in the
hearers hearts, yea, and believers were, every now and then, added to the
church And now let me ask, what is the reason why my ministry was not blessed,
when I preached up salvation partly by faith, and partly by works? It is
because this doctrine is not of God; and he will prosper not ministers but such
as preach salvation in his own appointed way, [viz] by faith in Jesus Christ.

Let me now apply myself to your own heart, and may God dispose you to receive
my words in the spirit of meekness. Indeed, Sir, I love and respect you, else I
could not have wrote to you so freely. Are you then in the same error that I
was in for near forty years, [viz] that you must be saved partly by faith, and
partly by works? And have you constantly preached this doctrine? Then you may
be certainly assured of these two things; first, that you never yet brought one
soul to Christ, by your ministry. And secondly, that you are not yet in the way
of salvation yourself. Oh! be not displeased with me for telling you the truth.
-- But you will say perhaps, that you have not only been sincere, but ever
zealous in preaching the word of God. So was I; but there is a zeal which is
not according to knowledge, and that zeal I had, though I knew it not. You may
say farther, that you have read and prayed much, so have I, but still 'I knew
nothing as I ought to know,' till God was pleased to show me that I was blind,
and then I cried heartily to him for light and direction, and he opened mine
eyes, John ix. 39.

Dear Sir, will you attend to the following advice? it is very safe advice, be
the state of your soul what it will. Pray to God to lead you into the knowledge
of the truth as it is in Jesus. Beseech God to keep you in the truth, if you
have received it; or if you are in error, to reveal it unto you If you will do
this heartily and constantly, God will not suffer you to abide in darkness, if,
indeed, you are in darkness, Jam i. 5.

I now proceed to give you some account of myself, and of the impediments which
kept me from the truth. When I first went to the College, I applied myself
diligently to my studies, thinking human learning to be the chief, if not the
only necessary qualification for a divine. Accordingly I studied the Classics,
Mathematics, Ethics, Logics, Metaphysics, and read the works of our most
eminent Divines; and this I did for twenty years; and all the while was
departing more and more from 'the truth as it is in Jesus;' vainly hoping to
receive light and instruction from human wisdom, which could only be had from
the word and Spirit of God.

During this time, I was thought one of the true ministers of Christ by some
people, only because I was a little more grave, and took a little more pains in
my ministry than some others of my brethren; but, in truth, I was not, I was an
utter stranger to the doctrines of their master, which they preached as well as
to Christ himself in my heart and could not abide the doctrine of justification
by faith, in particular. But when God was pleased to open mine eyes about half
a year ago, he showed and taught me other things. Now I saw that nothing had
kept me so much from the truth, as a desire of human wisdom. Now I perceived
that it was as difficult for a wise or learned man to be saved, as it was for a
rich man; or nobleman: 1 Cor. i. 26. Now I saw that God even still chose the
foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak things to
confound the mighty, for two plain reasons, 1st, that no flesh should glory in
his presence, ver. 29. and 2d. to show that faith did not stand in or was not
produced by the wisdom of man, but by the power of God, 1 Cor. ii. 5. Now I
discerned, that no one could understand the word of God, but by the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. ii. 12. Now I saw that every believer in Christ was anointed by the
holy Spirit of God, and thereby led to the knowledge of all needful truths, 1
John ii. 20. Now I saw that Justification by faith alone was a fundamental
doctrine of christianity; and did no longer wonder at the want of success in
those ministers who did not preach this in particular, and the other
fundamental doctrines of gospel. They preached not Christ's doctrine, and
Christ owned it not. I once neither believed nor preached Justification by
faith only, yea, what was more dreadful, I was undermining this fundamental
doctrine, and yet dreadful as this is, I fear it is the case of too many of the
clergy in this kingdom. Scarce any thing is preached but justification by faith
and works, at best. And what is the consequence? Why there is scarce any true
religion among us, the gospel of Christ is not truly preached by us, and Christ
will not own our ministry. Look around the Parishes which are near you, and see
whether you can find any thing besides the form of religion, and not much of
that. Nay, amongst those who are thought religious people; who are sober,
serious, just and devout; who read and pray, and give alms, and even fast;
amongst these you will scarce find one who knows any thing of the power of
religion, and has experimental knowledge of it. For if you ask such people in
the very words of scripture, "whether they know that Jesus Christ is in them,
otherwise they are reprobates," 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Whether Christ dwells in their
hearts by faith, Ephesians. iii. 17. Whether their sins are forgiven for Christ's
sake, John ii. 12. Whether they have received an unction from the holy One, 1
John ii. 20. Whether the love of God has been shed abroad in their hearts by
the holy Ghost, Romans v. ^. Whether they are filled with joy and peace in
believing, Romans xv. 13. Whether they walk in the comfort of the holy Ghost, and
do ever rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, Acts ix. 31. 1 Pet. i.
8. And lastly, whether the Holy Spirit bears witness with their own spirit that
they are the children of God, Romans viii. ^4. etc. If, I say, you ask the better
sort among us, whether they have any experience of these matters. they would
stare at you with the utmost amazement, and would think you an Enthusiast, if
they did not call you so. Or, at most, they would have expected to be enquired
at rather about the orthodoxy of the head, than about these experiences which
reside in the heart alone, as being fuller of that than the other. Now such
people who are only orthodox, and such who have all the form, but none of the
power of religion, who are outwardly reformed but not inwardly renewed by the
Holy Ghost. These last are what our Savior calls "whited sepulchers,"
beautiful without, but full of rottenness within; these are "striving to enter
into the kingdom of heaven, but are not able," because they do not "strive
lawfully:" for they do not seek to enter in through Jesus Christ, but partly
through Christ, and partly through themselves, partly by faith, and partly (if
not wholly) by works, and they first make a Christ of their orthodoxy, make it
to be 'all in all,' to supply the place of heart-Religion and holiness of life.
And even when these two Orthodoxy and outside Religion.
are found joined in any, it makes them but almost christians. And if at any
time it happens, that some are seized with deep convictions, and are made
sensible of their utter need of Christ, and that they can only be justified by
faith in his blood; these not finding proper food for their souls from one
minister, are obliged with those people who have from time to time been brought
into the same state of soul, to go and hear another that preaches the true
gospel, where they can find him. This is often the case, so scarce are gospel
ministers nowadays. It is no wonder therefore that there are so few real
christians. If you read the fathers of the church, if you read the works of our
good old reformers, and works that were published a hundred years ago, you will
there find the gospel of Christ preached, and the true doctrines of
Protestants. But since that time, I mean in the last Century, the clergy,
especially of the church of England, have been gradually departing more and
more from this gospel and those doctrines; so that at length there were few
clergymen to be found in England but who preached contrary to them. And almost
all the sermons that have been published in the last century, Meaning the same
as referred to in the last note.
are full of that soul-destroying doctrine, that we are to be justified either
partly by our own works, and partly by Christ's merits, or by the former only.

Do you ask how the clergy came to fall into this pernicious doctrine? I answer
very easily. Every man, whilst he continues under the power of the carnal mind
and is not awakened to see his utter lost condition, is naturally disposed to
embrace this doctrine. For not being yet convinced by the Spirit of God, that
all his righteousness is as filthy rags, Isa. lxiv. 6. And that he is without
help and strength in himself, Romans v. 6. I say, not being convinced of this, he
naturally goes about to establish some righteousness of his own, and cannot
submit to the righteousness of God by faith. Not being yet sensible of his
utter lost and helpless state, he must have some reliance on himself. And thus
instead of looking wholly to Jesus Christ for salvation, he looks partly to
Christ and partly to himself: instead of seeking for righteousness and strength
from the Lord Jesus Christ, he seeks for it partly from Christ and partly from
himself: instead of seeking to be justified in the Lord, he seeks after
justification partly through the Lord, and partly through himself. But see what
Christ says of this matter, Isa. xlv. 23, 23, 24, 25, etc.

And now let me ask, how the whole church of Rome happened to depart from the
simplicity of the gospel, and to fall into this doctrine of works, which we
[the clergy of the church of England and Scotland] now preach. It was owing to
the depraved nature of man, which makes him think himself to be something and
can do something, though he is nothing and can do nothing to justify himself in
God's sight. At the reformation those churches returned again to Jesus Christ,
and pleaded justification on the gospel-footing of faith only. And so it
continues: but though their Articles [and our confession of Faith] continue
sound and evangelical in this doctrie, [and are in every other doctrine, at
least, that is essential to salvation, agreeable to the word of God;] yet their
and our clergy have departed once more from them, and are advancing to Rome
again in this particular, with hasty strides; preaching in spite of Articles or
Confessions and subscriptions, that most pernicious, Papistical, and damnable
doctrine of Justification by faith and works. Which doctrine, I am verily
assured no one can hold, and be in a state of salvation. Oh, that God would
once more visit in mercy these poor distressed Churches!

When I sat down to write, I did not intend to have filled more than half a
sheet, but when I took my Pen in hand, I knew not how to lay it aside, I have
wrote my sentiments with great freedom, and I hope without offense.

May God give a blessing to what I have wrote. May he enlighten your eyes, as
he has done mine; adored be his mercy: may he lead you by his Spirit to "the
knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus;" and make you instrumental in
bringing souls "from darkness into light," and "translating them out of the
kingdom of Satan, into the glorious kingdom of his dear Son." AMEN.


