AN Authentic and Particular ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF FRANCIS BURDETT PERSONEL,
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. Who was executed at New York, September 10th, 1773; in the
Twenty-sixth Year of his Age, for the Murder of Mr. Robert White.

NEW YORK: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXIII.

An AUTHENTIC and PARTICULAR ACCOUNT of the LIFE of FRANCIS BURDETT PERSONEL,
etc.
I FRANCIS BURDETT PERSONEL, was born in Ireland, tenderly raised by careful
and industrious parents, who took all care imaginable of me in my education.
Though eight years schooling were laid out upon me, I did not improve it, so as
to answer the design of my parents, they finding that I had not so much
learning as they expected I might have had in that time, bound me an
apprentice, according to my own desire, to a good trade: When master of my
trade I went to England; but on my voyage thither, put into Wales, went from
thence to Bristol, in England, tarried there some time, and went from thence to
Shepton-Mallet, in Somersetshire, where I also abode a considerable while, and
was regarded by all who knew me for my sober deportment. My mother hearing
where I was, continually importuned me, by letters, to come home; which I
accordingly did. My father being now dead, I began to be very careful about
worldly affairs, and was remarkably sober; yet, my mother being a passionate
woman, could never be content with me; do what I could, I might have done it
better. She often said to others, that being an only child, she loved me beyond
measure; yet it grieved me that she was of such a tomper. I now became
acquainted with a young man, who knew her temper, and desired me to go with him
to a frolic; which I accordingly did: He espied a young woman walking along,
whom he knew; he spoke to her, and desired her to go with us to take a glass of
liquor, which she did, and was in company with us, till it was so late, that I
dreaded to go home. She was the first lewd woman I was ever in company with:
But sin and Satan strove so much with me, that I left my mother's house to be
at liberty. While from under her eye, I was guilty of pleasing the sinful
appetites of the flesh many times; she hearing of me, never rested, till she
got me home again. I then lived with her six or eight months; but soon growing
weary of her continual admonitions, was resolved to get out of her reach:
Accordingly, came to America, where I staid eighteen months; I then returned to
Ireland, was very much distressed when I got home, and was resolved never to
leave home again. I came to my mother in a poor and miserable condition; but
she received me tenderly, and kept me concealed, lest the neighbors should see
me before she had provided clothing for me. I then lived with her one year
very comfortably; but, she fearing that I would leave her again, advised me to
marry: I was glad of this proposal, and said, if she was willing, I would seek
me a wife as soon as possible; she answered, she had one already provided, of
an honest family, who had seven sisters already married to creditable men, and
that none of the family ever had the least blemish in their characters; she
said, that the one she had provided for (...), was the youngest, and I might
get a handsome dowry with her: I asked her name; when I heard who she was, I
said I must have some time to think of it, (not that ever I designed to have
her) but was unwilling to put my mother in a passion: She said, I might have
time to make love to her, but have her I must, or never be a penny the better
at her death. Thinking the young woman not handsome enough, nor sin eying her
in the least, knowing myself to be but young, I resolved not to have her, let
what would (...) My mother was at me day after day to have her, but to no
purpose. Being rid of this importunity by the young woman's being married to
another; through disobedience I came off to America a second time, and have
never since returned. I lived in Baltimore county, in Maryland, for eighteen
months, as a servant, and served but so much of four years due for my passage.
Being now in want of clothes, as those I brought from home were wore out, and
those I had of my master but indifferent, though far better than what other
servants got for common. At length, I took a thought to run away, and
accordingly did in a foolish manner; one morning, after breakfast, my master
came home, and showed me what was to be done; I worked a little after his
departure, then took my ax with me, went about a mile through the woods, and
seated myself on the top of a hill till night, it being then the spring of the
year, though the trees were not yet green. I traveled that night but slowly,
my shoes being bad and the roads very deep, as it had rained. I got within a
mile of Baltimore by daylight, and then, for fear of being discovered, went
and laid me down in the woods; but, having only a shirt, jacket, and a pair of
trowsers upon me, and it raining very much, I could not sleep, being cold, wet
and hungry. I now repented of my running away, and would have returned home,
had I not recollected that I had heard my master say, he would treat a runaway
that returned, worse than one that used his endeavor to get off; therefore, I
would not go home, nor tell that I was a runaway, but wished to be taken up;
and, with an expectation of being taken, came on the high road at midday, and
went into Baltimore Town. As nobody questioned me, I enquired for a certain
tavern, where I had heard my master say he used to put up at; coming there, I
mentioned my master's name, and said, that he desired me to get a dinner there;
the landlord asked me if my master had given me a note. I said, no: Then said
he, I cannot let you have dinner. I wished to be taken up, yet would not inform
him I was a runaway.

I then walked through the town, and came to a road that leads to Annapolis, I
reached the river by sunset, where I waited till two Gentlemen came who wanted
to get over; they asked me to whom I belong? I said to Squire Carroll of
Annopolis, which was false; but he living in Annapolis, and I wanting to get
there if possible: They examined me no farther, knowing that whom I called my
master had several farms, and his servants continually going from one to
another: I traveled with this lie in my mouth till I came to Annapolis; it was
evening when I came to town, and I had neither money, friends, nor clothes, I
walked about hoping somebody would take me up, but nobody noticed me. Going to
a Gentleman's house, I laid me down under the stoop, hoping that some one from
within would examine me, but there came none. The next morning I walked out of
town very feeble and hungry not having eat for a long time. I then wandered I
know not where, steering partly by the sun, traveled by day on the high road,
caring not much whether I was then taken up or no, but was resolved to keep
going whilst I was able. I met several people, and saluted them, and so passed
on: At length, I saw a Gentleman on horseback coming toward me, which daunted
me, fearing he was in pursuit of me, I saluted him, passed on, and sometime
after met his brother, who questioned me: I told him I was just free, and my
master was such a villain, that he would not give me my freedom dues, and that
I came to Annapolis, in search of a friend, to acquaint him how my master
served me. But unhappily, I told him, my friend had left town before I came,
and having no money I left town, with an intent to get work in the country; he
replied his brother wanted a workman but could get none this while past,
therefore, desired me to call at his brother's house, told me his name, and
gave proper directions, and desired me to tarry there till his brother came
home, where I went, and spoke to the Gentlewoman, who ordered me a dinner,
which was very welcome to me just then: When the Gentleman came home, I engaged
with him for four months under the name of James Alkins, having been with him a
week or two, pleasing him, being handy at any sort of plantation work, he let
me have necessary apparel; with him I lived till after harvest, but he not
letting me have my earnings, lest I should leave him before my time was
expired, and I fearing my master would hear of me, borrowed a coat, hat, and
other necessaries suitable, under a pretense of visiting a friend, and went
off, being provided with a pass I had written myself, and signed a Magistrate's
name to it, changing my name to Patt Percy; having now some money, I delayed
not till I got into Virginia; and, being well dressed, could write a passible
hand, and understood some figures, I set up for a Schoolmaster, accordingly I
got a school, where I taught for some time, was very well regarded by my
neighbors, some gave me credit for one thing and some for another. I lived
very happy, as I thought, just then, and could go out on a evening after school
and serve the devil with delight. I continued this practice for some time, till
I went to hear the Baptists called by some New Lights. I went more out of
curiosity then any thing else, having heard much of them: The first sermon I
heard pricked my heart. I went to hear them often, wrestled against sin in a
measure, and would not commit such as appeared base in the world, and as few
others as possible.

I had a desire to leave off all fin; but depended on the broken staff of my
own strength, therefore could not do it: I obtained the name of being a
religious young man by some, who knew not what it was; and I myself was
deceived, thinking I was converted when only convicted, and wanted to join the
church, but was not accepted, upon which the young men derided me: yet I
continued to hear preaeching, and, to appearance, had I staid there, should
have been brought to the knowledge of God through Christ: But two men, who
suspected me to be a runaway, saying they would take me up, occasioned my
leaving this place, being unwilling to return to Maryland to my master. I went
to a widow, whom I was bound in oath to be married unto, borrowed a mare,
bridle and saddle of her, under a pretense to go to town for some things; from
whence I went, calling myself Francis Personel, alias Burdett Personel, and
never returned. About an hundred miles therefrom I sold the mare, bridle and
saddle, and traveled to Pittsburg, nigh which I tarried sometime.

Thus you may see I have been a hypocrite, and what sin have I not committed,
except the sin against the Holy Ghost? And, I may thank God for restraining me
by his grace from that, for my heart was bad enough.

For some transactions prior to this time, not in his MS. see a note, marked (
a) at the end.
After I came to New York, I took a wife; and notwithstanding I knew she had
followed a loose way of life, I loved her. In short the next morning after I
had been married and beded to her, I consented to her going to her old
habitation, till she could pay some debts which she said she owed, and for
which otherwise I would be sued, but she could pay them very soon: She was not
long there before I took her away, as I could not bear to think of her
following that course any longer. I did not let her want whilst I was able to
work, and could get it to do; but, unfortunately, I had not been long married
before I was taken so ill, as to be unable to work; and, as we saw no other
way, rather than be beholden to the people we lived with, we concluded
unanimously, that we must either parish, or she take to her old course;
accordingly, she prostituted her body as usual. The first night she went on
this occasion, she returned somewhat cheerful, and said she had met with a
young woman that lent her some money, and declared she had no conversation with
any man that night. I answered, it was no matter if she had, I would never tell
her of it. Next night she went and brought home some cash, which she said was
lent her in like manner. Sometime after I was ill, she went out every night she
could, to which I still encouraged her, even so much as to go with her some
nights part of the way, and would pass the evening at some neighbor's house
till nine or ten o'clock, then meet her at the place appointed, and come home,
as though we had been together all the time we were out. This abominable
practice we followed until the 16th of May, when I went to her father's, not
expecting to return that night, neither did she expect me, according to her own
confession, otherwise she would not have staid out so late. Upon my coming home
that night, I sat down contentedly, knowing what she was after. I waited for
her till after nine o'clook, and she not returning, I proposed to go to bed;
and my landlady said she would lock the doors. As I was unwilling she should he
shut out all night, I said to my landlady, if she would sit up fifteen minutes,
I would go and see if I could find her; but if I did not return in that space
she might shut the doors and go to bed. I went in quest of her, and came to the
house where she was, and notwithstanding that she was there, as I learnt by
hearing her laugh, she was denied to be there; and, as I was going out of the
house, through the entry, I heard her speak in a room, the door being shut;
going to the room widow, I heard two Gentlemen speak, but knew not who they
were at that time: Mr. Gl -- r came out of the room and returned in about
fifteen minutes, after which they shortly came out, as I was standing near the
room window. I expected that the Gentlemen would depart from her, and then
intended to go home with her; but the Gentlemen took her one by the one arm,
and the other by the other arm, and so went away. It is not easy for me to
relate how I felt. As I had given her liberty before that time to act in such a
manner, according to the proverb, What the eye don't see the heart don't grieve
at yet, I confess, I had no right to meddle with the Gentlemen; but the devil
whom I faithfully served at that time, drew near and tempted me to get a
weapon, making me believe if I could strike one or both of them and take away
my wife it would appear in the eyes of some of my neighbors that I was an
honest man, and innocent of her doings; with this resolution I went into the
house where they had been, and seeing no other weapon, unfortunately took the
wooden bar of the door, and having pursued and overtaken them, made a blow
which struck Mr. Robert W -- to on his head, and by it he fell to the ground.
My wife ran off: Upon recovering the weapon to defend myself, Mr. Gl -- r
enclosed me, letting the bar fall to the ground. I fought with my hands After a
short combat; Mr. Gl -- r begged his life; I said it was granted: Whereupon he
asked me, why I had had struck Mr. Wh -- te? For being in company with my wife,
in a bad house at an unseasonable hour, said I: Upon my honor said he, I had
no connection with her, nor have I reason to believe that Mr. Wh -- te had? I
replied, if they were innocent I was sorry that I struck them. In the fray I
lost my hat, and so did Mr. Gl -- r his. While seeking for them, I considered,
as Mr. Wh -- te did not stir, that he might be dangerously wounded; therefore,
finding Mr. Gl -- r's hat and my own, and seeing some people approach, I made
immediately off with them both. I was at home some time before my wife came,
and told my landlady what happened, in order to make her believe that I was
innocent of what my wife followed. I went to bed that might, and after rising
in the morning, took Mr. Gl -- r's hat, and give it to a neighbor to keep,
where I suppose it remains The account of his pursuit and apprehension, adding
in not ( b) at the end, is not in his MS.
.

Herein God is glorified for putting a stop to the sinful course that my wife
and I followed, (as it was altogether abominable in his sight, who is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity) by detecting, apprehending and executing of me;
for though I did not intend to kill Mr. White, when I struck him; yet, as it
proved the cause of his death, I confess I am guilty of the murder of him,
inasmuch as I had given my wife the liberty beforementioned. Some people have
said, that it was a made up thing between my wife and me; but it is false,
neither do I blame her in the least, as I am the sinful wretch, and really
guilty, and none else: Why then should I strive to conceal that from the world,
which is well known unto God?

Thus you may read how great a sinner I have been. I have provoked God times
without number, procured his wrath daily, served the Devil faithfully, deserved
nothing, had I my deserts, but everlasting damnation; several other heinous,
soul damning sins have I committed, which are not here mentioned; and yet,
after serving the Devil so long, having been guilty of so many crimes of the
deepest dye, yet God was pleased to draw me from the mouth of the pit, to pluck
me out of everlasting burnings, and to receive me even at the eleventh hour,
and to give me the knowledge of himself in and through Jesus Christ. Oh! the
riches of the free grace of God to such a sinful wretch as I am, as I shall
endeavor to make appear as well as I am able, being assisted by the grace of
God. The last day of July I received sentence of death; I knowing that I was
then out of Christ, prayed for a long day for repentance, and six weeks were
granted me. Certainly, if I had been put to death at that time, I should have
been a lost soul, for my conscience was a hell to me, and witnessed against me:
I then saw hell open, as it were, to receive me, and could then see no way of
escape, for I was almost in despair, and was in dread that the holy Spirit of
God was withdrawn from me, never more to return. The condition I was then in I
am unable to express. I came to prison, was put in the condemned room, where I
sat very melancholy, and expected some of the Clergy to come and see me. I sent
for a Divine of the Church of England, but he did not come just then. I then
sent for Mr. Pilmore, a Methodist Minister, but he did not come that day, which
made me almost think that I was forsaken of God and his Ministers too. I was
advised to send for Mr. L -- le -- d, a Methodist; I accordingly did: He came,
with two others, and advised me much; I declared that I was a great sinner, and
that I had transgressed God's holy laws, despised his counsels, and grieved his
holy Spirit, and was not worthy to take his holy name into my polluted lips: He
counseled me not to despair, and made mention of several great sinners whom
the Lord had made monuments of his mercy, which are recorded in the holy
Scriptures. He came three or four times, advised me much, prayed and sung
whenever he came, and I must say, the Lord was pleased to make him an
instrument in his hands, of some good to me. Perhaps, the reader will be glad
to know how I was delivered from the fear of hell: It was done in so short a
time, that I can scarce tell; this I know, I prayed earnestly to God, after I
was awakened and alarmed, that he would be pleased to pluck me as a brand from
the burning: The Lord showed me the danger I was in, the follies and madness of
my past life, in living so many years without God in the world, he was pleased
to show me that I was under the curse of a broken law, and that if I departed
this life, without an interest in Jesus Christ, that I must be eternally lost;
therefore, seeing Christ the Savior, and none else, I prayed him to be
merciful to me for his own Name's sake, plead his own most gracious promises,
which he has left on record, desired him to save me, else I parish,
importuning him constantly until he was pleased to hear me and grant my
requests. The first mark or instance I had of it, was this, my troubled
conscience was at ease, my slavish fears were taken away; I now no more dreaded
hell; Christ Jesus was altogether lovely to me: I could see that my sins
crucified him, which grieved me: My imprisonment, my death, and the punishment
due to sin did not move me; now nothing troubled me, but the thought of having
offended so good a God so often as I had done. The Lord was pleased to give me
so much of his divine presence, that I was so lifted up, that I thought it was
all well, imagining that I was quite out of danger, I almost forgot how nigh I
was to everlasting damnation; but the Lord being willing to let me see and know
that of myself I was nothing, permitted Satan to tempt me, I being a poor weak
creature when left to myself, and not calling on the Lord to assist me, was
soon overcome; after Satan got that advantage of me, I was cast down so low
that he made me believe all my former peace was a delusion; I was between hope
and despair, was in dread to pray, lest it should be an abomination to the
Lord; at this time Mr. L -- le -- d came into the room, and was instrumental in
leading me to prayer.

I was visited at different times by the Rev. Dr. (...), the Rev. Mr. Page, the
Rev. Dr. Rogers, the Rev. Mr. Levingston, the Rev. Mr. Fering, the Rev. Mr.
Mason, the Rev. Mr. Gano, Mr. Pilmore and Mr. Rankin; who, though of different
denominations, are, in my opinion, each of them experienced Ministers of the
Gospel, some more, some less, according to the measure of the gift of Christ;
and I acknowledge their kindness in frequently attending me, whilst under
condemnation, in the prison; I hope the Lord blessed, a word, from each of them
to me; therefore to his name be the glory ascribed.

I am just going to depart to an eternity, and would have all sinners to take
warning, by my shameful ignominious, though most happy end: It is no matter of
joy to me when I think that it is my sins brought me to it; yet it yields me
comfort and consolation to die; when I think what God has done for me, even in
my last hours. Oh! how happy should I have been, if I had know so much of God
in time past, as I do now: but blessed be God, that he was pleased to reveal
his Son Jesus Christ to me, even inprison. O Lord God was not I the chief of
sinners, the most vile wretch on earth; and as thou, O God, has been pleased to
forgive me for thy Son's sake, so for his sake, and for the honor and glory of
thy holy name, do thou enable me to set forth a few lines, as a caution to
sinners, and, O God, do thou be pleased to bless them, though weak, that thy
holy name may be glorified by my death, and that it may redound to the honor
of the ever-blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

TO THE PUBLIC.
GOOD people and bad: But, Why did I say good? There is none good, no not one.
Whatever you are, whither rich or poor, learned or not, that read this, be
assured that you must taste death as well as I, and in a short space of time.
Your delicate bodies must be meat for worms, must lay rotting in corruption as
well as mine. You are all certain of death, but uncertain when you must die;
and there is nothing more sure, than that you must appear before the
judgment seat of the Lord Jesus Christ, to give an account of the deeds done in
the body. Knowing, therefore, that all this is true, there are three things
which should make a sinner, out of Christ tremble: The first is, When the soul
is to depart from his body. The second, When it is to appear before God to
receive judgment: And the third, When sentence is pronounced. Oh! how terrible
then will death be to a sinner. O dreadful moment, which cuts the thread of
time, and begins the web of eternity. It is not the most terrible consequence
of death, to leave this world; but it is, to give an account of our actions
unto the Creator of the world, especially in such a time, when you cannot look
for mercy. The thoughts of appearing before a holy God, made even Job tremble,
who was so just, that the Almighty himself rejoiced in having such a servant.
If Job trembled, then, methinks, sinners out of Christ, have greater cause to
tremble; for, if they depart out of this life in an unconverted state, how will
it amaze them, to behold the Lord Jesus Christ himself alive; not a dead image,
nor in that state of humiliation when he suffered on the cross; but upon a
throne of majesty, and seat of justice: Not in a time of mercy, but in the hour
of vengeance: Not naked, though with pierced hands, but armed against sinners
with the sword of justice, when he will come to judge and revenge the injuries
which they have done him: God is as righteous in his justice, as in his mercy;
and, as he has allotted a time for mercy, so he will for justice. O sinners,
think of these great truths, and consider the things that belong to your
everlasting peace, before it is too late. Remember, O sinners, that you were
born into this world under the wrath of God, by reason of the original
transgression committed by your forefather Adam, and see that every sin which
thou committest, deserves nothing but God's wrath and everlasting damnation.
Perhaps, some think that they are already Christians, and converted to God,
because they have been baptized in their infancy, and brought up in such a
church: But, my friend, whoever thou art, that harbors this opinion, without
being born anew of the Spirit of God, you are as yet mistaken; for that was the
very thought that I built my profession upon for many years, to my grief, and
if I had departed this life in that state, I should have been infallibly lost:
therefore, as I am a dying man, I tell you with love to your souls, as Jesus
Christ himself said and confirmed it with an oath, saying, Verily, verily,
Except a man be burn again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Thou drunkard,
thou bold blasphemer, thou thief, thou whoremaster, thou Sabbath breaker, thou
adulterer, thou fornicator, thou extortioner, thou unjust dealer, thou liar,
and thou daughters of hell, that are bond slaves, both you and your guests, to
the Devil; you, I say, that take delight in prostituting your bodies as common
whores, rather than work for an honest living; do any, or either of you, here
mentioned, think that you are Christians, or that if death was to cut you off
this day, that you would be received into the heavenly Jerusalem, where no
unclean thing can enter. O! says the foolish sinner, death is not so near me, I
am yet young and hearty, but when I arrive at such an age, then will I repent:
If I were to become serious in my young days, I should lose all the pleasures
of this life. O! be it known to you, that if this is the language of your
heart, you are deluded by your master, the Devil, whose you are, and whom you
serve, whilst carnally minded. Long was I deluded by him in the same manner,
until he made me commit the crime for which I justly die; and, if the Lord was
not pleased to make me a monument of his mercy and free grace, I should suffer
in hell to all eternity. O sinners! consider how my sins brought be to this
end; and remember my words, your sins, if not repented of, will bring you to
eternal torments. Consider, you are ever dying while in the body, still drawing
nigher the grave; therefore, you should be always ready. O young people! do ye
seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near, for the
Lord has made a gracious promise unto you; he has said in his word, that they
that seek him early, shall find him let old hardened sinners go on to serve the
Devil, if they are so minded; but, you young sinners, seek ye the Lord in your
youthful days, and you shall find thim, and you old hardened sinners, whose
heads are gray, whose looks of hair may be called the blossoms of the grave;
methinks you have been slaves to the Devil long enough, if you could but know
it; beg of the Lord, therefore, to show you what you are by nature and by
practice. Here is encouragement for all sinners, old and young, be their sins
ever so numerous, ever so heinous, or of ever so deep a dye, yet the blood of
Christ Jesus is able and all-sufficient to cleanse from all sin and iniquity;
and seeing that the Lord is gracious unto me at the eleventh hour, in a prison
room, to me that has been in vilest of wretches; methinks, every sinner ought
to come and try the Lord, Oh! the goodness of God, the riches of free grace in
and through Jesus Christ. Now, if you seek the Lord, you will certainly find him;
his promises are such, that the heavens and the earth shall pass away, but one
jot or title of his word shall not fail. If you neglect it, and obey not the
sound of the Gospel, now in your day, be it known unto you, that you must obey
the sound of the trump of God at the last day, when the angel of the Lord shall
sound it, and cry aloud, Arise ye dead and come to judgment; then, O sinners,
ye must come whether you will or no: as you die judgment will find you; as the
tree falls, so it does lie: If death sweep you off this day, in your sins,
where do you think you will find yourself; certainly in torments, never to
cease. O then flee from the wrath to come unto the city of refuge, unto a
crucified Jesus, unto the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world of
believers; confess your sins unto him, for he alone is able to cleanse you from
them by his atoning blood, and is ever really and willing to do it, if you
should think yourselves unworthy by reason of your many offenses; remember me,
the chief of sinners, that as the Lord was gracious to me, so will he be to
you, if you diligently seek him. Is not the blood of Christ sufficient to
cleanse from all sins? and, is not God able and willing to save all that come
unto him in and through Jesus Christ? But, if you that are filthy remain filthy
still, till death comes unawares, and cuts you off. Alas! for your poor souls,
it were better for you never to have been born. The day of judgment will be an
awful, shocking, dreadful day to you; when the Lord Jesus Christ will come in
the clouds of heaven, in power and great glory, with his holy angels, in
flaming fire, to take vengeance on them who know not God, and have not obeyed
the Gospel. Who will be able to bear everlasting burnings? How will it grieve
you, when you see them that were greater sinners than you, placed at the right
hand of the Judge, waiting for a crown of immortal glory, and you yourselves at
the left hand, waiting for the word, Depart! ye cursed! into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his angels! O terrible sentence! depart! alas dread
Sovereign, whereto? Into hell! into everlasting torments! where the God of
heaven will pour forth his wrath on the damned souls to all eternity! Oh
sinners! of all ranks and conditions tremble! And ye harlots of the city of
New York, and you innkeepers, that entertain such in your houses; and you
married or young men that are so led by the Devil, tremble, for you are all in
danger of dropping into hell every moment, and certainly will if death
overtakes you before you have got an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, then if
you intend to escape the wrath to come; if you seek or desire the salvation of
your own souls, fly from sin, shun every appearance of evil; shun gaming,
drinking, lying; shun bad company of all sorts; keep holy the Sabbath of the
Lord, attend to hear the word of God preached with an earnest desire to benefit
thereby, forsaking all your former sins and iniquities, and praying to the Lord
constantly, and then no doubt the Lord will bless a word from one or another of
his ministering servants to your hard hearts, to the breaking of them in
pieces. The word of God is like unto a hammer, sharper, then a two-edged sword
when it comes with power, and if the Lord is pleased to bless a word unto you,
then will you see the danger you are in; and if God so begins that work, the
Lord Jesus will certainiy give you repentance, and will take away the heart of
stone, and give you a heart of flesh. Then thus much being done by the grace of
God, your mind, your will, and the powers of your soul will be changed by the
Spirit of God from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto the
everliving and true God; your feet, formerly so nimble to run into destruction,
will now be employed in going to the house of God, and attending on his
ordinances; your eyes that lusted after all manner of vanities, will be now
fixed on the words of salvation, the testimony of his will, the sacred
Scriptures. Christ Jesus whom you so long rebelled against, will be now more
precious to you then ten thousand worlds. This is something of regeneration or
of the new birth, which Christ spoke of, and is what I wish you may attain to
for Christ's sake, that your precious, everlasting and never dying souls may be
found worthy of the promises of Christ, and of the glory, and those joys which
no tongue can express, and which are laid up for all who truly love and serve
the Lord; and the glory thereof shall be to God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

OF MY EXPERIENCE.
WHEN I was condemned, I saw myself out of Christ. I saw that I was under the
curse of a broken law, that I was a child of hell, a bond slave to the Devil
for many years, which threw me almost into despair. Knowing that God was just,
and that my sins had overtaken me. My neglecting the calls of mercy so often in
my past life, made me think that the Lord would not hear me now. The day after
I was condemned, I had but little hopes; my past life being in my view, was a
great shock to me. The 2d day of August, my burden was great, and my troubled
conscience was a hell to me. But, happily, before a week was expired, the fear
of hell was taken away from me, and my troubled conscience was at rest. I saw
that the blood of Christ was fully sufficient to cleanse from all sin and
iniquity. When the Ministers of Christ came to see me, I did not let them know
that I enjoyed this peace, for, I was in dread least I should be deceived.
After I enjoyed this peace two or three days, then I made it known, and was so
lifted up with inward frames and feelings, that I almost forgot what God had
done for me, in plucking me like unto a brand out of the burning: Then I
thought that I was past all danger; but God was pleased to let me see that I
was nothing of myself, in the following manner: Satan tempted me to sin, and I
not being on my guard, was overcome: Satan remained near me a long while, and
overcame me a second time, then he wanted to make me despair: He conquered me
so far, that he made me believe, all my former peace was a delusion; then I was
in dread to go to prayer, lest it should be an abomination to the Lord. I was
in great distress for some time, until I was told of the goodness of God in
different manners, which, when I had heard, I burst into tears; then was I
slain. After that, I could draw nigh to God in Prayer, in an humble manner, but
had many wrestlings with Satan, yet the Lord helped me to resist. I then (...)
enjoyed inward peace, but it was a considerable (...) before I could say Christ
suffered for me. This (...) that I could not be saved without a Savior. I knew
and believed, that Christ Jesus was the promised Messiah, the Anointed of God,
and I trusted on him, his blood and righteousness, and on none else. The Lord
showed me, that I had nothing in me that could commend me to God, therefore I
continually pleaded the promises of Christ, until he was pleased to give me
faith, that I could say he suffered for me. I always gained ground by the
instructions of the Ministers; yet was tempted by Satan, after all this, to
unbelief; but the Lord gave me to know it was a temptation, and helped me to
overcome. I saw that I was given much to spiritual pride at times, which made
me pray God to humble me. The week before my death, I was so lifted up at
times, and to that degree, that the approaching death seemed a comfort to me;
yet, at one time I could find my faith stronger than at another. I could say,
that Christ Jesus raised me from death to life. Nay, I was twice dead; dead in
sin, and dead by the laws of man, agreeable to the justice of God. Before I was
brought to life savingly by God, in and through Jesus Christ; and as I am
shortly to die a shameful death, which I brought upon myself, by reason of
living so long without God in the world; yet I would die this death, in the
confusion I am now in, rather than live in this world, to be carnally minded,
as usual. I die now to live eternally. Glory be to God for his free gift,
bestowed on me a vile sinner. I die, though most unworthy of the title, one of
the Israel of God, and an heir of glory.

Vide WATTS'S HYMNS, B. II. H. LXXXII. etc.
ARISE, my soul, my joyful powers,
And triumph in my God;
Awake, my voice, and loud proclaim
His glorious grace abroad.
He raised me from the deeps of sin,
The gates of gaping hell,
And fixed my standing more secure
Than 'twas before I fell.
The arms of everlasting love
Beneath my soul he placed,
And on the Rock of ages set
My slippery footsteps fast.
Now shall my body faint and die,
And thou my soul remove:
Oh! for some guardian angel nigh,
To bear it safe above.
He is a God of sovereign love,
That promised heaven to me,
And taught my thoughts to soar above,
Where happy spirits be.
Jesus, to thy dear faithful hand,
My naked soul I trust;
Now, my flesh waits for thy command,
To drop into my dust.
Prepare me, Lord, for thy right hand,
Now is the joyful day;
Come death, and some celestial band,
To bear my soul away.
Thus finish I may parting song,
And now I close my eyes.
Receive me, Lord, into thy arms:
Its thou alone I prize.
The above Francis Burdett Personel, toward the close of his life, appeared
very cheerful and resigned to the will of God. When he was told by the
officers, that they came to wait upon him, we are informed, he said smiling,
That he was ready; and when at the gallows, gave an exhortation with much
composure, and resigned himself to the King of Terros.

( a) It has been said, that he was tried at Lancaster, after he left Virginia,
for horse-stealing, in company with another, which he did not mention in the
acaccount of his life; but, as the true state of the affair cannot be justly
ascertained, at present, it must be omitted.

( b) After committing the crime of killing Mr. White, he went off, (having
informed his landlady, as before mentioned, of that action) and, as he said,
when coming back to get his effects, which were in New York, was apprehended.


