THE SPEECHES OF His Excellency Governor HUTCHINSON, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF
THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY. At a Session begun and held on the Sixth of January,
1773. WITH THE ANSWERS OF His MAJESTY's COUNCIL AND THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES RESPECTIVELY.

[ Published by Order of the House.]

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY EDES AND GILL, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES. M,DCC,LXXIII.

SPEECHES, etc.
HIS Excellency the Governor was pleased to open the Assembly with the
following Speech to both Houses, viz.
Gentlemen of the Council, and, Gentlemen of the House of Representatives.
I HAVE nothing in special Command from his Majesty to lay before you at this
Time; I have general Instructions to recommend to you, at all Times, such
Measures as may tend to promote that Peace and Order upon which your own
Happiness and Prosperity as well as his Majesty's Service very much depend.
That the Government is at present in a distu^bed and disordered State is a
Truth too evident to be denied. The Cause of this Disorder appears to me
equally evident. I wish I may be able to make it appear so to you, for then I
may not doubt that you will agree with me in the proper Measures for the
Removal of it. I have pleased myself, for several Years past, with Hopes that
the Cause would cease of itself and the Effect with it, but I am disappointed,
and I may not any longer, consistent with my Duty to the King and my Regard to
the Interest of the Province, delay communicating my Sentiments to you upon a
Matter of so great Importance. I shall be explicit and treat the Subject
without Reserve. I hope you will receive what I have to say upon it with
Candor, and, if you shall not agree in Sentiments with me, I promise you, with
Candor likewise, to receive and consider what you may offer in Answer.

When our Predecessors first took Possession of this Plantation or Colony,
under a Grant and Charter from the Crown of England, it was their Sense, and it
was the Sense of the Kingdom, that they were to remain subject to the supreme
Authority of Parliament. This appears from the Charter itself and from other
irresistible Evidence. This supreme Authority has, from Time to Time, been
exercised by Parliament and submitted to by the Colony, and has been, in the
most express Terms, acknowledged by the Legislature and, except about the Time
of the Anarchy and Confusion in England which preceeded the Restoration of King
Charles the Second, I have not discovered that it has been called in Question
even by private or particular Persons until within seven or eight Years last
past. Our Provincial or Local Laws have, in numerous Instances, had Relation to
Acts of Parliament made to respect the Plantations in general and this Colony
in particular, and in our Executive Courts both Juries and Judges have; to all
Intents and Purposes, considered such Acts as Part of our Rule of Law. Such a
Constitution, in a Plantation, is not peculiar to England but agrees with the
Principles of the most celebrated Writers upon the Law of Nations that when a
Nation takes Possession of a distant Country and settles there, that Country,
though separated from the principal Establishment or Mother Country, naturally
becomes a Part of the State equally with its ancient Possessions.

So much however of the Spirit of Liberty breathes through all Parts of the
English Constitution, that although from the Nature of Government there must be
one supreme Authority over the whole* yet this Constitution will admit of
subordinate Powers with legislative and executive Authority, greater or less
according to local and other Circumstances. Thus we see a Variety of
Corporations formed within the Kingdom with Powers to make and execute such
Bylaws as are for their immediate Use and Benefit, ^he Members of such
Corporations still remaining subject to the general Laws of the Kingdom. We see
also Governments established in the Plantations which, from their separate and
remote Situation, require more general and extensive Powers of Legislation
within themselves than those formed within the Kingdom, but subject
nevertheless, to all such Laws of the Kingdom as immediately respect them or
are designed to extend to them, and accordingly we in this Province have, from
the first Settlement of it, been left to the Exercise of our legislative and
executive Powers, Parliament occasionally though rarely, interposing as in its
Wisdom has been judged necessary.

Under this Constitution, for more than One Hundred Years, the Laws both of the
supreme and subordinate Authority were in general, duly executed, Offenders
against them have been brought to condign Punishment, Peace and Order have been
maintained and the People of this Province have experienced as largely the
Advantages of Government, as, perhaps, any People upon the Globe, and they have
from Time to Time in the most public Manner expressed their Sense of it and,
once in every Year, have offered up their united Thanksgivings to God for the
Enjoyment of these Privileges and, as often, their united Prayers for the
Continuance of them.

At Length the Constitution has been called in Question and the Authority of
the Parliament of Great Britain to make and establish Laws for the Inhabitants
of this Province has been, by many, denied. What was, at first, whispered with
Caution, was soon after openly asserted in Print and, of late, a Number of
Inhabitants in several of the principal Towns in the Province, have assembled
together in their respective Towns and, having assumed the Name of legal Town
Meetings, have passed Resolves which they have ordered to be placed upon their
Town Records, and caused to be printed and published in Pamphlets and
Newspapers. I am sorry that it is thus become impossible to conceal what I
could wish had never been made public. I will not particularize these Resolves
or Votes and shall only observe to you, in general, that some of them deny the
supreme Authority of Parliament, and so are repugnant to the Principles of the
Constitution, and that others speak of this supreme Authority, of which the
King is a constituent Part and to every Act of which his Assent is necessary,
in such Terms as have a direct Tendency to alienate the Affections of the
People from their Sovereign who has ever been most tender of their Rights, and
whose Person, Crown and Dignity we are under every possible Obligation to
defend and support. In consequence of these Resolves, Committees of
Correspondence are formed, in several of those Towns, to maintain the
Principles upon which they are founded.

I know of no Arguments, founded in Reason, which will be sufficient to support
these Principles or to justify the Measures taken in Consequence of them. It
has been urged, that the sole Power of making Laws is granted by Charter to a
Legislature established in the Province, consisting of the King by his
Representative the Governor, the Council and the House of Representatives --
that by this Charter there are likewise granted or assured to the Inhabitants
of the Province all the Liberties and Immunities of free and natural Subjects,
to all Intents Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as if they had been born
within the Realm of England -- that it is Part of the Liberties of English
Subjects, which has its Foundation in Nature, to be governed by Laws made by
their Consent in Person or by their Representative -- that the Subjects in this
Province are not and cannot be Represented in the Parliament of Great Britain
and, consequently, the Acts of Parliament cannot be binding upon them.

I do not find, Gentlemen, in the Charter such an Expression as sole Power or
any Words which import it. The General Court has, by Charter, full Power to
make such Laws as are not repugnant to the Laws of England. A favorable
Construction has been put upon this Clause when i^ has been allowed to intend
such Laws of England only as are expressly declared to respect us. Surely then
this is by Charter a Reserve of Power and Authority to Parliament to bind us by
such Laws, at least, as are made expressly to refer to us and consequently, is a
Limitation of the Power given to the General Court. Nor can it be contended
that by the Liberties of free and natural Subjects is to be understood an
Exemption from Acts of Parliament because not represented there, seeing it is
provided, by the same Charter, that such Acts shall be in Force; and if they
that make the Objection to such Acts will read the Charter with Attention, they
must be convinced that this Grant of Liberties and Immunities is nothing more
than a Declaration and Assurance on the Part of the Crown that the Place to
which their Predecessors were about to remove was and would be considered as
Part of the Dominions of the Crown of England, and therefore that the Subjects
of the Crown so removing, and those born there or in their Passage thither or
in their Passage from thence, would not become Aliens but would throughout all
Parts of the English Dominions, wherever they might happen to be, as well as
within the Colony, retain the Liberties and Immunities of free and natural
Subjects, their Removal from or (...) being born within the Realm
notwithstanding. If the Plantations be Part of the Dominions of the Crown, this
Clause in the Charter does not confer or reserve any Liberties but what would
have been enjoyed without it and what the Inhabitants of every other Colony do
enjoy where they are without a Charter. If the Plantations are not the
Dominions of the Crown will not all that are born here be considered as born
out of the Ligeance of the King of England, and whenever they go into any Part
of the Dominions will they not be deemed Aliens to all Intents and Purposes,
this Grant in the Charter notwithstanding?

They who claim Exemption from Acts of Parliament by Virtue of their Rights as
Englishmen, should consider that it is impossible the Rights of English
Subjects should be the same, in every Respect, in all Parts of the Dominions.
It is one of their Rights as English Subjects to be governed by Laws made by
Persons in whose Election they have, from Time to Time, a Voice -- They remove
from the Kingdom where, perhaps, they were in the full Exercise of this Right
to the Plantations where it cannot be exercised or where the Exercise of it
would be of no Benefit to them. Does it follow that the Government, by their
Removal from one Part of the Dominions to another, loses it is Authority over
that Part to which they remove, and that they are freed from the Subjection
they were under before; or do they expect that Government should relinquish its
Authority because they cannot enjoy this particular Right? Will it not rather
be said that, by this their voluntary Removal, they have relinquished for a
Time at least, one of the Rights of an English Subject which they might if they
pleased have continued to enjoy and may again enjoy whenever they will return
to the Place where it can be exercised?

They who claim Exemption, as Part of their Rights by Nature, should consider
that every Restraint which Men are laid under by a State of Government is a
Privation of Part of their natural Rights, and of all the different Forms of
Government which exist, there can be no two of them in which the Departure from
Natural Rights is exactly the same. Even in Case of Representation by Election,
do they not give up Part of their natural Rights when they consent to be
represented by such Person as shall be chosen by the Majority of the Electors,
although their own Voices may be for some other Person? And is it not contrary
to their natural Rights to be obliged to submit to a Representative for seven
Years, or even one Year, after they are dissatisfied with his Conduct, although
they gave their Voices for him when he was elected? This must therefore be
considered as an Objection against a State of Government rather than against
any particular Form.

If what I have said shall not be sufficient to satisfy such as object to the
Supreme Authority of Parliament over the Plantations, there may something
further be added to induce them to an Acknowledgment of it which I think will
well deserve their Consideration. I know of no Line that can be drawn between
the supreme Authority of Parliament and the total Independence of the Colonies:
It is impossible there should be two independent Legislatures in one and the
same State, for although there may be but one Head, the King, yet the two
Legislative Bodies will make two Governments as distinct as the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland before the Union. If we might be suffered to be altogether
independent of Great-Bri^^in, could we have any Claim to the Protection of that
Government of which we are no longer a Part? Without this Protection should we
not become the Prey of one or the other Powers of Europe, such as should first
seize upon us? Is there any Thing which we have more Reason to dread than
Independence? I hope it will never be our Misfortune to know by Experience the
Difference between the Liberties of an English Colonist and those of the
Spanish, French or Dutch.

If then the Supremacy of Parliament over the whole British Dominions shall no
longer be denied, it will follow that the mere Exercise of its Authority can be
no Matter of Grievance. If it has been or shall be exercised in such Way and
Manner as shall appear to be grievous, still this cannot be sufficient Grounds
for immediately denying or renouncing the Authority or refusing to submit to
it. The Acts and Doings of Authority in the most perfect Form of Government
will not always be thought just and equitable by all the Parts of which it
consists, but it is the greatest Absurdity to admit the several Parts to be at
Liberty to obey or disobey according as the Acts of such Authority may be
approved or disapproved of by them, for this necessarily works a Dissolution of
the Government. The Manner then of obtaining Redress must be by Representations
and Endeavors, in such Ways and Forms as the established Rules of the
Constitution prescribe or allow in order to make any Matters alleged to be
Grievances appear to be really such; but I conceive it is rather the mere
Exercise of this Authority which is complained of as a Grievance, than any
heavy Burdens which have been bro't upon the People by Means of it.

As Contentment and Order were the happy Effects of a Constitution strengthened
by universal Assent and Approbation, so Discontent and Disorder are now the
deplorable Effects of a Constitution enfeebled by Contest and Opposition.
Besides Divisions and Animositics which disturb the Peace of Towns and
Families, the Law in some important Cases cannot have its Course, -- Offenders
ordered by Advice of His Majesty's Council to be prosecuted, escape with
Impunity and are supported and encouraged to go on offending, -- the Authority
of Government is bro't into Contempt, and there are but small Remains of that
Subordination which was once very conspicuous in this Colony, and which is
essential to a well-regulated State.

When the Bands of Government are thus weakened, it certainly behooves those
with whom the Powers of Government are entrusted to omit nothing which may tend
to strengthen them.

I have disclosed my Sentiments to you without Reserve. Let me entreat you to
consider them calmly and not to be too sudden in your Determination. If my
Principles of Government are right let us adhere to them. With the same
Principles our Ancestors were easy and happy for a long Course of Years
together, and I know of no Reason to doubt of your being equally easy and
happy. The People, influenced by you will forsake their unconstitutional
Principles and desist from their Irregularities which are the Consequence of
them, they will be convinced that every Thing which is valuable to them depend
upon their Connection with their Parent State, that this Connection cannot be
continued in any other Way than such as will also continue their Dependence
upon the supreme Authority of the British Dominions, and that, notwithstanding
this Dependence, they will enjoy as great a Proportion of those Rights to which
they have a Claim by Nature or as Englishmen as can be enjoyed by a Plantation
or Colony.

If I am wrong in my Principles of Government or in the Inferences which I have
drawn from them, I wish to be convinced of my Error. Independence I may not
allow myself to think that you can possibly have in Contemplation. If you can
conceive of any other constitutional Dependence than what I have mentioned, if
you are of Opinion that upon any other Principles our Connection with the State
from which we sprang can be continued, communicate your Sentiments to me with
the same Freedom and Unreservedness as I have communicated mine to you.

I have no Desire, Gentlemen, by any Thing I have said to preclude you from
seeking Relief, in a constitutional Way, in any Cases in which you have
heretofore or may hereafter suppose that you are aggrieved and, although I
should not concur with you in Sentiment, I will, notwithstanding, do nothing to
lessen the Weight which your Representations may deserve. I have laid before
you what I think are the Principles of your Constitution: If you do not agree
with me I wish to know your Objections: They may be convincing to me, or I may
be able to satisfy you of the Insufficiency of them: In either Case I hope, we
shall put an End to those Irregularities, which ever will be the Portion of a
Government where the Supreme Authority is controverted, and introduce that
Tranquillity which seems to have taken Place in most of the Colonies upon the
Continent.

The ordinary Business of the Session I will not now particularly point out to
you. To the enacting of any new Laws which may be necessary for the more equal
and effectual Distribution of Justice, or for giving further Encouragement to
our Merchandise, Fishery, and Agriculture, which through the Divine Favor are
already in a very flourishing State, or for promoting any Measures which may
conduce to the general Good of the Province I will readily give my Assent or
Concurrence.

Council Chamber 6 January, 1773. T. HUTCHINSON.

ON the 25th of January William Brattle, Harrison Gray, James Pitts, James
Humphrey, and Benjamin Greenleaf, Esquires, a Committee of his Majesty's
Council, waited on the Governor with an Answer to the foregoing SPEECH, viz.
May it please your Excellency,
THE Board have considered your Excellency's Speech to both Houses with the
Attention due to the Subject of it; and we hope with the Candor you are
pleased to recommend to them.

We thank you for the Promise, that "if we shall not agree with you in
Sentiments, you will with Candor likewise, receive and consider what we may
offer in Answer."

Your Speech informs the two Houses that this Government is at present in a
disturbed and disordered State; that the Cause of this Disorder is the
unconstitutional Principles adopted by the People in questioning the Supreme
Authority of Parliament; and that the proper Measure for removing the Disorder
must be the substituting contrary Principles.

Our Opinion on these Heads, as well as on some others proper to be noticed,
will be obvious in the Course of the following Observations.

With regard to the present disordered State of the Government, it can have no
Reference to Tumults or Riots: from which this Government is as free as any
other whatever. If your Excellency meant only that the Province is
discontented, and in a State of Uneasiness, we should entirely agree with you;
but you will permit us to say we are not so well agreed in the Cause of it. The
Uneasiness, which was a general one throughout the Colonies, began when you
inform us the Authority of Parliament was first called in Question, viz. about
seven or eight Years ago. Your mentioning that particular Time might have
suggested to your Excellency the true Cause of the Origin and Continuance of
that Uneasiness.

At that Time the Stamp Act, then lately made, began to operate: Which with
some pr^ceeding and succeeding Acts of Parliament, subjecting the Colonies to
Taxes without their Consent, was the original Cause of all the Uneasiness that
has happened since; and has occasioned also an Enquiry into the Nature and
Extent of the Authority by which they were made. The late Town-Meetings in
several Towns are Instances of both. These are mentioned by your Excellency in
Proof of a disordered State: But though we do not approve some of their Resolves,
we think they had a clear Right to instruct their Representatives on any
Subject they apprehended to be of sufficient Importance to require it: which
necessarily implies a previous Consideration of, and Expression of their Minds
on, that Subject: however mistaken they may be concerning it.

When a Community, great or small, think their Rights and Privileges infringed,
they will express their Uneasiness in a Variety of Ways: some of which may be
highly improper, and criminal. So far as any of an a^trocious Nature have taken
Place, we would express our Abhorrence of them: and as we have always done
hitherto, we shall continue to do, every Thing in our Power to discourage and
suppress them. But it is in vain to hope that this can be done effectually so
long as the Cause of the Uneasiness, which occasioned them, exists.

Your Excellency will perceive that the Cause you assign is by us supposed to
be an Effect derived from the original Cause abovementioned: the Removal of
which will remove its Effects.

To obtain this Removal, we agree with you in the Method pointed out in your
Speech, where you say, "the Manner of obtaining Redress must be by
Representations and Endeavors in such Ways and Forms as the Constitution
allows, in order to make any Matters alleged to be Grievances appear to be
really such." This Method has been pursued repeatedly. Petitions to Parliament
have gone from the Colonies, and from this Colony in particular; but without
Success. Some of them, in a former Ministry, were previously shown to the
Minister, who (as we have been informed) advised the Agents to postpone
presenting them to the House of Commons 'till the first reading of the Bill
they referred to: when being presented, a Rule of the House against receiving
Petitions on Money Bills was urged for the rejecting of them, and they were
rejected accordingly: And other Petitions for want of Formality, or whatever
was the Reason, have had the same Fate. This we mention, not by Way of Censure
on that honorable House, but in some Measure to account for the Conduct of
those Persons, who despairing of Redress in a constitutional Way, have denied
the just Authority of Parliament: concerning which we shall now give our own
Sentiments, intermixed with Observations on those of your Excellency.

You are pleased to observe, that "when our Predecessors first took Possession
of this Colony, under a Grant and Charter from the Crown of England, it was
their Sense, and it was the Sense of the Kingdom, that they were to remain
Subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament." And to prove that Subjection
the greater Part of your Speech is employed.

In order to a right Conception of this Matter, it is necessary to guard
against any improper Idea of the term Supreme Authority. In your Idea of it
your Excellency seems to include unlimited Authority: for you are pleased to
say, you "know of no Line that can be drawn between the Supreme Authority of
Parliament and the total Independence of the Colonies:" But if no such Line can
be drawn a Denial of that Authority in any Instance whatever implies and
amounts to a Declaration of total Independence. But if Supreme Authority
includes unlimited Authority, the Subjects of it are emphatically Slaves: and
equally so whether residing in the Colonies or Great Britain. And indeed in
this Respect all the Nations on Earth, among whom Government exists in any of
its Forms, would be alike conditioned: excepting so far as the mere Grace and
Favor of their Governors might make a Difference; "for from the Nature of
Government there must be, as your Excellency has observed, one Supreme
Authority over the whole."

We cannot think, "that when our Predecessors first took Possession of this
Colony it was their Sense, or the Sense of the Kingdom, that they were to
remain Subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament" if this Idea of it. Nor
can we find that this appears from the Charter; or that such Authority has ever
been exercised by Parliament, submitted to by the Colony, or acknowledged by
the Legislature.

Supreme or unlimited Authority can with Fitness belong only to the Sovereign
of the Universe: And that Fitness is derived from the Perfection of his Nature.
-- To such Authority, directed by infinite Wisdom and infinite Goodness, is due
both active and passive Obedience: Which, as it constitutes the Happiness of
rational Creatures, should with Cheerfulness and from Choice be unlimitedly
paid by them. -- But with Truth this can be said of no other Authority
whatever. If then from the Nature and End of Government, the supreme Authority
of every Government is limited, the Supreme Authority of Parliament must be
limited; and the Enquiry will be what are the Limits of that Authority with
Regard to this Colony? -- To fix them with Precision, to determine the exact
Lines of Right and Wrong in this Case, as in some others, is difficult; and we
have not the Presumption to attempt it. But we humbly hope, that as we are
personally and relatively, in our private and public Capacities, for ourselves,
for the whole Province, and for all Posterity, so deeply interested in this
important Subject, it will not be deemed Arrogance to give some general
Sentiments upon it, especially as your Excellency's Speech has made it
absolutely necessary.

For this Purpose we shall recur to those Records that contain the main
Principles on which the English Constitution is founded; and from them make
such Extracts as are pertinent to the Subject.

Magna Charta declares, "that no Aid shall be imposed in the Kingdom, unless by
the Common Council of the Kingdom, except to redeem the King's Person, etc".
And that "all Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Ports shall have their Liberties and
free Customs; and shall have the Common Council of the Kingdom concerning the
Assessment of their Aids, except in the Cases aforesaid."

The Statute of the 34th of Edward I, de tallagio non concedendo, declares,
"that no T^llage or Aid should be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in
the Realm, without the Good Will and Assent of the Arch Bishops, Bishops, Earls
Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this
Realm."

A Statute of the 25 Ed. 3, enacts "that from thenceforth no Person shall be
compelled to make any Loans, to the King against his Will, because such Loans
were against Reason and the Franchise of the Land."

The Petition of Rights in the 3d of Charles 1st, in which are cited the two
foregoing Statutes, declares that by those "Statutes, and other good Laws and
Statutes of the Realm, his Majesty's Subjects inherited this Freedom, that they
should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like
Charge, not set by common Consent of Parliament." And the Statute of the I. of
William 3d, for declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject and settling
the Succession of the Crown declares, "That the levying of Money for or to the
Use of the Crown, by Pretense of Prerogative without Grant of Parliament, for
longer Time, or in any other Manner than the same is or shall be granted, is
illegal."

From these Authorities it appears an essential Part of the English
Constitution, that no Tallage or Aid or Tax shall be laid or levied "without
the Good Will and Assent of the Freemen of the Commonalty of the Realm." If
this could be done without their Assent, their Property would be in the highest
Degree precarious: or rather they could not with Fitness be said to have any
Property at all. At best they would be only the Holders of it for the Use of
the Crown; and the Crown be in Fact the real Proprietor. This would be
Vassallage in the extreme; from which the generous Nature of Englishmen has
been so abhorrent, that they have bled with Freedom in the Defense of this Part
of their Constitution, which has preserved them from it: and influenced by the
same Generosity, they can never view with Disapprobation any lawful Measures
taken by us for the Defense of our Constitution, which intitles us to the same
Rights and Privileges with themselves.

These were derived to us from Common Law, which is the Inheritance of all his
Majesty's Subjects; have been recognized by Acts of Parliament; and confirmed
by the Province Charter, which established its Constitution; and which Charter
has been recognized by Act of Parliament also. This Act was made in the second
Year of his late Majesty GEO. II, for the better Preservation of his Majesty's
Woods in America: in which is recited the Clause of the said Charter reserving
for the Use of the Royal Navy all Trees suitable for Masts: and on this Charter
is grounded the succeeding enacting Clause of the Act. And thus is the Charter
implicitly confirmed by Act of Parliament.

From all which it appears, that the Inhabitants of this Colony are clearly
entitled to All the Rights and Privileges of free and natural Subjects: which
certainly must include that most essential one, that no Aid or Taxes be levied
on them without their own Consent, signified by their Representatives. But from
the Clause in the Charter relative to the Power granted to the General Court to
make Laws, not repugnant to the Laws of England, your Excellency draws this
Inference, that "surely this is by Charter a Reserve of Power and Authority to
Parliament to bind us by such Laws, at least, as are made expressly to refer to
us, and consequently is a Limitation of the Power given to the General Court."
-- If it be allowed that by that, Clause there was a Reserve of Power to
Parliament to bind the Province, it was only by such Laws as were in Being at
the Time the Charter was granted: for by the Charter there is nothing appears
to make it refer to any Parliamentary Laws, that should be afterward made, and
therefore it will not support your Excellency's Inference.

The Grant of Power to the General Court to make Laws runs thus, -- "full Power
and Authority, from Time to Time, to make, ordain and establish all Manner of
wholesome and reasonable Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, Directions and
Instructions, either with Penalties or without (so as the fame be not repugnant
or contrary to the Laws of this our Realm of England) as they shall judge to be
for the Good and Welfare of our said Province." etc. -- We humbly think an
Inference very different from your Excellency's, and a very just one too, may
be drawn from this Clause, if Attention be given to the Description of the
Orders and Laws that were to be made. -- They were to be wholesome, reasonable
and for the Good and Welfare of the Province, and in order that they might be
so, it is provided that they be "not repugnant or contrary to the Laws of the
Realm," that were then in being: by which Proviso, all the Liberties and
Immunities of free and natural Subjects within the Realm were more effectually
secured to the Inhabitants of the Province agreeable to another Clause in the
Charter, whereby those Liberties and Immunities are expressly granted to them:
and accordingly the Power of the General Court is so far limited, that they
shall not make Orders and Laws to take away or diminish those Liberties and
Immunities.

This Construction appears to us a just one, and perhaps may appear so to your
Excellency if you will please to consider, that by another Part of the Charter
effectual Care was taken for preventing the General Assembly passing of Orders
and Laws repugnant to, or that in any Way might militate with Acts of
Parliament then or since made; or that might-be exceptionable in any other
Respect whatever: for the Charter reserves to his Majesty the Appointment of
the Governor, whose Assent is necessary in the passing of all Orders and Laws:
after which they are to be sent to England for the Royal Approbation or
Disallowance: by which double Control effectual Care is taken to prevent the
Establishment of any improper Orders or Laws whatever. -- Besides, your
Excellency is sensible that "Letters Patent must be construed one Part with
another, and all the Parts of them together, so as to make the whole harmonize
and agree. But your Excellency's Construction of the Paragraph impowering the
General Court to make Orders and Laws, does by no means harmonize and agree
with the Paragraph granting Liberties and Immunities; and therefore we humbly
conceive is not to be admitted: Whereas on the other Construction there is a
perfect Harmony and Agreement between them. But supposing your Excellency's
Inference just, that by the said former Paragraph (considered by itself) are
reserved to Parliament Power and Authority to bind us by Laws made expressly to
refer to us. Does it consist with Justice and Equity that it should be
considered apart, and urged against the People of this Province with all its
Force and without Limitation, and at the same Time the other Paragraph which
they thought secured to them the essential Rights and Privileges of free and
natural Subjects be rendered of no Validity? If the former Paragraph (in this
supposed case) be binding on this People, the latter must be binding on the
Crown, which thereby became Guarantee of those Rights and Privileges. Or it
must be supposed that one Party is held by a Compact, and the other not: Which
Supposition is against Reason and against Law; and therefore destroys the
Foundation of the Inference. However, supposing it well founded, it would not
from thence follow, that the Charter intended such Laws as should subject the
Inhabitants of the Province to Taxes without their Consent: For (as appears
above) it grants to them all the Rights and Liberties of free and natural
Subjects: Of which one of the most essential is a Freedom from all Taxes not
consented to by themselves. -- Nor could the Parties, either Grantor or
Grantees, intend such Laws. The Royal Grantor could not, because his Grant
contradicts such Intention; and because it is inconsistent with every Idea of
Royalty and royal Wisdom, to grant what it does not intend to grant. And it
will be readily allowed that the Grantees could not intend such Laws, not only
on account of their Inconsistency with the Grant, but because their Acceptance
of a Charter, subjecting them to such Laws, would be voluntary Slavery.

Your Excellenny next observes, "that it cannot be contended that by the
Liberties of free and natural Subjects is to be understood an Exemption from
Acts of Parliament, because not represented there, seeing it is provided by the
same Charter, that such Acts shall be in Force." -- If the Observations we have
made above, and our Reasoning on them be Just, it will appear that no such
Provision is made in the Charter, and therefore that the Deductions and
Inferences derived from the Supposition of such Provision, are not well
founded. And with Respect to Representation in Parliament, as it is one of the
essential Liberties of free and natural Subjects, and properly makes those who
enjoy it liable to Parliamentary Acts, so in Reference to the Inhabitants of
this Province, who are entitled to all the Liberties of such Subjects, the
Impossibility of their being duly represented in Parliament, does clearly
exempt them from all such Acts at least, as have been or shall be made by
Parliament to Tax them: Representation and Taxation being in our Opinion
constitutionally inseparable.

"This Grant of Liberties and Immunities, your Excellency informs us, is
nothing more than a Declaration and Assurance on the Part of the Crown, that
the Place to which our Predecessors were about to remove, was and would be
considered as Part of the Dominions of the Crown, and therefore that the
Subjects so removing would not become Aliens, but would, both without and
within the Colony retain the Liberties and Immunities of free and natural
Subjects."

The Dominion of the Crown over this Country before the Arrival of our
Predecessors was merely ideal. Their Removal hither realized that Dominion, and
has made the Country valuable both to the Crown and Nation, without any Cost to
either of them from that Time to this. Even in the most distressed State of our
Predecessors, when they expected to be destroyed by a general Conspiracy and
Incursion of the Indian Natives, they had no Assistance from them. This Grant
then of Liberties, which is the only Consideration they received from the Crown
for so valuable an Acquisition to it, instead of being violated by military
Power, or explained away by nice Inferences and Distinctions, ought in Justice,
and with a generous Openness and Freedom, to be acknowledged by every Minister
of the Crown, and preserved sacred from every Species of Violation.

"If the Plantation be Part of the Dominions of the Crown this Clause in the
Charter (granting Liberties and Immunities) does not, your Excellency observes,
confer or reserve any Liberties but what would have been enjoyed without it;
and what the Inhabitants of every other Colony do enjoy, where they are without
a Charter." -- Although the Colonies considered as Part of the Dominions of the
Crown are entitled to equal Liberties, the Inhabitants of this Colony think it
a Happiness, that those Liberties are confirmed and secured to them by a
Charter; whereby the Honor and Faith of the Crown are pledged, that those
Liberties shall not be violated. And for Protection in them we humbly look up
to his present Majesty, our rightful and lawful Sovereign, as Children to a
Father, able and disposed to assist and relieve them; humbly imploring his
Majesty, that his Subjects of this Province, ever faithful and loyal, and ever
accounted such till ^he Stamp Act existed, and who in the late War, and upon
all other Occasions, have demonstrated that Faithfulness and Loyalty by their
vigorous and unexampled Exertions in his Service, may have their Grievances
redressed, and be restored to their just Rights.

Your Excellency next observes "that it is impossible the Rights of English
Subjects should be the same in every Respect, in all Parts of the Dominions,"
and Instances in the Right of being "governed by Laws made by Persons, in whose
Election they have a Voice." When "they remove from the Kingdom to the
Plantations where it cannot be enjoyed," you ask, "will it not be said, that by
this their voluntary Removal, they have relinquished, for a Time at least, one
of the Rights of an English Subject, which they might if they pleased, have
continued to enjoy, and may again enjoy whenever they will return to the
Place where it can be exercised."

When English Subjects remove from the Kingdom to the Plantations with their
Properties, they not only relinquish that Right de facto, but it ought to cease
in the Kingdom de jure. But it does not from thence follow, that they
relinquish that Right, in Reference to the Plantation or Colony to which they
remove. On the contrary, being become Inhabitants of that Colony, and qualified
according to the Laws of it, they can exercise that Right equally with the
other Inhabitants of it. And this Right, on like Conditions, will travel with
them through all the Colonies, wherein a Legislature, similar to that of the
Kingdom, is established. And therefore in this Respect, and we suppose in all
other essential Respects, it is not impossible the Rights of English Subjects
should be the same in all Parts of the Dominions" under a like Form of
Legislature.

This Right of Representation is so essential and indispensible in Regard of
all Laws for levying Taxes, that a People under any Form of Government
destitute of it, is destitute of Freedom -- of that Degree of Freedom, for the
Preservation of which, Government was instituted; and without which, Government
degenerates to Despotism. It cannot therefore be given up, or taken away,
without making a Breach on the essential Rights of Nature.

But your Excellency is pleased to say* that they "who claim Exemption as Part
of their Rights by Nature, should consider that every Restraint which Men are
laid under by a State of Government, is a Privation of Part of their natural
Rights. Even in Case of Representation by Election, do they not give up Part of
their natural Rights, when they consent to be represented by such Persons as
shall be chosen by the Majority of the Electors, although their own Voices may
be for some other Person? And is it not contrary to their natural Rights to be
obliged to submit to a Representative for seven Years, or even one Year, after
they are dissatisfied with his Conduct, although they gave their Voices for
him, when he was elected? This must therefore be considered as an Objection
against a State of Government rather than against any particular Form."

Your Excellency's Premises are true, but we do not think your Conclusion
follows from them. It is true, that every Restraint of Government is a
Privation of natural Right: and the two Cases you have been pleased to mention,
may be Instances of that Privation. But as they aris^ from the Nature of
Society and Government; and as Government is necessary to secure other natural
Rights infinitely more valuable, they cannot therefore be considered as an
Objection either "against a State of Government" or "against any particular
Form of it."

Life, Liberty, Property, and the Disposal of that Property with our own
Consent, are natural Rights. Will any one put the other in Competition with
these, or infer that because those other must be given up in a State of
Government, these must be given up also? The Preservation of these Rights is
the great End of Government: but is it probable they will be effectually
secured by a Governor, which the Proprietors of them have no Part in the
Direction of, and over which they have no Power or Influence whatever? Hence is
deducible, Representation: which being necessary to preserve these invaluable
Rights of Nature, is itself, for that Reason, a natural Right, coinciding with,
and running into, that great Law of Nature, Self-Preservation.

Thus have we considered the most material Parts of your Speech, and agreeable
to your Desire disclosed to you our Sentiments on the Subject of it.

"Independence, as your Excellency rightly judged, we have not in
Contemplation." We cannot however adopt "your Principles of Government," or
acqu^esce in all the Inferences you have drawn from them.

We have the highest Respect for that august Body the Parliament, and do not
presume to prescribe the exact Limits of its Authority, yet with the Deference
that is due to it, we are humbly of Opinion, that as all human Authority in the
Nature of it, is and ought to be limited, it cannot constitutionally extend,
for the Reasons we have above suggested, to the levying of Taxes in any Form,
on his Majesty's Subjects of this Province.

In such Principles as these "our Predecessors were easy and happy:" and in the
due Operation of such, their Descendants ^^e present Inhabitants of this
Province have been easy and happy: but they are not so now. Their Uneasiness
and Unhappiness are derived from Acts of Parliament, and Regulations of
Government, that lately and within a few Years past have been made. And this
Uneasiness and Unhappiness, both in the Cause and Effects of them, though your
Excellency seems and can only seem, to be of a different Opinion, have extended
and continue to extend to all the Colonies throughout the Continent.

It would give us the highest Satisfaction to see Happiness and Tranquillity
restored to the Colonies; and especially to see between Great Britain and them
an Union established on such an equitable Basis as neither of them shall ever
wish to destroy. We humbly supplicate the Sovereign Arbiter and Superintendent
of human Affairs for these happy Events.

AND on the 26th of January the House of Representatives sent up to his
Excellency their Answer, by Mr. Adams, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Bacon, Col. Bowers,
Major Hawley, Capt. Derby, Mr. Phillips, Col. Thayer, and Col. Stockbridge.
May it please your Excellency,
YOUR Excellency's Speech to the General Assembly at the Opening of this
Session, has been read with great Attention in this House.

We fully agree with your Excellency, that our own Happiness as well as his
Majesty's Service, very much depends upon Peace and Order; and we shall at all
Times take such Measures as are consistent with our Constitution and the Rights
of the People to promote and maintain them. That the Government at present is
in a very disturbed State is apparent! But we cannot ascribe it to the People's
having adopted unconstitutional Principles, which seems to be the Cause
assigned for it by your Excellency. It appears to us to have been occasioned
rather, by the British House of Commons assuming and exercising a Power
inconsistent with the Freedom of the Constitution, to give and grant the
Property of the Colonists, and appropriate the same without their Consent.

It is needless for us to enquire what were the Principles that induced the
Councils of the Nation to so new and unprecedented a Measure. But when the
Parliament by an Act of their own expressly declared, that the King, Lords and
Commons of the Nation "have, ever had, and of Right ought to have full Power
and Authority to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient Force and Validity to
bind the Colonies and People of America, Subjects of the Crown of
Great Britain, in all Cases whatever," and in Consequence hereof another
Revenue Act was made, the Minds of the People were filled with Anxiety, and
they were justly alarmed with Apprehensions of the total Extinction of their
Liberties.

The Result of the free Enquiries of many Persons into the Right of the
Parliament to exercise such a Power over the Colonies, seems in your
Excellency's Opinion, to be the Cause of what you are pleased to call the
present "disturbed State of the Government;" upon which you "may not any longer
consistent with your Duty to the King, and your Regard to the Interest of the
Province, delay communicating your Sentiments." But that the Principles adopted
in Consequence hereof, are unconstitutional, is a Subject of Enquiry. We know
of no such Disorders arising therefrom as are mentioned by your Excellency. If
Grand Jurors have not on their Oaths found such Offenses, as your Excellency
with the Advice of his Majesty's Council have ordered to be prosecuted, it is
to be presumed they have followed the Dictates of good Conscience. They are the
constitutional Judges of these Matters; and it is not to be supposed, that
moved from corrupt Principles, they have suffered Offenders to escape a
Prosecution, and thus supported and encouraged them to go on offending. If any
Part of Authority, shall in an unconstitutional Manner, interpose in any
Matter, it will be no wonder if it be brought into Contempt; to the lessening
or confounding of that Subordination which is necessary to a well regulated
State. Your Excellency's Representation that the Bands of Government are
weakened, we humbly conceive to be without good Grounds; though we must own the
heavy Burdens unconstitutionally brought upon the People have been and still
are universally and very justly complained of as a Grievance.

You are pleased to say, that "when our Predecessors first took Possession of
this Plantation or Colony, under a Grant and Charter from the Crown of England,
it was their Sense, and it was the Sense of the Kingdom, that they were to
remain subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament;" whereby we understand
your Excellency to mean in the Sense of the Declaratory Act of Parliament
aforementioned, in all Cases whatever. And indeed it is difficult, if possible,
to draw a Line of Distinction between the universal Authority of Parliament
over the Colonies, and no Authority at all. It is therefore necessary for us to
enquire how it appears, for your Excellency has not shown it to us, that when
or at the Time that our Predecessors took Possession of this Plantation or
Colony, under a Grant and Charter from the Crown of England, it was their
Sense, and the Sense of the Kingdom, that they were to remain subject to the
Supreme Authority of Parliament. In making this Enquiry, we shall, according to
your Excellency's Recommendation, treat the Subject with Calmness and Candor,
and also with a due Regard to Truth.

Previous to a direct Consideration of the Charter granted to this Province or
Colony, and the better to elucidate the true Sense and Meaning of it, we would
take a View of the State of the English North American Continent at the Time
when and after Possession was first taken of any Part of it, by the Europeans.
It was then possessed by Heathen and Barbarous People, who had nevertheless all
that Right to the Soil and Sovereignty in and over the Lands they possessed,
which God had originally given to Man. Whether their being Heathen, inferred
any Right or Authority to Christian Princes, a Right which had long been
assumed by the Pope, to dispose of their Lands to others, we will leave to your
Excellency or any one of Understanding and impartial Judgment to consider. It
is certain they had in no other Sense forfeited them to any Power in Europe.
Should the Doctrine be admitted that Discovery of Lands owned and possessed by
Pagan People, gives to any Christian Prince a Right and Title to the Dominion
and Property, still it is vested in the Crown alone. It was an Acquisition of
Foreign Territory, not annexed to the Realm of England, and therefore at the
absolute Disposal of the Crown. For we take it to be a settled Point, that the
King has a constitutional Prerogative to dispose of and alienate any Part of
his Territories not annexed to the Realm. In the Exercise of this Prerogative,
Queen Elizabeth granted the first American Charter; and claiming a Right by
Virtue of Discovery, then supposed to be valid, to the Lands which are now
possessed by the Colony of Virginia, she conveyed to Sir Walter Rawleigh, the
Property, Dominion and Sovereignty thereof, to be held of the Crown by Homage,
and a certain Render, without any Reservation to herself of any Share in the
Legislative and Executive Authority. After the Attainder of Sir Walter, King
James the First created two Virginia Companies, to be governed each by Laws
transmitted to them by his Majesty, and not by the Parliament, with Power to
establish and cause to be made a Coin to pass current among them; and vested
with all Liberties, Franchises and Immunities within any of his other
Dominions, to all Intents and Purposes, as if they had been abiding, and born
within the Realm. A Declaration similar to this is contained in the first
Charter of this Colony, and in those of other American Colonies; which shows
that the Colonies were not intended or considered to be within the Realm of
England, though within the Allegiance of the English Crown. After this, another
Charter was granted by the same King James, to the Treasurer and Company of
Virginia, vesting them with full Power and Authority, to make, ordain and
establish all Manner of Orders, Laws, Directions, Instructions, Forms and
Ceremonies of Government and Magistracy, fit and necessary, and the same to
abrogate, etc. without any Reservation for securing their Subjection to the
Parliament and future Laws of England. A third Charter was afterward granted
by the same King to the Treasurer and Company of Virginia, vesting them with
Power and Authority to make Laws, with an Addition of this Clause, "so always
that the same be not contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of
England." The same Clause was afterward copied into the Charter of this and
other Colonies, with certain Variations, such as that these Laws should be
"consonant to Reason," "not repugnant to the Laws of England," "as nearly as
conveniently may be to the Laws, Statutes and Rights of England." etc. These
Modes of Expression convey the same Meaning, and serve to show an Intention
that the Laws of the Colonies should be as much as possible, conformant in the
Spirit of them to the Principles and fundamental Laws of the English
Constitution* its Rights and Statutes then in Being; and by no Means to bind
the Colonies to a Subjection to the Supreme Authority of the English
Parliament. And that this is the true Intention, we think it further evident
from this Consideration, that no Acts of any Colony Legislative, are ever
brought into Parliament for Inspection there, though the Laws made in some of
them, like the Acts of the British Parliament are laid before the King for his
Assent or Disallowance.

We have brought the first American Charters into View, and the State of the
Country when they were granted, to show that the Right of disposing of the
Lands was in the Opinion of those Times vested solely in the Crown -- that the
several Charters conveyed to the Grantees, who should settle upon the
Territories therein granted, all the Powers necessary to constitute them free
and distinct States -- and that the fundamental Laws of the English
Constitution should be the certain and established Rule of Legislation, to
which the Laws to be made in the several Colonies were to be as nearly as
conveniently might be, conformable or similar; which was the true Intent and
Import of the Words, "not repugnant to the Laws of England," "consonant to
Reason," and other variant Expressions in the different Charters. And we would
add, that the King in some of the Charters reserves the Right to judge of the
Consonance and Similarity of their Laws with the English Constitution to
himself, and not to the Parliament; and in Consequence thereof to affirm, or
within a limited Time, disallow them.

These Charters, as well as that afterward granted to Lord Baltimore, and
other Charters, are repugnant to the Idea of Parliamentary Authority: And to
suppose a Parliamentary Authority over the Colonies under such Charters, would
necessarily induce that Solecism in Politics Imperium in Imperio. And the
King's repeatedly exercising the Prerogative of disposing of the American
Territory by such Charters, together with the Silence of the Nation thereupon,
is an Evidence that it was an acknowledged Prerogative.

But further to show the Sense of the English Crown and Nation that the
American Colonists and our Predecessors in particular, when they first took
Possession of this Country by a Grant and Charter from the Crown, did not
remain subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament, we beg Leave to observe;
that when a Bill was offered by the two Houses of Parliament to King Charles
the First, granting to the Subjects of England the free Liberty of Fishing on
the Coast of America, he refused his Royal Assent, declaring as a Reason, that
"the Colonies were without the Realm and Jurisdiction of Parliament."

In like Manner, his Predecessor James the First, had before declared upon a
similar Occasion, that America was not annexed to the Realm, and it was not
fitting that Parliament should make Laws for those Countries." This Reason was,
not secretly, but openly declared in Parliament. If then the Colonies were not
annexed to the Realm, at the Time when their Charters were granted, they never
could be afterward, without their own special Consent, which has never since
been had, or even asked. If they are not now annexed to the Realm, they are not
a Part of the Kingdom, and consequently not subject to the Legislative
Authority of the Kingdom. For no Country, by the Common Law was subject to the
Laws or to the Parliament, but the Realm of England.

We would if your Excellency pleases, subjoin an Instance of Conduct in King
Charles the Second, singular indeed, but important to our Purpose; who, in
1679, framed an Act for a permanent Revenue for the Support of Virginia, and
sent it there by Lord Colpepper, the Governor of that Colony; which was
afterward passed into a Law, and "Enacted by the King's most excellent
Majesty, by and with the Consent of the General Assembly of Virginia." If the
King had judged that Colony to be a Part of the Realm, he would not, nor could
he consistently with Magna Charta, have placed himself at the Head of, and
joined with any Legislative Body in making a Law to Tax the People there, other
than the Lords and Commons of England.

Having taken a View of the several Charters of the first Colony in America, if
we look into the old Charter of this Colony, we shall find it to be grounded on
the same Principle: That the Right of disposing the Territory granted therein
was vested in the Crown, as being that Christian Sovereign who first discovered
it, when in the Possession of Heathen; and that it was considered as being not
within the Realm, but only within the Fee and Seignory of the King. As
therefore it was without the Realm of England, must not the King, if he had
designed that the Parliament should have had any Authority over it, have made a
special Reservation for that Purpose? which was not done.

Your Excellency says, it appears from the Charter itself, to have been the
Sense of our Predecessors who first took Possession of this Plantation or
Colony, that they were to remain subject to the Authority of Parliament. You
have not been pleased to point out to us how this appears from the Charter,
unless it be in the Observation you make on the abovementioned Clause, viz.
"That a favorable Construction has been put upon this Clause, when it has been
allowed to intend such Laws of England only as are expressly made to respect
us," which you say "is by Charter a Reserve of Power and Authority to
Parliament to bind us by such Laws at least as are made expressly to refer to
us, and consequently is a Limitation of the Power given to the General Court."
But we would still recur to the Charter itself, and ask your Excellency, How
this appears from thence to have been the Sense of our Predecessors? Is any
Reservation of Power and Authority to Parliament thus to bind us, expressed or
implied in the Charter? It is evident, that King Charles the first, the very
Prince who granted it, as well as his Predecessor, had no such Idea of the
supreme Authority of Parliament over the Colony* from their Declarations before
recited. Your Excellency will then allow us further to ask, by what Authority
in Reason or Equity the Parliament can enforce a Construction so unfavourable
to us. Quod ab initi^ injustum est, nullum potest habere juris effectum, said
Gr^tius. Which with Submission to your Excellency may be rendered thus,
Whatever is originally in its Nature wrong, can never be satisfied or made
right by Reputation and Use.

In solemn Agreements subsequent Restrictions ought never to be allowed. The
celebrated Author whom your Excellency has quoted, tells us that "neither the
one or the other of the interested or contracting Powers has a right to
interpret at Pleasure." This we mention to show, even upon a Supposition that
the Parliament had been a Party to the Contract, the Invalidity of any of its
subsequent Acts, to explain any Clause in the Charter; more especially to
restrict or make void any Clause granted therein to the General Court. An
Agreement ought to be interpreted "in such a Manner as that it may have its
Effect:" But if your Excellency's Interpretation of this Clause is just, "that
it is a Reserve of Power and Authority to Parliament to bind us by such Laws as
are made expressly to refer to us," it is not only "a Limitation of the Power
given to the General Court" to Legislate, but it may whenever the Parliament
shall think ^it, render it of no Effect; for it puts it in the Power of
Parliament to bind us by as many Laws as they please, and even to restrain us
from making any Laws at all. If your Excellency's Assertions in this and the
next succeeding Part of your Speech were well grounded, the Conclusion would be
undeniable, that the Charter even in this Clause, "does not confer or reserve
any Liberties" worth enjoying, "but what would have been enjoyed without it;"
saving that within any of his Majesty's Dominions we are to be considered
barely as not Aliens. You are pleased to say, it cannot "be contended that by
the Liberties of free and natural Subjects" (which are expressly granted in the
Charter to all Intents, Purposes, and Constructions whatever) "is to understood
an Exemption from Acts of Parliament because not represented there; seeing it
is provided by the same Charter that such Acts shall be in Force." If, says an
eminent Lawyer, "the King grants to the Town of D. the same Liberties which
London has, this shall be intended the like Liberties." A Grant of the
Liberties of free and natural Subjects is equivalent to a Grant of the same
Liberties. And the King in the first Charter to this Colony expressly grants
that it shall be construed, reputed and adjudged in all Cases most favorably
on the Behalf and for the Benefit and Behoof of the said Governor and Company
and their Successors -- any Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding." It is one of the Liberties of free and natural Subjects, born
and abiding within the Realm, to be governed as your Excellency observes, "by
Laws made by Persons in whose Elections they from Time to Time have a Voice."
This is an essential Right. For nothing is more evident, than that any People
who are subject to the unlimited Power of another, must be in a State of abject
Slavery. It was easily and plainly foreseen that the Right of Representation in
the English Parliament could not be exercised by the People of this Colony. It
would be impracticable, if consistent with the English Constitution. And for
this Reason, that this Colony might have and enjoy all the Liberties and
Immunities of free and natural Subjects within the Realm, as stipulated in the
Charter, it was necessary, and a Legislative was accordingly constituted within
the Colony; one Branch of which consists of Representatives chosen by the
People, to make all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, etc. for the well ordering and
governing the same, not repugnant to the Laws of England, or, as nearly as
conveniently might be, agreeable to the fundamental Laws of the English
Constitution. We are therefore still at a Loss to conceive where your
Excellency finds it " provided in the same Charter, that such Acts," viz. Acts
of Parliament made expressly to refer to us, "shall be in Force" in this
Province. There is nothing to this Purpose expressed in the Charter, or in our
Opinion even implied in it. And surely it would be very absurd, that a Charter,
which is evidently formed upon a Supposition and Intention, that a Colony is
and should be considered as not within the Realm; and declared by the very
Prince who granted it, to be not within the Jurisdiction of Parliament, should
yet provide, that the Laws which the same Parliament should make expressly to
refer to that Colony, should be in Force therein. Your Excellency is pleased to
ask* "Does it follow that the Government by their (our Ancestors) Removal from
one Part of the Dominions to another, loses its Authority over that Part to
which they remove: And that they were freed from the Subjection they were under
before?" We answer, if that Part of the King's Dominions to which they removed
was not then a Part of the Realm, and was never annexed to it, the Parliament
lost no Authority over it, having never had such Authority; and the Emigrants
were consequently freed from the Subjection they were under before their
Removal: The Power and Authority of Parliament being constitutionally confined
within the Limits of the Realm and the Nation collectively, of which alone it
is the Representing and Legislative Assembly. Your Excellency further asks,
"Will it not rather be said, that by this their voluntary Removal, they have
relinquished for a Time at least, one of the Rights of an English Subject,
which they might if they pleased have continued to enjoy, and may again enjoy,
whenever they return to the Place where it can be exercised?" To which we
answer; They never did relinquish the Right to be governed by Laws made by
Persons in whose Election they had a Voice The King stipulated with them that
they should have and enjoy all the Liberties of free and natural Subjects born
within the Realm, to all Intents, Purposes and Constructions whatsoever; that
is, that they should be as free as those who were to abide within the Realm:
Consequently he stipulated with them that they should enjoy and exercise this
most essential Right, which discriminates Freemen from Vassals, uninterruptedly
in its full Sense and Meaning; and they did and ought still to exercise it,
without the Necessity of returning, for the Sake of exercising it, to the
Nation or State of England.

We cannot help observing, that your Excellency's Manner of Reasoning on this
Point, seems to us to render the most valuable Clauses in our Charter
unintelligible: As if Persons going from the Realm of England to inhabit in
America, should hold and exercise there a certain Right of English Subjects;
but in Order to exercise it in such Manner as to be of any Benefit to them,
they must not inhabit there, but return to the Place where alone it can be
exercised. By such Construction, the Words of the Charter can have no Sense or
Meaning. We forbear remarking upon the Absurdity of a Grant to Persons born
within the Realm, of the same Liberties which would have belonged to them if
they had been born within the Realm.

Your Excellency is disposed to compare this Government to the Variety of
Corporations formed within the Kingdom, with Power to make and execute Bylaws,
etc. And because they remain subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament, to
infer that this Colony is also subject to the same Authority: This Reasoning
appears to us not just. The Members of those Corporations are Resiant within
the Kingdom; and Residence subjects them to the Authority of Parliament, in
which they are also represented: Whereas the People of this Colony are not
Resident within the Realm. The Charter was granted with the express Purpose to
induce them to reside without the Realm; consequently they are not represented
in Parliament there. But we would ask your Excellency; Are any of the
Corporations formed within the Kingdom, vested with the Power of erecting other
subordinate Corporations? Of enacting and determining what Crimes shall be
Capital? And constituting Courts of Common Law with all their Officers, for the
hearing, trying and punishing capital Offenders with Death? These and many
other Powers vested in this Government, plainly show that it is to be
considered as a Corporation in no other Light, than as every State is a
Corporation. Besides, Appeals from the Courts of Law here, are not brought
before the House of Lords; which shows that the Peers of the Re^^m are not the
Peers of America: But all such Appeals are brought before the King in Council,
which is a further Evidence that we are not within the Realm.

We conceive enough has been said to convince your Excellency, that "when our
Predecessors first took Possession of this Plantation or Colony by a Grant and
Charter from the Crown of England, it was not and never had been the Sense of
the Kingdom, that they were to remain subject to the Supreme Authority of
Parliament. We will now with your Excellency's Leave, enquire what was the
Sense of our Ancestors of this very important Matter.

And as your Excellency has been pleased to tell us, you have not discovered
that the Supreme Authority of Parliament has been called in Question even by
private and particular Persons, until within seven or eight Years past; except
about the Time of the Anarchy and Confusion in England, which preceeded the
Restoration of King Charles the Second; we beg leave to remind your Excellency
of some Parts of your own History of Massachusetts Bay. Therein we are informed
of the Sentiments of "Persons of Influence" after the Restoration, from which
the Historian tells us, some Parts of their Conduct, that is of the General
Assembly, "may be pretty well accounted for." By the History it appears to have
been the Opinion of those Persons of Influence, "that the Subjects of any
Prince or State had a natural Right to remove to any other State or to another
Quarter of the World, unless the State was weakened or exposed by such Remove;
and even in that Case, if they were deprived of the Right of all Mankind,
Liberty of Conscience, it would justify a Separation, and upon their Removal
their Subjection determined and ceased." That "the Country to which they had
removed, was claimed and possessed by independent Princes, whose Right to the
Lordship and Sovereignty thereof had been acknowledged by the Kings of
England," an Instance of which is quoted in the Margin; "That the^ themselves
had actually purchased for valuable Consideration, not only the Soil, but the
Dominion, the Lordship and Sovereignty of those Princes;" without which
Purchase, "in the Sight of God and Men, they had no Right or Title to what they
possessed. That they had received a Charter of Incorporation from the King,
from whence arose a new Kind of Subjection, namely, "a voluntary, civil
Subjection;" and by this Compact "they were to be governed by Laws made by
themselves." Thus it appears to have been the Sentiments of private Persons,
though Persons by whose Sentiments the public Conduct was influenced, that
their Removal was a justifiable Separation from the Mother State, upon which
their Subjection to that State determined and ceased. The Supreme Authority of
Parliament, if it had then ever been asserted, must surely have been called in
Question, by Men who had advanced such Principles as these.

The first Act of Parliament made expressly to refer to the Colonies, was after
the Restoration. In the Reign of King Charles the Second, several such Acts
passed. And the same History informs us there was a Difficulty in conforming to
them; and the Reason of this Difficulty is explained in a Letter of the General
Assembly to their Agent, quoted in the following Words, "They apprehended them
to be an Invasion of the Rights Liberties and Properties of the Subjects of his
Majesty in the Colony, they not being represented in Parliament, and according
to the usual Sayings of the Learned in the Law, the Laws of England were
bounded within the four Seas, and did not reach America: However as his Majesty
had signified his Pleasure that those Acts should be observed in the
Massachusetts, they had made Provision by a Law of the Colony that they should
be strictly attended." Which Provision by a Law of their own would have been
superfluous, if they had admitted the Supreme Authority of Parliament. In
short, by the same History it appears that those Acts of Parliament as such
were disregarded; and the following Reason is given for it; "It seems to have
been a general Opinion that Acts of Parliament had no other Force, than what
they derived from Acts made by the General Court to establish and confirm them."

But still further to show the Sense of our Ancestors respecting this Matter,
we beg leave to recite some Parts of a Narrative presented to the Lords of
Privy Council by Edward Randolph, in the Year 1676, which we find in your
Excellency's Collection of Papers lately published. Therein it is declared to
be the Sense of the Colony, "that no Law is in Force or Esteem there, but such
as are made by the General Court; and therefore it is accounted a Breach of
their Privileges, and a Betraying of the Liberties of their Commonwealth, to
urge the Observation of the Laws of England." And further, "That no Oath shall
be urged or required to be taken by any Person, but such Oath as the General
Court has considered, allowed and required." And further, "there is no notice
taken of the Act of Navigation, Plantation or any other Laws made in England
for the Regulation of Trade." "That the Government would make the World believe
they are a free State, and do act in all Matters accordingly." Again, "These
Magistrates ever reserve to themselves a Power to alter, evade and disannul any
Law or Command, not agreeing with their Humor o^ the absolute Authority of
their Government, acknowledging no Superior." And further, "He the (Governor)
freely declared to me, that the Laws ^^de by your Majesty and your Parliament,
obliges them in nothing, but what consists with the Interests of that Colony,
that the Legislative Power and Authority is and abides in them solely." And in
the same Mr. Randolph's Letter to the Bishop of London, July 14, 1682, he says,
"This Independency in Government, claimed and daily practiced." And your
Excellency being then sensible that this was the Sense of our Ancestors, in a
Marginal Note in the same Collection of Papers, observes, that "this, viz. the
Provision made for observing the Acts of Trade, "is very extraordinary, for
this Provision was an Act of the Colony declaring the Acts of Trade shall be in
Force there." Although Mr. Randolph was very unfriendly to the Colony, yet as
his Declarations are concurrent with those recited from your Excellency's
History, we think they may be admitted for the Purpose for which they are now
brought.

Thus we see, from your Excellency's History and Publications, the Sense our
Ancestors had of the Jurisdiction of Parliament under the first Charter. Very
different from that which your Excellency in your Speech apprehends it to have
been.

It appears by Mr. Neal's History of New England, that the Agents who had been
employed by the Colony to transacts it Affairs in England at the Time when the
present Charter was granted, among ^ther Reasons gave the following for their
Acceptance of it, viz. "The General Court has with the King's Approbation as
much Power in New England, as the King and Parliament have in England; they
have all English Privileges, and can be touched by no Law, and by no Tax but of
their own making." This is the earliest Testimony that can be given of the
Sense our Predecessors had of the Supreme Authority of Parliament under the
present Charter. And it plainly shows, that they, who having been freely
conversant with those who framed the Charter, must have well understood the
Design and Meaning of it, supposed that the Terms in our Charter "full Power
and Authority," intended and were considered as a sole and exclusive Power, and
that there was no "Reserve in the Charter to the Authority of Parliament, to
bind the Colony" by any Acts whatever.

Soon after the Arrival of the Charter, viz. in 1692, your Excellency's History
informs us, "the first Act" of this Legislative was a Sort of Magna Charta,
asserting and setting forth their general Privileges, and this Clause was among
the rest, "No Aid, Tax, Tallage, Assessment, Custom, Loan, Benevolence or
Imposition whatever, shall be laid, assess'd, imposed or levied on any of their
Majesty's Subjects, or their Estates, on any Pretense whatever, but by the Act
and Consent of the Governor, Council and Representatives of the People
assembled in General Court." And though this Act was disallowed, it serves to
show the Sense which the General Assembly contemporary with the granting the
Charter had of their sole and exclusive Right to Legislate for the Colony. The
History says, "the other Parts of the Act were copied from Magna Charta;" by
which we may conclude that the Assembly then construed the Words "not repugnant
to the Laws," to mean, conformable to the fundamental Principles of the English
Constitution. And it is observable that the Lords of Privy Council, so lately
as in the Reign of Queen Anne, when several Laws enacted by the General
Assembly, were laid before her Majesty for her Allowance, interpreted the Words
in this Charter, "not repugnant to the Laws of England," by the Words "as
nearly as conveniently (...) be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of England."
And her Majesty was pleased to disallow those Acts, not because they were
repugnant to any Law or Statute of England, made expressly to refer to the
Colony; but because diverse Persons, by Virtue thereof, were punished without
being tried by their Peers in the ordinary "Courts of Law," and "by the
ordinary Rules and known Methods of Justice;" contrary to the express Terms of
Magna Charta, which was a Statute in Force at the Time of granting the Charter,
and declaratory of the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects within the Realm.

You are pleased to say, that "our Provincial or Local Laws have in numerous
Instances had Relation to Acts of Parliament made to respect the Plantations
and this Colony in particular." The Authority of the Legislature, says the same
Author who is quoted by your Excellency, "does not extend so far as the
Fundamentals of the Constitution." "They ought to consider the Fundamental Laws
as sacred, if the Nation has not in very express Terms, given them the Power to
change them. For the Constitution of the State ought to be fixed: And since
that was first established by the Nation, which afterward trusted certain
Persons with the Legislative Power, the fundamental Laws are excepted from
their Commission." Now the Fundamentals of the Constitution of this Province
are stipulated in the Charter; the Reasoning therefore in this Case holds
equally good. Much less then ought any Acts or Doings of the General Assembly,
however numerous, to neither of which your Excellency has pointed us, which
barely relate to Acts of Parliament made to respect the Plantations in general,
or this Colony in particular, to be taken as an Acknowledgment of this People,
or even of the Assembly, which inadvertently passed those Acts, that we are
subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament. And with still less Reason are
the Decisions in the Executive Courts to determine this Point. If they have
adopted that "as Part of the Rule of Law," which in Fact is not, it must be
imputed to Inattention or Error in Judgment, and cannot justly be urged as an
Alteration or Restriction of the Legislative Authority of the Province.

Before we leave this Part of your Excellency's Speech, we would observe, that
the great Design of our Ancestors, in leaving the Kingdom of England, was to be
freed from a Subjection to its spiritual Laws and Courts, and to worship God
according to the Dictates of their Consciences. Your Excellency in your History
observes, that their Design was "to obtain for themselves and their Posterity
the Liberty of worshipping God in such Manner as appeared to them most
agreeable to the sacred Scriptures." And the General Court themselves declared
in 1651, that "seeing just Cause to fear the Persecution of the then Bishop,
and High Commission for not conforming to the Ceremonies of those under their
Power, they thought it their safest Course, to get to this Outside of the
World, out of their View and beyond their Reach." But if it had been their
Sense, that they were still to be subject to the Supreme Authority of
Parliament, they must have known that their Design might and probably would be
frustrated; that the Parliament, especially considering the Temper of those
Times, might make what ecclesiastical Laws they pleased, expressly to refer to
them, and place them in the same Circumstances with Respect to religious
Matters, to be relieved from which was the Design of their Removal. And we
would add* that if your Excellency's Construction of the Clause in our present
Charter is just, another Clause therein, which provides for Liberty of
Conscience for all Christians except Papists, may be rendered void by an Act of
Parliament made to refer to us, requiring a Conformity to the Rites and Mode of
Worship in the Church of England, or any other.

Thus we have endeavored to show the Sense of the People of this Colony under
both Charters; and if there have been in any late Instances a Submission to
Acts of Parliament, it has been in our Opinion, rather from Inconsideration or
a Reluctance at the Idea of contending with the Parent State, than from a
Conviction or Acknowledgement of the Supreme Legislative Authority of
Parliament.

Your Excllency tells us, "you know of no Line that can be drawn between the
Supreme Authority of Parliament and the total Independence of the Colonies." If
there be no such Line, the Consequence is, either that the Colonies are the
Vassals of the Parliament, or, that they are totally Independent. As it cannot
be supposed to have been the Intention of the Parties in the Compact, that we
should be reduced to a State of Vassallage, the Conclusion is, that it was
their Sense, that we were thus Independent. "It is Impossible, your Excellency
says, that there should be two independent Legislatures in one and the same
State." May we not then further conclude, that it was their Sense that the
Colonies were by their Charters made distinct States from the Mother Country?
Your Excellency adds, For although there may be but one Head, the King, yet the
two Legislative Bodies will make two Governments as distinct as the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland before the Union. Very true, may it please your
Excellency; and if they interfere not with each other, what hinders but that
being united in one Head and common Sovereign, they may live happily in that
Connection, and mutually support and protect each other? Notwithstanding all
the Terrors which your Excellency has pictured to us as the Affects of a total
Independence, there is more Reason to dread the Consequences of absolute
uncontrouled Supreme Power, whether of a Nation or a Monarch, than those of a
total Independence. It would be a Misfortune "to know by Experience, the
Difference between the Liberties of an English Colonist and those of the
Spanish, French and Dutch: And since the British Parliament has passed an Act
which is executed even with Rigor, though not voluntarily submitted to, for
raising a Revenue, and appropriating the same without the Consent of the People
who pay it, and have claimed a Power making such Laws as they please to order
and govern us, your Excellency will excuse us in asking, whether you do not
think we already experience too much of such a Difference, and have not Reason
to fear we shall soon be reduced to a worse Situation than that of the Colonies
of France, Spain or Holland?

If your Excellency expects to have the Line of Distinction between the Supreme
Authority of Parliament, and the total Independence of the Colonies drawn by
us, we would say it would be an arduous Undertaking; and of very great
Importance to all the other Colonies: And therefore, could we conceive of such
a Line, we should be unwilling to propose it, without their Consent in Congress.

To conclude, These are great and profound Questions. It is the Grief of this
House, that by the ill Policy of a late injudicious Administration, America has
been driven into the Contemplation of them. And we cannot but express our
Concern, that your Excellency by your Speech has reduced us to the unhappy
Alternative, either of appearing by our Silence to acquiesce in your
Excellency's Sentiments, or of thus freely discussing this Point.

After all that we have said, we would be far from being understood to have in
the least abated that just Sense of Allegiance which we owe to the King of
Great Britain, our rightful Sovereign: And should the People of this Province
be left to the free and full Exercise of all the Liberties and Immunities
granted to the^ by Charter, there would be no Danger of an Independance on the
Crown. Our Charters reserve great Power to the Crown in its Representative,
fully sufficient to balance, analagous to the English Constitution, all the
Liberties and Privileges granted to the People. All this your Excellency knows
full well -- And whoever considers the Power and Influence, in all their
Branches, reserved by our Charter to the Crown, will be far from thinking that
the Commons of this Province are too Independent.

On Tuesday the 16th of February his Excellency was pleased to deliver the
following Speech to both Houses in the Council Chamber, viz.
Gentlemen of the Council, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
THE Proceedings of such of the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston as assembled
together and passed and published their Resolves or Votes as the Act of the
Town at a legal Town-Meeting, denying in the most express Terms the Supremacy
of Parliament, and inviting every other Town and District in the Province to
a^opt the same Principle and to establish Committees of Correspondence to
consult upon proper Measures to maintain it, and the Proceedings of diverse
other Towns, in Consequence of this Invitation, appeared to me to be so
unwarrantable and of such a dangerous Nature and Tendency, that I thought
myself bound to call upon you in my Speech at Opening the Session, to join with
me in discountenancing and bearing a proper Testimony against such
Irregularities and Innovations.

I stated to you fairly and truly, as I conceived, the Constitution of the
Kingdom and of the Province so far as relates ^o the Dependence of the latter
upon the former; and I desired (...), if you differed from me in Sentiments, to
show me with Candor my own Errors, and to g^ve your Reasons in support of your
Opinions, so far as you might differ from me. I hoped that you would have
considered my Speech by your joint Committees, and have given me a joint
Answer; but, as the House of Representatives have declined that Mode of
Proceeding, and as your Principles in Government are very different, I am
obliged to make separate and distinct replies.

I shall first apply myself to you,

Gentlemen of the Council,
The two first Parts of your Answer, which Respect the Disorders occasioned by
the Stamp Act and the general Nature of Supreme Authority, do not appear to me
to have a Tendency to invalidate any Thing which I have said in my Speech; for,
however the Stamp Act may have been the immediate Occasion of any Disorders,
the Authority of Parliament was notwithstanding denied in Order to justify or
excuse them. And, for the Nature of the Supreme Authority of Parliament, I have
never given you any Reason to suppose that I intended a more absolute Power in
Parliament, or a greater Degree of active or passive Obedience in the People,
than what is founded in the Nature of Government, let the Form of it be what it
may. I shall, therefore, pass over those Parts of your Answer without any other
Remark. I would also have saved you the Trouble of all those Authorities which
you have brought to show, that all Taxes upon English Subjects must be levied
by Virtue of the Act not of the King alone but in Conjunction with the Lords
and Commons, for I should very readily have allowed it; and I should as readily
have allowed that all other Acts of Legislation must be passed by the same
joint Authority, and not by the King alone.

Indeed, I am not willing to continue a Controversy with you upon any other
Parts of your Answer. I am glad to find that Independence is what you have not
in Contemplation; and that you will not presume to prescribe the exact Limits
of the Authority of Parliament; only, as with due Deference to it, you are
humbly of Opinion, that, as all human Authority in the Nature of it is and
ought to be limited, it cannot constitutionally extend for the Reasons you have
suggested, to the levying of Taxes in any Form on his Majesty's Subjects of
this Province.

I will only oberve, that your Attempts to draw a Line as the Limits of the
Supreme Authority in Government, by distinguishing some natural Rights as more
peculiarly exempt from such Authority than the rest, rather tend to evince the
Impracticability of drawing such a Line; and that some Parts of your Answer
seem to infer a Supremacy in the Province at the same Time that you acknowledge
the Supremacy of Parliament, for otherwise the Rights of the Subjects cannot be
the same in all essential Respects* as you suppose them to be, in all Parts of
the Dominions, "under a like Form of Legislature."

From these, therefore* and other Considerations I cannot help flattering
myself, that, upon more mature Deliberation and in Order to a more consistent
Plan of Government, you will choose rather to doubt of the Expediency of
Parliament's Exercising its Authority in Cases that may happen* than to limit
the Authority itself, especially as you agree with me in the proper Method of
obtaining a Redress of Grievances by constitutional Representations, which
cannot well consist with a Denial of the Authority to which the Representations
are made; and, from the best Information I have been able to obtain, the Denial
of the Authority of Parliament, expressly or by Implication in those Petitions
to which you refer was the Cause of their not being admitted, and not any
Advice given by the Minister to the Agents of the Colonies.

I must enlarge and be much more particular in my Reply to you,

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
I shall take no Notice of that Part of your Answer which attributes the
Disorders of the Province to an undue Exercise of the Power of Parliament,
because you take for granted, what can by no Means be admitted, that Parliament
had exercised its Power without just Authority. The Sum of your Answer so far
as it is pertinent to my Speech, is this.

You allege that the Colonies were an Acquisition of Foreign Territory not
annexed to the Realm of England, and therefore at the absolute Disposal of the
Crown; the King having, as you take it, a constitutional Right to dispose of
and alienate any Part of his Territories not annexed to the Realm -- that Queen
Elizabeth accordingly conveyed the Property, Dominion and Sovereignty of
Virginia to Sir Walter Raleigh to be held of the Crown by Homage and a certain
Render, without reserving any Share in the Legislative and Executive Authority
-- that the subsequent Grants of America were similar in this Respect, that
they were without any Reservation for securing the Subjection of the Colonists
to the Parliament and future Laws of England, -- that this was the Sense of the
English Crown, the Nation and our Predecessors when they first took Possession
of this Country -- that if the Colonies were not then annexed to the Realm they
cannot have been annexed since that Time -- that if they are not now annexed to
the Realm they are not Part of the Kingdom, and consequently not subject to the
Legislative Authority of the Kingdom; for no Country, by the Common Law, was
subject to the Laws or to the Parliament but the Realm of England.

Now if this your Foundation shall fail you in every Part of it, as I think it
will, the Fabric which you have raised upon it must certainly fall.

Let me then observe to you that, as English Subjects, and agreeable to the
Doctrine of Feudal Tenure, all our Lands and Tenements are held me^iately or
immediately of the Crown, and although the Possession and Use or Profits be in
the Subject, there still remains a Dominion in the Crown. When any new
Countries are discovered by English Subjects, according to the general Law and
Usage of Nations, they become Part of the State, and, according to the Feudal
System, the Lordship or Dominion is in the Crown and a Right accrues of
disposing of such Territories, under such Tenure or for such Services to be
performed as the Crown shall judge proper, and whenever any Part of such
Territories, by Grant from the Crown, becomes the Possession or Property of
private Persons, such Persons, thus holding under the Crown of England, remain
or become Subjects of England to all Intents and Purposes, as fully as if any
of the Royal Manors Forests or other Territory within the Realm had been
granted to them upon the like Tenure. But that it is now, or was when the
Plantations were first granted, the Prerogative of the Kings of England to
alienate such Territories from the Crown, or to constitute a Number of new
Governments altogether independent of the Sovereign Legislative Authority of
the English Empire. I can by no Means concede to you. I have never seen any
better Authority to support such an Opinion than an anonimous Pamphlet by which
I fear you have too easily been mislead, for I shall presently show you that
the Declarations of King James the First, and of King Charles the First,
admitting they are truly related by the Author of this Pamphlet, ought to have
no Weight with you; nor does the Cession or Restoration, upon a Treaty of
Peace, of Countries which have been lost or acquired in War militate with these
Principles, nor may any particular Act of Power of a Prince in selling or
delivering up any Part of His Dominions to a foreign Prince or State against
the general Sense of the Nation be urged to invalidate them, and upon
Examination it will appear that all the Grants which have been made of America
are founded upon them and are made to conform to them, even those which you
have adduced in Support of very different Principles.

You do not recollect that, prior to what you call the first Grant by Q.
Elizabeth to Sir Walter Raleigh, a Grant had been made, by the same Princess,
to Sir Humphrey Gilbert of all such Countries as he should discover which were
to be of the Allegiance of her, her Heirs and Successors but, he dying in the
Prosecution of his Voyage, a second Grant was made to Sir Walter Raleigh which,
you say, conveyed the Dominion and Sovereignty without any Reserve of
Legislative or Executive Authority being held by Homage and a Render. To hold
by Homage, which implies Fealty, and a Render is Descriptive of Socage Tenure
as fully as if it had been said to hold as of our Manor of East Greenwich the
Words in your Charter. Now this alone was a Reserve of Dominion and Sovereignty
in the Queen her Heirs and Successors and, besides this, the Grant is made upon
this express Condition, which you pass over, that the People remain subject to
the Crown of England, the Head of that Legislative Authority which, by the
English Constitution, is equally extensive with the Authority of the Crown
throughout every Part of the Dominions. Now if we could suppose the Queen to
have acquired separate from her Relations to her Subjects, or in her natural
Capacity, which she could not do, a Title to a Country discovered by her
Subjects and then to grant the same Country to English Subjects in her public
Capacity as Queen of England, still by this Grant she annexed it to the Crown.
Thus by not distinguishing between the Crown of England and the Kings and
Queens of England in their personal or natural Capacities, you have been led
into a fundamental Error which must prove fatal to your System. It is not
material whether Virginia reverted to the Crown by Sir Walter's Attainder or
whether he never took any Benefit from his Grant, though the latter is most
probable seeing he ceased from all Attempts to take Possession of the Country
after a few Years Trial. There were, undoubtedly, diverse Grants made by King
James the First of the Continent of America in the Beginning of the 17th
Century and similar to the Grant of Queen Elizabeth in this Respect, that they
were dependant on the Crown. The Charter to the Council at Plymouth in Devon
dated November 3d, 1620 more immediately respects us, and of that we have the
most authentic Remains.

By this Charter, upon the Petition of Sir Ferdinando Gorges a Corporation was
constituted to be and continue by Succession forever in the Town of Plymouth
aforesaid, to which Corporation that Part of the American Continent which lies
between the 40 and 48 Degrees of Latitude was granted to be held of the King
his Heirs and Successors as of the Manor of East Greenwich with Powers to
constitute subordinate Governments in America and to make Laws for such
Governments, not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of England. From this
Corporation your Predecessors obtained a Grant of the Soil of the Colony of
Massachusets-Bay, in 1627, and, in 1628, they obtained a Charter from King
Charles the First making them a distinct Corporation, also within the Realm,
and giving them full Powers within the Limits of their Patent; very like to
those of the Council of Plymouth throughout their more extensive Territory.

We will now consider what must have been the Sense of the King of the Nation
and of the Patentees at the Time of granting these Patents. From the Year 1602
the Banks and Sea Coasts of New England had been frequented by English Subjects
for catching and drying Cod-Fish. When an exclusive Right to the Fishery was
claimed, by Virtue of the Patent of 1620, the House of Commons was alarmed and
a Bill was brought in for allowing a free Fishery, and it was upon this
Occasion that one of the Secretaries of State declared perhaps as his own
Opinion, that the Plantations were not annexed to the Crown and so were not
within the Jurisdiction of Parliament. Sir Edwin Sandys, who was one of the
Virginia Company and an eminent Lawyer, declared that he knew Virginia had been
annexed and was held of the Crown as of the Manor of East Greenwich and he
believed New England was so also; and so it most certainly was. This
Declaration, made by one of the King's Servants, you say showed the Sense of
the Crown and, being not secretly but openly declared in Parliament you would
make it the Sense of the Nation also, notwithstanding your own Assertion that
the Lords and Commons passed a Bill that showed their Sense to be directly the
contrary. But if there had been full Evidence of express Declarations made by
King James the First, and King Charles the First, they were Declarations
contrary to their own Grants, which declare this Country to be held of the
Crown and consequently it must have been annexed to it. And may not such
Declarations be accounted for by other Actions of those Princes who when they
were soliciting the Parliament to grant the Duties of Tonnage and Poundage
with other Aids and were, in this Way, acknowledging the Rights of Parliament,
at the same Time were requiring the Payment of those Duties with Ship Money,
etc. by Virtue of their Prerogative?

But to remove all doubt of the Sense of the Nation and of the Patentees of
this Patent or Charter in 1620 I need only refer you to the Account published
by Sir Ferdinando Gorges himself of the Proceedings in Parliament upon this
Occasion. As he was the most active Member of the Council of Plymouth and as he
relates what came within his own Knowledge and Observation his Narrative, which
has all the Appearance of Truth and Sincerity, must carry Conviction with it.
He says that soon after the Patent was passed and whilst it lay in the
Crown-Office he was summoned to appear in Parliament to answer what was to be
objected against it, and the House being in a Committee and Sir Edward Coke
that great Oracle of the Law, in the Chair, he was called to the Bar and was
told by Sir Edward that the House understood that a Patent had been granted to
the said Sir ^erdinando and diverse other noble Persons for establishing a
Colony in New England, that this was d^^med a Grievance of the Commonwealth
(...) to the Laws, and to the Privileges of the Subject, that it was a
Monopoly, etc. and he required the Delivery of the Patent into the House. Sir
Ferdinando Gorges made no Doubt of the Authority of the House but submitted to
their Disposal of the Patent as in their Wisdom they thought good "not knowing,
under Favor, how any Action of that King could be a Grievance to the Public
seeing it was undertaken for the Advancement of Religion, the Enlargement of
the Bounds of our Nation. etc. He was willing, however, to submit the whole to
their honorable Censures." After diverse Attendances he imagined he had
satisfied the House that the planting a Colony was of much more Consequence
than a simple disorderly Course of Fishing. He was, notwithstanding,
disappointed and, when the Public Grievances of the Kingdom were presented by
the two Houses, that of the Patent for New England was the first. I don't know
how the Parliament could have shown more fully the Sense they then had of their
Authority over this new acquired Territory, nor can we expect better Evidence
of the Sense which the Patentees had of it, for I know of no historical Fact of
which we have less Reason to doubt.

And now Gentlemen I will show you how it appears from our Charter itself,
which you say I have not yet been pleased to point out to you except from that
Clause which restrains us from making Laws repugnant to the Laws of England,
that it was the Sense of our Predecessors at the Time when the Charter was
granted that they were to remain subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament.

Besides this Clause, which I shall have Occasion further to remark upon before
I finish, you will find that, by the Charter a Grant was made of Exemption from
all Taxes and Impositions upon any Goods imported into New England, or exported
from thence into England for the Space of twenty-one Years, except the Custom
of five per Cent upon such Goods as, after the Expiration of seven Years,
should be brought into England. Nothing can be more plain than that the
Charter, as well as the Patent to the Council of Plymouth, constitutes a
Corporation in England with Powers to create a subordinate Government or
Governments within the Plantation, so that there would always be Subjects of
Taxes and Impositions both in the Kingdom and in the Plantation. An Exemption
for twenty-one Years implies a Right of Imposition after the Expiration of the
Term, and there is no Distinction between the Kingdom and the Plantation. By
what Authority, then, in the Understanding of the Parties, were these
Impositions to be laid? If any, to support a System, should say by the King
rather than to acknowledge the Authority of Parliament, yet this could not be
the Sense of one of our principal Patentees Mr. Samuel Vassal who at that
Instant, 1628, the Date of the Charter, was suffering the Loss of his Goods
rather than submit to an Imposition laid by the King without the Authority of
Parliament; and to prove that a few Years after it could not be the Sense of
the rest I need only to refer you to your own Records for the Year 1642 where
you will find an Order of the House of Commons, conceived in such Terms as
discover a plain Reference to this Part of the Charter, after fourteen Years of
the Twenty-one were expired. By this Order the House of Commons declare that
all Goods and Merchandise exported to New England or imported from thence shall
be free from all Taxes and Impositions both in the Kingdom and in New England
until the House shall take further Order therein to the contrary. The Sense
which our Predecessors had of the Benefit which they took from this Order
evidently appears from the Vote of the General Court, acknowledging their
humble Thankfulness, and preserving a grateful Remembrance of the Honorable
Respect from that high Court, and resolving that the Order sent unto them under
the Hand of the Clerk of the Honorable House of Commons shall be entered among
their Public Records to remain there unto Posterity: And, in an Address to
Parliament, Nine Years after, they acknowledge, among other undeserved Favors
that of taking off the Customs from them.

I am at a Loss to know what your Ideas could be when you say that if the
Plantations are not Part of the Realm, they are not Part of the Kingdom, seeing
the two Words can properly convey but one Idea and they have one and the same
Signification in the different Languages from whence they are derived. I do not
charge you with any Design, but the equivocal Use of the Word Realm in several
Parts of your Answer makes them perplexed and obscure. Sometimes, you must
intend the whole Dominion which is subject to the Authority of Parliament,
sometimes only strictly the Territorial Realm to which other Dominions are or
may be annexed. If you mean that no Countries but the ancient territorial Realm
can constitutionally be subject to the Supreme Authority of England, which you
have very incautiously said is a Rule of the Common Law of England, this is a
Doctrine which you will never be able to support. That the Common Law should be
controuled and changed by Statutes every Day's Experience teaches, but that the
Common Law prescribes Limits to the Extent of the Legislative Power, I believe
has never been said upon any other Occasion. That Acts of Parliament for
several Hundred Years past have respected Countries, which are not strictly
within the Realm, you might easily have discovered by the Statute Books. You
will find Acts for regulating the Affairs of Ireland, though a separate and
distinct Kingdom. Wales and Calais, whilst they sent no Representatives to
Parliament, were subject to the like Regulations. So are Guernsey, Jersey,
Alderney, etc. which send no Members to this Day. These Countries are not more
properly a Part of the ancient Realm, than the Plantations, nor do I know that
they can more properly be said to be annexed to the Realm, unless the declaring
that Acts of Parliament shall extend to Wales, though not particularly named
shall make it so, which I conceive it does not in the Sense you intend.

Thus, I think, I have made it appear that the Plantations, though not strictly
within the Realm, have from the Beginning been constitutionally subject to the
Supreme Authority of the Realm and are so far annexed to it as to be, with the
Realm and the other Dependencies upon it, one entire Dominion; and that the
Plantation or Colony of Massachusetts Bay in particular is holden as feudatory
of the Imperial Crown of England: Deem it to be no Part of the Realm it is
immaterial, for, to use the Words of a very great Authority in a Case in some
Respects analogous, "being Feudatory the Conclusion necessary follows, that it
is under the Government of the King's Laws and the King's Courts in Cases
proper for them to interpose, though (like Counties Palatine) it has peculiar
Laws and Customs, Jura Regalia, and complete Jurisdiction at Home."

Your Remark upon and Construction of the Words, not Repugnant to the Laws of
England, are much the same with those of the Council; but can any Reason be
assigned why the Laws of England as they stood just at that Period should be
pitched upon as the Standard, more than at any other Period? If so, why was it
not recured to when the second Charter was Granted, more than sixty Years after
the first? It is not improbable that the original Intention might be a
Repugnancy in general and, a Fortiori, such Laws as were made more immediately
to Respect us, but the Statute of 7th and 8th, of King William and Queen Mary,
soon after the second Charter, favors the latter Construction only, and the
Province Agent, Mr. Dummer, in his much applauded Defense of the Charter, says
that then a Law in the Plantations may be said to be repugnant to a Law made in
Great Britain, when it flatly contradicts it so far as the Law made there
mentions and relates to the Plantations. But, Gentlemen, there is another
Clause both in the first and second Charter which, I think will serve to
explain this or to render all Dispute upon the Construction of it unnecessary.
-- You are enabled to impose such Oaths only as are warrantable by, or not
repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. I believe you will not contend
that these Clauses must mean such Oaths only as were warrantable at the
respective Times when the Charters were granted. It has often been found
necessary, since the Date of the Charters, to alter the Forms of the Oaths to
the Government by Acts of Parliament, and such Alterations have always been
conformed to in the Plantations.

Lest you should think that I admit the Authority of King Charles the Second in
giving his Assent to an Act of the Assembly of Virginia, which you subjoin to
the Authorities of James the First and Charles the First, to have any Weight, I
must observe to you that I do not see any greater Inconsistency with Magna
Charta in the King's giving his Assent to an Act of a Subordinate Legislature
immediately or in Person than when he does it mediately by his Governor or
Substitute but, if it could be admitted that such an Assent discovered the
King's Judgment that Virginia was Independent, would you lay any Stress upon it
when the same King was from Time to Time giving his Assent to Acts of
Parliament which inferred the Dependence of all the Colonies, and had by one of
those Acts declared the Plantations to be inhabited and peopled by his Majesty
Subjects of England?

I gave you no Reason to Remark upon the Absurdity of a Grant to Persons born
within the Realm of the same Liberties which would have belonged to them if
they had been born within the Realm, but rather guarded against it by
considering such Grant as declaratory only, and in the Nature of an Assurance
that the Plantations would be considered as the Dominions of England. But is
there no Absurdity in a Grant from the King of England of the Liberties and
Immunities of Englishmen to Persons born in and who are to inhabit other
Territories than the Dominions of England, and would such Grant, whether by
Charter or other Letters Patent, be sufficient to make them inheritable, or to
entitle them to the other Liberties and Immunities of Englishmen, in any Part
of the English Dominions?

As I am willing to rest the Point between us upon the Plantations having been,
from their first Discovery and Settlement under the Crown, a Part of the
Dominions of England, I shall not take up any Time in remarking upon your
Arguments to show that since that Time, they cannot have been made a Part of
those Dominions.

The remaining Parts of your Answer are principally intended to prove that,
under both Charters, it has been the Sense of the People that they were not
subject to the Jurisdiction of Parliament, and, for this Purpose, you have made
large Extracts from the History of the Colony. Whilst you are doing Honor to
the Book, by laying any Stress upon its Authority, it would have been no more
than Justice to the Author if you had cited some other Passages which would
have tended to reconcile the Passage, in my Speech to the History. -- I have
said that, except about the Time of the Anarchy which preceded the Restoration
of King Charles the Second, I have not discovered that the Authority of
Parliament had been called in Question even by particular Persons. It was, as I
take it, from the Principles imbibed in those Times of Anarchy that the Persons
of Influence, mentioned in the History, disputed the Authority of Parliament,
but the Government would not venture to dispute it. On the contrary, in four or
five Years after the Restoration, the Government declared to the King's
Commissioners that the Act of Navigation had been for some Years observed here,
that they knew not of it is being greatly violated and that such Laws as
appeared to be against it were repealed, It is not strange that these Persons
of Influence should prevail upon great Part of the People to fall in, for a
Time with their Opinions and to suppose Acts of the Colony necessary to give
Force to Acts of Parliament; the Government, however, several Years before the
Charter was vacated, more explicitly acknowledged the Authority of Parliament
and voted that their Governor should take the Oath, required of him, faithfully
to do and perform all Matters and Things enjoined him by the Acts of Trade. I
have not recited in my Speech all these Particulars, nor had I them all in my
Mind but, I think, I have said nothing inconsistent with them. My Principles in
Government are still the same with what they appear to be in the Book you refer
to, nor am I conscious that, by any Part of my Conduct, I have given Cause to
suggest the contrary.

Inasmuch as you say that I have not particularly pointed out to you the Acts
and Doings of the General Assembly which relate to Acts of Parliament, I will
do it now, and demonstrate to you that such Acts have been acknowledged by the
Assembly, or submitted to by the People.

From your Predecessors Removal to America until the Year 1640 there was no
Session of Parliament, and the first short Session of a few Days only in 1640,
and the whole of the next Session, until the withdraw of the King, being taken
up in the Disputes between the King and the Parliament, there could be no Room
for Plantation Affairs. Soon after the King's withdraw the House of Commons
passed the memorable Order of 1642, and from that Time to the Restoration, this
Plantation seems to have been distinguished from the rest, and the several Acts
or Ordinances, which respected the other Plantations, were never enforced here,
and, possibly, under Color of the Exemption in 1642, it might not be intended
they should be executed.

For 15 or 16 Years after the Restoration, there was no Officer of the Customs
in the Colony, except the Governor annually elected by the People, and the Acts
of Trade were but little regarded, nor did the Governor take the Oath required
of Governors by the Act of the 12th of King Charles the Second, until the Time
which I have mentioned. Upon the Revolution the Force of an Act of Parliament
was evident in a Case of as great Importance as any which could happen to the
Colony. King William and Queen Mary were proclaimed in the Colony, King and
Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in
the Room of King James, and this not by Virtue of an Act of the Colony, for no
such Act ever passed, but by Force of an Act of Parliament which altered the
Succession to the Crown, and for which the People waited several Weeks with
anxious Concern. By Force of another Act of Parliament, and that only, such
Officers of the Colony as had taken the Oaths of Allegiance to King James
deemed themselves at Liberty to take, and accordingly did take the Oaths to
King William and Queen Mary. And that I may mention other Acts of the like
Nature together, it is by Force of an Act of Parliament that the Illustrious
House of Hanover succeeded to the Throne of Britain and its Dominions, and by
several other Acts, the Forms of the Oaths have from Time to Time, been
altered, and by a late Act that Form was established which every one of us has
complied with as the Charter in express Words requires and makes our Duty.
Shall we now dispute whether Acts of Parliament have been submitted to when we
find them submitted to in Points which are of the very Essence of our
Constitution? If you should disown that Authority which has Power even to
change the Succession to the Crown, are you in no Danger of denying the
Authority of our most gracious Sovereign, which I am sure none of you can have
in your Thoughts?

I think I have before shown you, Gentlemen, what must have been the Sense of
our Predecessors at the Time of the first Charter, let us now, whilst we are
upon the Acts and Doings of the Assembly, co^^^^er what it must have been at
the Time of the second Charter. Upon the first Advice of the Revolution in
England, the Authority which assumed the Government instructed their Agents to
petition the Parliament to restore the first Charter, and a Bill for that
Purpose passed the House of Commons, but went no farther. Was not this owning
the Authority of Parliament? By an Act of Parliament, passed in the first Year
of King William and Queen Mary, a Form of Oaths was established to be taken by
those Princes and by all succeeding Kings and Queens of of England at their
Coronation, the first of which is, that they will govern the People of the
Kingdom and the Dominions thereunto belonging, according to the Statutes in
Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and Customs of the same. When the Colony
directed their Agents to make their humble Application to King William to grant
the second Charter, they could have no other Pretense than as they were
Inhabitants of Part of the Dominions of England, and they also knew the Oath
the King had taken to govern them according to the Statutes in Parliament;
surely then, at the Time of this Charter also, it was the Sense of our
Predecessors, as well as of the King and of the Nation that there was and would
remain a Supremacy in the Parliament. About the same Time, they acknowledge, in
an Address to the King, that they have no Power to make Laws repugnant to the
Laws of England. And, immediately after the Assumption of the Powers of
Government by Virtue of the new Charter, an Act passed to revive for a limited
Time all the Local Laws of the Colonies of Massachusetts Bay and New Plymouth,
respectively, not repugnant to the Laws of England. And, at the same Session,
an Act passed establishing Naval Officers in several Ports of the Province, for
which this Reason is given, that all undue Trading contrary to an Act of
Parliament made in the 15th Year of King Charles the Second may be prevented in
this their Majesty's Province. The Act of this Province passed so long ago as
the second Year of King George the first, for stating the Fees of the
Custom-House Officers, must have relation to the Acts of Parliament by which
they are constituted, and the Provision made in that Act of the Province for
extending the Port of Boston to all the Roads as far as Cape-Aod, could be for
no other Purpose than for the more effectual carrying the Acts of Trade into
Execution. And, to come nearer to the present Time, when an Act of Parliament
had passed in 1741, for putting an End to certain unwarrantable Schemes in this
Province, did the Authority of Government, or those Persons more immediately
affected by it, ever dispute the Validity of it? On the contrary, have not a
Number of Acts been passed in the Province, that the Burdens to which such
Persons were subjected might be equally apportioned, and have not all those
Acts of the Province been very carefully framed to prevent their militating
with the Act of Parliament? I will mention also an Act of Parliament made in
the first Year of Queen Ann; although the Proceedings upon it more immediately
respected the Council. By this Act no Office Civil or Military shall be void by
the Death of the King, but shall continue six Months, unless suspended or made
void by the next Successor. By Force of this Act, Governor Dudley continued in
the Administration six Months from the Demise of Queen Ann, and immediately
after, the Council assumed the Administration and continued it until a
Proclamation arrived from King George, by Virtue of which Governor Dudley
reassumed the Government. It would be tedious to enumerate the Addresses, Votes
and Messages of both the Council and House of Representatives to the same
Purpose. I have said enough to show that this Government has submitted to
Parliament from a Conviction of it is constitutional Supremacy, and this not
from Inconsideration, nor merely from Reluctance at the Idea of contending with
the Parent State.

If then I have made it appear, that both by the first and second Charters we
hold our Lands and the Authority of Government not of the King but of the Crown
of England, that being a Dominion of the Crown of England, we are consequently
subject to the Supreme Authority of England, that this has been the Sense of
this Plantation, except in those few Years when the Principles of Anarchy which
had prevailed in the Kingdom had not lost their Influence here; and if, upon a
Review of your Principles, they shall appear to you to have been delusive and
erroneous, as I think they must, or if you shall only be in Doubt of them, you
certainly will not draw that Conclusion which otherwise you might do, and which
I am glad you have hitherto avoided; especially when you consider the obvious
and inevitable Distress and Misery of Independence upon our Mother Country, if
such Independence could be allowed or maintained, and the Probability of much
greater Distress, which we are not able to foresee.

You ask me if we have not Reason to fear we shall soon be reduced to a worse
Situation than that of the Colonies of France, Spain or Holland. I may safely
affirm that we have not; that we have no Reason to Fear any Evils from a
Submission to the Authority of Parliament, equal to what we must feel from its
Authority being disputed, from an uncertain Rule of Law and Government. For
more than seventy Years together the Supremacy of Parliament was acknowledged
without Complaints of Grievance. The Effect of every Measure cannot be foreseen
by human Wisdom. What can be expected more from any Authority than when the
Unfitness of a Measure is discovered, to make it void? When upon the united
Representations and Complaints of the American Colonies any Acts have appeared
to Parliament to be unsalutary, have there not been repeated Instances of the
Repeal of such Acts? We cannot expect these Instances should be carried so far
as to be equivalent to a Disavowal or Relinquishment of the Right itself. Why
then shall we fear for ourselves and our Posterity, greater rigor of
Government for seventy Years to come than what we and our Predecessors have
felt in the seventy Years past.

You must give me Leave, Gentlemen, in a few Words to vindicate myself from a
Charge, in one Part of your Answer, of having, by my Speech, reduced you to the
unhappy Alternative of appearing by your Silence to acquiesce in my Sentiments,
or of freely discussing this Point of the Supremacy of Parliament. I saw, as I
have before observed, the Capital Town of the Province, without being reduced
to such an Alternative, voluntarily not only discussing but determining this
Point, and inviting every other Town and District in the Province to do the
like. I saw that many of the principal Towns had followed the Example, and that
there was imminent Danger of a Compliance in most if not all the Rest, in Order
to avoid being distinguished. Was not I reduced to the Alternative of rendering
myself justly obnoxious to the Displeasure of my Sovereign by acquiescing in
such Irregularities, o^ of calling upon you to join with me in suppressing
them? Might I not rather have expected from you an Expression of your Concern
that any Persons should project and prosecute a Plan of Measures which would
lay me under a Necessity of bringing this Point before you? It was so far from
being my Inclination, that nothing short of a Sense of ^uty to the King, and
the Obligations I am under to consult your true Interest could have compelled
me to it.

Gentlemen of the Council, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives*
We all profess to be the loyal and dutiful Subjects of the King of
Great Britain. His Majesty considers the British Empire as one entire Dominion,
subject to one Supreme Legislative Power, a due Submission to which is
essential to the Maintenance of the Rights, Liberties and Privileges of the
several Parts of this Dominion. We have abundant Evidence of his Majesty's
tender and impartial Regard to the Rights of his Subjects; and I am authorized
to say that "his Majesty will most graciously approve of every Constitutional
Measure that may contribute to the Peace, the Happiness, and Prosperity of his
Colony of Massachusetts Bay, and which may have the Effect to show to the World
that he has no Wish beyond that of reigning in the Hearts and Affections of his
People."

To this Speech His Majesty's Council on the 25th of February sent to his
Excellency the following Answer, by Harrison Gray, James Russell, James Pitts,
Stephen Hall, and James Humphry, Esq'rs; viz.
May it please your Excellency,
AS a small Part only of your Excellency's last Speech to both Houses is
addressed to the Board, there are but a few Clauses on which we shall Remark.

With Regard to the Disorders that have arisen, your Excellency and the Board
have assigned different Causes. The Cause you are pleased to assign, together
with the Disorders themselves, we suppose to be Effects arising from the
Stamp Act, and certain other Acts of Parliament. If we were not mistaken in
this, which you do not assert, it so far seems to invalidate what is said in
your Speech on that Head.

We have taken Notice of this, only because it stands connected with another
Matter, on which we would make a few further Observations. What we refer to is
the general Nature of Supreme Authority. We have already offered Reasons, in
which your Excellency seems to acquiesce, to show that, though the Term Supreme
sometimes carries with it the Idea of unlimitted Authority, it cannot, in that
Sense, be applied to that which is human. What is usually denominated the
Supreme Authority of a Nation must nevertheless be limited in it is Acts to the
Objects that are properly or c^nstitutionally cognizable by it. To illustrate
our Meaning, we beg Leave to quote a Passage from your Speech, at the Opening
of this Session, where your Excellency says, "so much of the Spirit of Liberty
breathes through all Parts of the English Constitution, that although from the
Nature of Government there must be one Supreme Authority over the whole, yet
this Constitution will admit of Subordinate Powers with Legislative and
Executive Authoriy, greater or less, according to Local and other
Circumstances." -- This is very true, and implies, that the Legislative and
Executive Authority granted to the Subordinate Powers should extend and operate
as far as the Grant allows; and that, if it does not exceed the Limits
prescribed to it, and no Forfeiture be incurred, the Supreme Power has no
rightful Authority to take away or diminish it, or to substitute its own Acts
of Cases wherein the Acts of the Subordinate Power can, according to its
Constitution, operate. To suppose the contrary is to suppose, that it has no
Property in the Privileges granted to it, for if it holds them at the Will of
the Supreme Power, which it must do by the above Supposition, it can have no
Property in them: upon which Principle, which involves the Contradiction, that
what is granted is in Reality not granted, no Subordinate Power can exist. But
as in Fact the two Powers are not incompatible, and do sub^^st together, each
restraining its Acts to their Constitutional Objects, can we not from hence see
how the Supreme Power may supervise, regulate, and make general Laws for the
Kingdom, without interfering with the Privileges of the Subordinate Powers
within it? And also see how it may extend its Care and Protection to its
Colonies, without injuring their Constitutional Rights? -- What has been here
said concerning Supreme Authority has no Reference to the Manner in which it
has been in Fact exercised, but is wholly confined to its general Nature; and
if it conveys any just Idea of it, the Inferences that have been at any Time
deduced from it, injurious to the Rights of the Colonists, are not well
founded; and have probably arisen from a Misconception of the Nature of that
Authority.

Your Excellency represents us as introducing a Number of Authorities merely to
show, that "all Taxes upon English Subjects must be levied by Virtue of the
Act, not of the King alone, but in Conjunction with the Lords and Commons." and
are pleased to add, that "you should very readily have allowed it; and you
should as readily have allowed, that all other Acts of Legislation must be
passed by the same joint Authority, and not by the King alone." -- Your
Excellency "would have saved us the Trouble of all those Authorities:" and on
our Part we should have been as willing to have saved your Excellency the
Trouble of dismembering our Argument, and from thence taking Occasion to
represent it in a disadvantageous Light, or rather totally destroying it.

In Justice to ourselves it is necessary to Recapitulate that Argument adduced
to prove, that the Inhabitants of this Province are not constitutionally
subject to Parliamentary Taxation. In order thereto we recurred to Magna Charta
and other Authorities. And the Argument abridged stands thus -- That from those
Authorities it appears an Essential Part of the English Constitution, "that no
Tallage, or Aid, or Tax, shall be laid or levied, without the Good Will and
Assent of the Freemen of the Commonalty of the Realm." That from Common Law,
and the Province Charter, the Inhabitants of this Province are clearly entitled
to all the Rights of free and natural Subjects within the Realm: That among
those Rights must be included the essential one just mentioned concerning Aids
and Taxes; and therefore that no Aids or Taxes can be levied on us
constitutionally without our own Consent signified by our Representatives. From
whence the Conclusion is clear, that therefore the Inhabitants of this Province
are not constitutionally subject to Parliamentary Taxation.

We did not bring those Authorities to show that Tax Acts, or any other Acts of
Parliament, in order to their Validity, must have the Concurrence of the King,
Lords, and Commons; but to show, that it has been, at least from the Time of
Magna Charta, an essential Right of free Subjects within the Realm, to be free
from all Taxes but such as were laid with their own Consent. And it was proper
to show this, as the Rights and Liberties, granted by the Province Charter,
were to be equally extensive, to all Intents and Purposes, with those enjoyed
by free and natural Subjects within the Realm. Therefore to show our own Rights
in Relation to Taxes, it was necessary to show the Rights of Freemen within the
Realm, in Relation to them: and for this Purpose those Authorities were
brought, and not impertinently, as we humbly apprehend. Nor have we seen Reason
to change our Sentiments with Respect to this Matter or any other contained in
our Answer to your Excellency's Speech.

In the last Clause of your Speech, your Excellency informs the two Houses,
"you are Authorized to say, that his Majesty will most graciously approve of
every Constitutional Measure, that may contribute to the Peace, the Happiness
and Prosperity of his Colony of Massachusetts Bay." -- We have the highest
Sense of his Majesty's Goodness in his gracious Disposition to approve of such
Measures, which, as it includes his Approbation of the Constitutional Rights of
his Subjects of this Colony, manifests his Inclination to protect them in those
Rights; and to remove the Encroachments that have been made upon them. Of this
Act of Royal Goodness they are not wholly unworthy, as in Regard to Loyalty,
Duty and Affection to his Majesty, they stand among the foremost of his
faithful Subjects.

And on Tuesday March 2d, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Gorham, Major Fuller, Capt.
Greenlease, Capt. Heath, Mr. Phillips, Capt. Nigh, Capt. Brown of Watertown, and
Capt. Gardner, a Committee of the House of Representatives, waited on the
Governor with their Answer as follows, Viz.
May it please your Excellency,
IN your Speech at the Opening of the present Session, your Excellency
expressed your Displeasure at some late Proceedings of the Town of Boston, and
other principal Towns in the Province. And in another Speech to both Houses we
have your repeated Exceptions at the same Proceedings as being "unwarrantable,"
and of a dangerous Nature and Tendency; "against which you thought yourself
bound to call upon us to join with you in bearing a proper Testimony." This
House have not discovered any Principles advanced by the Town of Boston, that
are unwarrantable by the Constitution; nor does it appear to us that they have
"invited every other Town and District in the Province to adopt their
Principles." We are fully convinced that it is our Duty to bear our Testimony
against "Innovations of a dangerous Nature and Tendency:" But is clearly our
Opinion, that it is the indisputable Right of all or any of his Majesty's
Subjects in this Province, regularly and orderly to meet together to state the
Grievances they labor under; and to propose and unite in such constitutional
Measures as they shall judge necessary or proper to obtain Redress. This Right
has been frequently exercised by his Majesty's Subjects within the Realm; and
we do not recollect an Instance, since the happy Revolution, when the two
Houses of Parliament have been called upon to discountenance or bear their
Testimony against it, in a Speech from the Throne.

Your Excellency is pleased to take Notice of some things which we "allege" in
our Answer to your first Speech; and the Observation you make, we must confess,
is as natural and as undeniably true, as any one that could have been made,
that "if our Foundation shall fail us in every Part of it, the Fabric we have
raised upon it, must certainly fall." You think, this Foundation will fail us;
but we wish your Excellency has condesended to a Consideration of what we have
"a^duced in Support of our Principles." We might then perhaps have had some
things offered for our Conviction, more than bare Affirmations; which, we must
beg to be excused if we say, are far from being sufficient, though they came
with your Excellency's Authority, for which however we have a due Regard.

Your Excellency says that "as English Subjects and agreeable to the Doctrine
of the Feudal Tenure all our Lands are held mediately or immediately of the
Crown." We trust your Excellency does not mean to introduce the Feudal System
in it is Perfection; which to use the Words of one of our greatest Historians,
was "a State of perpetual War, Anarchy and Confusion; calculated solely for
Defense against the Assaults of any foreign Power, but in it is Provision for
the interior Order and Tranquillity of Society extremely defective." "A
Constitution so contradictory to all the Principles that govern Mankind, could
never be brought about but by foreign Conquest or native Usurpation:" And a
very celebrated Writer calls it "that most iniquitous and absurd Form of
Government by which human Nature was so shamefully degraded." This System of
Iniquity by a strange Kind of Fatality, "though originally formed for an
Encampment and for Military Purposes only, spread over a great Part of Europe:"
and to serve the Purposes of Oppression and Tyranny "was adopted by Princes and
wrought into their Civil Constitutions;" and aided by the Canon Law, calculated
by the Roman Pontiff, to exalt himself above all that is called God, it
prevailed to the almost utter Extinction of Knowledge, Virtue, Religion and
Liberty from that Part of the Earth. But from the Time of the Reformation, in
Proportion as Knowledge, which then darted its Rays upon the benighted World,
increased and spread among the People, they grew impatient under this heavy
Yoke: And the most virtuous and sensible among them, to whose Stedfastness we
in this distant Age and Climate are greatly indebted, were determined to get
rid of it: And though they have in a great Measure subdued it is Power and
Influence in England, they have never yet totally eradicated its Principles.

Upon these Principles the King claimed an absolute Right to and a perfect
Estate in all the Lands within his Dominions; but how he came by this absolute
Right and perfect Estate is a Mystery which we have never seen unravelled, nor
(...) our Business or Design at present to enquire. ^e granted Parts of Parcels
of it to his Friends the Great Men, and they granted lesser Parcels to their
Tenants: All therefore derived their Right and held their Lands, upon these
Principles, mediately or immediately of the King; which Mr. Blackstone however
calls "in Reality a meey Fiction of our English Tenures."

By what Right in Nature and Reason the Christian Princes in Europe claimed the
Lands of Heathen People, upon a Discovery made by any of their Subjects, is
equally mysterious: Such however was the Doctrine universally prevailing when
the Lands in America were discovered; but as the People of England upon those
Principles held all the Lands they possessed by Grants from the King, and the
King had never granted the Lands in America to them, it is certain they could
have no Sort of Claim to them: Upon the Principles advanced, the Lordship and
Dominion like that of the Lands in England, was in the King solely: and a Right
from thence accrued to him of disposing such Territories under such Tenure and
for such Servies to be performed, as the King or Lord thought proper. But how
the Grantees became Subjects of England, that is the Supreme Authority of the
Parliament, your Excellency has not explained to us. We conceive that upon the
Feudal Principles all Power is in the King; they afford us no Idea of
Parliament. "The Lord was in early Times the Legislator and Judge over all his
Feudatories," says Judge Blackstone. By the Struggles for Liberty in England
from the Days of King John to the last happy Revolution, the Constitution has
been gradually changing for the better; and upon the more rational Principles
that all Men by Nature are in a State of Equality in Respect of Jurisdiction
and Dominion, Power in England has been more equally divided. And thus also in
America, though we hold our Lands agreeably to the Feudal Principles of the
King; yet our Predecessors wisely took care to enter into Compact with the King
that Power here should also be equally divided agreeable to the original
fundamental Principles of the English Constitution, declared in Magna Charter,
and other Laws and Statutes of England, made to confirm them.

Your Excellency says, "you can by no Means concede to us that it is now or was
when the Plantations were first granted the Prerogative of the Kings of England
to constitute a Number of new Governments altogether independent of the
Sovereign Authority of the English Empire." By the Feudal Principles upon which
you say "all the Grants which have been made of America are founded" "the
Constitutions of the Emperor have the Force of Law." If our Government be
considered as merely Feudatory, we are subject to the King's absolute Will, and
there is no Room for the Authority of Parliament, as the Sovereign Authority of
the British Empire. Upon these Principles, what could hinder the King's
constituting a Number of independent Governments in America? That King Charles
the First did actually set up a Government in this Colony* conceding to it
Powers of making and executing Laws, without any Reservation to the English
Parliament, of Authority to make future Laws binding therein, is a Fact which
your Excellency has not disproved if you have denied it. Nor have you shown
that the Parliament or Nation objected to it, from whence we have inferred that
it was an acknowledged Right. And we cannot conceive, why the King has not the
same Right to alienate and dispose of Countries acquired by the Discovery of
his Subjects, as he has to "restore upon a Treaty of Peace Countries which have
been acquired in War," carried on at the Charge of the Nation; or to "sell and
deliver up any Part of his Dominions to a foreign Prince or State, against the
General Sense of the Nation" which is "an Act of Power" or Prerogative which
your Excellency allows. You tell us that "when any New Countries are discovered
by English Subjects, according to the general Law and Usage of Nations, they
become Part of the State." The Law of Nations is or ought to be founded on the
Law or Reason. It was the Saying of Sir Edwin Sandis, in the great Case of the
Union of the Realm of Scotland with England, which is applicable to our present
Purpose, that "there being no Precedent for this Case in the Law, the Law is
deficient; and the Law being deficient, Recourse is to be had to Custom; and
Custom being insufficient, we must recur to natural Reason," the greatest of
all Authorities, which he adds "is the Law of Nations." The Opinions therefore,
and Determinations of the greatest Sages and Judges of the Law in the Exchequer
Chamber ought not to be considered as decisive or binding in our present
Controversy with your Excellency, any further than they are consonant to
natural Reason. If however we were to recur to such Opinions and Determinations
we should find very great Authorities in our Favor, to show that the Statutes
of England are not binding on those who are not represented in Parliament
there. The Opinion of Lord Coke that Ireland was bound by Statutes of England
wherein they were named, if compared with his other Writings, appears
manifestly to be grounded upon a Supposition, that Ireland had by an Act of
their own, in the Reign of King John, consented to be thus bound, and upon any
other Supposition this Opinion would be against Reason; for Consent only gives
human Laws their Force. We beg Leave, upon what your Excellency has observed of
the Colony becoming a Part of the State, to subjoin the Opinions of several
learned Civilians, as quoted by a very able Lawyer in this Country; "Colonies,
says Puffendorf, are settled in different Methods. For either the Colony
continues a Part of the Common Wealth it was set out from; or else is obliged
to pay a dutiful Regard to the Mother Common Wealth, and to be in Readiness to
defend and vindicate its Honor, and so is united by a Sort of unequal
Confederacy; or lastly, is erected into a separate Common Wealth and assumes
the same Rights, with the State it descended from." And King Tullius, as quoted
by the same learned Author from Grotius, says "We look upon it to be neither
Truth nor Justice that Mother Cities ought of Necessity and by the Law of
Nature to rule over the Colonies."

Your Excellency has misinterpreted what we have said, "that no Country by the
Common Law, was subject to the Laws or the Parliament but the Realm of
England," and are pleased to tell us that we have expressed ourselves
"Incautiously." We beg Leave to recite the Words of the Judges of England in
the before mentioned Case to our Purpose. "If a King go out of England with a
Company of his Servants, Allegiance remain^th among his Subjects and Servants,
although he be out of his Realm whereto his Laws are confined," We did not mean
to say, as your Excellency would suppose, that "the Common Law prescribes
Limits to the Extent of the Legislative Power," though we shall always affirm
it to be true of the Law of Reason and natural Equity. Your Excellency thinks
you have made it appear, that the Colony of Massachusetts Bay is holden as
feudatory of the Imperial Crown of England;" and therefore you say, "to use the
Words of a very great Authority in a Case in some Respects analogous to it,"
being feudatory it necessarily follows, that it is under the Government of the
King's Laws." Your Excellency has not named this Authority: but we conceive his
Meaning must be, that being Feudatory, it is under the Government of the King's
Law^ absolutely; for as we have before said the Feudal System admits of no Idea
of the Authority of Parliament, and this would have been the Case of the Colony
but for the Compact with the King in the Charter.

Your Excellency says, that "Persons thus holding under the Crown of England
remain or become Subjects of England;" by which we suppose your Excellency to
mean, subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament "to all Intents and
Purposes as fully as if any of the Royal Manors, etc. within the Realm had been
Granted to them upon the like Tenure." We apprehend with Submission, your
Excellency is Mistaken in supposing that our Allegiance is due to the Crown of
England. Every Man swears Allegiance for himself to his own King in his Natural
Person. "Every Subject is presumed by Law to be Sworn to the King, which is to
his Natural Person," says Lord Coke. Rep. on Calvin's Case. "The Allegiance is
due to his Natural Body." And he says "in the Reign of Edward II. the Spencers,
the Father and the Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their Hearts, invented
this damnable and damned Opinion, that Homage and Oath of Allegiance was more
by Reason of the King's Crown, that is of his politic Capacity, than by Reason
of the Person of the King; upon which Opinion they inferred execrable and
detestable Consequents." The Judges of England, all but one, in the Case of the
Union between Scotland and England, declared that "Allegiance fol^oweth the
natural Person not the politic;" and "to prove the Allegiance to be tied to
the Body natural of the King, and not to the Body politic, the Lord Coke cited
the Phrases of diverse Statutes, mentioning our natural liege Sovereign." -- If
then the Homage and Allegiance is not to the Body politic of the King, then it
is not to him as the Head or any Part of that Legislative Authority, which your
Excellency says "is equally extensive with the Authority of the Crown
throughout every Part of the Dominion;" and your Excellency's Observations
thereupon must fail. The same Judges mention the Allegiance of a Subject to the
Kings of England who is out of the Reach and Extent of the Laws of England;
which is perfectly reconcil^able with the Principles of our Ancestors quoted
before from your Excellency's History, but upon your Excellency's Principles
appears to us to be an Absurdity. The Judges, speaking of a Subject, say,
"although his Birth was out of the Bounds of the Kingdom of England, and out of
the Reach and Extent of the Laws of England, yet if it were within the
Allegiance of the King of England, etc. Normandy, Acquitain, Gascoign, and
other Places within the Limits of France, and consequently out of the Realm or
Bounds of the Kingdom of England, were in Subjection to the Kings of England.
And the Judges say, " Rex et Regnum be not so Relatives, as a King can be King
but of one Kingdom, which clearly hold^th not but that his Kingly Power
extending to diverse Nations and Kingdoms, all owe him equal Subjection and are
equally born to the Benefit of his Protection, and although he is to govern them
by their distinct Laws, yet any one of the People coming into the other is to
have the Benefit of the Laws wheresoever he comes." So they are not to be
deemed Aliens, as your Excellency in your Speech supposes in any of the
Dominions; all which accords with the Principles our Ancestors held. "And he is
to bea^ the Burden of Taxes of the Place where he comes, but living in one or
for his Livelihood in one, he is not to be taxed in the other, because Laws
ordain Taxes, Impositions and Charges as a Discipline of Subjection
particularized to every particular Nation;" Nothing we think can be more clear
to our Purpose than this Decision, of Judges, perhaps as learned as ever
adorned the English Nation; or in Favor of America in her present Controversy
with the Mother State.

Your Excellency says, that by our not ^istinguishing between the Crown of
England and the Kings and Queens of England in their personal of natural
Capacities, we have been led into a fundamental Error." Upon this very
Distinction we have availed ourselves. We have said that our Ancestors
considered the Land which they took Possession of in America as out of the
Bounds of the Kingdom of England, and out of the Reach and Extent of the Laws
of England; and that the King also even in the Act of granting the Charter,
considered the ^errit^ry as not within the Realm; that the King had an absolute
Right in himself to dispose of the Lands, and that this was not disputed by the
Nation; nor could the Lands on any solid Grounds be claimed by the Nation, and
therefore our Ancestors received the Lands by Grant from the King* and at the
same Time compacted with him and promised him Homage and Allegiance, not in his
public or politic but natural Capacity only. -- If it be difficult for us to
show how the King acquired a Title to this Country in his natural Capacity, or
separate from his Relation to his Subjects, which we confess, yet we conceive
it will be equally difficult for your Excellency to show how the Body Politic
and Nation of England acquired it. Our Ancestors supposed it was acquired by
neither; and therefore they declared, as we have before quoted from your
History, that saving their actual Purchase from the Natives, of the Soil, the
Dominion, the Lordship, and Sovereignty, they had in the Sight of God and Man,
no Right and Title to what they poss^ssed. How much clearer ^hen in natural
Reason and Equity must our Title be, who hold Estates dearly p^^chased at the
Expense of our own as well as our Ancestors Labor, and defended by them with
^reasure and Blood.

Your Excellency has been pleased to co^firm, rather than deny or confute a
Piece of History which you say we took from an anonimous Pamphlet, and by which
you "^ear we have been too easily m^sled." It may be gathered from your own
Declaration and other Authorities besides the (...) Pamphlet, that the House of
Commons took Exception, not at the King's having made an absolute Grant of the
Territory* but at the Claim of an exclusive Right to the Fishery on the Banks
and Sea Coast, by Virtue of the Patent. At this you say "the ^ouse of Commons
was ala^med, and a B^ll was brought in for allo^ing a free Fishery." And upon
this Occasion ^our Excellency allows, that "one of the Secretaries of State
declared that the Plantations were not annexed to the Crown, and so were not
within the Jurisdiction of Parliament." If we should concede to what your
Excellency supposes might possibly or "perhaps" be the Case, that the Secretary
made this Declaration "as his own Opinion," the Event showed that it was the
Opinion of the King too; for it is not to be accounted for upon any other
Principle, that he would have denied his Royal Assent to a Bill formed for no
other Purpose, but to grant his Subjects in England the Privilege of Fishing on
the Sea Coasts in America. The Account published by Sir Ferdinando Gorges
himself, of the Proceedings of Parliament on this Occasion, your Excellency
thinks will remove all Doubt of the Sense of the Nation and of the Patentees of
this Patent or Charter in 1620. "This Narrative, you say, has all the
Appearance of Truth and Sincerity," which we do not deny: And to us it carries
this Conviction with it, that "what was objected" in Parliament was, the
exclusive Claim of Fishing only. His imagining that he had satisfied the House
after diverse Attendances, that the Planting a Colony was of much more
Consequence than a simple disorderly Course of Fishing, is sufficient for our
Conviction. We know that the Nation was at that Time alarmed with Apprehensions
of Monopolies; and if the Patent of New England was presented by the two Houses
as a Grievance, it did not show* as your Excellency supposes, "the Sense they
then had of their Authority over this new-acquired Territory," but only their
Sense of the Grievance of a Monopoly of the Sea.

We are happy to hear your Excellency say, that "our Remarks upon and
Construction of the Words not repugnant to the Laws of England, are much the
same with those of the Council." It serves to confirm us in our Opinion, in
what we take to be the most important Matter of Difference between your
Excellency and the two Houses. After saying, that the Statute of 7th and 8th of
William and Mary favors the Construction of the Words as intending such Laws of
England as are made more immediately to respect us, you tell us, that "the
Province Agent Mr. Dummer in his much applauded Defense, says that then a Law
of the Plantations may be said to be repugnant to a Law made in Great Britain,
when it flatly contradicts it so far as the Law made there mentions and relates
to the Plantations." This is plain and obvious to common Sense, and therefore
cannot be denied. But if your Excellency will read a Page or two further in
that excellent Defense, you will see that he mentions this as the Sense of the
Phrase, as taken from an Act of Parliament, rather than as the Sense he would
choose himself to put upon it; and he expressly designs to show, in Vindication
of the Charter, that in that Sense of the Words, there never was a Law made in
the Plantations repugnant to the Laws of Great Britain. He gives another
Construction much more likely to be the true Intent of the Words; namely, "that
the Patentees shall not presume under Color of their particular Charters to
make any Laws inconsistent with the Great Charter and other Laws of England, by
which the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of Englishmen are secure^." This is
the Sense in which our Ancestors understood the Words; and therefore they were
unwilling to conform to the Acts of Trade, and disregarded them till they made
Provision to give them Force in the Colony by a Law of their own; saying, that
"the Laws of England did not reach America: And those Acts were an Invasion of
their Rights, Liberties and Properties," because they were not "represented in
Parliament." The Right of being governed only by Laws which were made by
Persons in whose Election they had a Voice, they looked upon as the Foundation
of English Liberties. By the Compact with the King in the Charter, they were to
be as free in America, as they would have been if they had remained within the
Realm; and therefore they freely asserted that they "were to be governed by
Laws made by themselves and by Officers chosen by themselves." Mr. Dummer says,
"It seems reasonable enough to think that the Crown," and he might have added
our Ancestors, "intended by this Injunction to provide for all its Subjects,
that they might not be oppressed by Arbitrary Power -- but -- being still
Subjects, they should be protected by the same mild Laws and enjoy the same
happy Government as if they continued within the Realm." And considering the
Words of the Charter in this Light, he looks upon them as designed to be a
Fence against Oppression and despotic Power. But the Construction which your
Excellency puts upon the Words, reduces us to a State of Vassallage, and
exposes us to Oppression and despotic Power, whenever a Parliament shall see
fit to make Laws for that Purpose and put them in Execution.

We flatter ourselves that from the large Extracts we have made from your
Excellency's History of the Colony, it appears evidently, that under both
Charters it has been the Sense of the People and of the Government that they
were not under the Jurisdiction of Parliament. We pray you again to recur to
those Quotations and our Observations upon them: And we wish to have your
Excellency's judicious Remarks. When we adduced that History to prove that the
Sentiments of private Persons of Influence, four or five Years after the
Restoration, were very different from what your Excellency apprehended them to
be when you delivered your Speech, you seem to concede to it by ^elling us "it
was, as you take it, from the Principles imbibed in those Times of Anarchy
(preceding the Restoration) that they disputed the Authority of Parliament;"
but you add, "the Government would not venture to dispute it." We find in the
same History (...) Quotation from a Letter of Mr. Stoughton, dated 17 Years
after the Restoration, mentioning "the Country's not taking Notice of the Acts
of Navigation to observe them." And it was, as we take it, after that Time,
that the Government declared in a Letter to their Agents, that they had not
submitted to them; and they ventured to "dispute" the Jurisdiction, asserting
that they apprehended the Acts to be an Invasion of the Rights, Liberties and
Properties of the Subjects of his Majesty in the Colony, they not being
represented in Parliament; and that "the Laws of England did not reach
America." It very little avails in Proof that they conceded to the Supreme
Authority of Parliament, their telling the Commissioners "that the Act of
Navigation had for some Years before been observed here, that they knew not of
its being greatly violated, and that such Laws as appeared to be against it
were repealed." It may as truly be said now, that the Revenue Acts are observed
by some of the People of this Province; but it cannot be said that the
Government and People of this Province have conceded that the Parliament had
Authority to make such Acts to be observed here. Neither does their
Declarations to the Commissioners that such Laws as appeared to be against the
Act of Navigation were repealed, prove their Concession of the Authority of
Parliament, by any means so much as their making Provision for giving Force to
an Act of Parliament within this Province, by a deliberate and solemn Act or
Law of their own, proves the contrary.

You tell us, that "the Government four or five Years before the Charter was
vacated more explicitly," that is than by a Conversation with the
Commissioners, "acknowledged the Authority of Parliament, and voted that their
Governor should take the Oath required of him faithfully to do and perform all
Matters and Things enjoined him by the Acts of Trade." But does this, may it
please your Excellency, show their explicit Acknowledgment of the Authority of
Parliament? Does it not rather show directly the contrary: For, what need could
there be for their Vote or Authority to require him to take the Oath already
required of him by the ^ct of Parliament, unless both he and they judged that
an Act of Parliament was not of Force sufficient to bind him to take such Oath?
We do not deny, but on the contrary are fully persuaded that your Excellency's
Principles in Government are still of the same with what they appear to be in
the History; for you there say, that "the passing this Law plainly shows the
wrong Sense they had of the Relation they stood in to England." But we are from
hence convinced that your Excellency when you wrote the History was of our Mind
in this Respect, that our Ancestors in passing the Law discovered their Opinion
that they were without the Jurisdiction of Parliament: For it was upon this
Principle alone that they showed the wrong Sense they had in your Excellency's
Opinion, of the Relation they stood in to England.

Your Excellency in your second Speech condescends to point out to us the Acts
and Doings of the General Assembly which relates to Acts of Parliament, which
you think "demonstrates that they have been acknowledged by the Assembly or
submitted to by the People:" Neither of which in our Opinion shows that it was
the Sense of the Nation, and our Predecessors when they first took Possession
of this Plantation or Colony by a Grant and Charter from the Crown, that they
were to remain subject to the supreme Authority of the English Parliament.

Your Excellency seems chiefly to rely upon our Ancestors* after the Revolution
"proclaiming King William and Queen Mary in the Room o^ King James," and taking
the Oaths to them, "the Alteration of the Form of Oaths from Time to Time," and
finally "the Ebablishment of the Form which every one of us has complied with,
as the Charter in express Terms requires and makes our Duty." We do not know
that it has ever been a Point in Dispute whether the Kings of England were ipso
facto Kings in and over this Colony or Province. The Compact was made between
King Charles the First, his Heirs and Successors, and the Governor and Company,
their Heirs and Successors. It is easy upon this Principle to account for the
Acknowledgment of and Submission to King William and Queen Mary as Successors
of Charles the First, in the Room of King James: Besides it is to be
considered, that the People in the Colony as well as in England had suffered
under the TYRANT James, by which he had alike forfeited his Right to reign over
both. There had been a Revolution here as well as in England. The Eyes of the
People here were upon William and Mary, and the News of their being proclaimed
in England was as your Excellency's History tells us, "the most joyful News
ever received in New England." And if they were not ploclaimed here "by virtue
of an Act of the Colony," it was, as we think may be concluded from the Tenor
of your History; with the general or universal Consent of the People as
apparently as if "such Act had passed." It is Consent alone, that makes any
human Laws binding; and as a learned Author observes, a purely voluntary
Submission to an Act, because it is highly in our Favor and for our Benefit, is
in all Equity and Justice to be (...) as not at all proceeding from the Right
we include in the Legislators, that they thereby obtain an Authority over us,
and that ever hereafter we must obey them of Duty. We would observe that one of
the first Acts of the General Assembly of this Province since the present
Charter, was an Act requiring the taking the Oaths mentioned in an Act of
Parliament, to which you refer us: For what Purpose was this Act of the
Assembly passed, if it was the Sense of the Legislators that the Act of
Parliament was in Force in the Province. And at the same Time another Act was
made for the Establishment of other Oaths necessary to be taken; both which
Acts have the Royal Sanction, and are now in Force. Your Excellency says, that
when the Colony applied to King William for a second Charter, they knew the
Oath the King had taken, which was to govern them according to the Statutes in
Parliament, and (which your Excellency here omits) the Laws and Customs of the
same. By the Laws and Customs of Parliament, the People of England freely
debate and consent to such Statutes as are made by themselves or their chosen
Represen^atives. This is a Law or Custom which all Mankind may justly challenge
as their inherent Right. According to this Law the King has an undoubted Right
to govern us. Your Excellency upon Recollection surely will not infer from
hence, that it was the Sense of our Predecessors that there was to remain a
Supremacy in the English Parliament, or a full Power and Authority to mak^ Laws
binding upon us in all Cases whatever, in that Parliament where we cannot
debate and deliberate*upon the Necessity or Expediency of any Law, and
consequently without our Consent, and as it may probably happen destructive of
the first Law of Society, the Good of the Whole. You tell us that "after the
Assumption of all the Powers of Government, by Virtue of the new Charter, an
Act passed for the reviving for a limited Time all the local Laws of the
Massachusetts Bay and New-Plymouth respectively, not repugnant to the Laws of
England. And at the same Session an Act passed establishing Naval Officers,
that all undue Trading contrary to an Act of Parliament -- may be prevented."
Among the Acts that were then revived we may reasonably suppose was that
whereby Provision was made to give Force to this Act of Parliament in the
Province. The Establishment thereof of the Naval Officers was to aid the
Execution of an Act of Parliament for the Observance of which within the Colony
the Assembly had before made P^^vision after free Debates with their own
Consent and by their own Act.

The Act of Parliament passed in 1741, for putting (...) to several
unwarrantable Schemes, mentioned ^y your Excellency was designed for the
^^^eral Good, and if the Validity of it was not disputed, it cannot be urged as
a Concession of the supreme Authority, to make Laws binding on us in all Ca^es
whatever: But if the Design of it was for the general Benefit of the Province,
it was in one Respect at least greatly complained of by the Persons more
immedia^ely affected by it* and to remedy the Inconvenience, the Legislative of
this Province passed an Act, directly (...) with it. Which is the strongest
evidence, that although they may have submitted sub si^entio to some ^cts of
Parliament that they conceived might operate for their Benefit, they did not
conceive themselves bound by any of its Acts which they judged would operate to
the Injury even of Individuals.

Your Excellency has not thought proper to attempt to confute the Reasoning of
a learned Writer on the Laws of Nature and Nations, quoted by us on this
Occasion, to show that the Authority of the Legislature does not extend so far
as the Fundamentals of the Constitution. We are unhappy in not having your
Remarks upon the Reasoning of that great Man; and until it is confuted, we
shall remain of the Opinion, that the Fundamentals of the Constitution being
excepted from the Commission of the Legislators, none of the Acts or Doings of
the General Assembly, however deliberate and solemn, could avail to change
them, if the People have not in very express Terms given them the Power to do
it; and that much less ought their Acts and Doings however numerous, which
barely refer to Acts of Parliament made expressly to relate to us, to be taken
as an Acknowledgment that we are subject to the Supreme Authority of Parliament.

We shall sum up our own sentiments in the Words of that learned Writer Mr.
Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical Policy, as quoted by Mr. Lock, "The lawful Power
of making Laws to command whole political Societies of Men, belonging so
properly to the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate of what
Kind soever, to exercise the same of himself, and not from express Commission
immediately and personally received from God, is no better than mere Tyranny.
Laws therefore they are not which public ^pprobation has not made so, for
"Laws human of what Kind soever are available by Consent." "Since Men naturally
have no full and perfect Power to command whole politic Multitudes of Men,
therefore, utterly without our Consent we could in such Sort be at no Man's
Commandment living. And to be commanded we do not consent, when that Society
whereof we be a Part, has at any Time before consented." We think your
Excellency has not proved, either that the Colony is a Part of the politic
Society of England, or that it has ever consented that the Parliament of
England or Great Britain should make Laws binding upon us in all Cases
whatever, whether made expressly to refer to us or not.

We cannot help before we conclude, expressing our great Concern, that your
Excellency has thus repeatedly, in a Manner insisted upon our free Sentiments
on Matters of so delicate a Nature, and weighty Importance. The Question
appears to us to be no other, than Whether we are the Subjects of absolute
unlimitted Power, or of a free Government formed on the Principles of the
English Constitution. If your Excellency's Doctrine be true the People of this
Province hold their Lands of the Crown and People of England, and their Lives,
Liberties and Properties are at their Disposal* and that even by Compact and
their own Consent. They are subject to the King as the Head alterius Populi of
another People, in whose Legislative they have no Voice or Interest. They are
indeed said to have a Constitution and a Legislative of their own, but your
Excellency has explained it into a mere Phantom; limited, controuled,
superceded and nullified at the Will of another. Is this the Constitution which
so charmed our Ancestors, that as your Excellency has informed us, they kept a
Day of solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty God when they received it? And were they
Men of so little Discernment, such Children in Understanding, as to please
themselves with the Imagination that they were blessed with the same Rights and
Liberties which natural born Subjects in England enjoyed, when at the same Time
they had fully consented to be ruled and ordered by a Legislative a Thousand
Leagues distant from them, which cannot be supposed to be sufficiently
acquainted with their Circumstances, if concerned for their Interest, and in
which they cannot be in any Sense represented.

On Saturday the 6th of March, his Excellency was pleased to put an End to the
Session, after delivering the following SPEECH to both Houses, viz.
Gentlemen of the Council, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
I THINK it incumbent on me to make some Observations, before I put an End to
the Session, upon your last Messages to me on the Subject of your
Constitutional Dependence upon the Supreme Authority of the British Dominions.
As the Council admit a partial Dependence, and suppose it to be consistent with
the Principles and Nature of Government, I shall only endeavor very briefly to
show the contrary.

In your first Message, Gentlemen of the Council, you made some Strictures upon
the Nature of the Supreme Authority in Government, both divine and human, the
latter of which you determined could not be absolute and unlimitted. I thought
the Di^^inction between divine and human Power not pertinent, and in Answer to
you, I only remarked, that I had given you no Reason to suppose I in^ended a
more absolute Power in Parliament than what is founded in the Nature of
Government, and this, in your second Message, you construe an Acquiescence in
your Reasons, which it certainly was not. You go on however to explain your
Meaning by asserting, that "what is usually denominated the Supre^e Authority
of a Nation must be limited in its Acts to the Objects that are properly or
constitutionally Cognizable by it."

Before you thus defined the Nature of Supreme Authority, I wish you had
considered more fully what Objects there can be in a Government which are not
cognizable by such Authority. You instance in a subordinate Power in Government
which, whilst it keeps within its Limits, is not subject to the Control of the
supreme Power. Is there no Inconsistency in supposing a subordinate Power
without a Power superior to it? Must it not so far as it is without Control
be, itself, Supreme?

It is essential to the Being of Government that a Power should always exist
which no other Power within such Government can have Right to withstand or
control: Therefore, when the word Power relates to the Supreme Authority of
Government it must be understood absolute and unlimited.

If we cannot agree in these Principles which no sensible Writer upon
Government has before denied, and if you are still of Opinion that two
Jurisdictions, each of them having a Share in the Supreme Power, are compatible
in the same State, it can be to no Purpose to Reason or Argue upon the other
Parts of your Message. Its enough to observe that this Disagreement in our
Principles will have its Influence upon all the Deductions which are made from
them.

I will also consider the last Message from you, Gentlemen of the House of
Representatives, upon the same Subject, in as few words as the Importance of it
will admit.

You say you have not discovered that the Principles advanced by the Town of
Boston are unwarrantable by the Constitution. Whether they are or are not* will
depend upon the Determination of the Point which you are now controverting.
Your not having discovered that the other Towns and Districts in the Province,
were invited by the Town of Boston to adopt their Principles, must proceed from
Inattention. Have not the Doings of that Town been sent through the Province,
accompanied with a circular Letter, "desiring a free Communication of
Sentiments," and, among other Expressions of the like Tendency, lamenting the
Extinction of Ardor for civil and religious Liberty if it should be the general
Voice of the Province, that the Rights as stated do not belong to them, and
trusting that this cannot be the Cas^. If this is not inviting to adopt their
Principles. I have mistaken their Sense and Meaning. The consequent Doings of
so many other Towns show that they understood them as I have done. I am s^re I
have no Disposition to represent unfavourably the Doings of any Town in the
Province.

You assert "that it is the indisputable Right of all or any of His Majesty's
Subjects in this Province regularly and orderly to meet together to sta^e the
Grievances they labor under." etc. I never (...) it. Does it follow that it is
regular and orderly for the Inhabitants of Towns, in their Corporate Cap^^ity,
to meet and determine upon Points which the Law gives them no Power to act
upon? You have not asserted that it is, but you have no declared that it is
not, as I thought a Regard to the Peace and Order of the Province made our Duty.

If the Fundamentals of our Government were not disputed, these Irregularities
would appear to you in a very strong Light and you would join in
discountenancing them.

To support your Principle that you hold your Lands and d^rive your Authority
of Government from the Kings of England and not from the Crown of England you
have very largely handled the Doctrine of Feudal Tenures. I observed to you in
my last Speech that you had been misled by the Authority of an anonimous
Pamphlet. I am now obliged to observe that you are again misled by having a
general View of this Doctrine brought before you, as it respects States or
Governments under absolute Monarchs, and not as it is connected with or grafted
upon the English Constitution* I shall not therefore spend Time in examining
the Principles of your System, it being immaterial to the Point between us
whether they are just or not. Instead thereof I will in as brief and clear
Terms as I can, lay this Doctrine before you as it relates to the Government o^
England.

Let me then observe to you* that from the Nature (...) Government a Suprem^
Legislative Power must always exist over all the Parts and all the Affairs of
every Dominion -- that in absolute Monarchies the Legislative and executive
Powers are united in the Prince or Monarch -- that in the English Constitution
there is, and always has been, a Legislative Power distinct from the regal or
executive Power -- that the Feudal System, in your View of it and without
correcting, could not be introduced into the English Government without
changing the Constitution from a mixed to an absolute monarchical Government --
that this System nevertheless has been introduced, the Constitution of a mixed
Government still remaining, and consequently the System has been corrected or
altered. What this Alteration has been will appear from Historical Facts.
Before the Reign of William the First the Traces of Feudal Tenure are faint,
the Evidence of a Legislative Power, an Assembly or Council of Wise Men,
distinct from the Regal Power is strong and sufficient. After William had
obtained the Crown, the other Nations of Europe being under this System, and
particularly his Dominions in Normandy, and Wars being more frequent and
Commerce small, and the Means of furnishing Money, the Sinews of War, difficult
if not impracticable, merely for the Defense of the Kingdom this Polity was so
for established as that all the Landholders were made to contribute, by
Military or other Services, to the Defense of the State, and for this Purpose,
and by a Faction only, the Lands were in Form acknowledged to have been
originally in the King and held of him by his Subjects, and by this Form
subjected to a supposed just Proportion of the Defense and Support of the
Kingdom. This ^stablishment appears to have been made, not by an Act of Regal
Power alone but by the Authority of the great Council of the Nation or Assembly
of the Realm, and the Legislative Authority still remained, according to its
Nature, paramount and above all other Powers in the Dominion, and accordingly
from Time to Time the Abuses of the Feudal Power either in the Sovereign or in
such as held under him were corrected by the Supreme Legislative, and Magna
Charta itself was framed and agreed upon, principally if not altogether for
this Purpose. In succeeding Ages, as Commerce and M^ney increased and the Means
of supporting War became more easy, these Military Services were gradually
taken away, either, by Purchase or commuting for other Services or certain
Rents, so that at the Period when America was first granted, the Remains were
inconsiderable and the Lands of the Kingdom were held, generally, by what is
called Socage Tenure or, in other Words, an Acknowledgment of Fidelity to the
Sovereign, and a certain Rent which was in Name only, or of Value so
inconsiderable as not to be demanded. The original Claim in the Sovereign,
whether at first a Fiction or not, so far remained as that all Forfeitures, all
Escheats* all new discovered Lands accrued to him* unless the Supreme
Legislative should limit the Right to them, or otherwise dispose of them. This
was the State of Feudal Tenure in England at the Time when the first Cha^^^r
was granted, and the Difference between your System and mine will appear by
this familiar Instance: Louis the 13. of France, I think the same Year the
Massachusetts Patentees obtained the Grant of that Colony, by a Royal Edict
granted to one Hundred Associates the Country of Canada, with Powers of
Government and all the Privileges of natural born Subjects of France to all who
should go and Inhabit or be Born there, with other very great Powers and
Privileges. This, then, appears to be the different State of the People of the
two Colonies. Louis, being an absolute Monarch, the Regal and Legislative Power
were united in him. The Inhabitants of Canada therefore were subject to him and
to every succeeding King of France as their Supreme Lord who, by Virtue of his
uncontrollable Power, might at any Time revoke the Royal Edict at Pleasure, or
dissolve any Charter whatsoever even though like the famous Edict of Nantes it
had been declared irrevocable. Charles, having in him the regal Power only,
could Grant no more than was in him, and the Legislative Power which was in the
Parliament must still remain there, and consequently the Subjects of England
continued when in the Colony still subject to the regal constitutional Power of
Charles and the supreme Legislative Power of Parliament. And, I think, nothing
is more certain than that the constitutional Restraint of the regal Power in
Charles prevented the Charter from being revoked and annulled in less than Ten
Years after the Date of it.

If this brief Account of Feudal Tenure, as it is Part of the English
Constitution, be just, as I shall think it is until I have better Authority
than any I have yet seen to the contrary, the Fabric which you have raised
will still fail of Support, for it wholly depends upon very different
Principles, and upon what you hope I do not mean to introduce, viz. the Feudal
System in its Perfection. If this Support fails, there is but little Occasion
for me to remark upon the other Parts of your Message, and I shall pass them
over, except such as may tend to make wrong Impressions upon any unwary Readers.

You cannot conceive "why the King has not the same Right to alienate and
dispose of Countries acquired by the Discovery of his Subjects as he has to
restore upon a Treaty of Peace Countries acquired in War carried on at the
Charge of the Nation, or to sell and deliver up any Part of his Dominions
against the general Sense of the Nation." I will venture to conjecture a
Reason. By the English Constitution the sole Power of making War and Peace is
in the King. It often happens that the restoring and ceding Acquisitions made
in War is absolutely necessary to the Reestablishment of Peace, and if the King
was ^estrained from such Restorations or Cessions an unsuccessful War might be
perpetuated to the Destruction of the Kingdom. This Power therefore seems
necessarily to result from this Prerogative of the Crown. And for selling any
Part of the Dominions against the general Sense of the Nation I never supposed
it to be a Part of the Prerogative, but have called it an Act of Power, by
which I thought no candid Reader would understand any Thing but mere Power.

Your Attempt to show that new discovered Countries do not become Part of the
State, from the Authority of Pu^^endorff, etc. will fail, because the Instance
given by him of a Colony erected into a separate Common Wealth plainly appears
by the Context to be by the Leave or ^^nsent of the Parent State, and it does
not appear that the other Cases were not so.

Your Remark upon the Authority I bring to show that the Colony, being
feudatory, is under the Government of the King's Laws, is very singular. You
suppose it must mean the King's Laws absolutely, or as you explain it, not the
Laws of Parliament. Do any of you remember ever to have seen the Expression,
the King's Laws, meaning the King of England, used in any other Sense than the
Laws of the Realm? You say I have not named the Authority. The Case I refer to
is the King against Crowle, in the 2d. Vol Burrow's Reports, and for the
Authority, which you will find mentioned there, I am not able to name a greater.

I would pass over in Silence your Attempt to show that Allegiance is due to
the natural Person and not to the Body Politic of the King, if I had not been
well informed that the artificial Reasoning of Lord Chief Justice Coke upon the
Doctrine of Allegiance, in the noted Case of Calvin* as you have recited it,
had great Weight with some of the Members of the House. But have you recited
this Case truly? After all the Refinements on this Subject does it appear that
they can amount to any Thing more than that Allegiance is not due to the
Politic Capacity only? And is it not expressly said that the natural Person of
the King is ever accompanied with the Politic Capacity, and the Politic
Capacity as it were appropriated to the Natural Capacity? Or have you any clear
Idea of Allegiance to a King in his natural Capacity without any Relation to
his political Capacity? From this Authority misunderstood you infer that I am
mistaken in supposing your Allegiance to be due to the Crown of England.
Without any Refinements, it is plain that it was one Condition, on the
Performance whereof the first Charter depended, that Allegiance should be borne
to King Charles his Heirs and Successors. Wherever therefore the Succession to
the Crown shall go there Allegiance is to follow. The Condition in the second
Charter is the same, and this is enough for my Purpose, which was to show that
in whatever Person the Regal Authority shall be, there your Allegiance is due.
I wish you had omitted all you have said upon this Subject, for neither the
Reasoning of Lord Coke, nor the Declarations of the Judges, in any Measure tend
to the Purpose for which you produce them.

Your Assertion that Parliament, in regulating the Fishery, had nothing in View
but to prevent a Monopoly of the Sea, and claimed no Authority over the
Plantations or Lands in America, has only your own Authority to support it. It
appears from the Debates in Parliament, that it was the Refusal of the
Patentees to suffer Fish to be dried upon the Land within their Patent, by any
Person who had not License from them, which was complained of as a Grievance,
and the Bill was brought in to remove this Grievance: The King might very well
refuse his Assent, not because Parliament had no Jurisdiction, but because he
did not think fit to join with the Lords and Commons in an Act which
invalidated or abridged those Privileges in a Patent of Lands which by his
Royal Prerogative he had a Right to grant.

I will make no particular Remarks upon those Parts of your Message which
relate to the Sense the People have had of their Constitution, as there can be
no End to Disputes upon Facts which by small Deviations from the true State of
them may be made to serve one Side or the other.

It is evident that the first Settlers of this Colony left* England with a just
Sense of their Dependence -- that the Sense continued until the Principles of
Anarchy in England spread in America, and it is conceded that these Principles
were avowed by many of the Inhabitants here for near twenty Years after they
were exploded in England. It is equally certain, that at the Time of the
Revolution the People returned to a just Sense of the Supremacy of Parliament,
and I think I may very sa^ely say that the oldest Person in the Province has
never heard the Supremacy called in Question until within a few Years past.

You again express your Concern that I should thus repeatedly insist upon your
giving your free Sentiments on so delicate a Subject as the Authority of
Parliament. In the Beginning of your Message you (...) the Town of Boston and
the other Towns in the P^^vince, which have met together and (...) upon the
same Subject, and (...) their P^^^^^dings Matter of R^cord and published them
in Newspapers; and yet in the Close of it you ass^rt that the Subject is too
delicate and of too great Importance for you to consider. Certain^y then it
must have been extremely irregular in the Towns to take upon them separ^^e^y to
determine Points which they had no Authority to determine, and in this Way to
influence if not determine the Acts and Doings of their Representatives in
General Assembly, who cannot have the same Freedom of thinking and acting,
(...) their Constituents have determined and resolved, as they had before.

Gentlemen of the Council and House of Representatives,

I am sensible that nice Distinctions of civil Rights and legal Constitutions
are far above the Reach of the Bulk of Mankind to comprehend. There are,
however, a few plain fundamental Principles of Government which carry within
themselves such Evidence as cannot be resisted, and are no sooner proposed than
assented to -- Such as these -- That in every Government there must be
somewhere a supreme uncontrollable Power, an absolute Authority to decide and
determine -- That two such Powers cannot coexist, but necessarily will make two
distinct States -- That in a State of Society we give up Part of our natural
Lib^rty in order to ^^cure that legal Freedom which it is the great End of
Government to maintain and preserve -- That a Right in Individuals or Parts of
a Government to judge of the Decisions of the Supreme Authority and to submit
or not submit as they think proper, cannot consist with a State of Government
and must work the Dissolution of it. Whilst these Principles had their due
Influence we enjoyed all that Freedom and all those other Blessings which a
State of Government will admit of. Our Connection with our Parent State secured
these Blessings to us, and by Means of a nominal Dependence we possessed as
great a Share of real Freedom as the Parent State itself upon which we are said
to depend.

I have laid before you, Gentlemen, what appeared to me to be the true
Constitution of the Province, and recommended an Adherence to it because I
believed it would restore us to and continue us in that happy State in which we
flourished so long a Course of Years.

Certainly it is of the utmost Importance to you that these Points should be
settled, for I know of no Maxim in the Law of greater Truth than this. Where
the Constitution is contested and the Laws are vague and uncertain, there, will
be the greatest Slavery.

ERRATA.
PAGE 30, Line 31, for Governor, read Government. -- p. 42, l. 19, f.
satisfied, r. sanctified. -- l. 20, f. Reputation, r. Repetition. -- p. 52, l.
3, f. it, r. its. -- p. 57, ^. 3, f. Affect^, r. Effects. -- p. 80, l. 24, f.
Cape And, r. Cape Cod. -- In some of the Copies, P. 110. l. 15. f. thereof, r.
therefore -- and P. 118. l. 31. f. Faction, r. Fiction.


