A FORENSIC DISPUTE ON The Legality of enslaving the AFRICANS, HELD At the
public COMMENCEMENT IN CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND, JULY 21st, 1773.

BY Two CANDIDATES For the BACHELOR's Degree.

BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOIL, for THOMAS LEVERETT, Near the POST OFFICE in
Cornhill. MDCCLXXIII.

A Forensic Dispute, etc.
A. MY friend, the last question Colorum diversitas, diversas inter gentes ex
climatum differentia praecipue oritur.
has suggested another; which, as it is acknowledged by all to be far from
unimportant, and, in the apprehensions of many, by no means improper to be
attentively considered by this people at the present day; the candor of this
truly venerable, this learned and polite assembly will excuse us in attempting,
in a few words, to examine, Whether the slavery, to which Africans are in this
province, by the permission of law, subjected, be agreeable to the law of
nature? And since, fully persuaded of the truth of those principles, in which
is founded the idea of natural equality, to the exclusion of a right in one
individual of the human species to exercise any degree of authority over
another without his consent, I am obliged to appear in favor of the negative of
the proposition; and since, if I rightly remember, I have sometimes heard you
express a very different sentiment, if you are disposed to join in the
proposal, I will first attend to what may be offered on your part in support of
it. And shall therefore only observe, that the strangely inconsistent conduct
of mankind, respecting this matter, furnishes us with reflections upon the
present state of human nature by no means the most agreeable. To me, I confess,
it is matter of painful astonishment, that in this enlightened age and land,
where the principles of natural and civil Liberty, and consequently the natural
rights of mankind are so generally understood, the case of these unhappy
Africans should gain no more attention; -- that those, who are so readily
disposed to urge the principles of natural equality in defense of their own
Liberties, should, with so little reluctance, continue to exert a power, by the
operation of which they are so flagrantly contradicted. For what less can be
said of that exercise of power, whereby such multitudes of our fellow-men,
descendants, my friend from the same common parent with you and me, and between
whom and us nature has made no distinction, save what arises from the stronger
influence of the sun in the climate whence they originated, are held to groan
under the insupportable burden of the most abject slavery, without one chearing
beam to refresh their desponding souls; and upon whose dreary path not even the
feeblest ray of hope is permitted to dawn, and whose only prospect of
deliverance is -- in death. If indeed the law protects their lives, (which is
all that can be said even here, and more -- shame to mankind! -- more than can
be said in some of our sister colonies According to an act of Virginia (4 Anne,
Chapter 49. sect. 37. p. 227.) After proclamation is issued against slaves that run
away and lie out, it is lawful for any person whatever, to kill and destroy
such slaves by such ways and means as he, she, or they shall think fit, without
accusation or impeachment of any crime for the same, etc. And it is enacted in
the succeeding clause (No. 38.) That for every slave killed, in pursuance of
this act, or put to death by law, the master or owner of such slave, shall be
paid by the public.
) the only favor these unhappy people receive, from such protection, is a
continuation of their misery; the preservation of a life, every moment of which
is worse than nonexistence. A favor this, no doubt, that in a very special
manner demands acknowledgement!

B. Though conscious, my friend, of my inability, the most advantageously to
represent the arguments in favor of this proposition, especially when
circumscribed within the narrow limits the present occasion will allow; yet
clearly convinced of the propriety of attentively considering this question,
especially at a period when persons of every denomination are so justly
affected with a sense of Liberty, I readily comply; rather hoping that if any
present, are in doubt respecting this matter, they will take occasion from
hence, so fully to examine it, as to procure satisfaction to themselves, than
expecting what shall be now offered on my part will have so desirable an effect.

I am well aware of the difficulty of his task who attempts to defend a
proposition of this nature. An heart replete with benevolence and compassion
will hardly admit reasoning that involves principles seemingly incompatible
with the happiness of any. Suffer me therefore to entreat you, that every
tender sentiment, that even the feelings of humanity may be suspended, while we
calmly attend to the voice of reason, which is the voice of nature's alwise and
benevolent Author.

That Liberty to all is sweet I freely own; but still it is what, in a state of
society at least, all cannot equally enjoy, and what even in a free government
can be enjoyed in the most perfect sense by none. Such is the nature of
society, that it requires various degrees of authority and subordination; and
while the universal rule of right, the happiness of the whole, allows greater
degrees of Liberty to some, the same immutable law suffers it to be enjoyed
only in less degrees by others. And though my friend, I can most cordially join
with you in the benevolent wish, that it were possible that these Africans, who
I am free with you to call my brethren, and to whom, it is confessed, the
principles of our civil constitution allow but a small degree of liberty, might
enjoy it equally with us; yet 'till I am convinced it might comport with the
rule above mentioned, to allow them more I am in duty bound to appear an
advocate for those principles.

Let it therefore be remembered, that the question to be considered is,
"Whether the slavery, to which Africans are in this Province, by the permission
of law, subjected, be agreeable to the law of nature?"

It is, I presume, scarcely necessary to observe to you, that by the law of
nature is intended that law which is the measure of all our moral actions, and
by which their fitness and propriety, and consequently their justice or
injustice, are to be determined. In other words, that law to which whatever
action is in it is nature fit and proper, just and right, is agreeable, and to
which every action of an opposite nature is disagreable. This, then being
intended by the law of nature, whether the justice of African slavery, if found
agreeable to this law, is defensible, will be needless to inquire. But it will
be said, through this definition of the law of nature be admitted, we are still
to be informed what those actions are, that are agreeable to this law, and
consequently right. I answer, whatever action in it is nature, concomitant
circumstances being considered; tends to happiness on the whole, is agreeable to
this law, and every action of a contrary tendency is hereunto disagreable. And
hence it will follow, that whatever practical principle of society, (which is
to be considered as the action of the community) has this tendency, is to be
reputed just, and approved and adopted, and those of a contrary tendency
consequently disapproved.

To demonstrate this, it will be necessary only to observe, that as nothing in
nature can possibly be of the least consequence but happiness or misery, so the
difference in the tendency of the practical principles of any society to the
production of these, is the only thing that can possibly render some eligible,
fit and proper, rather than others; and was it not for this distinction, it
must forever remain a matter of perfect indifference, what practical principles
were in any society adopted. But without stopping more fully to demonstrate the
truth of this principle, it having been recognized as well by the generality of
ethic writers, as by the wisdom of all good governments, I shall proceed to
enquire, how far it will operate to the determination of the present question.

And in the first place, I shall enquire into the agreement of the law of
nature with the idea of slavery in general, in opposition to that principle of
natural equality, which is so zealously contended for by the advocates for
universal Liberty.

By slavery in general I mean the involuntary subordination of the will of one
to that of another; whereby, independent of all compact, the actions of the
former are in all things to be directed by the will of the latter. Now if
slavery in general, according to this definition, be agreeable to the law of
nature, the principle of natural equality must fall, and in order to determine
the question in dispute, it will be necessary only to apply the general
principle to the case of the African subordination, whereby it will be casy to
discern if there is any thing in the nature of their particular case not
agreeable hereto.

I am therefore now to show, that slavery, as above defined, is not repugnant
to the law of nature, and therefore that the principle of natural equality
cannot be true.

That right of authority is to be found in some being involving subordination
in others, independent of all voluntary contract on the part of the
subordinate, is, as far as I know, universally acknowledged. Such is the right
of the Governor of the universe to govern and direct the conduct of all finite
existences, and such is the right of parents to govern and direct the conduct
of their children. Now if it be found, that there is the same foundation for
authority and subordination among different individuals of the human species,
between whom no such relations as those abovementioned do subsist, as there is
for authority and subordination in those cases where it is acknowledged to be
just, it will follow, that degrees of rightful authority in some, involving
degrees of subordination in others, must be admitted among them likewise. In
other words, if the reason and foundation of the absolute authority of the
Governor of the universe over the creation, and the limited authority of
parents over their children, be found to operate with equal strength in favor
of a right of some individuals among mankind to exercise any degrees of
authority over others, the exercise of such authority must be acknowledged
just, i. e. agreeable to the law of nature. And now to determine this question,
it is necessary to inquire, in what the right of authority, in the cases
abovementioned, is founded: And here the answer is obvious, in the greatest
good of the whole. For since the Governor of the universe is possessed of
power, wisdom, and goodness in perfection of degree, it is impossible but that
the greatest happiness to the creation should be the result of his exercise of
the most absolute sovereignty. And though this right of absolute authority in
the Creator over his creatures be inseparable from the relation between Creator
and creature, yet it is not founded simply in that relation, that is, in the
idea of derived existence; but in the natural imperfection and dependence of
the creature, and the natural perfection of the Creator, and the reason of the
necessarily absolute subjection of the creature does not consist merely in his
having received existence, but in his having received it from such a Being; a
Being by the perfection of his nature qualified for the most perfect
government, and under whose administration it is impossible but that the
beforementioned immutable law of nature, the greatest happiness of the whole,
should operate to effect. Agreeable to this is the foundation of the natural
authority of parents over their children; it by no means consisting in the
notion of derived existence; but in the different qualifications of parents and
children to execute this immutable law: For while parents so far excel their
children in wisdom, and from natural affection are disposed to promote their
happiness, it will follow, that more happiness will result to both, from the
exercise of authority in parents, and subordination in children, than from the
exercise of equal Liberty in each. And that this authority of parents over
their children is derived from this source, and not from the natural relation
subsisting between them, considered merely as parents and offspring, is
moreover evident beyond all contradiction from this consideration, that
whenever the parent is by any means disqualified, in the respects before
mentioned, to direct the conduct of his child, the subordination of the child
ceases.

If this, which I think none will deny, be a just representation of the
foundation in nature of authority and subordination; in order to justify
involuntary slavery in general, in opposition to the notion of natural
equality, it is necessary only to inquire, whether among different individuals,
between whom there is no such natural relation as that of parent and offspring,
there be not the same reason, ground, and foundation in nature for the exercise
of authority in some, necessarily involving subordination in others, which
there is in cases where such relation actually subsists. And concerning this,
no one surely can remain a moment undetermined, who reflects with the least
degree of attention, upon the vast inequality observable between different
individuals of the human species, in point of qualification for the proper
direction of conduct. Now whether this inequality be considered as arising from
difference in natural capacity, difference in the means of improvement, or in
disposition properly to employ such means; in a word, whether it arises from
nature or education, or any other supposeable quarter, it matters not, while
this is in fact the case, while some are actually found so far to excel others
both in respect of wisdom and benevolence, both in the knowledge of the
principles of propriety, and a disposition to practice such principles, that
the general end, happiness, would be better promoted by the exercise of
authority in the former, though necessarily involving subordination in the
latter, than by the enjoyment of equal Liberty in each, the exercise of such
authority must be right, and never the less so, though the individuals by such
an economy subordinated, do not consent. It is fit that children should be
subjected to the authority of their parents, whether they consent to such
subjection or not; this is put beyond all possibility of doubt by the express
declaration of wisdom which cannot err; not to mention the consent of all ages
in their approbation of the principles of those civil societies which have
warranted the exercise of such authority. Every law is applicable to all cases
within the same reason; and since it cannot be denied that the reason of
authority and subordination between parents and children, equally applies to
the support of a distinction of the same kind among others not so related, it
follows inevitably, that a distinction in the latter case is equally
justifiable with one in the former; they are both supported by the same
principle of natural law, and therefore must stand or fall together.

I have introduced these observations upon the foundation of the authority of
the Governor of the universe over the creation, and of parents over their
children, for the sake of example, rather than as necessary to support the
general idea of inequality: I say as necessary, for while there is so
manifestly great an inequality in the capacities and dispositions of mankind to
direct their own as well as the conduct of others, to its only proper end, I
think it demonstrable, that the principle of absolute equality could not be
supported, even though we had no argument from fact by which it might be
illustrated. And in truth, I think, before the principle of absolute equality
can be maintained, it must be made to appear, that all mankind, in point of
capacity and disposition to conduct properly, are equal.

It now remains only to apply these general principles to the particular case
of Africans in this country, and see what degree of authority the people here
are thereby warranted to exercise over them; and if it shall appear in fact,
that they are not reduced by the law of this land to a degree of subordination
beyond what the law of nature abovementioned, the happiness of both, requires,
it will follow undeniably, that the law by which they are thus subjected is
just.

A. Before you proceed to the application you mention, permit me to make an
observation, that perhaps may render such application unnecessary. I think you
have by no means supported the idea of slavery in general; but that your
argument in favor of natural inequality, though ingeniously enough conducted,
is manifestly inconclusive, and that the contrary, notwithstanding all you have
alleged, may still be true. For though I acknowledge, that in every society
the practical principle that in it is operation tends to the greatest happiness
of the whole is right, i. e. agreeable to the law of nature, and that the
absolute authority of the Governor of the universe, and the limited authority
of parents over their children is founded in the reason you allege; and also
admit, among different individuals, all those different degrees of
qualification for the proper direction of conduct for which you contend; yet
that the natural right of independence is hence excluded, and the principle of
natural equality consequently overthrown is by no means acknowledged. The
reason is obvious, that the principle for which you contend is in the nature of
things utterly impracticable; your conclusion therefore, from premises implying
a false hypothesis, cannot be admitted.

The exercise of authority, only in cases where such exercise is productive of
happiness, is undoubtedly right: But such is the constitution of things with
regard to man, such his nature, state, and condition, as renders it absolutely
impossible that a principle, warranting the exercise of authority in any
particular case, independent of the consent of the subordinate, should be
correspondent to this end. And for this good reason, that it is impossible for
human wisdom to distinguish the cases where the exercise of such authority
would be proper, from those where it would not be so; and could this be
effected, it would still be utterly impossible for any practical principle of
society, for any human law to make the distinction. The same law which would
warrant the exercise of authority in one case, must of necessity warrant it in
another; unless it could be supposed, that some infallible judge could be
present at all times, and in all places, and direct the operation of law in
every particular case. And were even this possible, it might still be doubted
whether the principle of natural equality would be overthrown. Such are the
weaknesses and imperfections, the passions and prejudices of the best of men,
and so deeply are all impressed with a sense of Liberty and independence, that
it may well be questioned, whether a law, warranting authority in those cases
only where it would be most proper, were such law possible, would operate more
to the general happiness, than a law establishing the principle of natural
equality: For though in that case, many would conduct less foolishly than they
now do; yet the idea of servitude, and dependence upon the will of another,
would be a perpetual, and not unfruitful source of misery. But whatever might
be the effect of such a constitution, since that is confessedly impossible, it
is evident beyond all contradiction, that the principle of natural equality is
infinitely better adapted to the general end, happiness, than any other
practical principle that can possibly be established. Hence I think it is
manifest, notwithstanding the plausible appearance of your reasoning in theory,
since it will not endure the true touchstone of practice, that slavery, which
many to their cost know to be a practical thing, is far from being supported
thereby.

Your notion of the ground and foundation of natural authority, in the examples
you have adduced, is undoubtedly just, and consent in those cases, is by no
means necessary to subordination, but, unfortunately for your conclusion, the
cases are far from being applicable to the point in hand: For as in one case,
perfection of wisdom and goodness excludes the possibility of error, and
renders the most perfect subjection necessarily best; so the principle of
affection implanted by the Author of nature in the breast of the parent,
inspiring such a tender concern for the welfare of his offspring, and so
strongly operative to the production of kind offices toward him, together with
the natural inability of the child, through weakness or inexperience, to be his
own director, may well warrant a general rule of limited subordination in the
other. And when you have shown me the man, or number of men, capable of
infallibly directing the conduct of others, the exercise of authority in them,
shall not want my approbation. And when you shall point out to me any classes
of men, between whom there is such a comparative difference in point of ability
for the proper direction of conduct, as between parents and children, and the
same disposition in the superior toward the inferior, that the Author of
nature has implanted in the hearts of parents toward their children, I will
readily acknowledge the exercise of a like degree of authority justifiable by
the law of nature.

But I am much at a loss to conceive how your reasoning in favor of slavery in
general, were it ever so fully conclusive, could possibly justify us in thus
forcibly subjugating the Africans, between whom and us nature seems to have
made no such difference as that, upon which you suppose the notion of natural
inequality to be founded: For I suppose you will hardly imagine the darkness of
a man's skin incapacitates him for the direction of his conduct, and authorizes
his neighbors, who may have the good fortune of a complexion a shade or two
lighter, to exercise authority over him. And if the important difference does
not lay here, it seems not very easy to determine where it does; unless
perchance, it be in the quality of their hair; and if the principle of
subordination lies here, I would advise every person, whose hair is inclined to
deviate from a right line, to be upon his guard. If indeed any should allege,
that they are distinguished by the flatness of their noses, I cannot but think
this circumstance against them, for if a man is to be led and governed by the
nose, it may well be questioned, whether a nose of a different figure would not
be better adapted to the purpose.

B. My friend, I am no enemy to humor, but I think it rarely serves to
illustrate a logical conclusion. I confess my argument, as you have represented
it, appears ridiculous enough; but if you had deferred your reply till I had
made an application of the principle to the point in hand, perhaps it had saved
you this needless expense of wit. I have not pretended, as a consequence from
my principles, that every degree of superiority in point of discretion would
warrant to any individual of a community a right to exercise authority over his
neighbor: I have only contended, that the notion of equality, in the strict
sense, had no foundation in nature; but as happiness is the only end of action,
so superiority in wisdom, goodness, etc. is in the nature of things a proper
foundation of authority. And as nature has made differences among creatures in
these respects; so it is fit and proper, and agreeable to nature's law, that
different degrees of authority in point of direction of conduct should be
exercised by them; and that in some cases, even among the human species, this
difference is so important, as to render the exercise of authority justifiable,
even without the consent of the governed: For this I have produced an example
from fact, in the case of parents and children. All this you have implicitly
allowed. I now go on to say, as a consequence from the same acknowledged
principle, that whenever such a connection of things takes place, that any
number of men cannot, consistently with the good of the whole, have a residence
in any community but in a state of involuntary subordination, and that their
residence in such community notwithstanding such subordination, be in fact best
for the whole, such subordination, though involuntary, is no violation of the
law of nature; but on the contrary to all intents and purposes correspondent
thereto. This is a true conclusion from premises incontestible, principles
universally acknowledged, and which you yourself have but now admitted.
Subordination in this case comes fully within the reason of the subordination
of children, rests on precisely the same foundation, and is therefore
justifiable on precisely the same principles. For whether the necessity of such
subordination arises from natural incapacity, or from any other quarter, it
matters not, if this is in fact the case; if the interest of the whole does
require it; let the causes or reasons of such requirement be what they may,
such subordination is equally justifiable as in any other case whatever; not
only in the case of children, but even in the case of consent; for the
obligation to submission arising from consent, is founded in the general
obligation to fulfill contracts; which obligation is ultimately founded in the
good of society.

Now fully within this predicament lies, as I conceive, the particular case of
Africans in this country. That it is only in a state of limited subordination
(I say limited, for it is to be remembered, that the authority of those to whom
they are subordinate, is restricted by the superior authority of law, to which
we are all subordinate, and which provides that they, as well as others, shall
be treated according to the general principles of humanity) that these people
can consistently enjoy a residence among us is, I suppose, acknowledged by all.
And whether it is not better for them to reside here, notwithstanding such
subordination, even regard being had to their interest only, than in their
native country, no one can doubt, at least no one, who has a tolerably adequate
conception of their misery, and wretchedness there. Figure to yourself my
friend, you are not unacquainted with African history, figure to yourself the
delightful situation of a natural inhabitant of Africa. View him necessarily
destitute of every mean of improvement in social virtue, of every advantage for
the cultivation of those principles of humanity, in which alone consists the
dignity of the rational nature, and from which only source springs all that
pleasure, that happiness of life, by which the human species is distinguished
from the other parts of the animal creation. Consider his situation as a
candidate for an eternal existence; view him as necessarily ignorant of every
principle of that religion, through the happy influence of which alone the
degenerate race of Adam can rationally form the most distant expectation of
future felicity. View him moreover in a state of the most abject slavery, a
slavery of the worst kind, a slavery of all others most destructive of human
happiness, -- an entire subjection to the tyrannizing power of lust and
passion, -- wholly devoted to the governing influence of those irregular
propensities, which are the genuine offspring of depraved nature, when
unassisted by philosophy or religion. Behold him actually clothed in all that
brutal stupidity, that savage barbarity which naturally springs from such a
source. Add to this, his condition of perpetual insecurity, arising from the
state of hostility and war that forever rages in those inhospitable climes; and
consider the treatment he is to expect, whom the fortune of war has subjected
to the power of his enraged foe, whose natural cruelty is perpetually
sharpened, and whose desire of revenge is continually cherished, by a sense of
his own danger. Reflect, I say, a moment upon the condition of a creature in
human shape, (for in such a state of degradation one can hardly call him a man)
the misery, the wretchedness of whose situation is by these expressions but
faintly represented; and compare it with the condition of a slave in this
country; and then see if you can hesitate one moment which of the two is most
eligible. If peradventure a doubt should arise, if you will please to enquire,
whether you would rather choose one, for whose prosperity you was tenderly
concerned, should be educated in Africa, with all the immunities of a native
African, or in this country, though in that state of subordination, to which
Africans are here subjected, I will venture to warrant you of every such doubt
a speedy resolution.

Here then I rest the argument, for upon this point the present question must
infallibly determine. Notwithstanding all the uneasiness attending
subordination, and all the miseries to which an African is exposed in his
removal from his native country; while his condition here is so much more
eligible than his condition there, his removal is to be esteemed a favor: And
the constitution of our government, whereby such removal is countenanced and
encouraged, is by no means to be esteemed reprehensible. It is in vain to
allege here the want of consent on his part. It is evident from the reasoning
above, that consent, in order to subjection, is necessary in those cases only
where the end of authority, the greatest possible good, cannot be promoted
without it: But who I beseech you, ever thought the consent of a child, an
idiot, or a madman necessary to his subordination? Every whit as immaterial is
the consent of these miserable Africans, whose real character seems to be a
compound of the three last mentioned. What can avail his consent, who through
ignorance of the means necessary to promote his happiness, is rendered
altogether incapable of choosing for himself? And as the consent of such a
being could by no means involve subordination in a case where it would be
otherwise improper, so the want of it can be no bar in a case where it would
not. In all such cases it is undoubtedly the duty of those, whom providence has
favored with the means of improvement in understanding, and the wisdom
resulting from such improvement, to make use of their discretion in directing
the conduct of those who want it.

I am sensible that I have already dwelt too long upon this argument; you will
however in this connection, permit me to add, that were involuntary subjection,
in all cases, contrary to the law of nature, it is impossible to suppose, that
the Governor of the universe, whose wisdom is infinite, and whose will is
eternally and immutably coincident with, and when revealed to us, the measure
of, this law, should ever have expressly tolerated it in any particular
instance. I mention this in the present connection, the rather because I suppose
the authority, the Israelites, when under a government absolutely theocratical,
were permitted to exercise over strangers, was founded in the same reason with
the authority, for which I contend, viz: that it was better for them to reside
among a people, where they might have some opportunity for improvement in
knowledge and virtue, though in a state of subordination, than to remain
amongst the barbarous and idolatrous nations, whence they originated.

Were it necessary or expedient, it would be easy to show, by comparison, in a
great variety of instances not mentioned, the superiority of a slave in this
country, in point of condition, to a natural inhabitant of Africa. And though
it be too true, that these unhappy creatures are, in many particular cases,
cruelly treated, yet, while their importation is to them a redemption from a
condition on the whole so much more miserable, we must, as I said before,
justify the government in tolerating such importation; and with regard to the
particular instances of abuse, we can only say caveant qui sunt conscii.

I have omitted the right, sometimes pretended to be derived from purchase,
because I look upon the argument to be trifling. For though right of authority,
if it be well founded, be possibly, in some cases, transferable, yet it is well
known, that all the authority any one of these miserable creatures can pretend
to over another, is founded merely in the fortune of a brutal, savage war,
conducted without the lest regard, on either side, to any principles of equity,
justice, or national honor; and for the right of authority so founded I have no
disposition to contend. But I think there is much more in their argument who
contend that, by the purchase of these victims, their lives are preserved,
which would otherwise undoubtedly be sacrificed to the cruelty of the captors.
For though I am sensible, that to this is commonly replied, that the custom of
purchasing captives is a perpetual source of war; yet if we consider that a
people, so inhumanly savage as to dispose of their nearest relations for
baubles, can never want matter of discord; and that, was it not for the
advantages in this way made of them, the captives would generally perish, we
shall have no reason to doubt whether the custom of purchasing may in this way
be considered as a favor.

On the whole, since it is evident beyond all controversy, that the removal of
the Africans, from the state of brutality, wretchedness, and misery, in which
they are at home to deeply involved, to this land of light, humanity, and
christian knowledge, is to them so great a blessing; however faulty any
individuals may have been in point of unnecessary cruelty, practiced in this
business; yet, whether the general state of subordination here, which is a
necessary consequence of their removal, be agreeable to the law of nature, can
by no means longer remain a question.

A. Notwithstanding all you have so ingeniously alleged in support of this
question, I am still obliged to confess myself one of those in whom your
reasoning has failed to produce conviction: And must be excused in saying that
the justice of slavery generally understood, is still, for aught I am able to
discern, far from being supported. -- It is true the Israelites when under a
theocratical government were permitted, under certain circumstances, to
exercise authority over strangers resident among them. And this is adduced as
an argument, infallibly conclusive in favor of slavery. But is it certain that
this conclusion is not drawn a little too hastily?

The Governor of the universe has, in a certain instance, expressly tolerated
slavery, Nothing was ever by him tolerated but what was agreeable to the law of
nature. Therefore, -- Slavery is lawful. The man must have a very extraordinary
talent who can deduce this conclusion from such premises. -- It is readily
granted, that thus much may be justly inferred from them, viz. that such a
particular connection of things once took place, as rendered slavery, under the
express permission of the Governor of the universe, lawful. But will it follow
from hence, that slavery is ever lawful without such permission? As well may we
infer a right, by the law of nature, to put any who are unable to resist our
power, under harrows and axes of iron, and in a word, make the particular
precept in any case, given the Israelites, a measure, whereby to explain those
general laws of nature, which are to regulate the conduct of all mankind. It is
undoubtedly true, that every express declaration of the Governor of the
universe is agreeable to, and justly explanatory of, the law of nature, as far
as such declaration extends: And the conduct of any particular person, or
people, which is agreeable to such declaration is most certainly right; but it
can never be certainly inferred from hence, that a like conduct in others, not
having the same warrant, is agreeable to this law: For the imperfection of
human wisdom renders it forever uncertain, whether the cases are in all
respects similar; and consequently, it can never be certainly determined, that
the same conduct will, in both cases, have the same natural tendency to
happiness; and hence the same conduct, that in the former case was right, may
in the latter, be wrong. But could even this be ascertained, there would still
remain an insuperable difficulty in determining the actions of one people to be
right, merely from an express toleration of the same, or like actions in
another: And this arises solely from the want of such toleration. If it be
objected, that an action, in it is nature unfit, could not be tolerated; it may
be answered, that the same action, when so expressly authorized, may be fit and
proper, and in it is nature right, which without such toleration, would not be
so; and for this plain reason, that the same action, when by rightful authority
permitted, may have on the whole a tendency to happiness, which without such
permission, would have an opposite tendency.

If this reasoning be just (the validity of which, I am happily too well
acquainted with your knowledge of the principles of argumentation, to doubt
whether you will dispute) how far the lawfulness of the practice of slavery
among the Israelites, when expressly tolerated by the Governor of the universe,
will justify a people in a like practice, to whom no such toleration has ever
been granted, is by no means difficult to discern. And before the principle of
natural equality can be overthrown, the tendency of slavery to the good of
mankind, must, by arguments drawn from the nature and constitution of things,
be made evidently to appear.

I have no disposition to contend for the support of principles not founded in
sufficient reason; was I convinced, that the principle of natural equality,
universally understood, was not founded in the general good of mankind,
notwithstanding the consent of philosophers in all ages, I would readily give
it up. And was I persuaded, that the practice of enslaving Africans, as
tolerated in this province, was consonant to this end. I should no longer doubt
of it is propriety: But unhappily for my apprehension this is far from being the
case.

Was it possible to consider this case as standing alone, independent of it is
connexions with practices of a like kind in other places, and the more
extensive influence it may consequently have upon the happiness of mankind, it
is at least doubtful if it would then be right. I am ready to allow, that was
it certain that their condition here is happier on the whole, than in their own
country, your premises, in this independent view of the matter, would well
warrant your conclusion; but even this I apprehend is far from being true. You
have represented the misery and wretchedness of these people in their native
land, in a light indeed disagreeable enough: But I am still disposed from my
apprehension of the dignity of the rational nature, at least to hope that your
coloring is a little too strong; and that notwithstanding the unhappy state of
degradation into which they are confessedly sunk, they are still some degrees
above brutes. It is acknowledged that they are extremely unacquainted with the
politer arts, and almost wholly ignorant of every thing belonging to science,
and consequently strangers to all the pleasures of a scholar and a philosopher;
they are also confessedly destitute of an acquaintance with the principles of
urbanity and consequently want, in a great measure, the happiness resulting
from a well regulated civil society; their condition is allowedly not greatly
different from a state of nature; though it is to be remembered, that if modern
writers of the best reputation are to be credited, their manners, in most parts
of that extensive country, are far less savage and barbarous; their
conveniences and enjoyments much more numerous, and in a word their manner of
life much more agreeable than has been heretofore represented. We beg leave to
subjoin some extracts from several authors, quoted by Anthony Benezet, in a
work, published at Philapelphia in 1771. Page 15, and 16. M. Adanson,
correspondent of the royal academy of sciences at Paris, who spent four years
in making natural and philosophical observations on the country about the
rivers Senegal and Gambia, speaking of the appearance of the country, and the
disposition of the people, says, which way soever I turned my eyes on this
pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect image of pure nature; an agreeable solitude,
bounded on every side by charming landscapes; the rural situation of cottages
in the midst of trees; the ease and indolence of the Negroes reclining under
the shade of their spreading foliage; the simplicity of their dress and
manners; the whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and I
seemed to contemplate the world in it is primitive state. They are, generally
speaking, very good natured, sociable and obliging. I was not a little pleased
with this my first reception; it convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made in the accounts I had read and heard of the savage
character of the Africans. Adanson 's voyage to Senegal, etc. page 54.

Page 10. Francis Moor, in his account of the Fuliblacks, says, Their form of
government goes on easy, because the people are of a good quiet disposition,
and so well instructed with what is right, that the man who does ill is the
abomination of all, and none will support him against the chief. If any of
their people are known to be made slaves, all the Fulis will join to redeem
them; they also support the old, the blind and lame amongst themselves, and, as
far as their abilities go, they supply the necessities of the Mandingos, (among
whom they dwell) great numbers of whom they have maintained in famine. The
author adds, that they were rarely angry, that he never heard them abuse each
other. Moor's travels into distant parts of Africa, page 21.

Smith and Bosman, who had been in Guinea, speak-of the kingdom of Whidah on
the slave coast, unitedly declare, That it was one of the most delightful
countries in the world -- That the natives were kind and obliging, and so
industrious, that no place which was thought fertile, was left uncultivated.
Smith's voyage to Guinea, page 149. Bosman's description of Guinea, page 316.

Smith, speaking of their government, observes, That the gold coasts and slave
coasts are divided into several districts, some of which are governed by their
chiefs or kings; the other being more of the nature of a commonwealth, are
governed by some of the principal men, who, Bosman says, are properly
denominated civil fathers; whose province it is to take care of the welfare of
the city or village, and to prevent tumults. Smith 193.

In Astley's collections it is remarked, as an excellency in the Guinea
government, That however poor, they may be in general, yet they have no beggars
there. Which is owing to the care of their chief men, part of whose province it
is to see that such people earn their bread by their labor. Astley's col. 2
Vol. page 619.

Bosman ascribes: further reason for this good order, That when a Negro finds
he cannot subsist, he binds himself for a certain sum of money, and the master
to whom he is bound, is obliged to find him necessaries. That his service is
not in the least slavish* being chiefly to defend his master on occasions; or
in sowing time to work as much as he himself pleases. Bosman, page 119.


And indeed it is not to be wondered that those who have been disposed to make
a gain by this iniquitous practice of enslaving their fellow men, should be
careful, for their justification, to represent them as nearly upon a level with
the brute creation as possible; not to mention the ridiculous attempts that
have, in this view, been made to prove them actually of another species. But
granting their condition to be, as in fact it is, comparatively low; that their
sources of happiness, when compared with those which the members of a
well-ordered civil society enjoy, are few; yet it is not to be forgotten, that
their appetites and desires are in some good measure proportional. Nemo
desiderat quae ignorant. The benevolent author of our being has accommodated our
natural desires in a great measure to the natural means of gratification. And
he who attentively considers the anxious and perplexing cares; the fatiguing
and often fruitless labors; the cravings of unnatural appetites; the frequently
disappointed views and expectations; and, in a word, the various and almost
innumerable new sources of infelicity naturally, and many of them inseparably
connected with what is commonly called a state of civilization, will perhaps
perceive that the difference, in point of real happiness, between the scholar,
the courtier, and the simple child of nature, is far from infinite. But
allowing it to be very considerable, allowing that the privileges and
advantages of a free member, of a free society, where useful sciences and the
liberal arts are patronized and flourish, and where all those principles that
beautify and adorn the rational nature are cultivated, are comparatively very
great: What, I beseech you has all this to do with the present question? What
advantage is all the learning of this country to those ignorant wretches, who
are now practicing their ludicrous gambols on yonder common, except indeed that
it generally procures them one day in the year, a dispensation from the
severity of their servitude -- What is all our boasted acquaintance with
science and the politer arts to these miserable creatures, who, by their
situation, have little more concern in these matters than their brethren in the
middle regions of Africa; and which knowledge, could the obtain it, must serve
only to increase their misery? What a blessing, for example, would a knowledge
of the principles of civil Liberty be to a person perpetually doomed to a state
of the most abject slavery? -- In their native country, though their condition
be indeed contemptible enough, they have the blessing of Liberty to sweeten
every pleasure, and give a relish to every enjoyment: But here, though their
condition were in other respects much more favorable than it is, while
conscious of perpetual and absolute dependence upon the will of others, this
reflection, so opposite to the strong sense of Liberty implanted in the heart
of every son of Adam, must necessarily mar the happiness of every
gratification, effectually chill the sense of pleasure, and stop every natural
source of felicity. A keen excruciating sense of liberty forever lost must
still predominate, till, the spirit broken by the fatigue of incessant
distress, they sink into a state of lifeless insensibility. And then for sooth
we are presently disposed to tax them with natural stupidity; and make the very
thing that our unnatural treatment has occasioned the ground of our
justification. -- It is well known, that stupidity is by no means the natural
characteristic of these people; Griffith Hughes, rector of St. Lucy in
Barbados, in his natural history of that island, speaking of the Negroes,
says, That the capacities of their minds in common affairs of life are but
little inferior, if at all, to those of the Europeans. If they fail in some
arts, he says it may be owing more to their want of education and the
depression of their spirits, by slavery than to any want of natural ability.
and when we consider the nature of their condition in this country, how
miserably dejected, depressed and despised, instead of marking their want of
apprehension, we ought rather to admire that there are any the least
appearances of sensibility remaining in them.

But it is alleged, that at home they are in a perpetual state of war, and
that by the purchase of captives many lives are preserved, that would otherwise
be devoted to destruction. Surprising indeed; that here, as in the former case,
the very evil that this practice has occasioned should be alleged in excuse of
it! One must have a favorable opinion indeed of that cause which needs the
support of such arguments! -- These people are naturally peaceable, and less
inclined to acts of hostility than the generality of mankind; Smith, mentioned
above, who had resided ten years in Africa, says, that the discerning natives
account it their greatest unhappiness that they were ever visited by the
Europeans -- That we christians introduced the traffic of slaves, and that
before our coming they lived in peace. Smith page 266. Bosman remarks, that one
of the Dutch commanders gave large sums of money to the Negroes of one nation
to induce them to attack some of the neighboring nations, which occasioned a
battle which was more bloody than the wars of the Negroes usually are. Bosman
page 31.

Barbot, agent for the French factory, says, That the country of D'Elmina,
which was formerly very powerful and populous was in his time so much drained
of it is inhabitants, by the intestine wars, fomented among the Negroes by the
Dutch, that there did not remain inhabitants enough to till the country.


the nature of their climate disposing rather to the softer pleasures, than the
fiercer passions. This though long smothered is now a truth well known; and
it is astonishing that the patience with which they endure the cruellest
servitude, should not, long e're this time have rectified this mistake. But I
may not enlarge here; the absurdity of this argument is too glaring to justify
a serious confutation.

It is also alleged, that in their own country they are unnecessarily ignorant
of the principles of our holy religion. This indeed, generally understood, is
confessedly a melancholy truth. The advantages they enjoy from revelation are
not to be mentioned. Those feeble rays of nature's light which the fatal
apostasy of our original parents has happily left unextinguished in their
posterity, are their almost only guide: And the insufficiency of these, for the
purposes of moral direction, is confessedly but too evident from the ignorance
of those, who are unhappily favored with no other directors. But admitting this
to be the case, that the advantages enjoyed by this people, of a religious
nature, are extremely small; before an argument can be hence derived in favor
of their removal to this country, it must be shown that the advanges they here
enjoy are greater. But if we examine the religious advantages of slaves in this
country, I fear we shall find, to the dishonor of our profession, that they are
not greatly superior to those of their brethren in Africa, at least the excess
will fall far short of of an equivalent for the excess of their misery.

It is true, that in most parts of New England, slaves are sometimes permitted
to attend public worship, but how much is to be expected from this, without the
addition of private instruction, which heaven knows is but sparingly afforded
them, their acquaintance in general with the principles of christianity
abundantly demonstrates. And if we consider their opportunities of instruction,
in connection with fixed prejudices against a religion, whose professors they
naturally consider as avowedly violating one of the plainest laws of nature;
and add to this, the strong temptations they are under, from the nature of
their condition, to every species of iniquity, we shall hardly expect to find
in them more of the spirit of true practical religion, than is to be found in
those who never heard of the gospel. And whether this is not in fact generally
the case, is by no means a question to those who are acquainted with them. But
admitting the possibility that some individuals, may be benefited in this way;
shall this be alleged as an equivalent for all the miseries to which these
people are, by this practice, inevitably subjected, for the sure and certain
destruction to which such multitudes are hereby devoted? As well may the design
of propagating christian knowledge, be alleged in excuse of the shocking
cruelties practiced on the miserable Americans, by their merciless destroyers,
the Spaniards and Portuguese. Thus we see this formidable argument turns out
upon examination, not less deficient than those aforementioned; and this
practice of enslaving our fellow men, though considered in this independent
view, notwithstanding all that can be alleged, must be acknowledged altogether
unjustifiable.

But we must not stop here: Upon your own principles, we must consider this
practice in all its connexions; we must not only regard the evils of slavery in
this country, but must take in also the miseries and calamities that are by
this means brought upon any of the human race. Before this practice can be
justified, it must appear to be productive of general happiness; it must
correspond with the general good of the whole. Now if we consider the practice
of slavery in this country, in it is tendency to countenance and encourage the
same thing, as it is practiced in the southern colonies, and West Indies, it
will appear much more glaringly iniquitous and unjust. Several hundred
thousands of those unhappy creatures, are, by the best information, annually
exported from the various parts of Africa to America, a great proportion of
whom, through the shocking, the unparalleled sufferings of transportation,
miserably perish on the voyage, and as to those who unhappily survive, to enter
upon that state of perpetual servitude, to which they are destined, it is well
known, that they are treated with less humanity, more merciless severity, and
savage barbarity, than reason would warrant us to exercise toward the meanest
of the brute creation. Thomas Jeffery, speaking of the usage the Negroes
receive in the West Indies, says -- "Nothing can be more wretched than the
condition of this people." -- In general a few roots, potatoes especially, are
their food, and two rags, which neither screen them from the heat of the day,
nor the extraordinary coolness of the night, all their covering; their sleep
very short; their labor almost continual. They receive no wages, but have
twenty lashes for the smallest fault. Jeffery's account of part of N. America.
Sir Hans Sloane, speaking of the punishment of the Negroes, says, For
rebellion, the punishment is burning them by nailing them down on the ground
with crooked sticks on every limb, and then applying the fire by degrees from
the feet and hands, burning them gradually up to the head, whereby their pains
are extravagant. For crimes of a less nature, gelding, or chopping off half the
foot with an axe. -- For negligence, they are usually whipped by the overseers
with lance-wood switches. -- After they are whipped till they are raw, some put
on their skins pepper and salt to make them smart; at other times their masters
will drop melted wax on their skins, and use several very exquisite torments.
Introduction to the natural history of Jamaica, page 56.


It would wring drops of blood from an heart of adamant to relate the cruel
sufferings of these unhappy people, in those countries, who, at the same time,
have less advantages for christian knowledge, than the natives of California,
or the inhabitants of the antarctic circle. As an instance of the encouragement
the Negroes, in the West Indies, have for religious improvement, the reader
will excuse us in inserting the following account of what lately happened at
Barbados, quoted by the abovementioned author, (p. 79) from Morgan Godwyn a
clergyman in that island. -- A poor Negro having at his own request, prevailed
on a clergyman to administer baptism to him; on his return home, the brutish
overseer took him to task, giving him to understand that, that was no Sunday's
work for those of his complexion, that he had other business for him, the
neglect of which should cost him an afternoon's baptism in blood, as he in the
morning had received a baptism with water; which he accordingly made good; of
which the Negro complained to him, and he to the governor. Nevertheless the
poor miserable creature was ever after so unmercifully treated by that inhuman
wretch, the overseer, that to avoid his cruelty, betaking himself to the woods,
he there perished.
But I forbear -- The person that can imagine the practice of slavery in this
country, considered in all it is consequences, connexions and tendencies,
productive of the happiness of mankind, must, I think, allow, that the direct
way to increase their happiness is by every possible means to increase their
misery.

B. As you have not now disputed the truth of the principle, but joined with me
in resting the argument upon a matter of fact, I shall no farther pursue the
dispute, but leave that point to be determined by the judgment of others.

THE END.

