AN ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE BRITISH SETTLEMENTS, ON THE SLAVERY OF
THE NEGROES IN AMERICA.

THE SECOND EDITION.

To which is added, A VINDICATION of the ADDRESS, in Answer to a Pamphlet
entitled, "SLAVERY not forbidden in Scripture; OR, A Defense of the West India
Planters."

By a PENNSYLVANIAN.

Ah! Why will men forget that they are Brethren?
-- Why delight
In human sacrifice? -- why burst the ties
Of Nature, that should knit their Souls together
In One soft band of Amity and Love?
-- Was it for this
Thy breath divine, kindled within his breast,
The vital flame? -- For this, was thy fair Image
Stamped on his Soul with god-like lineaments?
For this, dominion given him absolute
Over all thy works, only that he might reign
Supreme in woe? --
-- O! better far,
Still had he slept in uncreated Night,
Is this the Lot of Being!
PROTEUS. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JOHN DUNLAP. M, DCC, LXXIII.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
SO much has been said upon the subject of Slave-Keeping, that an Apology may
be required for this Address. The only one I shall offer is, that the Evil
still continues. This may in part be owing to the great attachment we have to
our own Interest, and in part, to the subject not being fully exhausted. The
design of the following address is to sum up the leading arguments against it,
several of which have not been urged by any of those Authors who have written
upon it.

Without entering into the History of the facts which relate to the Slave
Trade, I shall proceed to combat the principal arguments which are used to
support it.

I need hardly say any thing in favor of the Intellects of the Negroes, or of
their capacities for virtue and happiness, although these have been supposed,
by some, to be inferior to those of the inhabitants of Europe. The accounts
which travelers give us of their ingenuity, humanity, and strong attachment to
their parents, relations, friends and country, show us that they are equal to
the Europeans, when we allow for the diversity of temper and genius which is
occasioned by climate. We have many well-attested anecdotes of as sublime and
disinterested virtue among them as ever adorned a Roman or a Christian
character. But we are to distinguish between an African in his own country, and
an African in a state of slavery in America. Slavery is so foreign to the human
mind, that the moral faculties, as well as those of the understanding are
debased, and rendered torpid by it. All the vices which are charged upon the
Negroes in the southern colonies and the West Indies, such as Idleness,
Treachery, Theft, and the like, are the genuine offspring of slavery, and serve
as an argument to prove that they were not intended for it.

Nor let it be said, in the present Age, that their black color (as it is
commonly called) either subjects them to, or qualifies them for slavery
Montesquieu, in his Spirit of Laws, treats this argument with the ridicule it
deserves.

"WERE I to vindicate our right to make slaves of the Negroes, these should be
my arguments.

The Europeans having extirpated the Americans, were obliged to make slaves of
the Africans for clearing such vast tracts of land.

Sugar would be too clear, if the plants which produce it were cultivated by
any other than slaves.

These creatures are all over black, and with such a flat nose that they can
scarcely be pitied.

It is hardly to be believed that God, who is a wise being, should place a
soul, especially a good soul, in such a black ugly body.

The Negroes prefer a glass necklace to that gold, which polite nations so
highly value: can there be a greater proof of their wanting common sense?

It is impossible for us to suppose these creatures to be men, because,
allowing them to be men, a suspicion would follow, that we ourselves are not
Christians."

BOOK XV. CHAP. V.
. The vulgar notion of their being descended from Cain, who was supposed to
have been marked with this color, is too absurd to need a refutation. --
Without enquiring into the Cause of this blackness, I shall only add upon this
subject, that so far from being a curse, it subjects the Negroes to no
inconveniences, but on the contrary qualifies them for that part of the Globe
in which providence has placed them. The ravages of heat, diseases and time,
appear less in their faces than in a white one; and when we exclude variety of
color from our ideas of Beauty, they may be said to possess every thing
necessary to constitute it in common with the white people. "Quamvis ille
niger, quamvis tu candidus esses.
-- Nimium ne creed colori.
Alba Ligustra cadunt; Vaccinia nigra leguntur."
VIRGIL. "I am black, -- but comely."
SONG of SOLOMON.
.

It has been urged by the inhabitants of the Sugar Islands and South Carolina,
that it would be impossible to carry on the manufactories of Sugar, Rice, and
Indigo, without negro slaves. No manufactory can ever be of consequence enough
to society to admit the least violation of the Laws of justice or humanity. But
I am far from thinking the arguments used in favor of employing Negroes for
the cultivation of these articles, should have any Weight. -- M. Le Poivre,
late envoy from the king of France, to the king of Cochin-China, and now
intendant of the isles of Bourbon and Mauritius, in his observations upon the
manners and arts of the various nations in Africa and Asia, speaking of the
culture of sugar in Cochin-China, has the following remarks. -- "It is worthy
observation too, that the sugar cane is there cultivated by freemen, and all
the process of preparation and refining, the work of free hands. Compare then
the price of the Cochin-Chinese production with the same commodity which is
cultivated and prepared by the wretched slaves of our European colonies, and
judge if, to procure sugar from our colonies, it was necessary to authorize by
law the slavery of the unhappy Africans transported to America. White sugar, of
the best quality, is sold for three Dollars the Cochin-China quintal, which
weighs from I50 to 200 pounds French. Ninety-one pounds eight ounces French,
makes one hundred pounds English.
From what I have observed at Cochin-China, I cannot entertain a doubt, but
that our WestIndia colonies, had they been distributed, without reservation
amongst a free people, would have produced double the quantity that is now
procured from the labor of the unfortunate negroes."

"What advantage, then, has accrued to Europe, civilized as it is, and
thoroughly versed in the laws of nature, and the rights of mankind, by legally
authorizing in our colonies, the daily outrages against human nature,
permitting them to debase man almost below the level of the beasts of the
field? These slavish laws have proved as opposite to its interest, as they are
to its honor, and to the laws of humanity. This remark I have often made."

"Liberty and property form the basis of abundance, and good agriculture: I
never observed it to flourish where those rights of mankind were not firmly
established. The earth, which multiplies her productious with a kind of
profusion, under the hands of the freeborn labourer, seems to shrink into
barrenness under the sweat of the slave. Such is the will of the great Author
of our Nature, who has created man free, and assigned to him the earth, that he
might cultivate his possession with the sweat of his brow; but still should
enjoy his Liberty." Now if the plantations in the islands and the southern
colonies were more limited, and freemen only employed in working them, the
general product would be greater, although the profits to individuals would be
less, -- a circumstance this, which by diminishing opulence in a few, would
suppress Luxury and Vice, and promote that equal distribution of property,
which appears best calculated to promote the welfare of Society. -- From this
account of Le Poivre's, we may learn the futility of the argument, that the
number of vessels in the sugar trade, serve as a nursery for seaman, and that
the Negroes consume a large quantity of the manufactures of Great Britain. If
freemen only were employed in the islands, a double quantity of sugar would be
made, and of course twice the number of vessels and seamen would be made use of
in the trade. One freeman consumes usually four times the quantity of British
goods that a Negro does. Slaves generally multiply slowly. Freemen multiply in
proportion as slavery is discouraged. It is to be hoped therefore that motives
of policy will at last induce Britons to give up a trade, which those of
justice and humanity cannot prevail upon them to relinguish.
I know it has been said by some, that none but the natives of warm climates
could undergo the `excessive heat and labor of the West India islands. But this
argument is founded upon an error; for the reverse of this is true. I have been
informed by good authority, that one European who escapes the first or second
year, will do twice the work, and live twice the number of years that an
ordinary Negro man will do nor need we be surpised at this, when we hear that
such is the natural fertility of soil, and so numerous the spontaneous fruits
of the earth in the interior parts of Africa, that the natives live in plenty
at the expense of little or no labor, which, in warm climates, has ever been
found to be incompatible with long life and happiness. Future ages, therefore,
when they read the accounts of the Slave Trade ( -- if they do not regard them
as fabulous) -- will be at a loss which to condemn most, our folly or our
Guilt, in abetting this direct violation of the Laws of nature and Religion.

But there are some who have gone so far as to say that Slavery is not
repugnant to the Genius of Christianity, and that it is not forbidden in any
part of the Scripture. Natural and Revealed Religion always speak the same
things, although the latter delivers its precepts with a louder and more
distinct voice than the former. If it could be proved that no testimony was to
be found in the Bible against a practice so pregnant with evils of the most
destructive tendency to society, it would be sufficient to overthrow its divine
Original. We read it is true of Abraham's having slaves born in his house; and
we have reason to believe, that part of the riches of the patriarchs consisted
in them; but we can no more infer the lawfulness of the practice, from the
short account which the Jewish historian gives us of these facts, than we can
vindicate telling a lie, because Rahab is not condemned for it in the account
which is given of her deceiving the king of Jericho. Josh. 2.
We read that some of the same men indulged themselves in a plurality of wives,
without any strictures being made upon their conduct for it; and yet no one
will pretend to say, that this is not forbidden in many parts of the Old
Testament Prove. v.19, 12, 20.
. But we are told the Jews kept the Heathens in perpetual bondage Levit.
xxv.44, 45, 46.
. The Design of providence in permitting this evil, was probably to prevent the
Jews from marrying amongst strangers, to which their intercourse with them upon
any other footing than that of slaves, would naturally have inclined them That
marriage with strangers was looked upon as a crime among the Jews, we learn
from Ezra ix.I to 6, also from the whole of Chapter x.
. Had this taken place -- their national religion would have been corrupted --
they would have contracted all their vices May not this be the reason why
Swine's flesh was forbidden to the Jews, least they should be tempted to eat
with their Heathen neighbors, who used it in diet? This appears more probable
than the opinion of Doctor MEAD, who supposes that it has a physical tendency
to produce the leprosy; or that of VOLTAIRE, who asserts that the Jews learned
to abstain from this Flesh from the Egyptians, who valued the Hog almost to a
degree of idolatry for its great usefulness in rooting up the Ground. What
makes this Conjecture the more probable is, that the Jews abstained from
several other kinds of flesh used by their Heathen neighbors, which have never
been accused of bringing on diseases of the skin, and which were used
constantly in diet by the Egyptians. The account which Tacitus gives of the
diet and customs of the Jews, is directly to our purpose --

"Bos quoque immolantur, quem AEgyptii apin colunt. AEgyptii pleraque animalia,
Effigiesque compositas venerantur; Judaei mente sola, unumque numen
intelligunt. Seperati Epulis, discreti Cubilibus, Alienarum Concubitu
Abstinent."

HISTOR. LIB. V.
, and the intention of Providence in keeping them a distant people, in order to
accomplish the promise made to Abraham, that "in his seed all the nations of
the earth should be blessed," would have been defeated; so that the descent of
the Messiah from Abraham, could not have been traced, and the divine commission
of the Son of God, would have wanted one of its most powerful argument^ to
support (...). But with regard to their own countrymen, it is plain, perpetual
slavery was not tolerated. Hence, at the end of seven years or in the year of
the jubilee, all the Hebrew slaves were set at liberty Deuteronomy xxiv.7. --
, and it was held unlawful to detain them in servitude longer than that time,
except by their own Consent. Deuteronomy. xv.I2.
But if, in the partial Revelation which God made, of his will to the Jews, we
find such testimonies against slavery, what may we not expect from the Gospel,
the Design of which was to abolish all distinctions of name and county. While
the Jews thought they complied with the precepts of the law, in confining the
love of their neighbor "to the children of their own people," Christ commands
us to look upon all mankind even our Enemies This is strongly inculcated in the
story of the goods Samaritan, Luke x.
as our neighbors and brethren, and "in all things, to do unto them whatever
we would wish they should do unto us." He tells us further that his "Kingdom is
not of this World," and therefore constantly avoids saying any thing that might
interfere directly with the Roman or Jewish Governments: and although he does
not call upon masters to emancipate their slaves, or slaves to assert that
Liberty wherewith God and Nature had made them free, yet there is scarcely a
parable or a sermon in the whole history of his life, but what contains the
strongest arguments against Slavery. Every prohibition of Covetousness --
Intemperance -- Pride -- Uncleanness -- Theft -- and Murder, which he
delivered, -- every lesson of meekness, humility, forbearance, Charity,
Self-denial, and brotherly-love, which he taught, are levelled against this
evil; -- for Slavery, while it includes all the former Vices, necessarily
excludes the practice of all the latter Virtues, both from the Master and the
Slave. -- Let such, therefore, who vindicate the traffic of buying and selling;
Souls, seek some modern System of Religion to support it, and not presume to
sanctify their crimes by attempting to reconcile it to the sublime and perfect
Religion of the Great Author of Christianity. The influence of Christianity in
putting a stop to Slavery, appears in the first christian emperor Constantine,
who commanded, under the severest penalties, all such as had Slaves, to set
them at liberty. He afterward contrived to render the manumission of them much
easier than formerly, for instead of recurring to the forms prescribed by the
Roman laws, which were attended with great difficulties and a considerable
expense, he gave leave to masters to infranchise their slaves in the presence
of a bishop, or a minister and a christian assembly.

Universal History, vol. xv. p. 574, 577. Dr. ROBERTSON, in treating of those
causes which weakened the feudal system, and finally abolished Slavery in
Europe, in the I4th century, has the following Observations --

"The gentle spirit of the Christian Religion, together with the doctrines
which it teaches, concerning the original equality of mankind, as well as the
impartial eye with which the almighty regards men of every condition, and
admits them to a participation of his benefits, are inconsistent with
servitude. But in this, as in many other instances, Considerations of Interest
and the Maxims of false Policy, led men to a conduct inconsistent with their
principles. They were so sensible, however, of the Inconsistency, that to set
their Fellow Christians at liberty from servitude was deemed an act of piety
highly meritorious, and acceptable to Heaven. The humane spirit of the
Christian Religion, struggled with the Maxims and Manners of the World, and
contributed more than any other circumstance, to introduce the practice of
manumission. The formality of manumission was executed, in a church or a
religious assembly. -- The person to be set free, was led round the great
altar, with a torch in his hand, he took hold of the horns of the altar, and
there the solemn words conferring liberty, were pronounced."

CHARLES V. Historical Illustrations. Note xx.


There are some amongst us who cannot help allowing the force of our last
argument, but plead as a motive for importing and keeping slaves, that they
become acquainted with the principles of the religion of our country. -- This
is like justifying a highway robbery because part of the money acquired in this
manner was appropriated to some religious use. -- Christianity will never be
propagated by any other methods than those employed by Christ and his Apostles.
Slavery is an engine as little fitted for that purpose as Fire or the Sword. A
Christian Slave is a contradiction in terms. St. Paul's letter to Philemon, in
behalf of Onesimus, is said by some to contradict this assertion, but, if
viewed properly, will rather support it. He desires Philemon to receive him
"not as a Servant, but as a Brother beloved," "as his Son -- and part of
himself." In other parts of his Writings, he obliquely hints at the
impossibility of uniting the duties of a Christian, with the offices of a
Slave. "Ye are bought with a price, be not therefore the servants of men." I
Cornith. vii.23. Had he lived to see christianity established by Law, in the
countries where he preached, with what a torrent christian eloquence may we not
suppose he would have declaimed against slavery.
But if we enquire into the methods employed for converting the Negroes to
Christianity, we shall find the means suited to the end proposed. In many
places Sunday is appropriated to work for themselves, reading and writing are
discouraged among them. A belief is even inculcated amongst some, that they
have no Souls. In a word, -- Every attempt to instruct or convert them, has
been constantly opposed by their masters. Nor has the example of their
christian masters any tendency to prejudice them in favor of our religion. How
often do they betray, in their sudden transports of anger and resentment,
(againsst which there is no restraint provided toward their Negroes) the most
violent degrees of passion and fury! -- What luxury -- what ingratitude to the
supreme being -- what impiety in their ordinary conversation do some of them
discover in the presence of their slaves! I say nothing of the dissolution of
marriage vows, or the entire abolition of matrimony, which the frequent sale of
them introduces, and which are directly contrary to the laws of nature and the
principles of christianity. Would to Heaven I could here conceal the shocking
violations of chastity, which some of them are obliged to undergo without
daring to complain. Husbands have been forced to prostitute their wives, and
mothers their daughters to gratify the brutal lust of a master. This -- all --
this is practiced -- Blush -- ye impure and hardened wretches, while I repeat
it -- by men who call themselves christians!

But further -- It has been said that we do a kindness to the Negroes by
bringing them to America, as we thereby save their lives, which had been
forfeited by their being conquered in war "From the right of killing in case of
conquest, politicians have drawn that of reducing to slavery; a consequence as
ill grounded as the principle.

There is no such thing is a Right of reducing people to slavery, but when it
becomes necessary for the preservation of the conquest. Preservation, but not
servitude, is the end of conquest; though servitude may happen sometimes to be
a necessary means of Preservation.

Even in that case it is contrary to the nature of things, that tho slavery
should be perpetual. The people enslaved ought to be rendered capable of
becoming subjects."

Mont^squie's Spirit of Laws, Book x. Chap. 3. "Servi autem e^ eo appellati
sunt, quod lmperatores captivos vendere, ac per hoc servare, nee Occidere
solent. Servitus est Constitutio Juris Gentium, qua quis Dominio alieno CONTRA
NATURUAM subjicitur. -- Justinian. Institut. L. i. Tit. 3. By what right are
the Children of these Captives kept in slavery?


. Let such as prefer or inflict slavery rather than Death, disown their being
descended from or connected with our mother countries. -- But it will be found
upon enquiry, that many are stolen or seduced from their friends who have never
been conquered; and it is plain, from the testimony of historians and
travelers, that wars were uncommon among them, until the christians who began
the slave trades stirred up the different nations to fight against each other.
Sooner let them imbrue their hands in each others blood, or condemn one another
to perpetual slavery, than the name of one christian, or one American, be
stained by the perpetration of such enormous crimes.

Nor let it be urged that by treating slaves well, we render their situation
happier in this Country, than it was in their own. -- Slavery and Vice are
connected together, and the latter is always a source of misery. Besides, by
the greatest humanity we can show them, we only lessen, but do not remove the
crime, for the injustice of it continues the same. The laws of retribution are
so strongly inculcated by the moral governor of the world, that even the ox is
entitled to his reward for "treading the Corn." How great then must be the
amount of that injustice, which deprives so many of our fellow creatures of the
Just reward of their (...).

But it will be asked here, What steps shall we take to remedy this Evil, and
what shall we do with those Slaves we have already in this Country? This is
indeed a most difficult question.' But let every man contrive to answer it for
himself. --

The first thing I would recommend to put a stop to slavery in this country, is
to leave off importing slaves. For this purpose let our assemblies unite in
petitioning the king and parliament to dissolve the African committee of
merchants: It is by them that the trade is chiefly carried on to America. We
have the more reason to expect relief from an application at this juncture, as
by a late decision in favor of a Virginia slave in Westminster Hall, the
Clamors of the whole nation are raised against them. Let such of our countrymen
as engage in the slave trade, be shunned as the greatest enemies to our
country, and let the vessels which bring the slaves to us, be avoided as if
they bore in them the Seeds of that forbidden fruit, whose baneful taste
destroyed both the natural and moral world. -- As for the Negroes among us,
who, from having acquired all the low vices of slavery, or who from age or
infirmities are unfit to be set at liberty, I would propose, for the good of
society, that they should continue the property of those with whom they grew
old, or from whom they contracted those vices and infirmities. But let the
young Negroes be educated in the principles of virtue and religion -- let them
be taught to read, and write -- and afterward instructed in some business,
whereby they may be able to maintain themselves. Let laws be made to limit the
time of their servitude, and to entitle them to all the privileges of freeborn
British subjects. At any rate let Retribution be to done God and to Society A
worthy friend of mine has favored me with the following Extract of a letter
from GRANDVILLE SHARP, Esquire of London.

"I AM told of some Regulations that have taken Place in the Spanish Colonies,
which do the Spaniards much Honor, and are certainly worthy our Imitation, in
case we should not be so happy as to obtain an entire Abolition of Slavery, and
probably you would find many American Subjects that would be willing to promote
such Regulations, though the same People would strenously oppose the scheme of a
total Abolition of Slavery. I have never seen an Account of the Spanish
Regulations in writing, but I understand that they are to the following Effect:
As soon as a slave is landed, his Name, Price, etc. are registered in a public
Office, and the Master is obliged to allow him One Working Day in every Week to
himself, besides Sundays, so that if the Slave chooses to work for his Master on
that Day, he receives the Wages of a Freeman for it, and whatever he gains by
his Labor on that Day, is so secured to him by Law, that the Master cannot
deprive him of it. This is certainly a considerable Step toward the abolishing
absolute Slavery. As soon as the slave is able to purchase another working Day,
the master is obliged to sell it to him at a proportionable price, viz. I-fifth
Part of his original Cost: and so likewise the remaining 4 Days at the same
Rate, as soon as the Slave is able to redeem them, after which he is absolutely
free. This is such an Encouragement to Industry, that even the most indolent
are tempted to exert themselves. Men who have thus worked out their Freedom are
inured to the Labor of the Country and are certainly the most useful Subjects
that a Colony can acquire. Regulations might be formed upon the same Plan to
encourage the Industry of Slaves that are already imported into the colonies,
which would teach them how to maintain themselves and be as useful, as well as
less expensive to the Planter. They would by such Means become Members of
Society and have an Interest in the Welfare of the Community, which would add
greatly to the Strength and Security of each Colony; whereas, at present, many
of the Planters are in continual Danger of being cut off by their Slaves. -- a
Fate which, they but too justly deserve!".




And now my countrymen, What shall I add more to rouse up your Indignation
against Slavekeeping. Consider the many complicated crimes it involves in it.
Think of the bloody Wars which are fomented by it, among the African nations,
or if these are too common to affect you, think of the pangs which attend the
dissolution of the ties of nature in those who are stolen from their relations.
Think of the many thousands who perish by sickness, melancholy, and suicide, in
their voyages to America. Pursue the poor devoted victims to one of the West
India islands, and see them exposed there to public sale. Hear their cries, and
see their looks of tenderness at each other, upon being separated. -- Mothers
are torn from their Daughters, and Brothers from Brothers, without the liberty
of a parting embrace. Their master's name is now marked upon their breasts with
a red hot iron. But let us pursue them into a Sugar Field: and behold a scene
still more affecting than this -- See! the poor wretches with what reluctance
they take their instruments of labor into their hands, -- Some of them,
overcome with heat and sickness, seek to refresh themselves by a little rest.
-- But, behold an Overseer approaches them -- In vain they sue for pity. -- He
lifts up his Whip, while streams of Blood follow every stroke. Neither age nor
sex are spared. -- Methinks one of them is woman far advanced in her pregnancy.
-- At a little distance from these behold a man, who from his countenance and
deportment appears as if he was descended from illustrious ancestors -- Yes --
He is the son of a Prince, and was torn by a stratagem, from an amiable wife
and two young children. -- Mark his sullen looks! -- now he bids defiance to
the tyranny of his Master, and in an instant -- plunges a Knife into his Heart.
-- But let us return from this Scene, and see the various modes of arbitrary
punishments inflicted upon them by their masters. Behold one covered with
stripes, into which melted wax is poured -- another tied down to a block or a
stake -- a third suspended in the air by his thumbs -- a fourth -- I cannot
relate it. -- Where now is Law or Justice? -- Let us fly to them to step in for
their relief. -- Alas! -- The one is silent, and the other denounces more
terrible, punishments upon them. Let us attend the place appointed for
inflicting the penalties of the law. See here one without a limb, whose only
crime was an attempt to regain his Liberty. -- another led to a Gallows for
stealing a morsel of Bread, to which his labor gave him a better title than his
master -- a third famishing on a gibbet -- a fourth, in a flame of Fire! his
shrieks pierce the very heavens. -- O! God! where is thy Vengeance! -- O!
Humanity -- Justice -- Liberty -- Religion! -- Where, -- where are ye fled. --

This is no exaggerated Picture. It is taken from real Life. -- Before I
conclude I shall take the liberty of addressing several Classes of my
countrymen in behalf of our Brethren (for by that name may we now call them)
who are in a state of Slavery amongst us.

In the first place let MAGISTRATES both supreme and inferior, exert the
authority they are invested with, in suppressing this evil. Let them
discountenance it by their example, and show a readiness to concur in every
measure proposed to remedy it.

Let LEGISLATORS, reflect upon the trust reposed in them. Let their laws be
made after the Spirit of Religion -- Liberty -- and our most excellent English
Constitution. You cannot show your attachment to your King, or your love to
your country better, than by suppressing an evil which endangers the dominions
of the former, and will in Time destroy the liberty of the latter. "In moderate
governments, it is a point of the highest importance, that there should not be
a great number of slaves. The political liberty of those states adds to the
value of civil liberty; and he who is deprived of the latter, is also deprived
of the former. He sees the happiness of a society, of which he is not so much
as a member; he sees the Security of Others fenced by laws, himself without so
much as protection. He sees his master has a Soul, that can enlarge itself;
while his own is constrained to submit to almost continual depression. Nothing
more assimilates a Man to a Beast, than living among Freemen, himself a Slave.
Such people as these are the natural enemies of a society, and their number
must be dangerous." Spirit of Laws, Book xv Chapt.I2
Population, and the accession of strangers, in which the Riches of all
countries consist, can only flourish in proportion as slavery is discouraged.
Extend the privileges we enjoy, to every human creature born amongst us, and
let not the Journals of our Assemblies be disgraced with the records of laws,
which allow exclusive privileges to men of one color in preference to another.
The alterations in the laws in favor of Negroes, should be gradual, -- 'till
the evil Habits they have acquired by Slavery, are eradicated. There are
several privileges, however, which might be extended to them immediately,
without the least risk to Society, in particular that inestimable one of Trial
by JURIES.


Ye men of SENSE and VIRTUE -- Ye ADVOCATES for American Liberty, rouse up and
espouse; the cause of Humanity and general Liberty. Bear a testimony against a
vice which degrades human nature, and dissolves that universal tie of
benevolence which should connect all the children of men together in one great
Family. -- The plant of liberty is of so tender a Nature, that it cannot thrive
long in the neighborhood of slavery. Remember the eyes of all Europe are fixed
upon you, to preserve an asylum for freedom in this country, after the last
pillars of it are fallen in every other quarter of the Globe.

But chiefly -- ye MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL, whose dominion over the principles
and actions of men is so universally acknowledged and felt, -- Ye who estimate
the worth of your fellow creatures by their Immortality, and therefore must
look upon all mankind as equal, -- let your zeal keep pace with your
opportunities to put a stop to slavery. While you enforce the duties of "tithe
and cummin," neglect not the weightier laws of justice and humanity. Slavery is
an Hydra sin, and includes in it every violation of the precepts of the Law and
the Gospel. In vain will you command your flocks to offer up the incence of
Faith and Charity, while they continue to mingle the Sweat and blood of Negro
slaves with their sacrifices. -- If the Blood of Able cried aloud for
vengeance; -- If, under the Jewish dispensation, Cities of refuge could not
screen the deliberate murderer -- if even manslaughter required sacrifices to
expiate it, -- and if a single murder so seldom escapes with impunity in any
civilized country, what may you not say against that trade, or those
manufactures -- or Laws, "If any Negro or other Slave under punishment by his
master, or his order for running away, or any other crimes or misdemeanors
toward his said master, unfortunately shall suffer in life or member, no
person whatever shall be liable to any fine; But if any man shall of
wantonness, or only of bloody mindedness, or cruel intention, wilfully kill a
Negro, or other slave of his own, he shall deliver into the public treasury
fifteen pounds sterling, and not be liable to any other punishment, or
forfeiture for the same." Laws of Barbados, Act 319.
which destroy the lives of so many thousands of our fellow creatures every
year? -- If in the Old Testament "God swears by his holiness, and by the
excellency of Jacob, that the Earth shall tremble and every one mourn that
dwells therein for the iniquity of those who oppress the poor and crush the
needy," who buy the poor with silver, and the needy with a pair of shoes, Amos
iv.I, 2 -- viii.6, 7.
what judgments may you not denounce upon those who continue to perpetrate
these crimes, after the more full discovery which God has made of the law of
Equity in the New Testament. Put them in mind of the Rod which was held over
them a few years ago in the Stamp, and Revenue Acts. Remember that national
crimes require national punishments, and without declaring what punishment
awaits this evil, you may venture to assure them, that it cannot pass with
impunity, unless God shall cease to be just or merciful.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE foregoing Address was written in a few Hours, at the particular Request of
a worthy Citizen, in order to promote and accompany a Petition to the
Honorable Assembly of Pennsylvania, to procure an Increase of the Duty upon
Negro Slaves imported into the Province. The only Condition upon which the
Author complied with this Request, was, that his Name should be concealed; --
such Subjects being foreign to his ordinary Studies, and Business: By some
Accident it was discovered; and he now thinks himself called upon to defend
what he has advanced. Although the Sword was unsheathed and put into his Hand
without being called for, yet in so good a Cause, he hopes he is not altogether
unprepared to wield it. He has nothing to Hope or Fear from any Quarter, by
publishing his Sentiments more fully upon this Subjects.

The following Observations upon the Defense of the West India Planters, though
a Work of more Leisure than the Address, are not so complete as they might have
been, had not the Author been afraid of trespassing too much upon the Patience
of his Readers.

PHILADELPHIA, SEPTEM. I5, I773.

A VINDICATION OF THE ADDRESS, To the INHABITANTS of the BRITISH SETTLEMENTS,
on the SLAVERY of the NEGROES in AMERICA, in Answer to a PAMPHLET entitled,
"SLAVERY NOT FORBIDDEN BY SCRIPTURE; Or a DEFENSE of the WEST INDIA PLANTERS
from the ASPERSIONS thrown out against them by the AUTHOR of the ADDRESS."

Disguise thyself as thou will, still SLAVERY thou art a bitter Draught; and
though thousands in all Ages have been made to drink of thee thou art no less
bitter on that Account. -- It Is thou thrice sweet, and gracious Goddess
LIBERTY, whom all in public or in private Worship; whose Taste is grateful, and
ever will be so, till Nature herself shall change. -- No tint of Words can spot
thy snowy Mantle, or chemic Power turn thy Scepter into Iron. STERN. BY A
PENNSYLVANIAN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP in MARKET-STREET. M, DCC, LXXIII.

A VINDICATION, etc.
THERE is no Subject so sacred that has not sometimes been exposed to Obloquy.
The immortality of the Soul, the Obligations of Morality, and even the
Existence of a Supreme Being, have all in their Turns been treated as unworthy
of Belief. On the other Hand, there is no Subject so subversive of the
Happiness of Mankind, but what has had its Advocates. -- Adultery -- Perjury,
-- and even Suicide, have all been defended as lawful. Posterity will hardly
believe that human Ingenuity could rise higher, and that a Man had lived, who
had undertaken to defend SLAVERY. Should they seek his Name or Country, how
will they be surprised to hear that he was descended from a Briton; -- that he
lived under the Protection of British Laws: -- And that he was still connected
with Great Britain. The Person I mean is the Author of a Pamphlet, entitled
Slavery not forbidden by Scripture, or a Defense of the West India Planters,
etc. and who calls himself a WEST-INDIAN.

THE Author of this Defense begins, by pleading in behalf of the Slavery of the
Negroes in the West Indies, the imperfections of all human Institutions Page 2.
. This must be acknowledged by every Body, but is by no means an Apology for
our not doing every thing that lies in our Power to Remedy them. Shall Judges
descend from their Benches, and cease to distribute Justice, because Fraud and
Violence still prevail in Society? Shall Physicians cease to relieve the Pains
of the Sick, because the Body must at last pay the Tribute to Mortality? Shall
the Clergy cease to inculcate the Duties of Religion, because they cannot put
an entire stop to the progress of Vice and Infidelity? --

IMPROVEMENTS of all kinds in Society are progressive. It is impossible to
review the Constitution and Laws of Great Britain, without admiring the gradual
Improvements which have been made in both: Many of which at their first
Proposal were no Doubt treated as visionary and impracticable. The abolition of
domestic Slavery is not an Utopian Scheme. It was abolished by Constantine the
first Christian Emperor throughout the Roman Empire. It ceased in many parts of
Europe after the Reformation. It is unknown in Britain. It Is Foundations are
now shaking in Spain and Portugal. It begins to loose Ground in America. The
Assembly of Virginia have petitioned for a Law to prevent the future
importation of Negroes amongst them. The Assembly of Pennsylvania have imposed
a Duty of twenty Pounds Currency upon every Negro, imported into the Province.
The inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay have instructed their
Representatives to enact Laws to restrain it. Reason and Humanity with respect
to Negro Slavery, have at last awakened in the West Indies, and many
respectable Planters now wish to extricate themselves from it. With such
Success and Prospects, I venture once more to take up my Pen in behalf of the
poor Africans. Great Events have often been brought about by slender Means.
Permanent changes in Government are seldom produced suddenly. It shall be our
Business to collect Materials: -- The next Generation we hope, will behold and
admire the finished TEMPLE OF AFRICAN LIBERTY IN AMERICA.

THE Author of the Defense in the next place attempts to prove that Slavery is
not forbidden by Moses, the Jewish Lawgiver Page 3.
; without repeating the Reason mentioned in the Address, for the distinction
which was made between Hebrew and Heathen-Slaves; and which is not overthrown
by our Author's Appeal to the Power of the Supreme Being, I shall remark here,
that Providence never employs extraordinary Means to accomplish an End, when
ordinary ones will do. Where there is no Legal Impediment, we find that
differences of Nation -- Religion, or even Color, cannot prevent People from
marrying amongst each other "The Africans (who are to be seen in every Corne^
(...) the Streets of Lisbon) are allowed to Marry, not only amongst themselves,
but also with those of a different Color. These strange Combinations have
filled this Town with such a variety of odd Faces, as to make a Traveller
doubt, whether he is in Europe; and it may be forseen that in a few Centuries,
not a Drop of pure Portugueze Blood will be left here." BARETTI'S Travels.
That the Jews should continue a distinct People at this Time, under so many
Circumstances unfavourable to it, cannot be equalled by any similar Case in
History; and therefore has always been looked upon as a standing Miracle. --
But again, we are not to set up a few detached Texts of Scripture against the
whole Tenor of the Jewish Law. It is not thus we interpret our English Laws, or
Acts of Parliament. Can it be supposed that the Supreme Being could deliver a
System of Laws that should contradict each other, or favor Injustice and
Violence? This would be to degrade him below a Lycurgus, or a Justinian The
three Maxims upon which the Laws of Justinian were founded are "to live
honestly; to hurt no one; and to give every Man his Due."
, or even Mahomet himself Mahomet proclaimed Liberty to all Slaves. He not only
emancipated his own Slave, but made him his Friend.
. I shall only add further upon this Head, that although the chief Design of
rendering the Slavery or the Heathens perpetual, was to prevent the Jews from
intermarrying with them, yet this Evil like the Divorces spoken of by our
Savior Matthew. xix.
, was permitted amongst them, upon the Account of the Hardness of their Hearts.
From the beginning it was not so. -- That is, the same Law of Nature, which in
the Beginning of the World forbid Divorces, upon trifling Occasions, likewise
forbid Slavery. But The depravity of the Jews, and in particular their
proneness to mix with, and adopt the Customs of other Nations, rendered a
Dispensation from the Rigor of the Moral Law necessary, not only with respect
to the keeping of Slaves, but to other things, equally repugnant to its
Perfection, and Purity "The whole History of the Jews shows that the Pride,
Magnificence, Power, and Glory usurped by their Kings, were utterly contrary to
the will of God. They did lift up their Hearts above their Brethren, which was
forbidden by the Law of God." LORD SUMMERS.
. But the same Plea cannot be made under the Christian Dispensation. Every
seeming imperfection which was accommodated to the State of Knowledge, and
Society amongst the Jews, was abolished by Christianity; instead of "an Eye for
an Eye, or a Tooth for a Tooth," we are commanded "not to resist Evil, but to
him that smites on the right cheek, to turn the other also." Can it be
believed that this divine Lawgiver, who inculcated such Patience of Injuries,
could approve of an Evil; which involved in it every thing that was destructive
to the Happiness of Individuals and Society? "The Gospel is so far from
enslaving us, or divesting us of these Rights, and Privileges which we have
already, that it encourages us to procure more Liberties and Franchises, if we
can come honestly by them. God never commanded any thing contrary to the Law of
Nature." LORD SUMMERS.
Although he reproved Vice in all its shapes, yet (I repeat it again) he
maintained a regard to the Roman and Jewish Governments. This appears plain
from his ordering Tribute to be paid to Caesar. It appear likewise from his
Behavior to the Woman caught in Adultery. Had he condemned her, he would have
offended against the Roman, and had he acquitted her, he would have abrogated
that Part of the Jewish Law which related to that Crime. He only commands her
to "go and sin no more."

The Author of the Defense employs several Pages to show the Loss that would
arise to the Planters, and to Great Britain, from the Manumission of the
Negroes in the West Indies Page 9, I0, II, I2, I3, I4, I5, 29.
. I am far from recommending such a Step to the Planters -- It would be as
prejudicial to the Slaves as to their Masters. Men used to Slavery, such as
prevails in the Southern Colonies and West Indies, are ever afterward unfit
for Liberty. The first Thing proposed was to leave of importing them. The Evil
after this would in some Measure remedy itself. As to the loss Britain would
sustain, it should not be mentioned. It has been proved by Mons. Le Poivre,
that she would derive not only Reputation, but immense Riches from it. Many
Families in Algiers would perhaps suffer a few temporary Inconveniences, and
the Revenues of that State be lessened, by their calling home their piratical
Ships. -- But will any Man pretend, upon this Account, to vindicate their
flagrant Violations of the Laws of Nature and Nations? -- If political
Advantages can justify the Infringement of the Laws of Justice and Humanity,
then let us cease to look with Horror upon the Massacre of the Protestants in
France and Ireland -- of the English at Amboyna -- and of the Jews in Spain. It
cannot be repeated too often, that the Obligations of Morality are alike
binding upon Communities and Individuals; and History as well as daily
Observation show us, that they both promote their true Interest in Proportion
as they comply with them. The Extract from Mons. Le Poivre, in the Address, may
serve as a full Answer to the common Objections of dividing the Lands in the
West Indies among a Number of Freemen, and effectually Refutes all the
Arguments adduced from the Expense of Cattle, Sugarworks, and the speedy
Fermentation of the Cane Juice. "Before Christianity had abolished civil
Slavery in Europe, working in Mines was judged too toilsome for any but Slaves,
or Malefactors, but at present there are Men employed in them who are known to
live happily. To an Increase of Labor, they have joined an Increase of Gain."
MONTESQUIEU Book v. chap. 8.


OUR Author attempts to palliate the Account given of the Severity of the
Punishments inflicted upon the Negroes Page I6, I7, I8.
. To such as know the Weakness, and Depravity of Human Nature, no Accounts of
the Cruelty of these Punishments will appear exaggerated. Invest the proud --
passionate -- ambitious, and covetous Creature Man, with an absolute Dominion
(such as is held in the West Indies) over the Lordly independent Creature Man,
and we may venture from what we know of Human Nature, to tell what will be the
Consequence. It is true, as our Author remarks Page I6.
, most of the Natives of the West Indies are educated in Britain, in the
Principles of Liberty and Humanity; but why are they sent from Home to be
educated? -- Why do Parents give up the most sacred Charge heaven can deposit
in their Hands, the Formation of the Minds of their Children, to Strangers? Why
is the Love of their native Country (so necessary in Human Societies) to be
weakened, or destroyed by a foreign Education? It is because it is so difficult
for them to improve in Learning or Virtue at Home, where they are exposed to
Vice from, every Quarter, and where they breathe nothing but the polluted
Atmosphere of Slavery "The Luxury -- Indolence -- Pride -- and Cruelty of the
Masters, have among other Causes been very justly attributed to their being
bred up amongst Slaves, a prodigious Number of whom are kept on Purpose to wait
upon them CAMPBELL'S Account of the Portuguese Settlement^ in America.
. But have all the Planters in the West Indies been educated in the Principle
of Liberty and Humanity? Or do those who have had a British Education always
reside at their Estates, or look after their Negroes? Perhaps they may in some
Cases disapprove of their Punishments, these being inflicted by Overseers or
their Dependants; yet they are generally too far removed from them to prevent,
or regulate them.

IT is to no Purpose to urge here that Self Interest leads the Planters to
treat their Slaves well. I9, 28.
There are many things which appear true in Speculation, which are false in
Practice. The Head is as apt to mistake its real Interest, as the Heart its
real Happiness. It would be the Interest of every Man to live agreeable to the
Rules of Reason and Morality; but, how few in this Respect pursue their true
Interest? It would be the Interest of Great Britain to give over attempting to
tax her Colonies: It would be her Interest likewise to abolish Slavery in every
Part of her Dominions; but how has she sacrificed her Interest in these
Respects, to the Party or private Considerations of a few weak, or bad Men.

I SHALL not leave the Account I have given of the cruel Treatment of the
Slaves in the West Indies to rest upon my own Authority.

THE Rev. Mr. Godwyn a Clergyman of the Church of England, in relating the
Difficulties he met with, in endeavoring to instruct the Negroes in Barbados,
in the principles of Christianity, informs us, that "they treat their Negroes
with far less Humanity, than they do their Cattle, for they do not Starve their
Horses, nor pinch the Cow by whose Milk they are sustained. The more innocent
and laborious are worked to Death. They are tormented and whipped almost, and
sometimes quite to Death, even for slight miscariages."

SIR HANS SLOAN (who resided many years in Jamaica) in his Introduction to the
Natural History of that Island, gives the following account of the Punishments
inflicted on the Negroes. "For Rebellion, the Punishment is burning them, by
nailing them down on the Ground, with crooked Sticks on every Limb, and then
applying the Fire by Degrees from the Feet and Hands, burning them gradually
upon the Head, whereby their Pains are extravagant. For Crimes of a less Nature
Castration or chopping off half the Foot with an Axe. For Negligence they are
usually Whipped by the Overseers with Lance-wood Switches. After they are
whipped 'till they are raw, some put on their Skins Pepper and Salt to make
them smart; at other Times their Masters will drop Melted Wax on their Skins,
and use several very exquisite Torments." -- I could here add the Testimonies
of many Gentlemen of Character who have witnessed Tortures (if possible) more
cruel than these, in several of the Islands, and who are ready if required to
give in their Names. But for the Honor of Human Nature I shall suppress them.
Let not our Author after this, be offended at the harshest Epithets that can be
given to those who inflict these Punishments. If he is, let him defend the
West India Planters from the Aspersions of Dr. Campbell, who speaking of the
Negroes in the West Indies, says, "They endure a Slavery more complete, and
attended with far worse Circumstances, than what any People in their Condition
suffer, in any other Part of the World; or have suffered, in any other Period
of Time Account of European Settlements in America.
." Let him defend them from the Aspersions of Huberus, who in his Defense of
the necessity of a mild Slavery in some Countries adds, "I speak only of that
kind of Slavery which was in Use amongst civilized Nations -- not of that which
prevails amongst BARBARIANS, or which the Africans endure in America Praelect.
Jur. civ. Page 48.
." Let him defend them from the Aspersions of Dr. Adam Smith, who speaking of
the Contempt of Death and Torture which prevails amongst Savage Nations, has
the following Passage, "There is not a Negro from the Coast of Africa, who does
not in this Respect possess a Degree of Magnanimity, which the Soul of his
fordid Master is too often scarce capable of conceiving. Fortune never exerted
more cruelly her Empire over Mankind, than when she subjected those Nations of
Heroes, to the Refuse of the Jails of Europe, to Wretches who possess the
Virtues neither of the Countries which they come from, nor of those they go to,
and whose Levity, Brutality, and Baseness, so justly expose them to the
Contempt of the Vanquished. Theory of Moral Sentiments.
" Here I must turn Advocate for the first Inhabitants of the West India
Islands. Many of them fled from religious and civil Persecution. Most of them
were descended from the first Families in Great Britain. The first Settlers in
Barbados in a particular manner, who fled from the Tyranny of Cromwell,
carried with them some of the purest Blood in the Nation. But what a Change has
Negro-slavery made in some of their Posterity! -- to be mistaken by a most
ingenious Writer, from their "Levity, Brutality, and Baseness" -- for "the
Refuse of the Jails of Europe." -- In a Word, if our Author means to defend the
Slave Trade, or the West India Planters to any purpose, let him defend them
from the Aspersions of Montesquieu, Franklin, Wallis, Hutchinson, Sharp,
Hargrave, Warburton, and Forster, who have all employed their Talents against
them. The flashes of their Eloquence have long been seen at a Distance. I shall
think myself Happy if I have served as an Instrument of conducting them to
those Piles of Iniquity, which Slavery has raised in the British Settlements in
America.

THE Author of the Defense endeavors to palliate the Severity of the penal
Laws which relate to Slaves in the West Indies by saying, that they may appear
"harsh at first Sight Page 18.
". We shall mention a few of them, extracted from the laws of Jamaica, and see
whether they do not appear harsh upon a closer Examination. "If a Slave strike
a White-Man, two Justices with three Freeholders, may punish him with Death,
provided such Offense was not committed by his Master's Order, or in a legal
Defense of his Goods." What a Door is here opened for Injuries of all kinds
against the Slaves! -- Even Self Preservation, the first Law of Nature, which
often shows itself in Instinct, anticedent to the slower Operations of Reason,
is here suspended by the Law of the Land Passive Obedience without Reserve, is
charging God with as palpable a Contradiction as any two things can be, it
being diametrically opposite to the Law of self Preservation, which is the Law
of Nature, and the Decree of the Almighty, which Law is sacred, and not to be
infringed by any Man."

"He that lets any Person whatsoever destroy him contrary to Law, when it is in
his Power to defend himself, does tacitly Consent to his own Death, which he is
obliged to defend by the Law of Nature, and therefore is guilty of his own
Blood, as well as he that destroys him." LORD SUMMERS.
. "Killing a Slave found stealing, or running away in the Night, shall be no
Damage." "Runaway Slaves may have a Foot cut off by order of two Justices and
three Freeholdes."

"Persons wilfully killing Slaves shall for the first time be guilty of Felony,
and the second Murder Abridgement of the Acts of Assembly of Jamaica, No. 70.
". Where are the Laws in any other civilized Country which make a distinction
between a first and second Murder? -- The difficulty of proving this Crime (so
much complained of in other Countries) is increased, by a Negro not being
suffered to be a Witness in their Courts. The small number of White People
here, renders it extremely difficult to prove this or any other Crime by their
Evidence.

I HOPE it will not be thought that I am about to desert the Cause of Humanity,
when I maintain with the Author of the Defense, that these severe Laws, and
arbitrary Punishments are "absolutely necessary to the Safety and good
Government of the Islands Page 18.
." Despotic Governments always require severe Laws. It is the same in Domestic
Slavery: The natural Love of Liberty which is common to all Men, and the Love
of Ease which is peculiar to the Inhabitants of Warm Climates, can only be
overcome by severe Laws and Punishments. While Slaves are employed in a Climate
and Labor, and treated with an Inhumanity, unknown to former Ages -- While
every Nerve must be kept stretched, and every Pore constantly open -- While the
Ideas of Liberty are kept up in the Minds of any of them, by the yearly
Importation of Cargoes from Africa -- While they are denied so many of the
Necessaries and Comforts of Life, and lastly while their Proportion is so much
greater than that of the white People, nothing but the Whip, melted Wax, Brine,
the Gallows, the Stake, and the Gibbet, will long prevent Insurrections among
them Dr Bancrost who resided several Years in the Dutch Settlements at Guiana
has the following passage in his Natural History of that Country.

"The Blacks are at least five Times more numerous than the Whites, and are
therefore kept at a submissive and humble Distance by severity of Discipllne,
which not only contributes to the safety of the White Inhabitants but to the
Happiness of the Slaves. The impossibility of obtaining, is ever found to
destroy the Dessire of Enjoyment; and rigid Treatement by annihilating every
Hope of Liberty, renders them Content with Slavery. The late Insurrection of
the Slaves in Berbice who of all others were the most favored, affords a
recent Example of the Danger of too much indulgence to Slaves, by which they
are excited to attempt the perfect Recovery of their Liberty. In this State
there is no Medium, either the Minds of Slaves must be depressed by abject
Slavery, or the Lives of their Masters are in eminent Danger. For this Reason
they have been oppressed by many humiliating Penalties, and Distinctions. Their
evidence relative to a white Person is of no validity; an Attempt to strike a
white Inhabitant is punished with Death; and their Masters and Overseers have
not only the Power of inflicting Corporal Punishment, but are in some Measure
allowed to exercise a Right over their Lives, since the putting a Negro to
Death is attended only with a pecunlary Punishment. In this Situation they are
subjected to many complicated Species of Misery, exposed to the Tyranny of the
Imperious, and the Lust of the Libidinous, and to an incestant Toil, which will
have no Period but with their Lives." Page 367, 368. "It is certain the
Treatment of the Negroes in the Plantations is very severe, and the Punishments
inflicted upon them for Faults or Neglects very cruel and inadequate. In
Capital Cases it is generally attended with Torture. They are often burnt, and
frequently hanged up alive. This, besides the Natural Inhumanity of those who
have been long among Slaves, are owing to the vast Disproportion between the
Whites and Blacks, which obliges the former to observe the latter with a
stricter Eye, and to chastise them with a severe Hand." WYNNE'S History of the
British Settlements in America. Page 542. vol. 3. "The greatest Severities, the
most cruel Punishments, are certainly in the present State of things absolutely
necessary, on Account of that total want of Principle, and that Malice and
Dishonesty, which Slavery necessarily introduces into the Minds of the
miserable Subjects of it. It is shocking to think that those unhappy Victims
must from the Nature of the thing, become more wicked, dangerous and
refractory, in proportion to the Natural greatness of their minds. A brave
ingenuous Principled Slave is indeed a Monster, and not included in the general
Occonomy of Nature." Plan for the Abolition of Slavery in the West Indies, P.
I2. "It is certain these Punishments (formerly mentioned by Sir Hans Sloan) are
sometimes merited by the Blacks, who are a very perverse Generation, and though
they may appear harsh are scarce equal to some of their Crimes." Introduction
to the Natural History of Jamaica.
. Even these art often ineffectual for that Purpose. In spite of them all,
Human Nature is now aiming to regain her Dignity, amongst the Slaves, in the
Brasils, Surinam, and Chili, who have at last asserted their Liberty "There is
more Reason to believe that Passive Obedience is a damnable Doctrine, than the
contrary; for it is inconsistent with those glorious Attributes of the Deity,
by which we believe him to be a God of infinite Love, Mercy and Compassion to
all Mankind, and no respecter of Persons; for that Doctrine makes him an
unmerciful, cruel, tyrannical God, in making all Mankind that they may be used
as Beasts, at the Will and Pleasure of a few of their Fellow Creatures, who are
but their Equals, till they make them supreme Heads, or Governors." LORD
SUMMERS.
. Are not these Insurrections the beginnings of universal Retribution and
Vengance upon European Tyranny, in America? and is it not high time for Britain
to change her Conduct, and to adopt some safe and equitable means of abolishing
Slavery in her Colonies.?

THE Author of the Defense endeavors to strengthen his Cause by degrading the
Genius and Manners of the Africans, below the ordinary rank of human Creatures
Page 21, 22, 23, 24.
. Few Travelers possess Abilities, Introductions, or Languages, proper to
acquire a complete knowledge of National Characters. Nations often differ
widely in the compass of a few Years, and even the same Nation is different, in
different parts of the same Kingdom. How widely do the Manners of the Chinese
differ according to Du Haldt, and the Author of Lord Anson's Voyage round the
World. The one describes the interior parts of the Country, the other, a
Seaport town. Human Nature is the same in all Ages and Countries; and all the
difference we perceive in its Characters in respect to Virtue and Vice,
Knowledge and Ignorance, may be accounted for from Climate, Country, Degrees of
Civilization, form of Government, or other accidental causes, "Mankind (says
that Citizen of the World Mr. Baretti) are of one great Family, and he is not a
Friend to that Family, who contributes his Mite toward keeping it in Discord,
by partial and false Representations. It is the Devil's Business to spread such
erroneous Notions, that Men may not consider themselves as Brothers, but
contemn and hate each other."

WITHOUT availing myself of the Authorities of Smith, Adanson, Astley, Bosman,
and others who speak in high Terms of the Africans, I shall allow that many of
them are inferior in Virtue, Knowledge, and the love of Liberty to the
Inhabitants of other parts of the World: but this may be explained from
Physical causes. The different Nations of Africa are divided from each other by
vast tracts of uninhabited Land. This is the reason why this quarter of the
Globe has never been the seat of a wide extended Empire; and hence the Natives
continue chiefly in a Savage or Barbarous State; for Arms (on which extensive
Empire has always been founded) and the Arts of Civilization have generally
traveled together. Moreover the Heat of the Climate in Africa, by bringing on
Indolence of Mind, and Body, exposes them at all Times to Slavery, while the
Fertility of the Soil renders the Want of Liberty a less Evil to them, than it
is to the Inhabitants of Northern, or less Warm and fruitful Countries
Montesquieu.
. These last Causes, have likewise fixed Slavery in Asia: but from the
undivided Nature of this Country, it has not been confined as in Africa to
petty Monarchies, but extended through large Empires: Hence the Asiatics are a
civilized People.

COULD it be proved, that the Negroes are the only People in the World, who are
ignorant of a Supreme Being, or that Worship Idols, it might add Weight to our
Author's Argument Page 16.
derived from these Facts, to show that they are an inferior Race of Men. Human
Inventions in all Ages have corrupted Natural, as well as Revealed Religion.
The Natives of Peru so famous in History, were discovered in a State of the
most blind Idolatry; Example of the same Kind are to be found without Number,
in the Accounts of Travelers, of every Age and Country. In the Polite City of
Athens, there were many who worshipped an "unknown God," and in Ephesus others,
who lived altogether "without God in the World."

THE best Definition that can be given of Man is, that he is a Creature capable
of Religion. Who has not heard of the Christian Church in Africa? If
Christianity has made less Progress, and been more corrupted in this Country
than in many others, it must be ascribed among other Causes to its opposing
Polygamy, a vice to which the Heat of the Climate, the early Maturity, and
speedy Decay of the Women, and the peculiar fertility of the Soil, strongly
disposed them. It is owing to the less, severe Restrain^s which Mahomet laid
upon this Vice, that his Religion continues to prevail throughout the greatest
Part of this Country. Montesquieu.


OUR Author's last Charge against the Genius and Manners of the Africans, is
founded upon their being "unacquainted with Friendship and Gratitude," and upon
their being "separated from their nearest Relations without looking after them,
or bidding them farewell. Page 22, 23.
" Friendship and Gratitude are founded upon the Wants and Weaknesses of Man in
a State of Society. If any of the Negroes appear to be Strangers to these
Virtues, it must be ascribed to their independent Mode of Life, as Savages,
which exempts them from most of those Weaknesses, and artificial Wants, which
are introduced by civilized Life. The Savage is indebted entirely to his Bow
and Fishing Rod, for his Support. The Woods and Brooks, by satisfying chief of
his Desires, raise him above the Obligations of Friendship and Gratitude. They
likewise, by precluding all comparatives Ideas, render him a Stranger to Envy
and Ambition. The seeming Indifference with which some of the Negroes part from
their Relations, must be ascribed in like Manner to their Character as Savages;
it being esteemed amongst them the highest Mark of Heroisim to bear the utmost
Degrees of Pain and Misery without complaining. But this Insensibility to the
Ties of Nature, Friendship, and Gratitude, is far from being general, amongst
the Negroes. The Natives of Congo, I have been informed by a Gentleman who has
witnessed the Sale of many Cargoes of Slaves in the West Indies, always show
Signs of Grief upon being parted from their Friends, and Relations. The
Cormanties are always prone to Insurrections. The Natives of Angola generally
seek to destroy themselves Two Negro Men a few Years ago in the Island of St.
Croix were observed to be much affected upon being fold apart. Their Masters
lived at a Distance from each other. They both ran away at once, and after
being absent two Weeks, were found in a lonely place, hanging dead in each
others Arms, on the Limb of a Tree.
. The Degrees of Natural Affection, Love of Liberty, and Resentment, discovered
by the Negroes, are always proportioned to the Progress they had made in
political, and domestic Happiness, in their own Country.

THE Amusements, Songs etc Page 27.
. of the Negroes, are urged as signs of their Happiness, or Contentment in
Slavery. Every one knows how often the Mind flies to these, to relieve itself
from Melancholy. Although some of their Songs, like those of civilized Nations,
are Obscene and Warlike, yet I have been informed that many of them, as well as
their Tunes, are of a most plantive Nature, and very expressive of their Misery.

To a Mind divested of those Prejudices with which Custom leads us to view
objects, the same Follies and Vices will appear under different forms in every
state of Society, not only in the Individuals of the different Ranks and
Characters of Mankind, but amongst different Nations likewise.

WHERE is the difference between an African Prince, with his face daubed with
Grease, and his Head adorned with a Feather; and a moderen Macaroni with his
artificial Club of Hair daubed with Powder and Pomatum? Where is the difference
between the British Senator who attempts to enslave his fellow subjects, in
America, by imposing Taxes upon them contrary to Law and Justice; and the
American Patriot who reduces his African Brethren to Slavery, contrary to
Justice and Humanity? Where is the difference between the skeptical Philosopher
who will not allow those Men to be his equals Genius or Manners, who differ
from his in a few trisling Customs; and the bigoted Christian who will not
allow those Christians to partake of the merits of his Savior who mix with
their worship a few trisling Ceremonies? Where is the difference between the
Mohammedan Negro who maintains three or four Wives agreeable to the Religion of
this Country; and the European Christian who keeps three or four Mistresses
contrary to the Religion of his Country? Where is the difference between the
Pagan Negro who worship an evil Spirit, and uses a few ceremonies at a Funeral;
and the superstitious Christian who worships God from a fear of a Devil, and
connects his future Happiness with a Sacrament before, and a Funeral right
after, his Death? Where is the difference between the African Savage, whose
scanty wants are supplied by Nature; and the European Nobleman, whose numerous
wants are supplied by Arts? They are both alike free from the Obligations of
Friendship and Gratitude " Vera Amicitia rarissime inveniuntur in iis qui in
benoribus, reque publica versantur." CICERO. "Pity, Benevolence and Friendship,
are things almost unknown in high Stations." BOLINBROKE.
. It would lead us too far from our subjet to show in how many other Instances,
the same rural sports, the same violent and lasting Resentments, the same Arts
of Address and Dissimulation, and the same want of Affection in the Union of
the sexes, Mark a Resemblance between the extremes of civilized, and the savage
Life. -- Lastly; where is the difference between that civilized Nation that
yearly destroys 30,000 souls by her Trade under the sanction of Laws; and that
barbarous Nation which destroys the same number with the Sword, without the
sanction of Laws? The proportion of Vice is the same in both Nations. In the
latter it appears like certain Diseases in strong Constitutions upon the
Extremities and surface of the Body, whereas in the former it is thrown upon
the Vitals. Still however, like the dreaded Worm of Africa it spreads its
malignant Influence to every part of the Body, and unless it be wholly
extracted, will at last end in its entire Dissolution. But supposing our Author
had proved the Africans to be inferior in every thing to the Inhabitants of the
other quarters of the Globe will his Cause derive any strength from it? Would
it avail a man to plead in a Court of Justice that he defrauded his Neighbor,
because he was inferior to him in Genius or Knowledge?

WAS I an arbitrary Prince in a Country whose Laws punished the lowest degree
of Inferiority of Genius or Manners with perpetual Slavery, and should a Man
claim a fellow subject for a Slave upon the best proofs of his being deficient
in both, -- I Would suffer the unfortunate Criminal to go free, and inflict
upon the Prosecutor the whole penalty of the Law. This Man's Genius and Manners
above all others, would render him fit for nothing but Slavery.

I come now to enquire into the causes which have prevented the increase of the
Negroes in the West Indies. These must be sought for, not in their
"carelessness in preserving their Health Page 27.
" as our Author supposes, but in their peculiar situation and manner of Life as
Slaves. The Africans multiply in their own Country with a Rapidity that is
hardly credible, and from their Color and certain Customs The chief of these is
anointing their Bodies with Palm Oil in the wet Seasons BARBOT'S Account of
Africa, Page I05.
which Experience has taught them, they are exempted from those Diseases which
prove so fatal to the Europeans that come amongst them.

THREE Causes concur to check Population in a Country, namely, Luxury,
Debauchery, and Slavery. The first of these by increasing our wants, increases
the difficulties of supporting a Family; the second renders the Sexes unfit,
while the last abates the Appetite, for propagating the Species. All these
produce their Effects according to their Degree, or according to their being
more or less combined. Slavery operates differently, whether it be of a
political, or domestic Nature. Political Slavery in some Countries has but
little influence upon Population, such as in some parts of Asia, and Africa. In
others it operates against it, as in Russia, and most of the states of Italy.
Domestic Slavery in like manner sometimes exists under such alleviations as to
have little influence upon Population. This was the case in Egypt. The
Israelites multiplied in a rapid manner during their Captivity. That they were
treated with Lenity we learn from the history of Joseph. Had Masters possessed
a right over the Lives of their Slaves, Potiphar would have avenged the
dishonor Joseph was accused of attempting to bring on his Bed, and not have
consigned him over to be tried, condemned and punished by the municipal Law of
the Country. Slaves increased nearly in the same proportion as Freemen in the
virtuous Ages of the Roman Empire. We read of some who owned 10,000, and others
20,000 of them. That the Romans treated their Slaves with Lenity, we learn from
the testimony of Seneca Epist. 47.
. It is true the Romans imported many Slaves from the Barbarous Countries they
subdued, but this was in the declension of their Empire. It was not 'till this
time that we read of the Ergastula, or House of Correction for Slaves. They
partook of the dissolute manners of their Masters, and therefore foreign
supplies were necessary to repair the waste which Debauchery had, introduced
amongst them. It is true also, the right of Life was held over Slaves, and
Tortures were inflicted upon them in criminal Cases: But the same right was
held by the Romans over their own Children, and Tortures were inflicted in like
cases upon Freemen. They were seldom put in Execution upon either, in the early
Ages of the Empire. Slaves multiplied among the ancient Germans, by whom they
were treated with the Familiarity of Children, according to the Testimony of
Tacitus De Morib. German. Chap. 20, 25.
. Slaves have multiplied moreover in the Northern and Middle Colonies of
America. But in the West Indies they have never increased by ordinary
Population. We shall first prove this Fact, and then assign the reasons of it.

LIGON in his Account of Barbados tells us that in the year 1646 there were
20,000 Whites on that Island, besides, to use his own Words "a (...) greater
number of Blacks". In the year 1676 the Negroes in Barbados amounted to above
one hundred thousand Campbell's European Settlements in America.
. Upon a Parliamentary enquiry into the state of the African Trade in the year
1728 it appeared that in three years only the number of Negroes imported into
Barbados, Jamaica, and Antigua amounted to 42,000, besides what were carried
to St. Kitts, Nevis, and Monserrat. From this it appears, that the Island of
Jamaica, allowing it only an equal proportion with Barbados and Antigua,
imported 14,000 Negroes in three years. When we consider the great increase of
the demand for Sugar, and the other Produce of that Island, since the year
1728, we cannot admit of less than 5,000 Negroes being imported there every
year since. Let us now enquire what is the present number of the Negroes in
those Islands. In Barbados "The Island of Barbados notwithstanding all the
Means they use to increase their Negroes by Propagation, notwithstanding that
the Climate in every Respect, except in being more Wholesome, resembles the
Climate from whence they came, notwithstanding all this, Barbados lies under a
Necessity of an annual Recruit of five thousand Slaves to keep up their Stock.
This prodigious Failure which is at least, in the same Proportion in all our
Islands, shows that some uncommon and insupportable Hardships lie upon the
Negroes, which wear them in such a surprising Manner." CAMPBELL's European
Settlements. "Allowing the Number of Negroes to be 100,000 they are entirely
renewed every twenty Years." What then must we think of the Management of a
People, who far from increasing greatly as those who have no loss by Wars ought
to do, must in so short a Space of Time as twenty Years, without foreign
Recruits be entirely consumed to a Man." Ibid.
they do not exceed 100,000, and in Jaimaica they do not amount to 200,000. If
in the latter they have increased by a few thousands within these forty years
it is not owing to ordinary Population, but to the many new Estates which have
lately been settled on that Island. When we look back and estimate the numbers
which have been sacrificed by this Trade, and when we look forward, and
estimate the increasing proportion which it must destroy, if it continues upon
its present footing The Number of Negroes imported one Year with another from
Africa to America, amounts to 200,000, a fourth Part of which falls to the
Share of the British Colonies and Islands. In the Year 1768 they imported
104,000. Computing each Negro at L 30 Sterling, they pay L 1500,000 a Year for
Slaves. Five thousand seven hundred and thirty one were imported into
Charlestown between November 1772, and July 1773. A few of them were brought
from the West Indies. "The Negroes sent from Jamaica to the Continent of
America (says Sir Hans Sloane) are only the Sick and the Mutinous." They do not
amount to one twentieth Part of the Number who perish yearly in that Island.
, we would wish to forget the obligations we owe to Justice, Humanity,
Religion, and to the British name. What War, or Pestilence ever made such
Havoc with the human species? Spaniards blush at the Recital of the Massacre
of the Indians in South America, and wish to blot it out of their Histories The
same Crimes amongst different Nations and Ages, often seek to screen themselves
under the same Sanctuary. Lopez de Gomara the Spanish Historian who relates
this Event, attempts, to justify", by degrading the Genius and Manners of the
Indians below those of Human Creatures, for, says he, "they eat Lice and Worms,
they intoxicate themselves with a Wine made of Indian Corn, also with the smoke
of Tobacco, and they pluck out their Beards." General History of the Indies,
Chap, 219.
. But Britons, once samed through every quarter of the Globe for their love of
Justice, Humanity and Liberty, -- nay more, British Americans, the descendants
of those illustrious Men of whom Britain at one period of her History was not
worthy, -- British Americans, who a few years ago risked their all in opposing
the claims of the British Parliament; these very Americans have fallen into a
trade more destructive to their fellow Creatures than Spanish tortures, they
have pursued it upwards of an hundred years, and what is more -- they defend it
as lawful.

HAVING proved that the Negroes in the West Indies do not increase by ordinary
population, I come now to enquire into the Reasons of it.

OF the three Causes we mentioned which concur to check Population, the two
last, namely, Debauchery, and Slavery, act chiefly upon the Negroes. Dr.
Bancroft ascribes their Decerase entirely to Debauchery In these as well as in
all other West India Colonies the Slaves diminish in Number unless recruited by
successive Supplies from Africa. This Decrease has been attributed to various
Causes, commonly to hard Labor, though with very little appearance of Reason,
since they are more Robust, Healthy, and Vigorous than their Masters. The true
Cause of their Want of Increase results from the Intercourse of the Whites with
the young Wenches, who derive no inconsiderable Emolument therefrom, and as
childbearing world put an end to this Commerce, they viciously use every
Precaution to avoid Conception; and if these prove ineffectual, they even
procure repeated Abortions, which incapacitates them for Child bearing in a
more advanced Age. This unnatural Practice is very frequent, and of the highest
Detriment to the Planters." Natural History of Guiana. Page 372, 373.
, but we shall find that Slavery (under its peculiar aggravations in the
West Indies) has a great share in destroying them. The Appetite for
propagating'the Species amongst the Blacks, bears no relation to the heat of
the Climate, or to the degrees of the same Appetite in the White People. A
greater proportion of Infants than in other Countries, perish in their Birth
Dr. George Tailor an eminent Physician and Manmidwife at St, Kitts informed me
that the Negro Women in that Island have very difficult, and sometimes
preternatural Births. He attributed it to the Pelvis being distorted, by the
Kicks they get when young, and to the Hardships they undergo during their
Pregnancy. The white Women he adds, have very easy and safe Births.
Childbearing is attended with little Pain and Danger in all warm Countries.

Dr. Bancroft says the Indian Women in Guiana seem to be exempted from the
Curse inflicted upon Eve. The same has been remarked of the Women in many Parts
of Africa.


. Their Children besides being subject to all the numerous Diseases of Children
in warm Countries, have one that is peculiar to them, and which arises from
their peculiar Circumstances as Slaves, which proves fatal to Numbers This
Disease is called by some of the Natives the Jaw-Fall. It is a species of the
Tetanus. The late Dr. Cadwallider Evans of this City, who practiced Physic
several Years in Jamaica, informed me that it was very common among the Negro
Children in that Island.

Dr. Chevalier in his "Lettres fur Les Maladies de St. Dominque," gives the
following Account of this Disorder, "Le mal de maachoire, ou le Tetanos des
Enfa^s est presque incurable. Il a diffeerentes Causes. La plus ordinaire est
le trop de feu que les Negresses accoucheees font dans leur Case; a laquelle on
peut ajouuter la fumee continuelle, car ellles n'ont point de Cheminee. par la
Chaleur du feu les Enfans font souvent in fueur, et la mondre fraicheur, fait
Impression fur les Nerfs delicats de ces jeunes Creatures. Une autre Cause fort
ordainaire de cette Malady font les Passions de la mere, et la maniere don't
elle a vecu dans fa Grosselle."

"Il y a de certaines Habitations, ou presque, tous les enfans mourent, du Mal
de Machoire. Ce Malheure, cause beaucoup de perte aux Habitans." Lettre
Premiere. "The Jaw Disorder, or the Tetanus of the Children, is almost always
incurable. It has different Causes. The most ordinary is the large Fires which
the Negro Women have in their Huts when they lie inn. To which we may add the
continual Smoke of these Fires, for their huts have no chimnies in them to
carry it off; the Children are by these means thrown into Sweats, so that the
least Cold makes an impression upon their Delicate Nerves. Another ordinary
cause of this Disease, is the Passions of the Mother during her Pregnancy.
There are certain places where almost all the Children die of it. This
misfortune causes a great loss to the Inhabitants."


. The Want of Confidence in Fathers in the Fidelity of their Wives, and the
Wretchedness of Mothers, have always been found to lessen that care which is
the Offspring of Natural Affection in Parents for their Children. This
Disregard in Parents for their Posterity, is increased among the Slaves in the
West Indies by the Reflection of the Misery they have entailed upon them; --
here then we discover another Source of Accidents and Mortality among the Negro
Children.

I MUST not omit taking Notice of a Disease called the Seasoning, which
destroys many of the Negroes. It arises partly from their unwholesome Diet Il
est rare, que les Esclaves, qu' on apporte de Guince, Soient attaques de seivre
malign; Mais quelques-uns, principalement les Juenes, Jusqu'a l'age de
quatorze ou quinze font sujes a une Malady que l'on appelle Mal D'Estomac, Ils
sentent de la Douleaur a la Region epigastriqueu, tout le corpse est pesant, le
Sommeil les acc^ble, en merchant, en travaillant; ils voudroient etre toujours
couches; il faut les battre pour les fair lever; and les Outils en travaillant
tombent des mains, ils out une faim devorant. on ne peut les rassasier. Cette
malady vieut de la nourriture grossiere qu on l^^r a dounee toute la
traversee, car ils ne mangeut que seeves de marais cuites avec du sell, and
peut-etre quelque graiss"

Lettres par M. le Dr. Chevalier fur les Maladies de St. Dominique

"The Slaves who are brought from Guinea are seldom attacked with a malignant
fever, but some of them, especially those about fourteen or fifteen years of
age are subject to a disease which is called the Disorder of the Stomach. They
feel a pain in the Epigrastic Region, the whole body is unwieldy, and sleep
weighs them down in walking, and at work. Their working instruments fall from
their hands. They incline always to be in bed, and it is necessary to beat them
to make them get up. They have a voracious appetite, which is never satisfied.
This disease arises from the gross food which is given them on their passage,
for they eat nothing but marsh beans dressed with salt and sometimes a little
fat."


on Shipboard, and partly from the Hippocondriac Disorder, which their new and
wretched Manner of Life brings on them. Now when we add to all these, the hard
Labor which the Negroes undergo in a Climate not intended for it -- their spare
Diet Upon deducting all the Expenses of fresh Negroes, Taxes, Doctors fees for
attending them when Sick, Accidents happening to Cattle and Mills, Land
Carriage, etc. All the Profits of the Sugar Trade to Great Britain and the
Planters, have appeared upon a nice Calculation to be saved from the Food and
Clothes of the Negroes. That many of them have been abridged in the last
Article, appears from the following Act of Assembly.

"All Slaves shall have Clothes, that is, Men Jackets and Drawers, and Women
Jackets and Petticoats, or Frocks once every Year, on or before the 25th Day of
December, upon Penalty of five shillings for every Slave's wanting," Laws of
Jamaica, No. 70. "The Negroes in the Plantations are subsisted at an easy Rate.
Some support themselves by working on Saturdays and Sundays; others are
supported with an Allowance of Guinea or Indian Corn, a salt Herring, or a
small quantity of Bacon, or salt Pork, a Day. All the rest of the Charge
consists in a Cap, a Shirt, a pair of Breeches, Stockings and Shoes. The whole
not exceeding forty Shillings a Year" CAMPBELL'S European Settlements.
-- and their intemperance in drinking the most pernicious Liquors we may
account for the immense Waste of them in the West Indies. They all stand
charged upon Slavery.

I KNOW it has been said by some, that the Climate of the West Indies destroys
many of the Negroes. But Experience convinces us that this is not the Case.
They are even exempted from the most fatal epidemic Diseases to which the White
People are subject. Nor should the Mortality among the Whites be attributed
entirely to the Climate. The most populous Nations, and the longest lived
People, have always been found in warm Countries. The Mortality of the
Europeans arises from their carrying with them to the West Indies their
European Diet, and Manners. Lind's Diseases of warm Climates.
These, together with that Luxury which is founded on the Labor of the Negroes,
have prevented the Increase of White People in the Islands. The Assembly of
Jamaica have in vain attempted, by Laws made for that Purpose, to encourage
Artificers and Laborers (who constitute the greatest Body of the People in all
Countries) to settle amongst them. They can never reconcile themselves to
working with Slaves. It is owing to these Causes, that the Number of White
People in Jamaica has not exceded 30,000 at one time, in the Course of Ninety
Years. Compare this, with the Province of Pennsylvania, whose inhabitants in
the same Space of Time, from ordinary Population and the Accession of
Strangers, have amounted to near 400,000 Souls. In these consist the true
Riches The Exports from Great Britain to the English West Indies from 1754, to
1758 inclusive, amounted to L 3,765,000 Sterling. To the Colonies in the same
Time, 7,410,000 The Difference in behalf of the latter -- 3,645,000
and Glory of Britain. "In the Multitude of People is the King's Honor, but in
the Want of People is the Destruction of a Prince."

Prove. xiv. 28.
THUS we see that the Slave Trade is not only repugnant to Religion, and the
true Interests of our Mother Country, but that it offers Violence to the
economy of Nature. The Air -- the Sea -- Heaven and Earth -- all the Elements,
conspire against it.

The Author of the Defense endeavors to shelter the West India Planters under
the Practices of some of the "firmest Supporters of Religion in England, both
of the Clergy and Laity Page 30.
." The greatest Sanctity of Office, and the highest seize in Wisdom, will
not always preserve Men from Vice and Error. The Author of the Treatise upon
the Trade from Great Britain to Africa uses the following Arguments in Defense
of the Slave Trade, "What vain pretense of Liberty can infatuate People to run
into such Licentiousness, as to assert a Trade is unlawful which Custom
immemorial, and various Acts of Parliament have given a Sanction to? Could they
support their enthusiastical Arguments, the African Trade would be effectually
ruined, for at present the richest Adventurres in it, are such Men as would
scorn to be engaged in any Pursuit, but what the Laws of God, and Man would
fully sanctify. Can the Defender of the Faith, and their most Catholic and
Christian Majesty's join in a Trade illicit in its Principles, and dishonorable
in its Pursuit? Where slept the Pope's Thunders, while these Dominions were
under his sway, that he never vindicated the universal Right of Freedom? How
came it that no Nation ever yet asserted so natural a Privilege, if it had
from the first, Religion, and Reason for its Foundation?" -- For this
Peformance the Society of African Merchants voted public Thanks to be given to
the Author.
The Clergy of every Church are as apt to confound the Attributes of the Deity,
with a few detached Passages in the Scriptures, as Lawyers are, to confound
Natural Equity with Acts of Parliament, of as Physicians are, to mistake the
Operations of Nature for those of Medicine. A Planter in one of the West India
Islands who felt some uneasiness in his Mind from keeping Negro Slaves, wrote
lately to a learned Divine in London, to know whether it was unlawful. The
Divine wrote for answer, that the Jews had Slaves -- that it was not forbidden
in the New Testament -- that domestic Slavery had existed in every Age and
Corner of the World -- and that by treating his Slaves well, he committed no
Crime in keeping them. Had this Planter listened a little longer to the Voice
of Heaven, speaking in his Heart, or consulted the whole Tenor of his Bible, he
would have received a very different Answer to his Question. I beg leave to add
here, that the same Arguments derived from Scripture and Precedents, which
establish domestic; likewise establish political Slavery. The Jews, God's
peculiar People, were under Bondage to the Egyptians, and unless we oppose the
whole Spirit of Christianity, to a few single Precepts, St. Paul's advice to
the Romans "Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers. For there is no
Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation." Chap. xiii.
is a much stronger Proof of the Lawfulness of political Slavery, than any yet
adduced from the Old or New Testament, in Favor of the Lawfulness of domestic
Slavery. If domestic Slavery is agreeable to the Will and Laws of God,
political Slavery is much more so. -- Then it follows, that our British
Constitution was obtained unjustly -- King Charles the First did no wrong --
Passive Obedience was due to Oliver Cromwell -- King James the Second was the
Lord's Anointed -- The Revolution was a Rebellion -- King William was a Tyrant
-- The illustrious House of Hanover are Usurpers -- and the Right of the
British Parliament to tax the American Colonies, is unlimited and indisputable.
-- Ancient and modern Precedents should have no Weight in this Dispute; for
political as well as domestic Slavery, has existed amongst civilized Nations in
every Age, and Corner of the World. But has its Iron Scepter been softened, by
the few despotic Kings who have been wise and just, and the few Nations which
have lived happily and flourished in that State? In a Word, if we reason from
Example, where shall we stop? For where is the Error, or Vice, that has not
been admitted as true, or practiced as lawful, in some Age or Country? "There
is a Way which seems right unto a Man; but the end thereof are the Ways of
Death."

Prove. xiv. 12.
THE Reader will here pardon my saying a Word or two of myself. I am called
upon by the Author of the Defense to answer a Question. -- Should I become "an
Owner of a West India Estate by the Death of a Relation, or some other
unexpected Means," he desires to know "whether I could lay my Hand on my Heart,
and say, with a safe Conscience, that I would instantly free all my Slaves, and
destroy my Sugar Works." Suppose I should refuse to do this, the Subject
remains where it did, -- I should then commit a Crime for which I should justly
"loose the Esteem of Men of Sense, and of a rational Way of thinking."

AND now my West India Friend, give me leave in my turn to ask you a few
Questions. Lay your Hand upon your Heart, and tell me; would you like to be
sold, for no fault, or torn against your will from your Sisters and Brothers,
and carried into a, foreign Country, to be subjected to the absolute dominion
of a Master; to be obliged to labor without intermission, to cease to make any
further improvements in Virtue or Knowledge; to be fed and clothed scantily;
to be tempted by your situation to all the low Vices of Slavery, to be punished
in the most cruel manner if you attempted to regain your Liberty; Would you
like to be told, if you should complain of your hard fate, that the
"Imperfection of Human Society" required that you should be a Slave; that Moses
the Jewish Lawgiver commanded it, that the Gospel did not proclaim a jubilee
to Slaves Page 39.
; that you had "no Genius" that Mr. Hume had said, from your Ignorance of the
Religion, and your backwardness in acquiring the Language, and Learning of the
Country you were in, you belonged to an inferior race of Men, Page 21.
, that you wanted feeling, because Resentment, and the prospect of greater
Misery absorbed the Grief you would otherwise have showed upon parting with
your Family; that your Master was "educated in a Country of Liberty and
Humanity," and that it was his "interest to treat you well"; that the Tortures
inflicted upon you for attempting to regain your Liberty, "were inferior to
those inflicted upon Damien, and the Conspirators against the Life of the
present King of Portugal"; Page 19.
"all Happiness was comparative"; that you were "much happier than the Peasants
of Scotland, Ireland, and Poland"; Page ^9.
that upon the whole your situation was more to be envied than pitied, "and
that you might quit the World with the certainty that your Children would be
treated with the same care you had experienced yourself". Page 2.
? -- I anticipate your Answer to these Questions. You would not. Then Sir pause
a few Minutes, and reflect upon what you have done. You have called in question
the Justice and goodness of the Supreme Being. You have charged the FATHER of
Mankind with being the Author of the greatest Evils to his Children. You have
aimed to establish Principles, which justify the most extensive and cruel
Depradations which have been made by Conquerors and Tyrants, upon the Liberties
and Lives of Mankind, and which at the same time condemn those glorious Events,
and illustrious Men, that Britain and her Colonies, are indebted to for their
Liberty and Prosperity. You have misrepresented the true Interests of our
Mother Country. You have attempted to palliate Crimes which are founded on a
Pride and Depravity of Soul, unavoidable in Masters and Slaves in the
West Indies. You have thrown a Veil over the true Causes which destroy so many
Thousands of your fellow Creatures every year. You have (to use your own Words)
"unworthily traduced" not "many of my valuable Friends" Preface to the Defense,
Page 1.
but the whole of your own Brethren -- the poor Africans. You have attempted to
sink Creatures, formed like yourself, in the Image of God, and equally capable
of Happiness both here and hereafter, below the rank of "Monsters and
Barbarians" Preface to the Defense, Page 2.
, or even Brutes themselves. You have -- but I forbear to add to the Reproaches
to which you have exposed yourself. -- "As a Person cannot err so grossly as not
to be able to make Atonement" Defense, Page 30.
I hope you will not fail immediately to ask forgiveness of your Maker, and
your Country, for the Attack you have made upon the Rights of Mankind.

PERHAPS some of my West India Readers are waiting to see an Apology, for the
Account I have given in the Address of the Punishments inflicted upon the
Negroes in the West Indies. If they are, they will certainly be mistaken.
Although the Address "was written hastily," yet the most ingenious Tortures
that ever were inflicted upon a West India Slave, should not prevail upon me to
acknowledge, that is was written "without sufficient Proofs of what I advanced
Page 30.
." The Authorities upon which I have rested all my Facts, cannot be
contradicted. But I am far from applying the Account that is given of the
inhuman Practices of some Masters, to ALL the Planters in the West Indies. If
it is unfair to reason against the Practice of any Thing in itself lawful, from
its Abuse; it is not so, to reason against Practices, in themselves unlawful,
from their Abuse. The rankest Weeds, and the most delicious Fruits, often grow
in the same Soil. I honor the West-Indians for their Hospitality, Generosity,
and Public Spirit. I have had the Pleasure of knowing many of them, who were
distinguished for their Humanity, and every other Virtue that could adorn human
Nature. There are some Metals so pure that they receive no Rust from being
exposed to the moistest Atmosphere; so there are some Dispositions naturally so
good, that they cannot contract the least soil of Vice -- even from Slavery.

I HAVE avoided as much as possible every Thing through the whole of this
Vindication, that could draw me from my Subject to the Author of the Defense. I
shall not even give him the Pain of repeating here the many unkind Insinuations
and Reflections he has thrown out against me. He was perhaps warm when he wrote
them -- When he cools, I am persuaded he will be "sorry for his ungenerous
abuse of a man who never injured him," Page 30.
or any other Individual born in the West Indies.

FINIS.

