Mr. Trumbull's DISCOURSE, AT THE FREEMEN's MEETING, APRIL 12, 1773.

DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THE ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE FREEMEN OF THE TOWN OF
NEW HAVEN, APRIL 12, 1773.

By BENJAMIN TRUMBULL, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN NORTH-HAVEN.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN. M,DCC,LXXIII.

EXODUS I.8. NOW THERE AROSE UP A NEW KING OVER EGYPT, WHICH KNEW NOT JOSEPH.
IT will be thought strange, no doubt, at least at first view, that the
preacher should make choice of a Text like this, upon such an occasion as the
present. The audience will say, What relation can the story of Joseph, and the
history of the Egyptian kings, have to the important business on which we are
assembled? What remarks can be made on Pharaoh's ignorance of Joseph, on his
cruel oppression of the Hebrews, or on his despotic government of his Egyptian
subjects, which can afford instruction or entertainment suited to the
circumstances of this free meeting? However if we view the words more
accurately, and enter fully into the story of which they are a part, we may,
perhaps, judge, that none could have been more proper: That no topic could
have given a finer lead to such sentiments, as are peculiarly adapted to an
occasion like the present.

THE Egyptians seem to have been particularly happy, in along succession of
native kings, from the reign of Misraim or Menes, the founder of the kingdom of
Egypt, to the reign of Concharis or Timaeus, the twenty fifth king of Tanis or
of the lower division of Egypt, for the term of about six centuries and a half
Misraim who was the first king of Egypt, is supposed to have built Zoan, the
seat of the Egyptian kings, in those early ages, and to have founded the
kingdom of Egypt A. M. 1772. The conquest of Egypt, by the Shepherds, is
thought to have happened, in the fifth year of the reign of Timaeus, A. M.
2420, which is 648 years later, near six centuries and a half. If we should
reckon from the building of Noph or Memphis, and from the beginning of the
reign of Naphtuhim, about A* M. 1777, the period will include 643 years.
. During this long period the Egyptians, (as did most nations in these early
times,) enjoyed great freedom, noble immunities and privileges. Especially, was
this the case, until the latter part of the reign of Thusimares, the twentieth
king of Tanis or of the lower division of Egypt. About the thirteenth year of
his reign Joseph the Hebrew was advanced to the office of prime minister in the
court of Pharaoh. Near thirteen years after his advancement, toward the close
of that remarkable famine, which then prevailed over Egypt, and all the
neighboring kingdoms, he bought the Egyptians themselves, as he had their
lands and cattle before. From this time they became the servants and tenants of
Pharaoh, and their former privileges suffered a great eclipse. They now held
their lands of the crown, tilled them for Pharaoh, and gave a fifth of their
increase, as an annual acknowledgement and tribute to their prince.

JOSEPH, who had been a father to Pharaoh, and to his subjects, seems to have
supported his character, not only during the reign of Thusimares, but also
during the three succeeding reigns: and to have been prime minister, in the
courts of four princes successively, for the term of about eighty years.

THE government under his administration, seems to have been wise and gentle:
and the people, though abridged of some, yet had many privileges left them.

THE great abilities and integrity of Joseph, with the eminent services he had
done in Egypt, rendered his name and memory dear, both to the princes whom he
had served, and to the people whose savior, as well as ruler he had been. He
had advanced the crown of Egypt to a state of grandeur and oppulence, which,
before this time, had been unknown in that, and, perhaps, in every other
kingdom.

LONG, no doubt, had the memory of Joseph and of his services been precious,
and his name been honored by the Egyptian princes and their subjects, had a
succession of native kings continued to hold the scepter. Long, no doubt, the
children of Jacob would, not only, have continued to flourish, but would, for
his sake, have obtained protection.

BUT about fifty years after his death, the kingdom was transferred to a
foreigner. Now there arose up a new King over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
That is, a king of another family and nation Josephus in his Antiquities, Book
II, says, When the kingdom was transferred to another family the Egyptians
treated the Israelites inhumanly, contrived to oppress them, etc.

Other Historians say, This new king, who knew not Joseph, was a foreigner, who
with a numerous army of Assyrians, or Phaenicians, or of the Arabians, or more
probably of the ancient Horims invaded and conquered Egypt, and called
themselves Pastors or Shepherds. Shuckford's Con. Vol. II. P. 206 -- 210.


. This new or foreign king, is supposed to have been Salatis, the first of the
Shepherd kings, as they are commonly called. He, about the fifth year of the
reign of Concharis or Timaeus, led a numerous army of foreigners, (probably the
ancient Horites, whom the children of Esau, about this time, expelled from
Mount Seir,) against Egypt. They marked their way with terrible slaughter and
devastation. The inhabitants were slain, their cities and houses laid in ashes,
and the country, unable to resist the fury and valor of these bloody invaders,
soon made its submission. The conquerors, advanced Salatis, their principal
leader, to the throne. HE knew not JOSEPH. He was a stranger to his person and
services. He had no particular connections with the Egyptians or Hebrews. He
had contracted no particular friendship or regard for either. How dear soever
the benefactors and saviors of their country were to the native inhabitants,
it little affected him Their good services to a country, for whose welfare, he
cared nothing, could have little influence indeed with him. To maintain himself
upon the throne, to which he had waded through blood and slaughter, to reward
his friends, and fix them in his interest, (as is usually the case in such
revolutions,) was his special care. He therefore distributed the lands among
his soldiers, enslaved the ancient inhabitants, subjected the country to
tribute, and garrisoned it at pleasure Shuckford's Connection, Vol. II, P. 205.
.

HAD he been a native of the country, the interest of it would have been dear
to him. A thousand tender connections would have been formed with his
countrymen. The interests and happiness of the nation would have been connected
with his own, and in many respects inseparable from them. To the counsels of
the wise men of his country, to the religion, customs, benefactors, and
saviors of it, he would have naturally paid a particular veneration and
regard. These would have all united their influence in favor of a mild and
happy government. But now they were all cast into the opposite scale, and
operated to aggrandize the conquerors, to enslave and ruin the native
inhabitants.

THE HEBREWS, who were settled chiefly in the lower Egypt, and were a brave,
numerous, and flourishing people, and bid the fairest to give trouble to the
usurper, and to restore the country to its ancient freedom, he took particular
care to enslave: and by every species of tyranny to oppress and keep low. In a
word, by these foreigners, the ancient form of government was wholly subverted,
and the Egyptians from a free, flourishing and happy people, were reduced to a
state of slavery and wretchedness.

FROM this historical sketch of the new king it will not be unnatural to remark,

THAT as the government of a people, by their freeborn sons, has the happiest
tendency to maintain and perpetuate their valuable rights and privileges; so
the introduction of foreigners, to civil rule, has the most efficacious
tendency to subvert their constitution, and to reduce them to a state of
slavery and wretchedness.

THE illustration of this observation will naturally conduct me into such a
field of discourse, as, I flatter myself, could it be executed, in any measure,
equal to the nature and importance of the subject, would by no means fail to
fix the attention of my audience, and agreeably to entertain them, on this
joyful anniversary.

THE provision made, by the infinitely wise LAWGIVER, for the government of his
chosen people, by their brethren, who were trained up among them, and to
prevent foreigners having any share in the government, cannot fail to throw
light on this subject. He expressly commanded: Thou shall in any wise set him
king over thee, whom the LORD thy GOD shall choose: one from among thy brethren
shall thou set king over thee: thou may not set a stranger over thee, who is
not thy brother Deuteronomy. 17.15.
. The principal reasons of this precept were, no doubt, That their king might
always be a person united and connected with his subjects, by all the bonds of
nature, religion, and friendship: That his interests and happiness might be
inseperably connected with the interests and happiness of his subjects: -- That
from love to his country, to the religion and laws of it, and from a natural
regard to his subjects, as brethren, he might rule for the general good: --
That he might maintain and promote the true religion, sway the scepter in
righteousness, with gentleness and brotherly kindness, toward all his subjects.

THE alwise and perfect GOVERNOR determined that such a person would be most
likely to answer the great ends of government: And that the constituting of
such a person to rule and govern had the happiest tendency to promote the
common weal, and transmit the privileges of his chosen people entire to future
times.

HE saw that the introduction of a foreigner would have a tendency directly the
reverse. Therefore the Jewish Monarch might be no stranger, no usurper, but a
native Jew, elected according to divine appointment, by the general consent and
suffrages of his brethren, whom he was to govern.

MOREOVER, the SUPREME LAWGIVER taught his people, That their Prince should be
a man of truth, "hating covetousness," of known and approved abilities, "just
ruling in the fear of God" Exodus 18.21. 2 Samuel 23.3.
. He was prohibited to multiply horses or chariots, or greatly to hoard up
silver and gold Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17.
. GOD saw that this would have a tendency to lift up his heart in pride, make
him independent of his subjects, and put it in his hands to oppress and
tyrannize over them.

FROM this view of the constitution of the Jewish KING, by the SUPREME
LAWGIVER, it is most evident, that He viewed it as a matter of great and high
importance that those who bear rule over others, should be their brethren, born
among them; bound by all the ties of nature, friendship, interest, and
religion, to rule in righteousness: and to maintain, promote, and perpetuate
the privileges, immunities, and happiness of their subjects. This He judged to
have the most happy tendency to promote and subserve these noble ends. Nor
could he think the privileges and happiness of his people secure under the
government of my foreigner or usurper. Therefore He expressly forbids the
appointment of a stranger, who was not an Israelite, to be their king. He knew,
that the bonds of nature, the alliances of friendship, that love and fondness
for their native country, which, in a greater or less degree possess all men,
would, in the case of foreign princes, all unite their influence, with
innumerable attendant circumstances and consequences, to render them oppressors
and tyrants, and to reduce their subjects to a state the most wretched and
miserable.

FURTHERMORE the same regulations were to be attended in the constitution of
all subordinate officers. It was commanded, Thou shall provide out of all the
people able men, such as fear GOD, men of truth, hating covetousness: and place
such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens. And Moses chose able men out of all Israel and
made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, etc Exodus 18.21, 25.
. Moses seems to have been first directed to this by his father in Law; but
it is evident from several Parts of the Scripture Numb. 11.16, 17.
, that it was done at the commandment of the LORD, by the general choice and
suffrage of the people. Take ye wise men and understanding, and known among
your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye answered me and said,
The thing which thou have spoken, is good for us to do. So I took the chief of
your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over
thousands, and captains over hundreds, captains over fifties, and captains over
tens, and officers among your tribes Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15.
. Their officers were all to be of themselves, men of great abilities, known
and approved in their several tribes and cities, as men of real piety, of
invincible veracity and integrity, of found wisdom and real largeness of heart:
Men who knew what Israel ought to do, and who would faithfully pursue the
welfare of the people of God.

FROM this view of the Jewish constitution, so far as it was of a civil nature,
it is most evident, that such, and such only, were to be appointed to rule over
them, from time to time, as were their brethren, acquainted with their genius
and character, connected with them by nature, friendship, interest and
religion: and every way so circumstanced, as that they should not only be the
best able to promote the common good of the people of God; but as that they
should be under the influence and constraint, of all imaginable engagements and
motives, to use all their abilities, opportunities, and advantages to make them
great, religious, and happy.

FURTHER, as this was an appointment of the SUPREME LAWGIVER, for the good of
that favorite people whose GOD and KING He was, it is most certain that the
appointment of such men to civil rule has the most efficacious tendency to
maintain and secure the rights of a people, and to transmit them entire to
posterity: -- The noblest tendency to make them a well governed, a free, a
brave, a great, and flourishing people.

ON the other hand, as the choice of a stranger is peremptorily forbidden, it
is equally certain, that the appointment of foreigners has directly the
opposite tendency: and is calculated, at once, to strip a commonwealth of
every thing dear and valuable, and to reduce them to a state of slavery and
wretchedness.

THIS subject will receive further light, if we consider, That it was
threatened as a terrible curse Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44.
upon Israel, that strangers should rule over them: and that it is mentioned as
a lamentable case indeed, when there were none to lead them among all the sons
whom they had brought up Isaiah 51.18.
. On the other hand, it is promised as a rich blessing, That their nobles
should be of themselves, and that their governor should proceed from the midst
of them Jer. 30.21.
. But in what respects can the one be considered as a curse, or the other as a
blessing, in any view but this, That the tendency of the one was to make them
miserable, and to deprive them of every thing dear and valuable, and of the
other to make them free, prosperous and happy?

AGAIN, the general thirst of nations and communities to be governed by their
own sons, and their great aversion to rulers of foreign extract demonstrate the
observation, I am attempting to illustrate, and show it to be agreeable to the
common sense and experience of mankind.

THAT there is a strong and universal thirst in all nations and communities to
be governed by their countrymen and acquaintance, is indisputably evident from
the struggles, which they have universally made to support their native princes
and rulers, and to expel others. Where is the nation which has not run to
arms, and disputed this matter at the point of the sword? How did the ancient
nations of the east contend with blood and fire for the privilege of being
governed by their native princes? When the Romans began to extend their
conquests in Italy, and when afterward they alarmed the European nations with
the terror of their arms, how warmly did the various independent states and
nations dispute this privilege at the expense of their lives and fortunes? When
foiled or vanquished in one terrible engagement, how soon did they rally again,
and with a bravery and heroism peculiar to free and independent nations rush to
new battles? Esteeming the privilege of being governed by their friends dearer
than their treasures or blood. Says a fine modern writer, These defended their
ancient possessions with obstinate valor. It was by the superiority of their
discipline rather than of their courage, that the Romans gained any advantage
over them. The vanquished people resumed their arms with fresh spirit and their
undisciplined valor animated by the love of liberty, supplied the want of
conduct as well as of union Dr. Robertson in his history of Charles V.
. How warm and bloody were the struggles of the ancient Britons for these
privileges when Julius Caesar Julius Caesar first landed in Britain on the 26th
of August, A. M. 3950, a little more than 54 years before the commencement of
the Christian Era. The battles between him and the Britons were very obstinate
and bloody, but the Romans, at last, by their superior skill and discipline
obtained the advantage, and got footing on the island. They remained here
almost 500 years; a great part of which time, the Britons were their
tributaries. They were, at times, intolerably oppressed and most barbarously
treated by the Romans: and at turns, for hundreds of years, they disputed their
liberties with them, with the most obstinate and invincible valor. In the
reign of Nero A. D. 61, Boadicea, a British Queen, who had been treated with
insufferable inhumanity and outrage, by the Romans, drew together an army of
230000 Britons, to avenge her own, and her country's wrongs. She reduced
several of the principal Roman cities, and put 70 or 80 thousand Romans to the
sword: But unfortunately engaging Suetonius the Roman general, in a narrow
pass, she was defeated, with the loss of 80 thousand men. The Romans took their
final leave of Briton, A. D. 448. Very soon after their departure, the Saxons
began to transport themselves into Britain, made settlements, and in the fifth
and sixth centuries formed the Heptarchy, or seven Saxon kingdoms. They reduced
the Britons to a state of servitude, and employed them in all manner of
drudgeries; particularly in cultivating those very lands, for their foreign
masters, of which they had been the Proprietors. In the beginning of the ninth
century Egbert put an end to the Heptarchy, and became the first monarch of all
England. The Danes began their Ravages in Britain about the year 832, and
continued them until 1013, when Swane or Swein, King of Denmark, made an entire
conquest of England, and was acknowledged as king. He died the next year, Feb.
3, 1014, after he had distressed the nation beyond all description. Speed,
speaking of this time, has this emphatical expression: "These were the days of
England's mourning." His Son, Canute the great, was afterward made king, and
the Danish Government continued for three short reigns comprising in the whole
about 29 years.
made his descent upon the British Island? -- And afterward, with the Saxons,
Danes and Normans? How bravely did the Barons of England take up arms in the
Reigns of King John, and of Henry the III, to drive foreigners from the courts
of the nation, and to fill the seats of Justice with their acquaintance and
freeborn sons? But what can be the language of all these bloody struggles, of
this universal thirst of nations to be governed by their own children, but
this, That the government of states and nations, by their own sons and
neighbors, has the happiest tendency to maintain and perpetuate their
privileges: and that the introduction of foreigners to civil government has
the most efficacious tendency, to subvert their constitution, to enslave and
make them miserable? This then is agreeable to the universal sense and
experience of mankind. These are sentiments written not in letters of gold, but
in the far more expressive characters of Human BLOOD.

FURTHERMORE, the history of ancient, as well as of later ages will reflect
light upon this subject. No sooner did foreigners possess themselves of civil
Rule in Egypt, than the ancient inhabitants, Egyptians, as well as Hebrews,
lost their former freedom and sunk into a state of slavery and wretchedness
hardly to be described. To show instances of the like nature, in most of the
eastern, as well as of the European nations, would not be hard or difficult.
But our own nation will furnish us with so many affecting instances of this
nature, that we need not search for them in foreign countries. To mention a
few; How intolerable were the sufferings, abuses and oppressions of the ancient
Britons, at turns, under the Roman government, and especially under the
Government of the Saxons and Danes? What uneasiness, universal discontent and
misery did the introduction of foreigners to civil rule breed in the nation, in
the reign of EDWARD the Confessor? Foreigners occupied all the great places of
trust and importance in the kingdom, whether civil or religious. Says a modern
writer, The Normans intercepted all the rays of regal favors, and basked in
the splendours, which were caused by the munificence and revenues of the
English. Their pernicious counsels and influence, had, more than once, well
nigh plunged the nation in all the calamities and horrors of a civil war.

THE dreadful effects of the government of foreigners, were still more terribly
felt in the reign of WILLIAM the Conqueror. Though he took the most solemn
oaths, and swore upon the relics of the dead, to confirm to the nation all
their ancient privileges, and to govern them by the laws of the land, yet, how
were the ancient inhabitants, without the least color of law or justice,
deprived both of their lives and fortunes? By him the native inhabitants were
almost universally deprived of every place of honor and trust, and Normans in
every part of the kingdom introduced to civil rule, who paid little regard to
law or justice, and practiced almost every species of oppression and tyranny.
Inferior officers treated the English gentry and nobility with insolence,
loaded the people with grievous exactions, and, in time of peace, plundered
their houses, and ravished their women, even with a savage and brutal
wantonness. And what is still worse, this scene of violence, outrage, and
horror, which nothing but cruelty could countenance, nothing but the most
barbarous savageness could tolerate, was connived at, if not favored by the
guardians of the realm. The perpetrators of these violences were protected, and
the complaints of the sufferers treated with insult and outrage See Rider's
History of England, Vol. 4. P. 197, 198.
.

THE people, mad with oppression, ran to arms, and WILLIAM, instead of
redressing their wrongs, wasted the country with fire and sword. The lands and
arms of the Natives were taken from them, their houses and churches consumed
with fire, and even the instruments of husbandry were wrested from their hands.
Some parts of the country, for sixty miles together, became a perfect waste and
desert, for many years. All the horrors of a dreadful famine succeeded this more
than human wantonness of cruelty and rage. Not less than an hundred thousand
souls are supposed to have perished for want of the necessaries of life.
Parents and children raving with hunger, expired in the arms of each other, and
lay all about the country rotting above ground, and having none to bury them
Rid. Vol. 5. P. 24, 25.
. The Nobles and friends of the nation, who survived the dreadful catastrophe,
were obliged, almost to a man, to abandon every dear interest and enjoyment in
their native land, and to seek refuge in foreign Courts: while outlandish
monsters licked up all the wealth and engrossed all the honors of the nation.
This scene of distress and horror lasted for years: nor is there the least
intimation that WILLIAM ever felt any relentings for his wretched subjects, or
took a single step to relieve the starving inhabitants. Could this have been
expected from a native Prince? Was the conduct of WILLIAM like this toward his
own countrymen? By no means. While he appeared not only destitute of all
justice, but of all humanity toward the Britons, he loaded them with every
royal favor William the Conqueror, sometimes called William the Bastard, was
the Base-born son of Robert, Duke of Normandy, a large and fruitful Province of
France, about 200 miles in length, and 100 in breadth. The Normans and Danes
made a conquest of this country about the year 912 under one Rollo whom they
created their first Duke. William, their seventh Duke, was neither of Saxon or
Danish Royal Blood, not does it appear that he had any just claim to the
British Crown. However, having assembled a numerous army he landed in England,
near Hastings in Suffex, Sept. 28, 1066; where, on the 14th of October, coming
to an engagement with Harold II, Son of the popular Earl Godwin, who had been
lately elected King of England, after an obstinate and bloody battle, fought on
both sides with the greatest resolution and most unremitting ardour, from seven
in the morning until in the Night, he obtained a complete victory. Harold the
British King with about 70000 of his men fell in the battle.

William was proclaimed King of England, and reigned almost 21 years. He
governed without any regard to his Oaths, or to the ancient Laws and customs of
the Nation: introduced the Norman customs and language, and all pleadings at
the bar were in French. He treated the English with great inhumanity, cutting
off the hands and feet of many thousands of the people, and destroying all the
North of England with fire and sword. Not less than 200000 Souls seem either to
have been put to the sword, to have been starved, or some how or other to have
been destroyed by him, from the time of his invading England to his Demise,
Sept. 9, 1087. He gave all the lands of the ancient inhabitants to the Normans,
so that at his death there was not an English Gentlemen in the whole nation who
possessed an estate in his own Right.

Normandy after the Conquest became a Province of England, and continued so
until the inglorious reign of King John.


.

NOR are these the only instances, in which rulers of foreign extract have
reduced the nation to the most wretched circumstances. To what distress and
perplexity did foreigners, foreign counsels, and influence reduce it in the
reign of King JOHN, and in the succeeding reign of HENRY the III? Especially,
the reign of the latter is strongly marked with the baleful consequences of the
government and influence of foreigners, who were the Prime Ministers and
Confidents of this misguided, base and unhappy Prince.

BUT to pass over other instances of such as have, in the most large and strict
sense, been foreigners, how terrible have been the consequences of Governors
from abroad, who have been independent of the people, to the New England
Colonies, and to the neighboring Provinces? How did New England groan under
the intolerable tyranny and injustice of Sir Edmund Andros and his creatures?
How insufferable were the grievances of New Jersey under the despotic
administration of Lord Cornby? How perplexing, how obstinate, how pernicious,
and almost perpetual have been the disputes of the Governors of the
Massachusetts and of New York with their respective Assemblies? How are
governors, who are not natives of the country, and who are independent of the
people whom they govern, harassing and plaguing their respective Assemblies,
with prorogations, dissolutions, and almost every low-lived artifice, to worry
them into measures fatal to the liberties and happiness of their Constituents?
On the other hand, what uninterrupted peace and tranquillity, what a steady and
faithful administration of justice, for a long succession of years, do Colonies
enjoy, which are governed by their own sons, elected by the free suffrages of
their constituents?

ONCE MORE, the provision long since made in our nation, that every man should
be judged by twelve jurors of the neighborhood, in all cases of property, as
well as of Life and Death, and that every man should be judged by his peers,
may serve further to illustrate the point in hand.

THE appointment of Juries, in the British nation seems to have been as early
as the reign of ALFRED THE GREAT, about the close of the ninth century. So
vigilant was that excellent prince against the least infringment of this noble
institution, that he hanged one of his judges for sentencing a man to death
without the assent of the twelve jurors. The right of trials by juries has
been esteemed as a privilege of inestimable worth, and as the very bulwark of
British Liberty, for many hundred years. The nation, at turns, contended for
this privilege at the point of the sword, until the grant of MAGNA CHARTA, by
King JOHN about the commencement of the thirteenth century The first Magna
Charta was granted June 15, A. D. 1215. The present Magna Charta, which is, in
some things, different from the former, was granted in the ninth year of the
reign of Henry III. A. D. 1224.
. By this the privilege of trials by peers and juries was put upon a more firm
and permanent footing. In this Britons glory and think themselves happy above
any other nation. But wherein lies the mighty advantage, unless it be in this,
That it secureth to every man a judgment by his countrymen and neighbors; in
which, he may expect all the favor and protection, which his character and
circumstances in life, and which the laws of his country will justly admit; and
is delivered from the intrigues and partial determinations of foreigners: with
whom his character and manner of life would have little or no influence, to
whom the laws of his country might be less known, and by whom they might be far
less regarded?

LASTLY, this point may receive still further light, from a consideration of
the esteem, veneration, connections and friendships, which men contract for
their native country, and from a consideration of the consequences of such
friendships and connections.

SUCH is human nature, that every man has a peculiar regard for his own nation
and country. All men seem to glory in the riches, valor, honor, literary
accomplishments, and various excellencies of their own country and nation. They
feel themselves sensibly interested in their welfare, and it is not easily that
such a regard for their native land is obliterated, and the influence of it
destroyed. They consider it as the nation to which they are related by the ties
of blood, as the country which gave them birth and nursed their tender years.
It is the country which has extended to them the breasts of science, and
enlightened their eyes with the knowledge of men and things. It is the country
of their forefathers, which has liberally poured it is favors on them and on
their posterity. It is the country under whose laws and immunities, the
religion, lives, fortunes, and every thing dear to their ancestors or to
themselves, have been protected and defended. It is the country in the defense
of which they have expended both their treasures and their blood. To the
religion, to the laws, customs, and manners of it they have been trained from
the tender years of Infancy. For them, by long use, they have contracted a
particular regard and veneration. Here are the companions, the guides and
protectors of their youth. Here are their neighbors, their friends, their
honors, and all their great Interests. Here are the people from whom they
expect preferment: The people for whose counsel, esteem, and friendship, above
all others they have a particular regard, and to whose interests and service
they are most ready to be devoted. Here are the Graves and Bones of their
Fathers; here they expect to leave their own, with all their friends and dear
enjoyments on this side Heaven. Besides, if they are exalted to the seats of
Legislature or of Judgment, in a free state, the esteem friendship and
suffrages of their neighbors have fixed them in those places of honor and
trust. The friendship of their constituents, the confidence they place in their
abilities, their dependence on their integrity and faithfulness, the public
manifestations of honor and esteem given them, cannot fail to influence noble
minds, to conciliate favor and engage fidelity. Therefore all the ties of
nature, of friendship, of honor, of interest, of gratitude and religion, unite
their influence, and bind them to pursue the common good of their native
country, the welfare of the great whole over which they preside, and with which
they are specially connected. When they act as Legislators, or set on the Bench
to determine causes civil or criminal, these all operate to produce LAWS the
most wise and salutary, and JUDGMENT the most righteous and impartial. If they
enact Laws for the state in general, or lift their hands to impose taxes, they
at the same time make laws for their neighbors, for their friends, for their
children and for themselves: They impose no burden upon others, but what at the
same time they lay, not only upon their nearest friends, but even upon
themselves. Every motive, therefore, uniteth it is influence, and operateth with
its whole force to secure and promote the interest of the GREAT WHOLE.

If we view them on the Bench, it is their countryman, their neighbor, as well
as fellow creature, whom they are about to judge. Their neighbor and their
country both share in their affections: they would injure neither, but do
justice to both. They are all attention to evidence, to law and equity, and
every thing is so circumstanced, as to effect a righteous decision, so far as
it can be in this imperfect state.

BESIDE, men educated in a country, must be supposed, (caeteris paribus,) to
have a much better knowledge of the laws, customs, manners, genius and interest
of the people, than any other man can be supposed to have. A thorough knowledge
of these is of great importance in a Ruler. A man can hardly govern a family in
any tolerable manner, without consulting the interest, genius, and manners of
it. Much less can a common wealth or kingdom be governed without the knowledge
of them. But some of these are to be learned, rather by acquaintance,
observation, and experience, than by reading or study.

THESE considerations therefore, at once, show us, in a striking point of
light, that the government of a people by their freeborn sons has the
happiest tendency to maintain and perpetuate all their valuable rights and
privileges.

ON the other hand, all these things, in the case of a foreigner, or of one who
is independent of the people whom he governs, and wholly dependent on others,
unite their influence to make him a tyrant, to render his government
intolerable, and to make the people servile and wretched.

SUCH Rulers are blinded by the foreign support and honors they receive, by
the foreign friendships and connections, which they have made, by the partial
regard they have imbibed for their native land, and they are, by these, as it
were bribed and bought off from the interests of the people whom they govern.
They by no means view things impartially: and it is but an ill chance, which
people have of being governed in a mild and righteous manner, or of having
their conduct and grievances fairly represented to courts abroad, on whom they
are dependent, and whom to deceive it is but too often their great interest.

IT may be well observed here, That if rulers are made independent of the
people whom they govern* and wholly dependent on others, in a distant country,
if their connections, friendships, and interests are there, the effects will be
much the same, as in the case of a foreigner in the largest sense. The
circumstance of their being born within the empire, in some other country, many
thousand miles distant from the people over whom they bear rule, will not
greatly help the matter. The circumstances and causes being nearly the same,
the effects will be similar.

THE misrepresentations which have been made of the American Colonies, at the
Court of GREAT BRITAIN, and the great partiality with which the Americans have
been treated, in the late struggles for liberty, will evince the truth of these
observations. How have disorders merely trifling, in America, been magnified
and swelled into high Treason, by the partial representations of such rulers
and their base minions? How have the disturbances of a few children or
imprudent sallies of a young rabble, which a grand juror or common constable
might have stilled, and a common justice of the peace have severely punished,
been magnified into open rebellion, become matters of serious concern and
deliberation in the Privy Council of a great Nation? British sleets have been
dismissed a thousand leagues, and troops collected from various parts of the
globe to curb and chastise the rebels.

IS not all this done without giving the party accused, though whole towns, yea
whole communities of people, the least hearing or trial? How unlike to this is
the treatment which Britons receive in the Parent State? Do not such riots and
mobs as Americans never saw, and even insults of Majesty itself, pass often
there unnoticed by administration? Not a slave can be punished there, but upon
a verdict of twelve jurors of the neighborhood, on a fair trial. But alas! Are
not Americans, at the distance of three thousand miles, in effect, condemned
unheard and treated as rebels? If Americans are supposed to be guilty of a
misdemeanour toward the Parent State, are not their towns invested with ships
of War, and must not examination of the matter be had under the mouths of
cannon, and before the points of sword and bayonet? If under these distressful
circumstances, any grounds of process can be found, is it not ordered that the
supposed criminal shall be dragged across the Atlantic, be at the expense of
transporting evidences to GREAT BRITAIN, and undergo a trial, even for life
before strangers? What a wretched chance indeed has a man for his life, though
ever so innocent, in circumstances like these! On the most favorable
supposition that he is at last acquitted, he and his family are reduced to
beggary: to be sure unless his fortune be more affluent than Americans can
commonly boast. At any rate, condemned or acquitted, he is undone. Are Britons
thus used in the Parent State? Would they brook such treatment as this? -- Yet
alas! is not all this right and constitutional with regard to their American
brethren?

FURTHER, it may be observed, that when a people are governed by their own
country men, chosen by the suffrages of the freemen whom they govern, they are
ordinarily some of the most able, religious, faithful men in the land, and they
will be careful to fill the places of all inferior officers, with men of good
abilities, and of good lives.

BUT on the other hand, when this is not the case, they are but too often of an
ill character: either the dependents of the great, shifted off to governments
abroad, to ease them of the trouble of their support; or they are reduced
Officers, exalted to government to get a piece of bread and advance their
fortunes. Men too often trained to vice, skilful in butchering the Human
Species, destitute of the tender feelings of the human heart, masters of
intrigue and corruption, as unpractised in virtue as they are accustomed to
vice, as untaught to govern, as they are artful at intrigue and corruption. Too
often are they children in abilities to those they govern: men whom the
suffrages of a religious and free people would never advance to the lowest
office in a state: and through their influence men of the like character are
introduced to all places of inferior trust. When this is the case, how dreadful
are the consequences? The chief rulers are the great examples and patterns of
vice and oppression. While they are in power the people mourn: they scorn and
hate them, they can place no confidence in their abilities or in their
integrity; nor can they with any pleasure submit to their authority; but almost
every thing contributeth its influence, to make the government unhappy, and the
people servile and miserable. And what makes the case still more deplorable,
is, That if by oppression and injustice, the people are provoked to
unwarrantable and seditious measures, instead of redressing their grievances,
and quieting their spirits, by the impartial administration of justice, the
sword is drawn against them, and they are butchered by hundreds, with the same
fierceness and barbarity, with which men trained to revenge, slaughter and
blood, destroy their most implacable enemies.

BUT in colonies governed by their native rulers, no such insurrections are
raised, no such bloody scenes are perpetrated. The people love and venerate
their rulers. They are their friends and neighbors, known and approved among
them, for ability, integrity, justice and mercy, The people rejoice in their
honors, venerate their counsels, and submit with cheerfulness to their
authority. The rulers and the ruled seek the honor and happiness of each
other, and mutually rejoice in the common weal.

THUS we have clear and striking evidence, That the government of a people by
their own countrymen and neighbors, chosen by common consent, has the
happiest tendency to secure and perpetuate the privileges, freedom and
happiness or communities; and that the introduction of foreigners, or of
persons independent of the people whom they govern, is calculated, at once, to
strip them of every valuable enjoyment, and to render them servile and
miserable.

IT will be necessary, before I improve the subject, just to observe, That when
persons become entirely naturalized, and have fixed their interests,
connections, alliances, and friendships in a country, and become equally
connected with it, and dependent upon it, with the natives themselves; as is
often the case, they are no more to be considered as foreigners: and it is far
from the design of this discourse to maintain or insinuate, that they may not,
with the same safety, as any other men whatsoever, be chosen into places or
trust, if in other respects they are equally qualified. Where a man was rocked
in his cradle, whether north or south of the Tweed, whether in Europe or
America it matters not, if he have proper qualifications for government.

AGAIN it may be observed, That it will be an objection of little weight,
against the preceding reasoning. That foreigners have some times governed well:
For there can be no just arguing from particulars to generals, from
extraordinary and exempt cases, to what may generally be expected.

THE sentiments before us naturally furnish us with this remark: That the
people of CONNECTICUT enjoy the greatest FREEDOM and PRIVILEGES, and are
particularly and singularly HAPPY.

IF to be governed by their own consent, by their native sons, chosen by their
free suffrages, if to enjoy the most happy form of civil government, can make a
people free; if these things have the greatest tendency to make them brave,
prosperous and happy, and to perpetuate every dear enjoyment, then great indeed
is the FREEDOM, great the PRIVILEGES and HAPPINESS of this COLONY. Such
FREEDOM, such PRIVILEGES, such HAPPINESS, through the good providence of GOD,
we amply enjoy. That great Blessing promised to Israel, That their NOBLES
should be of themselves, and that their GOVERNOR should proceed from the midst
of them Jer. 30.21.
, is vouchsafed unto us. Our Rulers are our countrymen, our neighbors and
friends. They love our country, as the place of their birth and education. It
is the country of their friends and brethren; to which they are united by all
the alliances of friendship and of blood; with which they have formed a
thousand tender and powerful connections. Their interests are inseperably
connected with our own. They are not only members of our civil, but of our
religious communities: members of our churches, bound by baptism, by a personal
profession of CHRISTIANITY, by sacramental vows, and the most sacred
engagements to GOD and men, to seek their good, and the general good of their
fellow men. They are bound by all the bands of nature, friendship, honor,
interest and religion, to promote the public Weal. They are "able men,"
intimately acquainted with the laws, customs, manners, genius and great
interests of the people. They love our country, our churches, and our religion.
Their experience, superior wisdom and penetration have compiled for us a most
excellent system of LAWS, founded on the great principles of liberty, justice,
and religion. Their government is mild and righteous: and as they do not govern
to get their bread and advance their fortunes, at the ruin of ours, and as they
can lay no burdens on us, without bearing the same weight themselves, their
government is as remarkable for the little expense of it, as it is for it is
gentleness, impartiality and righteousness. All our expenses, by way of salary
The whole amount of the salaries paid annually by the government is only L.
580. The Salary of the Governor is L. 300, of the Deputy Governor L. 100, of
the Secretary L. 20, and of the Treasurer L 160. The Judges of the Superior
Court have no salary from the government. The Chief Judge is allowed 18
shillings per day, and the four side Judges have 17 shillings each per day.
This court is obliged by law, to set 14 weeks annually, and commonly sets,
by adjournment, much longer, and the cost of it is about L. 600 per annum. The
expense of it for three years and a half past, upon a careful examination,
appears to be about L. 2100, just L. 600 per annum. The avails of it,
together with the forfeitures, for the same term, with proper allowances for
such as may not be recovered, amount to L. 2200: So that the Superior Court is
of no cost, at present, to the Colony, considered as a Government. In short the
whole expense of government in Connecticut is trifling. The cost of the General
Assembly annually is about L. 1500. A rate of one penny on the pound, on the
Grand List, which raises about L. 6000 per Annum, near the one half of which
is annually taken out of the Treasury for Schooling, has of late years been
sufficient to defray all our public charges as a Government.
to civil officers, do not, I imagine, amount annually, by considerable, to the
one half of the salary of a king's governor, in any of the neighboring
Provinces. Our lives and fortunes, all our privileges civil and religious are
in a very happy manner secured.

WE have the greatest religious, as well as civil privileges. We enjoy liberty
of conscience in the compleatest sense. No man is persecuted for his religion:
we all enjoy our Bibles, may read and think for ourselves. Happy indeed would
it be, did we read them more, understand them better, and build our faith and
practice more entirely on the excellent doctrines and maxims which they
prescribe.

THE Gospel is preached among us with light and power. We enjoy our Sabbaths
and all gospel ordinances and privileges. Happy indeed shall we be if we
"receive not" this "GRACE of GOD in vain."

BESIDES, we have a good land like Canaan of old, a land flowing with milk and
honey; in which we may eat bread to the full, whose stones are iron and out of
whose hills thou may dig brass. It is also a land under good advantages for
a sea-trade; so that we may suck of the abundance of the seas and of treasures
hid in the sand. The lines are fallen unto us "in pleasant places: yea" we have
a goodly heritage.

WHILE therefore we consider how great are our privileges and enjoyments, and
from whom they are all derived, can we but reflect, How great are our
obligations to the most grateful sentiments, even on the bended knees of our
hearts, to offer our devoutest acknowledgments of praise and thanksgiving to
GOD, the great author and giver of them? And that these streams of his
beneficence and mercy should lead us to him, and engage us constantly, and
forever in his service?

YEA, can we but reflect again, That our sin and ingratitude will be great
indeed, most inexcusable and abominable, if under all these privileges and
advantages we continue in sin, and do not become, in very deed, an obedient and
holy people? -- That as we are exalted up to Heaven, in point of privileges, so
we shall be cast down even to the lowest Hell, if we abuse and misimprove them?
-- That it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the
day of Judgment Luke 10.15.
, than for us.

ANOTHER thought which the preceding sentiments suggest, is this, That all
possible care, and every proper measure, should be taken to prevent foreigners,
and all others, who are independent of a people, from having any part in
government, and to keep civil rulers, as much as possible dependent on the
people whom they govern, and intimately connected with them.

NOT only the representations made, and horrible deeds related in this
discourse, but the history of all nations and ages will teach us, that nothing
can be more fatal to the civil rights and happiness of a people than the
government of strangers, and of rulers independent of the people whom they
govern. When the government of a state is put into the hands of men unconnected
with them, unsupported by them, whose intimate friends and special connections,
are in a different country, and who receive ample support from another quarter,
they may well expect oppression, injustice, the loss of liberty, and almost
every civil mischief. As this becomes the case with America, or with her
several provinces and governments, may not SHE, and THEY expect to bid farewell
to that liberty, to those happy times and days, which we and our fathers have
seen? As things are verging toward this, are not our liberties, by little and
little, crumbling away, and is not our happiness drawing to a close?

EVERY free state therefore should maintain a most vigilant care and guard
against foreign, or independent rulers, and against all such measures as are
calculated to introduce them, and impose them upon a people. The very first
step this way, ought thoroughly to rouse, thoroughly to alarm them.

IT should also be the particular care of every civil community to keep their
rulers as much as possible dependent on them, and intimately connected with
them. For this purpose it will be highly politic, in every free state, to keep
property as equally divided among the inhabitants as possible, and not to
suffer a few persons to amass all the riches and wealth of a country: and also
to have a special care how they adopt any laws, customs, or precedents, which
have a tendency this way. For when men become possessors of the Wealth of a
state, it will be in their power to purchase, or by undue influence, which, in
such circumstances, they may have ways almost innumerable, to thrust themselves
into all places of honor and trust. This will put it in their power, by fraud
or force to keep themselves in those important posts, and to oppress and
tyrannize over their fellow men. It will teach the people to look up to them,
as to lords and masters, make them servile, and by little and little it will
despoil them of all true liberty and freedom. But on the other hand, the
keeping of property, as equally divided as possible among a people, will make
elections more free, the rulers more dependent, and the liberty and privileges
of the ruled vastly more secure.

FURTHERMORE, will not our subject direct us to this enquiry, Whether the
erecting of Courts, and the making of civil rulers independent of the people,
whom they respect and govern, are not inconsistent with the original great
design of Government, inconsistent with the great and unchangeable RULES of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, and incompatible with the important RIGHTS, which GOD and Nature
have given, in common, to mankind?

Is it not the dictate of reason and of the will of GOD, That the original
great design of civil Government is the good of the community? The maintaining
and securing the rights, liberties, privileges and immunities of mankind? The
impartial and faithful administration of justice? Must not whatsoever
therefore, tends to deprive mankind of these important rights, and to prevent
the impartial administration of justice, be contrary to the great design of
government, and subversive of it is noble institution? But is not this the case,
when rulers are made wholly independent of the people, when strangers
unconnected with them, and independent of them, are appointed to rule over
them? Is not this calculated to deprive a people of liberty and justice; -- to
render life, property, and every dear enjoyment very precarious; and to reduce
them to a state of slavery and misery, instead of making them free and happy?
Is it not an infraction of the great and unchangeable LAWS of Nature, Reason,
and Religion? -- Incompatible with the essential rights of mankind? How
inconsistent is this with the constitution of the SUPREME LAWGIVER for the good
of his chosen people? Did he not command, That all their rulers should be
dependent upon their brethren and most intimately connected with them? HE said
also, Thou shall take no gift; for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth
the Words of the righteous Exodus 23.8.
. But if any gift tends to pervert judgment, if so small a gift as one
neighbor may ordinarily bestow on another, is a precious stone in the eyes,
will not hundreds or thousands sterling much more have this tendency? Will not
such showers of gold and silver overwhelm reason, confound the judgment, and
prove not only a stone in the eyes, but even render them totally dark and
blind? Have not Courts and civil rulers constituted, in a manner, wholly
independent of the people, ever been the public fountains of oppression and
injustice? Have they not, instead of defending the lives and liberties of
mankind, wantonly deprived them of both? And can this be more consistent with
the British constitution and the rights of Englishmen, than (...) the laws of
justice, and with the unalienable rights of mankind in general? Have not
Britons and Americans too, gloried in this, as a privilege, which they might
all claim, To be judged by their countrymen and neighbors, who were intimately
connected with them, and dependent on them? Have not thousands bravely bled to
procure and maintain it? Have not the whole nation thought it well secured to
them, for several hundred years, by MAGNA CHARTA? Have they all been mistaken?
Or is the constitution of courts and rulers independent of the people, and the
granting them large pensions or salaries from abroad, a flagrant violation of
the essential right of British subjects?

OUR subject will further instruct us what men we ought, this day, to elect
into places of civil trust; "Able men," men of truly great and noble minds,
possessed of resolution, courage, constancy, and firmness; excellent
preservatives against partiality and corruption, to which men of little minds,
narrow and contracted souls, are easily swayed, by threats, fears, hopes or
gifts. They should be men of genius, of great wisdom and abilities, who can
discern both time and judgment; well acquainted with the laws, customs,
manners, genius, and great interests of the government: -- Men of prudence, of
real piety and religion, of invincible integrity, veracity and faithfulness;
such as fear GOD, men of truth, hating covetousness Exodus 18.21.
. Rulers should, by no means, be men of deceit and intrigue, or of a covetous
narrow spirit, meanly coiling themselves up in their own dirty shell, and
making self the grand end of all their pursuits. They should be men of a public
spirit; men, who most sensibly feel the sacred ties of religion, and the awful
bonds and solemnities of an oath: Men who love their country -- love the
churches of our LORD JESUS CHRIST -- and for their brethren and companions
sakes will seek the peace and prosperity of JERUSALEM, and because of the HOUSE
of the LORD our GOD, will seek HER "GOOD" Psalm 122.7, 8, 9.
. They ought to be men most keenly penetrated with a sense of the vast worth
and high importance of our privileges, and of the force and energy of those
endearing motives, by which they are bound to promote the COMMONWEAL.

FURTHER, what has been said may not unnaturally introduce an address to the
civil authority of this town, and to the gentlemen who shall be chosen to
represent us, in the General Assembly.

Respected and worthy FATHERS and GENTLEMEN,

IT is with a very sensible pleasure and satisfaction, that we behold GENTLEMEN
exalted to rule over us, to protect our lives and fortunes, all our privileges
and dear enjoyments, and to promote our common happiness, who are our
countrymen, our neighbors, our friends, our brethren, and fathers: Men to whom
their country is endeared by all the ties of Nature, who are united with our
churches, by all the solemn and sacred bonds of our Holy religion; and
connected with the community, in general, both by friendship and interest: Who,
by our free consent, and by the influence of our esteem and friendship enjoy
their places of honor and trust. Great, worthy and dear GENTLEMEN, is the
trust we and the public repose in you. More valuable far than gold, yea, more
precious than our blood, are the privileges, which, under GOD, we commit to
you. We persuade ourselves you are sensible of their value, feel the importance
of your trust, and are not strangers to the influence of those efficacious
motives which bind you to seek and promote our interest and happiness. Under
the influence of these, we trust, you have lately unanimously entered upon
measures to suppress vice, and to encourage and promote order, virtue, and
religion, in the town The civil Authority of the Town of New Haven, observing
with serious concern the growing immoralities and vices of it, toward the
close of the last year, entered upon some new and spirited measures to suppress
them. On the 27th of November 1772, they addressed the whole town on the
subject, giving them the strongest assurance, that they would unitedly exert
all their power to suppress the immoralities prevailing in it: at the same time
inviting them to "unite" their "most vigorous endeavors with" them "in this
important affair." At a Town-meeting, Dec. 14th. 1772. It was voted, That the
thanks of the Town be returned to the civil Authority for their late spirited
address, etc. -- "And for their good endeavor," etc.
. For these you have already received the thanks of the inhabitants; and, on
the same account, in the name of my reverend fathers and brethren, in the
ministry, I return you public thanks: and assure you, that we shall cheerfully
contribute what in us lies, to encourage, support and assist you, in carrying
into execution whatsoever may be necessary for the peace, order and happiness
of this town, and of the several parts of it. These public testimonials of a
general approbation of your conduct, we persuade ourselves, will encourage you
with unwearied diligence, unremitting zeal and ardour, to persevere in every
salutary measure you have taken for the public good, and that they will afford
an argument, of no little weight, with you, to go into a prudent and vigorous
exertion of all your authority, abilities and influence, to suppress all kind
of vice, immorality and disorder, and to promote order, virtue, and religion.
You cannot be insensible, that this will have a charming aspect upon society,
that the happy effects and consequences of it may, through the blessing of GOD,
not only be felt by the present generation, but extend themselves to ages
unborn, yea, to all eternity. Good government and religion have a favorable
aspect not only upon the present, but future Times. No more can you be
insensible, That it is the duty, and an important branch of the character of
civil rulers, That they bear not the civil sword in vain, that they be
"ministers of GOD" Romans 13.4.
, revengers "to execute wrath upon him that does evil," and that they be
ministers "of GOD for good." This, certainly, is a character, which GOD and men
may reasonably expect you will well support. All the sacred bands of religion,
and the solemnities of OATHS are upon you, and plead for the faithful discharge
of your important trust. The temporal and eternal welfare of your neighbors,
of your brethren, and of your children; the good of this town and government,
together with all the tender and efficacious endearments, by which you are
bound to us and to your native land, plead for it with a united force and
energy. Unite then, in a vigorous exertion of all your powers, to stem the
torrent of vice, which is rolling in upon us: To suppress and punish idleness,
tavernhaunting, swearing, lying, intemperance, debauchery, unrighteousness and
injustice; profanation of the Lord's Day, and every other species of vice,
which may be cognizable by law, and fall within your province. Exert yourselves
with true zeal and patriotism for the general good. Let all the interests of
your country and nation, especially the interests of this TOWN, the great
interests of our COLLEGE, and of this COMMONWEALTH, be ever dear to you.
Particularly, may they be dear to, specially cared for and promoted by, the
GENTLEMEN, who shall now be elected, to represent us in the General Assembly of
this Colony. We imagine the public testimonials we shall give you of our
friendship and esteem, of our confidence in your abilities, integrity and
faithfulness, will, with an efficacious energy persuade and engage you most
laboriously and faithfully to promote our great interests. You will not fail to
consider you are acting for the country which gave you birth, and for the
people, who have nursed and protected your tender years: The country which your
fathers have purchased and defended at a vast expense both of treasure and
blood: That you are acting for the community where you have been trained to
science, and formed to think, and act great and noble things; and to which,
under GOD, you owe all your honors, privileges and immunities both civiland
religious: -- That you are acting for your neighbors, your friends, yea, your
brethren, not barely by the ties of nature, but by the more sacred bonds of our
COMMON CHRISTIANITY: -- That if under all these sacred bands and endearments,
you betray your trust, you must be persidious and vile, beyond all description;
and that your names will deserve to be handed down to posterity, loaded with
execrations, and strongly marked with eternal infamy and shame. You will not
fail to reflect, That to act up to your high character, as christians and good
rulers, serving GOD and your generation according to his Will, is the highest
honor and noblest happiness, to which you can aspire on this side Heaven: --
That this will give surer demonstrations of the greatness of your names, and of
the goodness of your hearts, and add to them a far greater and more unperishing
luster and glory, than monuments of brass or marble: That while you faithfully
exert yourselves for the common weal, all good men will rejoice in your
honors, and bid you God-speed: -- That this will give you the noblest comfort
and pleasure in life, the sweetest supports and most glorious prospects in
death: -- That this will embalm your names, and hand them down to futurity with
honor and applause, and that unborn ages will rise up and pronounce their
blessings on your memory. Under the influence of these GRAND MOTIVES, we
persuade ourselves you will, by no means, betray our great interests, but will
act worthy of the honor and trust we shall confer upon you.

I shall conclude with a word to the freemen of this free and honorable
corporation.

MEN AND BRETHREN,

WHILE I congratulate you on the account of your great and distinguishing
privileges, and on the return of this joyful anniversary, which affords us an
ocular demonstration that we are a free people, you will allow me to remind
you, that you are all bound by sacred bonds and engagements warmly to unite,
with our civil rulers, in promoting the welfare of this town, the good of our
churches, and of this commonwealth. The same sacred ties, in general, which
bind them to faithfulness, in their superior sphere of action, lie also upon
us, and should engage us with united zeal to exert ourselves, in our several
places and relations, by all proper means, to advance the common happiness. Let
us then feel the weight and influence of them. Let us prize the privileges we
enjoy, and be truly thankful for them, and carefully avoid all those sins and
vices which may endanger them, and provoke GOD to take them from us. Let us not
only "cease to do evil" but learn to do well, to "fear GOD, honor the KING 1
Pet. 2.17.
," and cheerfully submit to the laws and authority of the colony. Let us be
strict in family religion and government, inculcate on the rising generation
the vast necessity, high importance, and unspeakable happiness of becoming
truly religious: -- Teach them to venerate civil authority and government: to
reverence the sabbath, house, worship, and ordinances of GOD. Let us be careful
to give them living examples of these things in our own conduct. Let us all
strive to excel in the practice of righteousness, justice, honesty, sobriety,
temperance, chastity, industry, loyalty, frugality, and all the social and
christian virtues. Let us act conscientiously in the choice of our civil
rulers, with an awful regard to the oath of GOD, which is upon us, knowing,
that when the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the
wicked bears rule the people mourn Prove. 29.2.
. Let love to GOD, and love to men reign in our hearts, and from this highest,
noblest, divinest principle, let us serve GOD and one another, and as we have
opportunity do good to all men Gal. 6.10.
.

AND may "the LORD bless" us and "keep" us; the LORD make his "face shine upon"
us, Numb. 6.24* 25.
and be gracious unto us. AMEN.

P. 15. l. 2. in the marginal note, for Briton, r. Britain.

P. 17. l. 8. for succeeded, r. succeeded.

P. 32. l. 29. for which, r. with.


