THE REVOLUTION IN NEW ENGLAND JUSTIFIED, AND THE PEOPLE there VINDICATED FROM
THE ASPERSIONS Cast upon them by Mr. JOHN PALMER, In his PRETENDED ANSWER to
the DECLARATION Published by the Inhabitants of BOSTON, and the Country
adjacent, on the Day when they secured their late Oppressors, who acted by an
ILLEGAL and ARBITRARY Commission from the late King JAMES.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A NARRATIVE of the PROCEEDINGS OF Sir EDMOND ANDROSSE and
his Accomplices. Who also acted by an ILLEGAL and ARBITRARY Commission from the
late King JAMES, during his Government in NEW ENGLAND.

By several GENTLEMEN who were of his COUNCIL.

Printed in the Year 1691.

BOSTON: Reprinted and sold by ISAIAH THOMAS, near the MILL-BRIDGE,
M,DCC,LXXIII.

TO THE READER.
IT is not with any design or desire unnecessarily to expose the late
oppressors of that good protestant people which is in New England, that the
authors of the ensuing vindication have published what is herewith emitted. But
the agents lately sent from thence could not be faithful to their trust, if
when the people whom they represent are publicly (as well as privately)
aspersed, they should not (either by themselves, or by furnishing some other
with materials for such an undertaking) vindicate those who have been so deeply
injured.

As for Mr. Palmer his account, which he calls impartial, he has wronged
New England thereby, in some other particulars besides those insisted on, in
the subsequent apology. For he does endeavor to make the world believe that
the Massachusetts refused to answer to the quo-warranto prosecuted against
their charter: Than which misrepresentation nothing can be more untrue or
injurious. An account concerning that matter has formerly (and more than once)
been made public, in the which it is most truly affirmed, That when the
quo-warranto was issued out against the governor and company of the
Massachusetts colony in New England in the year 1683, the then king did by his
declaration enjoin a few particular persons to make their defense at their own
charge, without any public stock; which showed that there was a resolution to
take away that charter: yet the governor and company appointed an attorney to
answer to the quo warranto; but the suit was let fall in the court of
king's bench, and a new suit began by scire facias in court of chancery, where
time was not allowed to make defense. The former attorney for that colony
brought several merchants to testify that in the time allowed (which was from
April 16, till June 18) in was impossible to have a new letter of attorney
returned from New England. The then lord keeper North replied, that no time
ought to be given. So was judgment entered against them before they could
possibly plead for themselves. By this the impartial reader may judge what
ingenuity and veracity is in Mr. Palmer's account.

There is lately come forth another scandalous pamphlet, called New-England's
faction discovered. The author has not put his name to it: But it is supposed
to be written by a certain person known to be a prodigy for impudence and
lying. The reflection in it not only on New England in general, but on
particular persons there as well as in England, are so notoriously and
maliciously false, as that it must needs be much beneath a great mind to take
notice of such latrations, or to answer them any otherwise than with contempt.
When we are treated with the buffoonry and railery of such ungenteel pens, it
is good to remember the old saying, mognum contumeliae remedium, negligentia.

As for what Mr. Palmer does in his preface insinuate concerning the
New-Englanders being common-wealths-men, enemies to monarchy, and to the church
of England, that is such a sham as every one sees through it.

There are none in the world that do more fully concur with the doctrine of the
church of England contained in the 39 articles, than do the churches in
New England, as is manifest from the confession of their faith published in the
year 1680. Only as to liturgy and ceremonies they differ; for which cause alone
it was that they, or their fathers, transported themselves into that American
desert, as being desirous to worship God in that way which they thought was
most according to the scriptures. The platform of church discipline consented
unto by the elders and messengers of the churches assembled in a general synod
at Cambridge in New England in the year 1647, shows that they are as to
church government for the congregational way. The judiciously learned Mr.
Philip Nigh has long since evinced that no form of church government (no not
that which is episcopal) is more consistent with monarchy, or with the king's
supremacy, than that of the way-congregational, which some will needs call
independent. But there are a sort of men, who call those that are for English
liberties, and that rejoice in the government of their present majesty's, king
William and queen Mary, by the name of republicans, and represent all such as
enemies of monarchy and of the church. It is not our single opinion only, but
we can speak it on the behalf of the generality of their majesty's subjects in
New England, that they believe (without any diminution to the glory of our
former princes) the English nation was never so happy in a king, or in a queen,
as at this day. And the God of heaven, who has set them on the throne of these
kingdoms, grant them long and prosperously to reign.

E. R. S. S.


THE REVOLUTION IN NEW ENGLAND JUSTIFIED.
THE doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance, which a sort of men did
of late, when they thought the world would never change, cry up as divine
truth, is by means of the happy revolution in these nations, exploded, and the
assertors of it become ridiculous.

No man does really approve of the revolution in England, but must justify that
in New England also; for the latter was effected in compliance with the former,
neither was there any design among the people in New England to reassume their
ancient charter-government, until his present majesty's intended descent into
England, to rescue the nation from slavery as well as popery, was known to them
(for indeed to have attempted it before that would have been madness.) They
considered that the men then usurping government in New England were king
James's creatures, who had invaded both the liberty and property of English
protestants after such a manner as perhaps the like was never known in any part
of the world where the English nation has any government; and the commission
which they had obtained from the late king James was more illegal and
arbitrary, than that granted to Dudley and Empson by king Henry 7th. Or than it
may be was ever before given to any by king James himself, or by any one that
ever swayed the English scepter, which was a grievance intolerable; and yet
they desired not to make themselves judges in a case which so nearly concerned
them, but instead of harsher treatment of those who had tyrannized over them,
they only secured them that they might not betray that country into the hands
of the late king, or of king Lewis, which they had reason enough to believe
(considering their characters and dispositions) they were inclined to do. They
designed not to revenge themselves on their enemies, which they could as easily
have done as a thousand men are able to kill one, and therefore when they
secured their persons, they declared (as in their declaration printed at Boston
in New England is to be seen) that they would leave it to the king and
parliament of England, to inflict what punishment they should think meet for
such criminals. Their seizing and securing the governor, was no more than was
done in England, at Hull, Dover, Plymouth, etc. that such a man as Mr. John
Palmer should exclaim against it, is not to be wondered at, seeing he was one
of the governor's tools, being of his council, made a judge by him, and too
much concerned in some illegal and arbitrary proceedings; but his confidence is
wonderful, that he should publish in print that neither himself nor sir Edmund
Androsse, nor others of them who had been secured by the people in New England,
had any crimes laid to their charge, whereas the foresaid declaration emitted
the very day they were secured, does plainly set forth their crimes. And in the
preface of his book he has these words; viz.

We appeared at the council board where the worst of our enemies, even the very
men who had so unjustly imprisoned and detained us, had nothing to say or
object against us. --

By these enemies he speaks of, we suppose he means those who were lately sent
as agents from Boston in New England; he has therefore necessitated us to
inform the world, that the following objections (though not by his enemies,
yet) by those agents presented at the council board.

Matters objected against Sir EDMUND ANDROSSE, Mr. JOSEPH DUDLEY, Mr. PALMER,
Mr. RANDOLPH, Mr. WEST, Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. FAREWELL, Mr. SHERLOCK and others, as
occasions of their imprisonment in New England.
1. IT is objected against Sir Edmund Androsse, that he being governor of the
Massachusetts colony, after notice of his present Majesty's intention to land
in England, issued out a proclamation, requiring all persons to oppose any
descent of such as might be authorized by him, endeavored to stifle the news
of his landing, and caused him that brought this king's declaration thither to
be imprisoned, as bringing a seditious and treasonable paper.

2. That in the time of his government, he without form or color of legal
authority made laws destructive of the liberty of the people, imposed and
levied taxes, threatened and imprisoned them that would not be assisting to the
illegal levies, denied that they had any property in their lands without
patents from him, and during the time of actual war with the Indians, he did
supply them with ammunition, and several Indians declared, that they were
encouraged by him to make war upon the English, and he discountenanced making
defense against the Indians.

3. As to all the other persons imprisoned, they were accomplices and
confederates with Sir Edmund Androsse, and particularly Mr. Dudley, Mr.
Randolph, and Mr. Palmer were of his council, and joined with him in his
arbitrary laws and impositions, and in threatening and in punishing them who
would not comply. Mr. West was his secretary, and guilty of great extortion,
and gave out words which showed himself no friend to the English. Mr. Graham
was his attorney at one time, and Mr. Farewell at another, both concerned in
illegal proceedings destructive of the property of the subject. Mr. Farewell
prosecuted them who refused to comply with the illegal levies, and Mr. Graham
brought several writs of intrusion against men for their own land, and Mr.
Sherlock, another person imprisoned, though not named in the order, acted there
for some years as an high sheriff, though he was a stranger in the country, and
had no estate there, during his sherievalty he impannelled juries of strangers,
who had no freehold in that country, and extorted unreasonable fees.

These particulars were not only presented at the council board, but there read
before the right honorable the lords of the committee of foreign plantations on
April 17, 1690. when Sir Edmund Androsse, Mr. Palmer, and the rest concerned
were present, and owned that they had received copies thereof from Mr.
Blaithwaite. It is true that the paper then read was not signed by the agents
aforesaid, for which reason (as we understand, nor could it rationally be
otherwise expected) the matter was dismissed without an hearing; nevertheless
the gentlemen who appeared as council for the New England agents, declared,
that they were ready to prove every article of the objections; which shall now
be done.

1. That Sir Edmund Androsse, with others whom the people in New England
seized, and secured did, after notice of his present majesty's intended descent
into England to deliver the nation from popery and arbitrary power, to their
utmost oppose that glorious design, is manifest by the proclamation printed and
published in New England, Jan. 10, 1688, signed by Sir Edmund Androsse and his
deputy secretary John West, in which King James's proclamation of October 16,
1688, is recited and referred unto. Sir Edmund's proclamation begins thus;
Whereas his majesty has been graciously pleased by his royal letter bearing
date the 16th of October last past, to signify that he has undoubted advice
that a great and sudden invasion from Holland, with an armed force of
foreigners and strangers will be speedily made in an hostile manner upon his
majesty's kingdom of England, and that although some false pretenses relating
to liberty, property, and religion,' etc. And then he concludes thus -- 'All
which it is his majesty's pleasure should be made known in the most public
manner to his loving subjects within this his territory and dominion of
New England, that they may be the better prepared to resist any attempts that
may be made by his majesty's enemies in these parts, I do therefore hereby
charge and command all officers civil and military, and all other his majesty's
loving subjects within this his territory and dominion aforesaid, to be
vigilant and careful in their respective places and stations, and that upon the
approach of any fleet or foreign force, they be in readiness, and use their
utmost endeavors to hinder any landing or invasion that may be intended to be
made within the same.

2. And that they used all imaginable endeavors to stifle the news of the
prince's landing in England, appears not only from the testimony of the people
there, and from the letters of those now in government at Boston, but from the
deposition of Mr. John Winslow, who affirms that being in Nevis in February
1688, a ship arrived there from England with the prince of Orange's
declaration, and intelligence of the happy change of affairs in England, which
he knew would be welcome news in New England, and therefore was at the charge
to procure a written copy of that princely declaration with which he arrived at
Boston about a fortnight before the revolution there. He concealed the
declaration, from Sir Edmund, because he believed if it came into his
possession, he would keep the people in ignorance concerning it; but intimation
being given that Mr. Winslow had brought with him the declaration, he was
therefore committed to prison (though he offered two thousand pounds bail) for
bringing into the country a treasonable paper. For the satisfaction of such as
are willing to be informed in this matter, Mr. Winslow's testimony as it was
given upon oath before a magistrate in New England shall be here inserted. It
is as follows, viz.

JOHN WINSLOW, aged twenty-four years, or thereabouts, testifies and says,
that he being in Nevis, some time in February last past, there came in a ship
from some part of England with the prince of Orange's declarations, and brought
news also of his happy proceedings in England with his entrance there, which
was very welcome news to me, and I knew it would be so to the rest of the
people in New England; and I being bound thither, and very willing to carry
such good news with me, gave four shillings six pence for the said
declarations, on purpose to let the people in New England understand what a
speedy deliverance they might expect from arbitrary power. We arrived at Boston
harbor the fourth day of April following, and as soon as I came home to my
house, Sir Edmund Androsse understanding I brought the prince's declarations
with me, sent the sheriff to me; so I went along with him to the governor's
house, and as soon as I came in, he asked me why I did not come and tell him
the news. I told him I thought it not my duty, neither was it customary for any
passenger to go to the governor when the master of the ship had been with him
before, and told him the news; he asked me where the declarations I brought
with me were, I told him I could not tell, being afraid to let him have them,
because he would not let the people know any news. He told me I was a saucy
fellow, and bid the sheriff carry me away to the justices of the peace, and as
we were going, I told the sheriff, I would choose my justice, he told me, no, I
must go before doctor Bullivant, one picked on purpose (as I judged) for the
business; well I told him, I did not care who I went before, for I knew my
cause good, so soon as I came in, two more of the justices dropped in, Charles
Lidget and Francis Foxcroft, such as the former, fit for the purpose, so they
asked me for my papers, I told them I would not let them have them by reason
they kept all the news from the people, so when they saw they could not get
what I bought with my money, they sent me to prison for bringing traitorous and
treasonable libels and papers of news, notwithstanding, I offered them security
to the value of two thousand pounds.

Boston in New England, Feb. 4. 1689. sworn before ELISHA HUTCHINSON assistant.
JOHN WINSLOW.

By these things it appears that it was absolutely necessary for the people in
New England to seize Sir Edmund Androsse and his accomplices, that so they
might secure that territory for their present majesty's king William and queen
Mary.

3. That Sir Edmund Androsse, etc. did make laws destructive to the liberty of
the subjects, is notoriously known, for they made what laws they pleased
without any consent of the people, either by themselves or representatives,
which is indeed to destroy the fundamentals of the English and to erect a
French government. We cannot learn that the like was ever practiced in any
place where the English are planters, but only where Sir Edmund Androsse has
been governor: For whereas in New England by constant usage under their charter
government, the inhabitants of each town did assemble as occasion offered to
consider of what might conduce to the welfare of their respective towns, the
relief of the poor, or the like, Sir Edmund Androsse, with a few of his
council, made a law prohibiting any town-meeting except once a year, viz. on
the third Monday in May. The inhabitants of the country were startled at this
law, as being apprehensive the design of it was to prevent the people in every
town from meeting to make complaints of their grievances. And whereas by
constant usage any person might remove out of the country at his pleasure, a
law was made that no man should do so without the governor's leave. And all
fishing boats, coasters, etc. were to enter into a thousand pounds bond,
whereby fees were raised for himself and creatures. This law could not pass at
Boston, because many of Sir Edmund's council there opposed it; but then a
juncto of them meeting at New York, passed it; and after that law was made, how
should any dissatisfied persons ever obtain liberty to go for England to
complain of their being oppressed by arbitrary governors?

4. But besides all this, they made laws for the levying moneys without the
consent of the people either by themselves or by an assembly; for in order to
the supporting their own government, they did by an act bearing date March 3,
1686, raise considerable sums of money on the king's subjects in that part of
his dominions, viz. a penny in the pound on all estates personal or real,
twenty pence per head as poll money, a penny in the pound for goods imported,
besides an excise on wine, rum and other liquors.

It has indeed been pleaded that all this was but what the laws of the country
before the change of the government did allow. But this is vainly pretended,
for there was no such law in force at the time when these sums were levied, the
former laws which did authorize it, were repealed October 10, 1683, some years
before Sir Edmund Androsse and his accomplices had invaded the rights and
liberties of the people there. Moreover, in those parts of the country where
there were never any such laws in force, particularly in Plymouth colony, this
money was levied, which they heavily complained of. Yet further, in another act
dated Feb. 15, 1687, they did without any color of ancient law make an
additional duty of impost and excise, which raised the duty, some ten
shillings, some twenty shillings per pipe on wines, and so on other things. Nay
they levied moneys on Connecticut colony contrary to their charter, which was
never vacated, than which nothing more illegal and arbitrary could have been
perpetrated by them.

5. They did not only act according to these illegal taxes, but they did
inflict severe punishment on those true English men who did oppose their
arbitrary proceedings, as shall be made to appear in many instances. When the
inhabitants of Ipswich in New England were required to choose a commissioner to
tax that town, some principal persons there that could not comply with what was
demanded of them, did modestly give their reasons, for which they were
committed to goal, as guilty of high misdemeanors, and denied an habeus
corpus, and were obliged to answer it at a court of oyer and terminer at
Boston. And that they might be sure to be found guilty, jurors were picked of
such as were no freeholders, nay of strangers; the prisoners pleading the
privilege of Englishmen not to be taxed without their own consent, they were
told that the laws of England would not follow them to the end of the earth,
they meant the privileges of the English law, for the penalties they resolved
should follow them quo jure quaque injuria. And why should they insist on, and
talk of the privileges of Englishmen, when it had been declared in the
governor's council, that the king's subjects in New England did not differ much
from slaves, and that the only difference was, that they were not bought and
sold? But to go on with the matter before us; in as much as the prisoners
mentioned had asserted their English liberties, they were severely handled, not
only imprisoned for several weeks, but fined and bound to their good behavior;
Mr. John Wise was fined fifty pounds besides costs of court, deprived of the
means of his subsistence, and gave a thousand pounds bond for good behavior.
And Mr. John Appleton was fined fifty pounds and to give a thousand pounds bond
for good behavior, and moreover declared incapable to bear office, besides
unreasonable fees. After the same manner did they proceed with several others
belonging to Ipswich. Likewise the towns men of Rowley, Salisbury, Andover,
etc. had the same measure. And the king's subjects were not only oppressed thus
in the Massachusetts colony, but in Plymouth. For when Shadrach Wild boar the
town clerk of Taunton in New England did, with the consent of the town, sign a
modest paper signifying their not being free to raise money on the inhabitants
without their own consent by an assembly, the honest man was for this committed
close prisoner, and after that punished with a fine of twenty marks and three
months imprisonment, and bound to find sureties by recognizance to appear the
next court, and to be of the good behavior. As to the matter of fact, the
persons concerned in these illegal and arbitrary judgments will not have the
face to deny them; if they do, there are affidavits now in London which will
evince what has been related when ever there shall be occasion for it.

It is a vanity in Mr. Palmer, to think that he has answered this by
affirming, but not proving, that the Ipswich men assembled themselves in a
riotous manner; for that saying of his is very false. The world knows that
New England is not the only place where honest men have in these late days been
proceeded against as guilty of riots, when they never deserved such a censure
any more than these accused by Mr. Palmer. But the truth of what has been thus
far related is confirmed by the following affidavits.

Complaints of great wrongs done under the ill government of Sir Edmund
Androsse governor in New England, in the year 1687.
We John Wise, John Andrews, senior, Robert Kinsman, William Goodhue, junior,
all of Ipswich in New England, in the county of Essex, about the 22d day of
August, in the year above named, were with several principal inhabitants of the
town of Ipswich met at Mr. John Appleton's, and there discoursed and concluded
that it was not the town's duty any way to assist that ill method of raising
money without a general assembly, which was apparently intended by abovesaid
Sir Edmund and his council, as witness a late act issued out by them for such a
purpose. The next day in a general town-meeting of the inhabitants of Ipswich;
we the above named John Wise, John Andrews, Robert Kinsman, William Goodhue
with the rest of the town then met (none contradicting) gave our assent to the
vote then made.

The ground of our trouble, our crime was the copy transmitted to the council,
viz. At a legal town meeting August 23. Assembled by virtue of an order from
John Usher, Esquire treasurer for choosing a commissioner to join with the
select-men, to assess the inhabitants according to an act of his excellency the
governor and council for laying of rates; the town then considering that the
said act does infringe their liberty, as free born English subjects of his
majesty by interfering with the statute laws of the land, by which it was
enacted that no taxes should be levied upon the subjects without consent of an
assembly chosen by the freeholders for assessing of the same, they do therefore
vote that they are not willing to choose a commissioner for such an end without
said privilege; and moreover consent not that the select-men do proceed to lay
any such rate until it be appointed by a general assembly concurring with the
governor and council. We the complainants with Mr. John Appleton and Thomas
French all of Ipswich were brought to answer for the said vote out of our own
county, thirty or forty miles into Suffolk, and in Boston kept in goal, only
for contempt and high misdemeanors as our mitimus specifies, and upon demand,
denied the privilege of an habeas corpus, and from prison overruled to answer
at a court of eyer and terminer in Boston aforesaid. Our judges were Mr. Joseph
Dudley of Roxbury in Suffolk in New England, Mr. Stoughton of Dorchester, John
Usher of Boston, treasurer, and Edward Randolph. He that officiates as clerk
and attorney in the case is George Farewell.

The jurors only twelve men and most of them (as is said) non-freeholders of
any land in the colony, some of them strangers and foreigners, gathered up (as
we suppose) to serve the present turn. In our defense was pleaded the repeal of
the law of assessment upon the place. Also the Magna Charta of England, and the
statute laws that secure the subjects properties and estates, etc. To which was
replied by one of the judges, the rest by silence assenting, that we must not
think the laws of England follow us to the ends of the earth, or whether we
went. And the same person ( John Wise abovesaid testifies) declared in open
council upon examination of said Wise; Mr. Wise you have no more privileges
left you, than not to be sold for slaves, and no man in council contradicted.
By such laws our trial and trouble began and ended. Mr. Dudley aforesaid chief
judge, to close up the debate and trial, trims up a speech that pleased himself
(we suppose) more than the people. Among many other remarkable passages, to
this purpose, he bespeaks the jury's obedience, who (we suppose) were very well
preinclined, viz. I am glad, says he, there be so many worthy gentlemen of the
jury so capable to do the king service, and we expect a good verdict from you,
seeing the matter has been so sufficiently proved against the criminals. Note,
the evidence in the case as to the substance of it, was that we too boldly
endeavored to persuade ourselves we were English men, and under privileges;
and that we were all six of us aforesaid at the town meeting of Ipswich
aforesaid, and as the witness supposed, we assented to the foresaid vote, and
also that John Wise made a speech at the same time, and said we had a good God,
and a good king, and should do well to stand for our privileges -- Jury returns
us all six guilty, being all involved in the same information. We were remanded
from verdict to prison, and there kept one and twenty days for judgment. There
with Mr. Dudley's approbation, as judge Stoughton said, this sentence was
passed, viz.

John Wise, suspended from the ministerial functions, fine fifty pound, money,
pay cost, a thousand pound bond for the good behavior one year.

John Appleton not to bear office, fine 50. l money, pay cost, a thousand pound
for the good behavior one year.

John Andrews not to bear office, fine 30 l. money, pay cost, five hundred
pound bond for the good behavior one year.

Robert Kinsman not to bear office, fine 20 l. money, pay cost, five hundred
pound bond for the good behavior one year.

William Goodhue not to bear office, fine 20 l. money, pay cost, five hundred
pound bond for the good behavior one year.

Thomas French not to bear office, fine 15 l. money, pay cost, five hundred
pound bond for the good behavior one year.

The total fees of this case upon one single information demanded by Farewell
abovesaid, amount to about a hundred and one pound seventeen shillings, who
demanded of us singly about sixteen pound nineteen shillings six pence, the
cost of prosecution, the fines added make up this, viz. Two hundred eighty and
six pounds seventeen shillings, money.

Summa Totalis 286 l. 17 s. To all which we may add a large account of other
fees of messengers, prison charges, money for bonds and transcripts of records,
exhausted by those ill men one way and another to the value of three or
fourscore pounds, besides our expense of time and imprisonment.

We judge the total charge for one case and trial under one single information
involving us six men abovesaid in expense of time and moneys of us and our
relations for our necessary succor and support to amount to more, but no less
than 400 l. money.

Too tedious to illustrate more amply at this time, and so we conclude. John
Wise, John Andrews senior, William Goodhue, junior, Thomas French, these four
persons named, and Robert Kinsman.

These four persons first named appeared the twentieth day of December, and
Robert Kinsman appeared the one and twentieth day of December, 1689, and gave
in their testimony upon oath before me Samuel Appleton assistant for the colony
of the Massachusetts in New England.

6. That those who were in confederacy with Sir Edmund Androsse for the
enriching themselves on the ruins of New England, did invade the property as
well as liberty of the subject, is in the next place to be cleared, and we
trust will be made out beyond dispute. When they little imagined that there
should ever be such a revolution in England as that which by means of his
present majesty this nation is blessed with, they feared not to declare their
sentiments to the inexpressible exasperation of the people whom they were then
domineering over. They gave out, that now their charter was gone, all their
lands were the king's, that themselves did represent the king, and that
therefore men that would have any legal title to their lands must take patents
of them, on such terms as they should see meet to impose. What people that had
the spirits of Englishmen, could endure this? That when they had at vast
charges of their own conquered a wilderness, and been in possession of their
estates forty, nay sixty years, that now a parcel of strangers, some of them
indigent enough, must come and inherit all that the people now in New England
and their fathers before them, had labored for! Let the whole nation judge,
whether these men were not driving on a French design, and had not fairly
erected a French government. And that our adversaries may not insult and say,
these are words without proof, we shall here subjoin the testimonies of the
reverend Mr. Higginson, and several other worthy persons, given in upon oath,
concerning this matter.

Being called by those in present authority to give my testimony to the
discourse between Sir Edmund Androsse and myself, when he came from the Indian
war, as he passed through Salem going for Boston in March 1688-9, I cannot
refuse it, and therefore declare as follows, what was the substance of that
discourse. Sir Edmund Androsse then governor being acompanied with the
attorney general Graham, secretary West, judge Palmer, the room being also full
of other people, most of them his attendants, he was pleased to tell me, he
would have my judgment about this question; Whether all the lands in
New England were not the king's? I told him I was surprised with such a
question, and was not willing to speak to it; that being a minister, if it was
a question about a matter of religion, I should not be averse, but this being a
state matter, I did not look upon it as proper for me to declare my mind in it,
therefore entreated again and again that I might be excused. Sir Edmund
Androsse replied and urged me with much importunity, saying, Because you are a
minister, therefore we desire to know your judgment in it, then I told him, if
I must speak to it, I would only speak as a minister from scripture and reason,
not meddling with the law. He said, the king's attorney was present there to
inform what was law. I then said, I did not understand that the lands of
New England were the king's, but the king's subjects, who had for more than
sixty years had the possession and use of them by a twofold right warranted by
the word of God. 1. By a right of just occupation from the grand charter in
Genesis 1st and 9th chapters, whereby God gave the earth to the sons of Adam
and Noah, to be subdued and replenished. 2. By a right of purchase from the
Indians, who were native inhabitants, and had possession of the land before the
English came hither, and that having lived here sixty years. I did certainly
know that from the beginning of these plantations our fathers entered upon the
land, partly as a wilderness and Vacuum Domicilium, and partly by the consent
of the Indians, and therefore care was taken to treat with them, and to gain
their consent, giving them such a valuable consideration as was to their
satisfaction, and this I told them I had the more certain knowledge of, because
having learned the Indian language in my younger time, I was at several times
made use of by the government, and by diverse particular plantations as an
interpreter in treating with the Indians about their lands, which being done
and agreed on, the several townships and proportions of lands of particular men
were ordered and settled by the government of the country, and therefore I did
believe that the lands of New England were the subjects properties, and not the
king's lands. Sir Edmund Androsse and the rest replied, that the lands were the
king's, and that he gave the lands within such limits to his subjects by a
charter upon such conditions as were not performed, and therefore all the lands
of New England have returned to the king, and that the attorney general then
present could tell what was law, who spoke diverse things to the same purpose as
Sir Edmund Androsse had done, slighting what I had said, and vilifying the
Indian title, saying, they were brutes, etc. and if we had possessed and used
the land, they said we were the king's subjects, and what lands the king's
subjects have, they are the king's, and one of them used such an expression,
wherever an Englishman sets his foot, all that he has is the king's, and
more to the same purpose. I told them that so far as I understood, we received
only the right and power of government from the king's charter within such
limits and bounds, but the right of the land and soil we had received from God
according to his grand charter to the sons of Adam and Noah, and with the
consent of the native inhabitants as I had expressed before. They still
insisted on the king's right to the land as before, whereupon I told them, I
had heard it was a standing principle in law and reason, nil dat qui non habet;
and from thence I propounded this argument, he that has no right, can give no
right to another, but the king had no right to the lands of America before the
English came hither, therefore he could give no right to them. I told them, I
knew not of any that could be pleaded but from a Popish principle, that
christians have a right to the lands of heathen, upon which the Pope as the
head of the christians had given the West Indies to the king of Spain, but this
was disowned by all protestants. Therefore I left it to them to affirm and
prove the king's title. They replied and insisted much upon that, that the king
had a right by his subjects coming and taking possession of this land. And at
last Sir Edmund Androsse said with indignation, either you are subjects or you
are rebels, intimating, as I understood him, according to the whole scope and
tendency of his speeches and actions, that if we would not yield all the lands
of New England to be the king's, so as to take patents for lands, and to pay
rent for the same, then we should not be accounted subjects but rebels, and
treated accordingly. There were many other various replies and answers on both
sides, but this is the sum and substance of that discourse.

JOHN HIGGINSON, aged seventy-four years. STEPHEN SEAWALL, aged thirty-two
years.


John Higginson, minister in Salem, personally appeared before me, December,
24, 1689, and made oath to the truth of the abovesaid evidence.

JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

Captain Stephen Seawall of Salem appeared before me, December 24, 1689, and
made oath to the truth of the abovesaid evidence.

JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

Joseph Lynde of Charlestown in the county of Middlesex in New England, being
fifty-three years of age, testifies and says, that in the year 1687, Sir
Edmund Androsse then governor of New England did enquire of him the said Lynde
what title he had to his lands, who showed him many deeds for land that he the
said Lynde possessed, and particularly for land that the said Lynde was
certainly informed would quickly be given away from him, if he did not use
means to obtain a patent for it. The deed being considered by Sir Edmund
Androsse, he said it was worded well, and recorded according to New England
custom or words to the same purpose. He further enquired how the title was
derived, he the said Lynde told him, that he bought it of, had it of, his
father-in-law in marriage with his wife, and his said father from Charlestown,
and the said town from the general court grant of the Massachusetts Bay, and
also by purchase from the natives, and he said, my title were nothing worth if
that were all. At another time after showing him an Indian deed for land, he
said, that their hand was no more worth than a scratch of a bear's paw,
under-valuing all my titles, though every way legal under our former charter
government. I then petitioned for a patent for my whole estate, but Mr. West
deputy secretary told me I must have so many patents as there were counties
that I had parcels of land in, if not towns, finding the thing so chargeable
and difficult I delayed, upon which I had a writ of intrusion served upon me in
the beginning of the summer 1688, the copy whereof is in the Charlestown men's
complaint, and was at the same time with that of Mr. James Russell's, Mr.
Seawall's and Mr. Shrimpton's, it being for the same land in part that I showed
my title unto Sir Edmund Androsse as above, being myself and those I derived it
from possessed, enclosed, and improved for about fifty years, at which time I
gave Mr. Graham attorney general three pounds in money, promising that if he
would let the action fall I would pay court charges, and give him ten pound,
when I had a patent completed for that small parcel of land, that said writ
was served upon me for, which I did because a Quaker that had the promise of it
from the governor, as I was informed in the governor's presence should not have
it from me, the said Lynde, having about seven acres more in the same common
field or pasture, about a mile from his forty-nine acres near unto the land
that the said governor gave unto Mr. Charles Lidget, of diverse of my neighbors
which I concluded must go the same way theirs went and therefore though desired
to be patenteed by the said Lynde with the forty-nine acres, he could not
obtain a grant for it. About the same time Mr. Graham attorney general asked
the said Lynde what he would do about the rest of his land, telling him the
said Lynde that he would meet with the like trouble about all the rest of his
lands that he possessed, and were it not for the governor's going to New York
at this time, there would be a writ of intrusion against every man in the
colony of any considerable estate, or as many as a cart could hold, and for the
poorer sort of people said Sir Edmund Androsse would take other measures, or
words to the same purpose. The said Lynde further says, That after judgments
obtained for small wrongs done him, triable by their own laws before a justice
of the peace, from whom they allowed no appeals in small causes, he was forced
out of his own county by writs of false judgment; and although at the first
superior court in Suffolk, the thing was so far opposed by judge Stoughton as
illegal, as that it was put by, yet the next term by judge Dudley and judge
Palmer, the said Lynde was forced to answer George Farewell attorney aforesaid,
then saying in open court in Charlestown, that all causes must be brought to
Boston in Suffolk, because there was not honest men enough in Middlesex to make
a jury to serve their turns, or words to that purpose; nor did Suffolk, as
appeared by their practice, for they made use of non-residents in diverse cases
there. I mention not any damage though it is great, but to the truth above
written I the said Lynde do set my hand.

JOSEPH LYNDE.
Boston, 14th of January, 1789-90. Juratus coram me, JOHN SMITH, Assistant.

And that the practices of these men have been according to their principles,
destructive to the property of the subject, is now to be declared. It is a
thing too well known to be denied, that some of Sir Edmund's council begged (if
they had not had secret encouragement no man believes they would have done so)
those lands which are called the commons belonging to several townships,
whereby Plymouth, Lynn, Cambridge, Rhode Island, etc. would have been ruinated,
had these men's projects taken effect. And not only the commons belonging to
towns, but those lands which were the property of several particular persons in
Charlestown, were granted from them. And writs of intrusion were issued out
against Col. Shrimpton, Mr. Samuel Seawall, and we know not how many more
besides, that their lands might be taken from them under pretense of belonging
to king James. An island in the possession of John Pittome anciently
appropriated to the maintenance of a free school, was in this way seized. How
such men can clear themselves from the guilt of sacrilegious Oppression, they
had best consider. Mr. Palmer swaggers and hectors at a strange rate; for he
has these words, ( p. 29.) I should be glad to see that man who would
barefaced instance in no particular grant of any man's right or possession
passed by Sir Edmund Androsse during his government -- And what if we will show
him the men, that dare affirm as much or more than that? what will he do?

Me me adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum. We will produce those that have
said (and sworn) as much as all this comes to. For John Pittome has upon oath
declared, that James Sherlock, Sir Edmund's Sheriff, came on Dear Island on the
28th of January 1688, and turned him and his family afloat on the water when it
was a snowy day, although he was tenant there to Col. Shrimpton and that the
said Sherlock put two men (whom he brought with him) into possession of the
said Island (as he said) on behalf of King James the second. Let him also know,
that Mr. Shepard and Mr. Burrill of Lynn, and James Russell, Esquire of Charlestown
in New England have declared upon oath as follows.

Jeremiah Shepard aged forty two years and John Burrill aged fifty seven years,
we whose names are subscribed being made choice of by the inhabitants of the
town of Lynn in the Massachusetts colony in New England to maintain their right
to their properties and lands invaded by Sir Edmund Androsse governor, we do
testify that (besides Sir Edmund Androsse his unreasonable demands of money by
way of taxation, and that without an assembly, and deputies sent from our town
according to ancient custom, for the raising of money or levying of rates) our
properties, our honest and just and true titles to our land were also invaded,
and particularly a great and considerable tract of land called by the name of
the Nahants, the only secure place for the grazing of some thousands of our
sheep, and without which our inhabitants could neither provide for their own
families, nor be capacited to pay dues or duties for the maintenance of the
public, but (if dispossessed of) the town must needs be impoverished, ruined,
and rendered miserable, yet this very tract of land being petitioned for by
Edward Randolph, was threatened to be rent out of our hands, notwithstanding
our honest and just pleas for our right to the said land, both by alienation of
the said land to us from the original proprietors the Natives, to whom we paid
our moneys by way of purchase, and notwithstanding near fifty years peaceable
and quiet possession and improvement, and also enclosure of the said land by a
stone wall, in which tract of land also two of our patentees were interested in
common with us, viz. Major Humphreys, and Mr. Johnson, yet Edward Randolph
petitioning for the said land, Sir Edmund the governor did so far comply with
his unreasonable motion, that we were put to great charges and expenses for the
vindication of our honest rights thereto, and being often before the governor
Sir Edmund and his council for relief, yet could find no favor of our innocent
cause by Sir Edmund, nothwithstanding our pleas of purchase, ancient
possession, improvement, enclosure, grant of the general court, and our
necessitous condition, yet he told us all these pleas were insignificant, and
we could have no true title unless we could produce a patent from the king,
neither had any person a right to one foot of land in New England by virtue of
purchase, possession or grant of courts, but if we would have assurance of our
lands, we must go to the king for it, and get patents of it. Finding no relief
(and the governor having prohibited town-meetings, we earnestly desired liberty
for our town to meet, to consult what to do in so difficult a case and
exigency, but could not prevail. Sir Edmund angrily telling us that there was
no such thing as a town in the country, neither should we have liberty so to
meet, neither were our ancient town records (as he said) which we produced for
the vindication of our titles to said lands worth a rush. Thus were we from
time to time unreasonably treated, our properties, and civil liberties and
privileges invaded, our misery and ruin threatened and hastened, till such time
as our country groaning under the unreasonable heavy yoke of Sir Edmund's
government were constrained forcibly to recover our liberties and privileges.

JEREMIAH SHEPARD, JOHN BURRILL.


Jeremiah Shepard minister, and John Burrill, lieutenant, both of Lynn,
personally appeared before us, and made oath to the truth of this evidence,
Salem, Feb. 3, 1689-90.

JOHN HATHORNE, Assistant. JONATHAN CORWIN, Assistant.


James Russell, Esquire on the behalf of the proprietors of the stinted pasture in
Charlestown, and on his own personal account, declares as follows, viz.

That notwithstanding the answer made to Sir Edmund Androsse, his demand by
some gentlemen of Charlestown on the behalf of the proprietors, which they
judged satisfactory, or at least they should have a further hearing and
opportunity to make out their rights, there was laid out to Mr. Lidget
adjoining to his farm in Charlestown a considerable tract of land (as it is
said one hundred and fifty acres) which was of considerable value, and did
belong to diverse persons, which when it was laid out by Mr. Wells, there were
diverse bound-marks showed by the proprietors, and some of them, and I had
petitioned for a patent for my particular propriety, yet the whole tract was
laid out to the said Lidget, who not only did cut down wood thereon without the
right owner's consent, but arrested some for cutting their own wood, and so
they were deprived of any means to use or enjoy their own land. And
notwithstanding there were about twenty acres of pasture land and meadow taken
from the said Russell, and given to Mr. Lidget, yet afterward there was a writ
of intrusion served upon a small farm belonging unto the said Russell, unto
which the aforesaid pasture land did belong, and had been long improved by
Patrick Mark his tenant, (and others good part thereof) above fifty years, so
that to stop prosecution, the said Russell was forced to petition for a patent,
he having a tenant who was feared would comply in any thing that might have
been to his prejudice, and so his land would have been condemned under color
of law, and given away as well as his pastorage was without law. Further the
said Russell complains, that he having an island in Cascobay, called
Long Island, which his honored father long since bought of Mr. Walker, and was
confirmed to James Russell by the general court, and improved several years by
Captain Davis, by mowing as tenant to the said Russell, and the said Russell
hearing it was like to be begged away, caused his writ to be entered in the
public records in Mr. West's office, which he paid for the recording of;
notwithstanding Sir Edmund Androsse ordered Captain Clements (as he said) to
survey the same, and he showed me a plat thereof, and said, if I had a patent
for it, I must pay three pence per acre, it being 650 acres. He was further
informed, that if the said Russell would not take a patent for it, Mr. Usher
should have it.

Per JAMES RUSSELL.

January 30, 1689-90.
James Russell, Esquire personally appeared before me, and made oath to the truth
of what is before written.

WILLIAM JOHNSON, assistant.

Had not an happy revolution happened in England, and so in New England, in all
probability those few ill men would have squeezed more out of the poorer sort
of people there, than half their estates are worth, by forcing them to take
patents. Major Smith can tell them, that an estate not worth 200 l. had more
than 50 l. demanded for a patent for it. And if their boldness and madness
would carry them out to oppress the rich after such a manner as has been
showed, what might the poor look for? Nevertheless, their tyranny was beyond
any thing that has been as yet expressed: (...) men were willing to bring
their titles to their possessions to a legal trial, they were not only
threatened, but fined and prosecuted, and used with barbarous cruelty. When
some gentlemen in Boston resolved in a legal way to defend their title to an
island there, Sir Edmund's Attorney threatened that it might cost them all that
they are worth, and something besides, as appears by the following affidavit,
viz.

The deposition of Captain Daniel Turel, and Lieutenant Edward Willis, sworn,
say, That upon a Writ of Intrusion being served on Deer-Island, belonging to
the town of Boston, and let unto Colonel Samuel Shrimpton by the selectmen of
the said town, the rent whereof being of long time appropriated toward the
maintenance of a free school in the town, we the deponents two of the
select-men of the said town, do testify, That meeting with Mr. James Graham
upon the townhouse, and telling him, that if Colonel Shrimpton did decline to
personate the case of the said island, we the select-men would. The said Graham
said, Are you the men that will stand suit against the King? We the deponents
told him we would answer in behalf of the town. The said Graham replied, There
was no town of Boston, nor was there any town in the country; we made answer we
were a town, and owned so to be by Sir Edmund Androsse, governor, in the
warrant sent us for the making a rate; then the said Graham told us, We might
stand the trial if we would, but bid us have a care what we did, saying, it
might cost us all we were worth, and something else too, for ought he knew, and
further these deponents say not.

Jan. 30, 1689. DANIEL TUREL, EDWARD WILLIS.


Captain Daniel Turel and Lieutenant Edward Willis appeared personally before
me, and made oath to the truth of what is above written.

WILLIAM JOHNSON, Assistant.

One of Sir Edmund's council and creatures, petitioned for an island belonging
to the town of Plymouth, and because the agents of the said town obtained a
voluntary subscription from the persons concerned to bear the charge of the
suit; they were treated as criminals, and against all law, illegally compelled
to answer in another county, and not that where the pretended misdemeanors
were committed. And Mr. Wiswall the minister of Duxbury having at the desire of
some concerned transcribed a writing which tended to clear the right they had
to the island in controversy, and also concerning the abovesaid voluntary
subscription, both transcribed in the winter 1687. A messenger was sent, to
bring him to Boston on the 21st June, 1688; he was then lame in both feet with
the gout, fitter for a bed than a journey, therefore wrote to the governor,
praying that he might be excused until he should be able to travel, and engaged
that then he would attend any court, but the next week the cruel officer by an
express order from Sir Edmund Androsse, forced him to ride in that condition,
being shod with clouts instead of shoes; and when he came before the council he
was there made to stand till the anguish of his feet and shoulders had almost
overcome him; after he was dismissed from the council, the messenger came and
told him, he must go to goal, or enter into bonds for his appearance at the
next superior court held in Boston, and pay down 4 l. 2 s. in silver. His
sickness forced him to decline a prison, and to pay the money. At the next
superior court he appeared in the same lame and sick condition, and the
extremity of the weather cast him into such a violent fit of sickness, that he
was in the judgment of others nigh unto death, and he himself thought that he
should soon be out of their bonds, and at liberty to lay his information
against his oppressors before the righteous Judge of the whole world. After all
this having been forced a third time out of his own county and colony, near
forty miles, he was delivered from the hands and humors of his tyrannical
oppressors, who had exposed him to great difficulties, charges, and to 228
miles travel in journeying to and from Boston, directly opposite to the place
where he ought to have been tried, had he been guilty of any of the pretended
misdemeanors, none of which his worst enemies ever had the face to read in open
court, or openly to charge him with to this day. Now shall such men as these
talk of barbarous usage who have themselves been so inhumane?

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes! 7. As for Sir Edmund Androsse
his supplying the Indians with ammunition in the time of actual war with them,
the following testimonies confirmed the people of New England in the belief of
it.

Lenox Beverley aged about twenty-five years being sworn, says, that he being
soldier at Pemyquid the winter time 1688, where was Captain general Sir Edmund
Androsse, knight, there came to the fort where Sir Edmund Androsse then was,
two squaws, the one Madocowandos's sister, and the other Moxis's wife (as was
said) and two other Indian women that went along with them; they were in the
fort with Sir Edmund two days, and when they came forth they seemed to be half
drunk, this deponent and Peter Ripley was commanded to guard these squaws from
Pemyquid to New-Harbour, being in distance about two miles, and as we passed on
the way Madocowandos's sister laid down her burden in the snow and commanded
the deponant to take it up, whereupon the deponant looked into the basket, and
saw a small bag which he opened, and found it to be gunpowder, which (...)
judged five pounds weight, and a bag of bullets of a greater weight, and the
weight of the basket I took up, was as much as the deponant could well carry
along, and the other three squaws had each one of them their baskets, which
appeared rather to be of greater than lesser burden, than that the deponant
carried, which were all of them laden, and brought out of the fort, and
Madocowandos's sister said she had that powder of Sir Edmund, and added, that
she was to come again to him within four days.

Boston, Aug. 17, 1689. Sworn in council, LENOX X BEVERLEY his mark.
Attest. ISR. ADDINGTON, Sec'ry.

Gabriel Wood of Beverly, aged about twenty-four years, testifies, That being
one of the soldiers that was out the last winter past, Anno 1688, in the
eastward parts, and under the command of Sir Edmund Androsse, and being then at
Pemyquid with him, was commanded by him the said Sir Edmund, together with so
many more of the soldiers as made up two files to guard and safely conduct
three Indian women from Pemyquid aforesaid to New Harbor, which said Indian
women were all laden, and to my certain knowledge one of the said women had
with her in her said journey a considerable quantity of bullets, which she
brought with her from Pemyquid aforesaid, and to my best apprehension, she had
also a considerable quantity of powder in a bag in her basket, but I did not
see that opened, as I did see the bullets, neither dared I be very inquisitive,
the rest of the soldiers in company with me seeing the Indians so supplied with
ammunition (as we all apprehended they were by our governor and captain general
Sir Edmund Androsse aforesaid) we did very much question amongst ourselves,
whether the said Sir Edmund did not intend the destruction of our army, and
brought us thither to be a sacrifice to our heathen adversaries.

The mark of GABRIEL [A] WOOD.

Gabriel Wood of Beverly in the county of Essex, personally appeared before me
at Salem in New England, January 29, 1689-90, and made oath to the truth of the
abovesaid evidence.

JOHN HATHORNE, Assistant.

8. That the Indians declared they were encouraged by Sir Edmund Androsse to
make war upon the English, is most certainly true, although the lying author of
that scandalous pamphlet, called New-England's faction discovered, has the
impudence to say, that it is certainly false. Two Indians, Waterman and David,
testify that the Maquas Indians sent a messenger to Pennicock, to inform that
Sir Edmund Androsse had been tampering to engage them to fight against the
English. Another Indian called Solomon Thomas, affirmed, that Sir Edmund gave
him a book, and that he said that book was better than the Bible, that it had
in it the picture of the virgin Mary, and that when they should fight at the
eastward, Sir Edmund would sit in his Wigwam, and say, O brave Indians! Another
Indian named Joseph (who was in hostility against the English) bragged that the
governor had more love for them than for the English. Another Indian named John
James, did of his own voluntary mind declare to several in Sudbury, that Sir
Edmund Androsse had hired the Indians to kill the English: The men to whom he
thus expressed himself, reproved him, and told him that they believed he belied
Sir Edmund Androsse and therefore they secured him, and complained to a justice
of peace, by which means he was brought to Boston, but Sir Edmund instead of
punishing was kind to the Indian, when as both the justice and the Sudbury man
had (to use Mr. Palmer's phrase) horrible usage, by means whereof an alarm and
terror run through the country, fearing some mischievous design against them.
That this relation is not a feigned story, the ensuing testimonies make to
appear.

The testimony of Waterman, and David, Indians, says, that the Maquas sent a
messenger to Pennicok to inform that the governor Edmund Androsse hired the
Maquas to fight the English, and paid down to them one bushel of white wompon,
and one bushel of black wompon, and three cart loads of merchants good,
trucking cloth and cotton cloth, and shirt cloth, and other goods. The
Maquas said, that the English were their good friends, and said, they would not
fight them, for the English never wronged them, but the Maquas took the pay on
the account of the Maquas helping the English to fight their enemies the last
war.

DAVID'S X mark. WATERMAN'S Q mark.

Attest.
CORNELIUS WALDO, senior MOSES PARKER, THOMAS READ.


The two Indians abovementioned Waterman and David, appeared the 4th day of
May 1689, and to the council then fitting owned the above-written to be truth;

ISA. ADDINGTON, secretary.

Rochester in the king's province, Sept. 16, 1688. Samuel Eldred, junior of
Rochester came before Arthur Fenner and John Fones, esquires; two of his
majesty's justices of the peace, and did declare upon oath, that on the evening
before an Indian whom he had seized, by name of Joseph, did in an insulting and
vaunting manner say, there was 500 at Martin's Vineyard, 700 at Nantucket, and
400 at Chappaquessot, all very well armed, in a better manner than him the said
Samuel Eldred, and that our governor did not dare to disarm them for that the
governor had more love for them, the said Indians, than for his majesty's
subjects the English. The said Indian being brought before us, and examined,
did confess the greatest part of what was sworn against him, and owned that he
was one of them that were in hostility against the English in the late wars,
upon which the said Indian was committed to goal.

Per ARTHUR FENNER, JOHN FONES.

The testimony of Joseph Graves aged 46 years or there about, and Mary Graves
about 30 years, of John Rutter aged about 40 years, witness that on the 2d day
of January 1688, Solomon Thomas, Indian, being at the house of Joseph Graves,
in the town of Sudbury, said, that when the fight at the eastward should be, if
the Indians had the better of it, as the English did retreat, the friend
Indians were to shoot them down, but if the English get the day, we say
nothing, and that in the spring French and Irish would come to Boston, as many,
and all won Indians, for that was the first place that was to be destroyed, and
after that the country towns would be all won nothing. And further, the said
Solomon said, that the governor had given him a book, which said governor said
was better than the Bible, and all that would not turn to the governor's
religion, and own that book, should be destroyed. In which book he the said
Thomas said was the picture of our Savior, and of the virgin Mary and of the
twelve apostles; and the governor said, when we pray, we pray to the virgin
Mary; and when the fight should be at the eastward, the governor would sit in
his wigwam, and say, O brave Indians! Whereupon John Rutter told the Indian,
that he deserved to be hanged for speaking such things, but the Indian replied,
it was all true. Upon the hearing this discourse, we resolved to come to
Boston, and acquaint authority with it, but by reason of the sickness of Joseph
Graves, we could not presently, but as soon as conveniently we could, we
accordingly appeared at Boston with our information, which the said Joseph
Graves carried to Mr. Bullivant a justice of the peace.

JOSEPH GRAVES, JOHN X RUTTER, signum. MARY Y GRAVES, mark.


Boston, January 28, 1689, Joseph and Mary Graves came and made oath to the
above-written,

Before me, WILLIAM JOHNSON, Assistant.

That when the English secured some of the Indians mentioned, and brought them
before Sir Edmund Androsse's justices, they were basely and barbarously used
for their pains, the following affidavits show.

Sudbury in New England, March 22, 1688-9, Thomas Brown, aged about forty-four
years, and John Goodenow, aged about fifty-four years, John Growt, senior, aged
near seventy years, Jacob Moore, aged about forty-four years, Jonathan
Stanhope, aged about fifty-seven years, and John Parmiter, aged about fifty
years, all inhabitants of the town of Sudbury aforesaid, do witness, that he
heard John James, Indian, of his own voluntary mind, say, That the governor was
a rogue, and had hired the Indians to kill the English, and in particular, had
hired Wohawhy to kill Englishmen, and that the governor had given the said
Wohawhy a gold ring, which was his commission, which gold ring the said Wohawhy
sold to Jonathan Prescott for two shillings in money: Whereupon we replied,
Sirrah, you deserve to be hanged for what you say. John James the Indian
replied, What you papist, all one governor. I speak it before governor's very
face. This discourse of John James, Indian, was at the place, and on the day
above-written.

THOMAS BROWN, JOHN GOODENOW, JACOB MOORE, JONATHAN STANHOPE, JOHN PARMITER.


Thomas Brown and John Goodenow, two of the subscribers above, having received
this declaration from John James the Indian, we thought it our duty forthwith
to inform authority, and did with the Indian presently go to Watertown to
justice Bond, where the said John James did voluntarily give his testimony
before the said justice Bond, which after he had taken, the said justice Bond
ordered us the said Thomas Brown and John Goodenow to make our appearance
before the governor Sir Edmund Androsse, or one of the council with the Indian,
which accordingly we did, when we came to the governor's house; after long
waiting in a very wet and cold season we were admitted unto the governor's
presence, where we were detained until eleven or twelve o'clock at night, and
after a very unkind treat, we humbly prayed his excellency, he would please to
discharge us of the Indian, but he told us no, and joaked us, saying, we were a
couple of brave men, and had the command, one of a troop of horse, and the
other a company of foot, and could we not know what to do with a poor Indian?
Further, he asked us what money we gave the Indian to tell us such news, and
commanded us still to take care of the Indian till his pleasure was to call for
us again, and this as we would answer it. Thus being severely chidden out of
his presence, we were forced with the Indian to seek our quarters where we
could find them. The next morning we were preparing to go home again to Sudbury
(being twenty miles or more) being Saturday, we were again sent for by the
governor, by a messenger, to wait on the governor, with the Indian, which we
did, and waited at the exchange or council-house in Boston, from nine o'clock
in the morning till three of the clock in the afternoon, where in the face of
the country we were made to wait upon the Indian with many squibs and scoffs
that me met withal; at last we were commanded up before the governor and his
council, where we were examined apart over and over, and about the sunsetting
were granted leave to go home, it being the evening before the Sabbath.

THOMAS BROWN, JOHN GOODENOW.


On Monday morning following, being the 25th of March, 1689, Jacob Moore,
Joseph Graves, Joseph Curtis, Joseph Moore, Obadiah Ward, were by Thomas Larkin
as a messenger fetched down to Boston, where after examination, Jacob Moore was
committed to close prison. Joseph Moore, Joseph Graves, Joseph Curtis, and
Obadiah Ward were sent home again, paying the said Larkin twelve shillings per
man. On the next Monday morning after, being the first day of April 1689,
Samuel Gookin the sheriff of Middlesex and his deputy came up to Sudbury, and
commanded Thomas Brown, John Goodenow senior, John Growt senior, Jonathan
Stanhope, John Parmiter, forthwith to appear at Boston, at Colonel Page's
house, but it being a wet and cold day, we were detained at judge Dudley's
house at Roxbury, where after long waiting, had the kindness shown us, to have
an examination every man apart before judge Dudley, judge Stoughton, Mr. Graham
and others, and were bound over to answer at the next superior court to be
held at Boston, what should there be objected against us upon his majesty's
account. Thomas Brown, John Goodenow, senior, John Growt, senior, were each of
them bound over in three hundred pound bonds, and each man two sureties in
three hundred pound bond a piece. John Parmiter and Jonathan Stanhope, were
bound in a hundred pound a piece, besides the loss of our time and hindrance of
our business, the reproach and ignominy of bond and imprisonment, we shall only
take the boldness to give a true account of what money we were forced to expend
out of our own purses as follows, to the sheriff, and other necessary charges.

l. s. d. Thomas Brown, 2 00 00 J. Goodenow, sen. 2 00 00 J. Growt, sen. 0 10
00 J. Rutter, jun. 3 05 00 Joseph Curtis, 0 17 00 Jacob Moore, 3 00 00 Jona.
Stanhope, 0 15 00 John Parmiter, 0 15 00 Joseph Graves, 3 15 00

Boston, the 21st of December, 1689, THOMAS BROWN, JOHN GOODENOW, JACOB MOORE,
JONATHAN STANHOPE, JOSEPH CURTIS, JOHN PARMITER. Jurat. cor. ISAAC ADDINGTON,
Assistant.


Although no man does accuse Sir Edmund merely upon Indian testimony, yet let
it be duly weighed (the premises considered) whether it might not create
suspicion and an astonishment in the people of New England, in that he did not
punish the Indians who thus charged him, but the English who complained of them
for it. And it is certain, that some very good and wise men in New England do
verily believe that he was deeply guilty in this matter, especially considering
what might pass between him and Hope Hood an Indian, concerning which Mr.
Thomas Danforth the present deputy governor at Boston in New England, in a
letter bearing date April 1, 1690, writes thus: --

The commander in chief of those that made this spoil, (i. e.) the spoil which
was made in the province of Maine on the 18th of March last, is Hope Hood an
Indian, one that was with sundry other Indians in the summer 1688 seized by
some of Sir Edmund's justices and commanders in the province of Maine, and sent
prisoners to Boston, Sir Edmund being then at the westward, where he continued
absent many weeks; upon his return finding the Indians in prison, fell into a
great rage against those gentlemen that had acted therein, declared his
resolution to set them at liberty and calling his council together, was by some
opposed therein, and among others, one gentleman of the council accused this
Hope Hood to be a bloody rogue, and added, that he, the said Hope Hood, had
threatened his life, and therefore prayed Sir Edmund that he might not be
enlarged, but Sir Edmund made a flout and scorn of all that could be said. At
the same time some of the council desired Sir Edmund that this Hope Hood might
be sent for before the council, to which he replied, that he never had had a
quarter of an hour's conference with any of them, and that he scorned to
discourse with any heathen of them all, yet all this notwithstanding, at the
same time whilst the council was thus met, did Sir Edmund privately withdraw
himself, and repair to the prison where this Hope Hood was prisoner, and did
there continue with him two or three hours in private, the truth of what is
above related is attested by sundry gentlemen that were of Edmund's council,
and were then ear witnesses, and likewise by others that saw Sir Edmund at the
prison; and as it is now verily believed that at that very time he consulted
the mischief that is now acted by the said Hope Hood and company. Thus Mr.
Danforth.

9. That Sir Edmund Androsse discountenanced making defense against the
Indians, is complained of by five gentlemen who were of his council, and much
concerned at his strange actings in that matter as in the account annexed to
this apology is to be seen. It is also confirmed by the Affidavits of two
honest men, viz.

Henry Kerley aged about fifty-seven years and Thomas How aged thirty-five
years or thereabouts, both inhabitants of the town of Marlborough, do both
testify that in the fall of the year, 1688, when Sir Edmund Androsse came from
New York to Boston sometime after the Indians had killed some Englishmen at
North-field in New England, coming through our town of Marlborough, the said
Sir Edmund Androsse examined this deponent Henry Kerley by what order we did
fortify and garrison our houses, I answered it was by order of Captain
Nicholson, the said Sir Edmund then said, he had no power so to do. He the said
Sir Edmund examined what arms we made use of, and carried with us on the watch,
and what charge was given us, answer was made by the deponant, they carried
fire arms, and the charge was to keep a true watch, to examine all we met with,
and secure suspicious persons that we met with, the said Sir Edmund said, what
if they will not be secured, and what if you should kill them; answer was made
by the deponant, that if we should kill them, we were in our way, then Mr.
Randolph being there in the company said, you are in the way to be hanged. Sir
Edmund Androsse said further, that those persons that had left their houses, to
dwell in garrisons, if they would not return, others should be put in that
would live there.

Boston the 27th of December. 1689. Jur. Henry Kerley, and the 2d of January 1689,
Jur. Thomas How. HENRY KERLEY. THOMAS HOW. Cor. IS. ADDINGTON, Assistant.


That Sir Edmund's high sheriff was a stranger in the country, and one that had
no estate there needs no proof, and that strangers who had no freehold, were
impannelled for Jurors is notoriously known. So it was in the case of the
Ipswichmen as has been noted, and when that reverend person Mr. Charles
Morton, was causelessly and maliciously prosecuted, he was not only compelled to
answer (contrary to law) in another county, and not in that wherein the good
sermon they found fault with, was preached, but that if possible, they might
give him a blow, there was summoned to serve as a jury man, one John Gibson no
householder nor of any estate or credit, and one John Levingsworth a
brick-layer, who lived in another colony two hundred miles distance. When those
in government will use such base artifices as these to accomplish their
pernicious designs, how should any man's estate or life be secure under him?

11. That the persons objected against, were some of them guilty of great
extortion is manifest from what has been related, and may yet be further
proved, for (as by some instances we have already seen, and shall now hear
more) they compelled men to take patents for their own lands, which they and
their fathers before them, had quietly possessed till these covetous creatures
became a nuisance to the country, and it may be, none more criminal, as to this
particular, than Mr. Palmer and Mr. West. A friend of their own, viz. Mr.
Randolph, does in several of his Letters bitterly complain of them upon this
account. In a letter of his of August the 25th, 1687, he writes thus:

I believe all the inhabitants in Boston will be forced to take grants and
conformations of their lands, as now intended, the inhabitants of the province
of Maine which will bring in vast profits to Mr. West, he taking what fees he
pleases to demand. I shall always have a due honor and respect for his
excellency, but I must buy his favor at three or four hundred pounds a year
loss. And in another to the same, June, 21, 1688, he has these words. I went
to one Shurte town clerk of Pemyquid, to know what leases were made lately, and
by whom, and for what quit rent, he told me that above a year ago Captain
Palmer, and Mr. West produced to them a commission from Colonel Dungan, to
dispose of all their lands to whoever would take leases at five shillings the
hundred acres quit rent. They let there and at a place called Dartmouth twelve
or sixteen miles distant from Pemyquid about one hundred and forty leases, some
had eight hundred or ten hundred acres, few less than a hundred, some but three
or four acres and all paid 2 l. 10 s. for passing their grants of 100 acres of
woodland, with twenty acres of marsh wherever it could be found, but this
bred a great mischief among the people; few or none have their lands measured
or marked, they were in haste, and got what they could, they had their
emissaries among the poor people, and frighted them to take grants, some come
and complained to the governor, and prayed him to confirm their rights which he
refused to do, the commission and whole proceeding being illegal, having notice
they were to be under his government, they resented it, but served their turn.
The poor have been very much oppressed here, the fort run all to ruin, and
wants a great deal to repair it. Captain Palmer and Mr. West laid out for
themselves such large lots, and Mr. Graham though not there, had a child's
portion, I think some have eight thousand or ten thousand acres. I hear not of
one penny rent coming in to the king, from them who have their grants
confirmed at York. and the five shillings an hundred acres was only a sham upon
the people: at our return we saw very good land at Winter Harbor, enough to
make large settlements for many people. The governor will have it first
measured, and then surveyed, and then will dispose of it for settlements, Mr.
Graham and his family are settled at Boston, he is made Attorney general, and
now the governer is safe in his New York Confidents, all others being
strangers, to his council. 'Twas not well done of Palmer and West to tear all
in pieces that was settled and granted at Pemyquid by Sir Edmund, that was the
seen where they placed and displaced at pleasure and were as arbitary as the
great Turk. Some of the first settlers of that eastern country were denied
grants of their own lands, whilst those men have given the improved lands
amongst themselves, of which I suppose Mr. Hutchinson has complained. In
another, May the 10th 1689, he says; I must confess there have been ill men
from New York, who have too much studied the disease of this people, and both
in courts and councils, they have not been treated well. Thus does Edward
Randolph, a bird of the same feather with themselves confess the truth, as to
this matter, concerning his brother Palmer and West.

And that oppressive fees have been extorted by indigent and exacting officers
is declared by Mr. Hinckley the present governor of New-Plymouth in his
narrative of the grievances and oppressions of their majesty's good subjects in
the colony of New-Plymouth in New England, by the illegal and arbitrary actings
in the late Government under Sir Edmund Androsse, which narrative is too large
to be here inserted, but it is possible it may be published by itself, whereby
it will appear that every corner in the country did ring with complaints of the
oppressions, and (to speak in Mr. Palmer's phrase) horrible usages of these ill
men. Some passages out of Mr. Hinckley's narrative respecting this matter, we
shall here transcribe, whose words are these which follow.

The bill of cost taxed by judge Palmer seems also to be the greatest extortion
ever heard of before, as thrice twenty shillings for three motions for judgment
at the same term, (and was it not their courtesy they did not move ten times
one after another at the same rate) and taxed also, five pound for the king's
attorney, and one and twenty shillings for the judges, and ten shillings for
the sheriff, and other particulars as by the said bill appears, and that
which makes it the greater extortion is, that the whole bill of cost was
exacted of every one of them, which each of them must pay down, or be kept
prisoners till they did, though all seven of them were jointly informed against
in one information. Thus Mr. Hinckley.

The cry of poor widows and fatherless is gone up to heaven against them on
this account; for the probate of a will and letter of administration above
fifty shillings has been extorted out of the hands of the poor, nay they have
been sometimes forced to pay more than four pounds, when not much above a crown
had been due. Let Andrew Sergeant and Joseph Quilter among many others speak if
this be not true, who were compelled to travel two hundred miles for the
probate of a will, and to pay the unreasonable and oppressive fees complained
of.

Besides these things, under Sir Edmund's government they had wicked ways to
extort money when they pleased. Mr. William Coleman complains (and has given
his oath accordingly) that upon the supposed hired evidence of one man he
sustained forty pounds damage in his estate. And there were complaints all over
the country that Sir Edmund's excise men would pretend sickness on the road,
and get a cup of drink of the hospitable people, but privately drop a piece of
money, and afterward make oath that they bought drink at those houses, for
which the innocent persons were fined most unreasonably, and which was extorted
from them, though these villainies were declared and made known to those then in
power. William Goodhue, and Mary Dennis might be produced as witness hereof,
with many more. Some of Sir Edmund's creatures have said, that such things as
these made his government to stink. Also John Hovey and others complain of
sustaining ten pounds damages by the extortion of officers, though never any
thing (they could hear of) was charged upon them to this day, John and
Christoper Osgood complain of their being sent to prison nine or ten days,
without a mittimus, or any thing laid to their charge, and that afterward they
were forced to pay excessive charges -- It would fill a volume, if we should
produce and insert all the affidavits which do confirm the truth of these
complaints.

In the time of that unhappy government, if the officers wanted money, it was
but seizing and imprisoning the best men in the country for no fault in the
world, and the greedy officers would hereby have grist to their mill. Thus was
Major Appleton dealt with. Thus Captain Bradstreet. Thus that worthy and
worshipful gentleman Nathaniel Salstoristal, Esquire, was served by them and
barbarously prosecuted, without any information or crime laid to his charge;
for he had done nothing worthy of bonds, but it was the pleasure of Sir Edmund
and some others, thus to abuse a gentleman far more honorably descended than
himself, and one concerned in the government of New England before him, but (to
his eternal renown) one who refused to accept of an illegal and arbitrary
commission, when in the reign of the late king James it was offered to him.

We have now seen a whole jury of complaints which concur in their verdict
against Sir Edmund Androsse and his confederates. Were these things to be heard
upon the place, where the witnesses who gave in their affidavits are resident,
they would amount to legal proof, as to every particular which was by the
agents of the Massachusetts colony in New England objected against Sir Edmund
Androsse, and others seized and secured by the people there.

Moreover there are other matters referring to Sir Edmund Androsse which caused
great, and almost universal jealousy of him. For first, His commission was such
as would make any one believe that a courtier in the time of the late king
James spoke true, who said Sir Edmund Androsse was sent to New England on
purpose to be a plague to the people there. For he with three or four more,
none of them chosen by the people, but rather by that implacable enemy who
prosceuted the quo warranto's against their charters, had power given them to
make laws, and raise what moneys they should think meet for the support of
their own government, and he had power himself alone to send the best and most
useful men a thousand miles, (and further if he would) out of the country, and
to build cities and castles (in the air if he could) and demolish them again,
and make the purses of the poor people pay for it all. Such a commission was an
unsufferable grievance, and no honest Englishman would ever have accepted of
it, or acted by it.

Secondly, Jealousies were augumented by his involving the country in a war
with the Indians, by means whereof he has occasioned the ruin of many families
and plantations; yea the death or captivity of we know not how many souls. For
he went (with the Rose frigate, and violently seized, and took and carried
away, in a time of peace all the household goods and merchandises of monsieur
Cakeen a Frenchman at Penobscot who was allied to the Indians having married
the daughter of one of their princes whom they call Sagamores or Sachems; and
when this was done, it was easy to foresee, and was generally concluded that
the French and Indians would soon be upon the English, as it quickly came to
pass. After the flame was kindled, and barbarous outrages committed by the
Indians, Sir Edmund's managery was such as filled the country with greater
fears of an horrid design. For bloody Indians whom the English had secured,
were not only dismissed, but rather courted than punished by him.

Thirdly, It cannot be expressed what just and amazing fears surprised the people
of New England when they had notice of the late king James being in France,
lest Sir Edmund Androsse whose governor and confident he was, should betray
them into the power of the French king, other circumstances concurring to
strenghen these fears. The Mohawks and other Indians were in hostility against
the French and it was very advantageous to the English interest to have it so,
but Sir Edmund caused them to make a peace with the French, whereby the French
interest in those parts was strengthened, and the English weakened. Mr. Peter
Reverdy (a French protestant) in his memoirs concerning Sir Edmund Androsse
complains of this.

After that Sir Edmund Androsse and his accomplices were secured, such reports
and informations came to hand, as made New England admire the divine providence
in accomplishing what was done against the late oppressors. They then saw the
persons from whom they suspected the greatest danger, were now incapable of
betraying them.

If an unaccountable instinct and resolution had not animated the inhabitants
in and about Boston, to seize on those few men, the people there believe
New England would have been in the hands not of king William but king Lewis
ever this day: For in Sept. 1689, several vessels belonging to New England were
taken near Cansoe in America by some French men of war. The prisoners since at
liberty, inform, that the French told them, that there was a fleet of ships
bound from France directly for Boston in New England, but some of them were
taken by the English ships of war, and three or four of them lost at
Newfoundland, and that Sir Edmund Androsse had sent to the French king for them
to come over, and the country should be delivered up. And the Lieutenant of a
French man of war professed, that if Sir Edmund Androsse had not been
imprisoned, they would then have gone to Boston. This shows what a good opinion
the French had of him, and such reports so testified made a strange impression
on the spirits of the people throughout the country: And that the world may see
we do not write fictions of our own, the subsequent Affidavits are produced and
here inserted.

John Langford of Salem testifies, That he being in the Ketch Margaret of
Salem, Daniel Gygles commander, they were taken by the French ships off Tarbay
in America, near Cansoe on Tuesday the 17th day of September last past, and
being put on board the Admiral, viz. The Lumbuscado, and in the said ship
carried a prisoner to Port Royal, and then did hear several of the company on
board the said ship say, that they came directly from France, and that there
was ten or twelve sail of them ships of war that came in company together, but
some of them were taken upon the coast of France and some were lost since, and
that they were all bound directly for New England, and that Sir Edmund Androsse
late governor of New England had sent to the French king for them to come over,
and the country should be delivered up into his hands, and that they expected
that before they should arrive, it would have been delivered into the hands of
the French.

JOHN LANGFORD.

Benjamin Majery of Salem, Jersey-man, also testifies, that he being taken the
same day, and at the same place in the Ketch Diligence, Gilbert Peter's
commander; as is abovesaid in the evidence of John Langford, he heard the same
related, by several of the company on board the other French ship of war that
was in company with the Lumbuscado; viz. The Frugum, so called, that there was
ten sail of them came out directly from France together; that Sir Edmund
Androsse late governor of New England had sent to the king of France for them
to come over, and he would deliver the country into their hands, and that they
were bound directly for Boston in New England but had lost most of their ships
coming over.

The mark M of BENJAMIN MAJERY.

John Langford and Benjamin Magery, both made oath to the truth of their
respective evidences in Salem, November 23, 1689.

Before me, JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

Joshua Conant testifies, That he being commander of the Ketch, Thomas and
Mary of Salem, he was taken by three French ships off from Tarbay, near Cansoe,
upon Tuesday the 17th of September last, two of which were ships of war, the
other a merchant-man, and being put on board the Admiral, viz. the Lumbuscado,
and therein carried to to Port Royal a prisoner, Mr. Mero told me that the
French on board told him, that there was ten sail of them ships of war came out
in company together from France, and that they came directly from France, and
were bound to Boston in New England, and that Sir Edmund Androsse had sent to
the French king for them, and that the country was to be delivered up into
their hands; but having lost several of their ships in their voyage, and
hearing that Sir Edmund Androsse was taken, and now in hold, should not proceed
at present, but threatened what they would do the next summer.

JOSHUA CONANT.

Joshua Conant personally appeared before me, and made oath to the truth of the
abovesaid evidence. Salem, November the 23d, 1689.

JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

Phillip Hilliard of Salem, Jersey-man, testifies, That he was taken by the
French in a Ketch belonging to Salem; viz. the Thomas and Mary, Joshua Conant
commander off from Tarbay near Cansoe, this autumn, September 17, and being
carried on board the Lumbuscado, did on board the said ship hear several of the
company say, that there was about twelve sail of them ships of war, came out in
company together from France, and were bound directly for Boston in
New England, and that Sir Edmund Androsse, the late governor there had sent
into France for them to come over.

The mark S of PHILLIP HILLIARD.

Phillip Hilliard personally appeared before me, and made oath to the truth of
the abovesaid evidence. Salem. November the 23d, 1689.

JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

James Cocks of Salem, mariner, testifies, That he was taken by the French in
the Ketch Margaret of Salem, Daniel Gygles commander, on Tuesday the 17th of
September last past, off from Tarbay near Cansoe, by two French ships of war,
who had one merchant-man in company with them, and he being carried on board
the admiral, viz. the Lumbuscado, he there met with a man he had known in
London, one of the said ship's company, who was a Biscay born, named Peter
Goit, who told him that there was thirteen ships of them came out of France in
company together, and that they were bound directly for Boston in New England,
expecting that the country was before, or would be at their coming delivered up
to the king of France, and told him, before they could get clear of the coast
of France, several of their ships were taken by the English ships of war, and
the rest of their fleet taken or dispersed, and lost about Newfoundland.

The mark S S of JAMES COCKS.

James Cocks personally appeared before me, and made oath to the truth of the
abovesaid evidence. Salem, November 23d, 1689.

JOHN HATHORNE, assistant.

But as to one of the crimes objected against Sir Edmund Androsse and his
accomplices, Habemus confitentem reum. Mr. Palmer cannot deny but that they
levied moneys on the king's subjects in New England, contrary to the
fundamentals of the English government, which does not allow the imposition of
taxes without a parliament. The New-Englanders supposed that their late
oppressors had been guilty of no less than a capital crime by their raising
money in such a way as they did; and we are assured that one of them after he
received, and before he acted by virtue of his illegal commission from the late
king, professed, that if ever he had an hand in raising a penny of money
without an assembly, his neck should go for it; and yet no man that we know of
had a deeper hand in it than this person had. But Mr. Palmer, for the
justification of this so foul a business, lays down several positions which he
would have no man deny; one of his positions is. That it is a fundamental point
consented to by all christian nations, That the first discoverer of a country
inhabited by infidels, gives a right and dominion of that country to the prince
in whose service and employment the discoverers were sent. These are his words,
p. 17. We affirm, that this fundamental point (as he calls it) is not a
christian, but an unchristian principle. It is controverted among the
Schoolmen, an dominium fundatur in gratia. Papists are (as Mr. Palmer is) for
the affirmative, but the scripture teaches us to believe that the heathen
nations, and the sons of Adam, and not the children of Israel only, have a
right to the earth, and to the inheritance which God has given them therein,
Deuteronomy. 32.8. When Mr. Palmer has proved that infidels are not the sons of Adam,
we shall consent to his notion, that christians may invade their rights, and
take their lands from them, and give them to whom they please, and that the
pope may give all America to the king of Spain. But let him know, that the
first planters in New England, had more of conscience and the fear of God in
them, than it seems Mr. Palmer has. For they were not willing to wrong the
Indians in their properties; for which cause it was that they purchased from
the natives their right to the soil in that part of the world, notwithstanding
what right they had by virtue of their charters from the kings of England. Mr.
Palmer's position is clearly against Jus Gentium and Jus Natural, which
instructs every man, Nemini injuriam facers. He that shall violently, and
without any just cause take from infidels their lands, where they plant, and by
which they subsist does them manifest injury. And let us know of Mr. Palmer, if
christian princes have power to dispose of the lands belonging to infidels in
the West Indies, whether they have the like dominion over the lands belonging
to the infidels in the East Indies, and if these infidels shall refuse to
consent that such christians shall possess their lands, that then they may
lawfully vi and armis expel or destroy them, as the Spaniards did! We may send
Mr. Palmer for further instruction in this point to Balaam's ass, which
ingenuously acknowledged that her master (though an infidel) had a property in,
and right of dominion over her, Numb. 22.30. But this gentleman has some other
assertions which he would have us take for postulata, and then we shall be his
slaves without all peradventures. He tells us in page 17, 18, 19, that the
English plantations (in partiticulur New England) are no parts of the empire of
England, but like Wales and Ireland, which were conquered, and belong to the
dominion of the crown of England, and that therefore he that wears the crown,
may set up governments over them, which are despotick and absolute, without any
regard to Magna Charta, and that whereas in Barbados, Jamaica, Virginia, etc.
they have their assemblies, that is only from the favor of the prince, and not
that they could pretend right to such privileges of Englishmen.

And now we need no further discovery of the man. Could the people of
New England who are zealous for English liberties ever endure it long, that
such a person as this should be made one of their judges, that by squeezing of
them, he might be able to pay his debts? And can any rational man believe, that
persons of such principles did not tyrannize over that people when once they
had them in their cruel clutches, and could pretend the authority of the late
king James for for what they did? in our opinion Mr. Palmer has not done like
a wise man thus to expose himself to the just resentments and indignation of
all the English plantations. If ever it should be his chance to be amongst them
again, what could he expect but to be looked on as communis hostis, when he
thus openly declares that they have no English liberties belonging to them? --
That worthy gentleman Sir William Jones (who was Attorney General in the reign
of king Charles the second) had certainly more understanding in the law than
Captain Palmer, and yet Captain Palmer (we suppose) is not ignorant that when
some proposed, that Jamaica (and so the other plantations) might be governed
without any assembly, that excellency Attorney (not like Captain Palmer but
like an Englishman) told the then king, that he could no more grant a
commission to levy money (...) subjects (...) without their consent by an
assembly, than they could discharge themselves from their allegiance to the
English crown; and what Englishmen in their right wits will venture their lives
over the seas to enlarge the king's dominions, and to enrich and greaten the
English nation, if all the reward they shall have for their cost and adventures
shall be their being deprived of English liberties, and in the same condition
with the slaves in France or in Turkey! And if the colonies of New England are
not to be esteemed as parts of England, why then were the quo warranto's issued
out against the government in Boston as belonging to Westminster in Middlesex!
Are the English there, like the Welsh and Irish a conquered people? When Mr.
Palmer has proved that he has said something. They have (through the mercy of
God) obtained conquests over many of their enemies, both Indians and French, to
the enlargement of the English dominions. But except Mr. Palmer and the rest of
that crew will say, that his and their domineering a while was a conquest, they
were never yet a conquered people. So that his alleging the case of Wales and
Ireland before English liberties were granted to them, is an impertinent story.
Besides, he forgets that there was an original contract between the king and
the first planters in New England, the king promising them, if they at their
own cost and charge would subdue a wilderness, and enlarge his dominions, they
and their posterity after them should enjoy such privileges as are in their
charters expressed, of which that of not having taxes imposed on them without
their own consent was one. Mr. Palmer and his brethren oppressors will readily
reply, their charter was condemned. But he cannot think, that the judgment
against their charter made them cease to be Englishmen. And only the colony of
the Massachusetts had their charter condemned. And yet these men ventured to
levy moneys on the king's subjects in Connecticut colony. For the which
invasion of liberty and property they can never answer. Indeed they say the
corporation of Connecticut surrendered their charter. But who told them so? It
is certain, that no one belonging to the government there, knows of any such
thing; and how their oppressors should know that Connecticut made a surrender
of their charter when the persons concerned know nothing of it, is very
strange. We can produce that written by the secretary of that colony with his
own hand, and also signed by the present governor there, which declares the
contary to what these men (as untruly as boldly) affirm. Witness the words
following.

In the second year of the reign of king James the second we had a quo warranto
served upon us by Edward Randolph, requiring our appearance before his
majesty's courts in England, and although the time of our appearance was
elapsed before the serving of the said quo warranto, yet we humbly petitioned
his majesty for his favor, and the continuance of our charter with the
privileges thereof. But we received no other favor but a second quo warranto,
and we well observing that the charter of London and other considerable cities
in England were condemned, and that the charter of the Massachusetts had
undergone the like fate, plainly saw what we might expect, yet we not judging
it good or lawful to be active in surrendering what had cost us so dear, nor to
be altogether silent, we empowered an attorney to appear on our behalf, and to
present our humble address to his majesty, but quickly upon it as Sir Edmund
Androsse informed us, he was empowered by his majesty to receive the surrender
of our charter, if we saw meet so to do and us also to take under his
government. Also, Col. Thomas Dungan his majesty's governor of New York,
labored to gain us over to his government. We withstood all these motions, and
in our reiterated addresses, we petitioned his majesty to continue us in the
free and full enjoyment of our liberties and properties, civil and sacred,
according to our charter. We also petitioned that if his majesty should not see
meet to continue us as we were, but was resolved to annex us to some other
government; we then desired that in as much as Boston had been our old
correspondents, and a people whose principles and manners we had been
acquainted with, we might rather be annexed to Sir Edmund Androsse his
government, than to Colonel Dungan's, which choice of ours was taken for a
resignation of our charter, though that was never intended by us for such, nor
had it the formalities in law to make it such. Yet Sir Edmund Androsse was
commissionated to take us under his government, pursuant to which about the end
of October 1687, he with a company of gentlemen and grenadiers to the number of
sixty or upwards came to Hartford the chief seat of this government, caused his
commission to be read, and declared our government to be dissolved, and put
into commission both civil and military officers throughout our colony as he
pleased. When he passed through the principal parts thereof, the good people of
the colony though they were under a great sense of the injuries sustained
thereby, yet chose rather to be silent and patient than to oppose, being indeed
surprised into an involuntary submission to an arbitrary power.

Hartford, June 13, 1689. ROBERT TREAT, Governor. JOHN ALLEN, Secretary.


Thus did Sir Edmund Androsse and his creatures, who were deeply concerned in
the illegal actions of the late unhappy reigns, contrary to the laws of God and
men, commit a rape on a whole colony; for which violence it is hoped they may
account, and make reparation (if possible) to those many whose properties as
well as liberties have been invaded by them.

Captain Palmer in the close of his partial account of New England entertains
his readers with an harangue about the sin of rebellion, and misapplies several
scriptures that so he might make the world believe that the people of
New England have been guilty of wicked rebellion by their casting off the
arbitrary power of those ill men who invaded liberty and property to such an
intolerable degree as has been proved against them. But does he in sober
sadness think, that if when wolves are got among sheep in a wilderness, the
shepherds and principal men there shall keep them from ravening, that this is
the sin of rebellion condemned in the scripture? How or by whose authority our
lawyer comes to play the divine we know not. But since he has thought meet to
take a spiritual weapon into his hand, let him know that the scripture speaks
of a lawful and good rebellion, as well as of that which is unlawful. It is
said of good Hezekiah that he rebelled against the king of Assyria and served
him not, 2 Kings 18.7. Indeed reviling Rabshakeh upbraided him, and said as in
verse 20, thou rebellest (not unlike to Captain Palmer) saying to New England,
thou rebellest. Hezekiab's predecessors had basely given away the liberties of
the people, and submitted to the arbitrary power of the Assyrians, and
therefore Hezekiah did like a worthy prince in casting off a tyrannical
government, and asserting the liberty of them that were the Lord's people, and
God did signally own and prosper him in what he did, and would never permit the
Assyrian to regain his tyrannical power over Jerusalem or the land of Judah,
though for their trial he permitted their enemies to make some devastations
among them. The like (we hope) may be the happy case of New England. Mr. Palmer
tells us, that New England (...) valued itself for the true profession pure
exercise of the protestant religion, but he intimates that they will be termed
a land full of hypocrisy and rebellion, irreligion, and a degenerate wicked
people, p. 39. And is this the sincerity and christian moderation which he
boasts himself of in his preface? Surely these are the hissings of the old
serpent, and do sufficiently indicate whose children the men are that use them.
Since he will be at divinity, let him (if he can) read the apologies written by
Justin Martyr and Tertullian, and there see if Pagans did not accuse Christians
of old, just after the same manner, and with the same crimes that he wickedly
upbraids that good and loyal people with. Who are they that use to call the
holiest and most conscientious men in the world hypocrites, liars, rebels, and
what not? but they that are themselves the greatest hypocrites, liars, and
rebels against heaven that the earth does bear? It is hard to believe that
Captain Palmer does not rebel against the light of his own conscience, when he
affirms as in page 38, that in New England, every thing that has any relation
to their majesty's is neglected and unregarded, without any recognition of
their authority over those dominions. He cannot be ignorant of the humble
addresses which the people in New England have from time to time made to their
present majesty's, acknowledging their authority. He knows that on the first
notice of their majesty's being proclaimed king and queen in England, both
those now in government in New England, and the body of the people with them,
did (without any command) of their own accord, with the greatest joy proclaim
their majesty's in New England. He knows that their majesty's have no subjects
more cordialy and zealously devoted to them than those in New England are, or
that do with greater fervor pray for their long and happy reigns, or that are
more willing to expose themselves to the utmost hazards in their service, and
yet this man that knows all this, to cast an odium on that loyal and good
people, insinuates as if they were rebels, and disaffected to the present
government, and designed to set up an independent common wealth, and had no
regard to the laws of God or men. After this lying and malicious rate has he
expressed himself. What rational charity can be extended so far as to believe
that it is possible for him to think that what himself has written is true?
When Sanballat wrote that Nehemiah and the Jews with him intended to rebel, did
he believe what he had written? no, he did not, but feigned those things out of
his own heart. The like is to be said of those Sanballats that accuse the
people of New England with thoughts of rebellion. And so we have done with Mr.
Palmer. What has been said is sufficient to justify the revolution in
New England, and to vindicate the people there from the aspersions cast upon
them by their enemies. Several worthy gentlemen have under their hands given an
account concerning some of Sir Edmund's arbitrary proceedings, which is
subscribed by five (and more would have concurred with them had there been time
to have communicated it) of those who were of Sir Edmund's council during his
government there, and for that cause their complaints carry more weight with
them, which shall therefore as a conclusion be here subjoined.

READER,
THERE is such notoriety as to matter of fact in the preceding relation, that
they who live in New England are satisfied concerning the particulars contained
therein. If any in England should hesitate, they may please to understand that
Mr. Elisha Cook, and Mr. Thomas Oaks (who were the last year sent from Boston
to appear as agents in behalf of the Massachusetts Colony) have by them
attested copies of the affidavits (at leastwise of most of them) which are in
this vindication published, and are ready (if occasion serve) to produce them.

A NARRATIVE of the PROCEEDINGS OF Sir EDMUND ANDROSSE and his Accomplices, Who
acted by an ILLEGAL and ARBITRARY Commission from the late King JAMES, during
his Government in NEW ENGLAND.

By several GENTLEMEN who were of his COUNCIL.

To the READER.
THE particulars mentioned in the ensuing narrative, are but a small part of
the grievances justly complained of by the people in New England, during their
three years oppression under Sir Edmund Androsse. For a more full account, the
reader is referred to the justification of the revolution in New England, where
every particular exhibited against Sir Edmund and his accomplices, by the
agents lately sent to England, is by the affidavits of honest men confirmed. If
some men find themselves thereby exposed to the just resentments and
indignation of all true christians, or true Englishmen, they must thank
themselves for publishing such untrue accounts as that which goes under the
name of Captain John Palmer's, and that scandalous pamphlet called
New-England's Faction discovered, supposed to be written by an implacable enemy
of all good men, and a person that for impudence and lying has few equals in
the world. This which follows, being signed by several gentlemen of great
integrity, who likewise had a particular knowledge of the things by them
related, is therefore of unquestionable credit. The design in making of it thus
public, is to vindicate their majesty's loyal subjects in New England, and to
give a true representation of things unto those who have by false relations
been imposed on.

Boston, New England, Feb, 4, 1690-91.
HAVING received from Mr. Addington by order of the Council and representatives
of the Massachusetts colony a signification of their desire; That whereas we
where members of the late council in the time of Sir Edmund Androsse's
Government, we would give some information of the grievances and
male-administrations under the same. Upon consideration had thereof, and in
answer thereunto, we cannot but own and declare, that not only ourselves and
many others in the same station (not now present to join with us) were of a
long time much dissatisfied and discouraged with very many of the proceedings
and administrations in the said government; and had little reason to wonder
that so great a number of the people were so too. It might well have been
expected that the governor (not so successful heretofore) notwithstanding the
extraordinariness (to say no more) of many clauses and powers in his
commission; yea the rather and the more, because thereof would have cautioned
and moderated the execution of the same: But to our great trouble we found it
very much otherwise. Many were the things that were accounted irregular and
grievous therein, far from conducing to the public weal of the territory, and
not a little to the disservice of the crown, as tending rather to the
disturbing and disaffecting of the subjects here, than to the furtherance of
that cheerful obedience, loyalty, love and duty in them, which ought by all
good means, to have been nourished and promoted. And of all this unhappiness,
we must reckon the first step and inlet to be that the governor did so quickly
neglect the great number of the council, and chiefly adhere unto and govern by
the advice only of a few others, the principal of them strangers to the
country, without estates or interest therein to oblige them, persons of known
and declared prejudices against us, and that had plainly laid their chiefest
designs and hopes to make unreasonable profit of this poor people. Innumerable
were the evil effects that from hence were continually growing up amongst us;
the debates in council were not so free as ought to have been, but too much
overruled, and a great deal of harshness continually expressed against persons
and opinions that did not please. The greatest rigor and severity was too
often used toward the soberest sort of people, when any thing could be found
or pretended against them, their humble submissions were little regarded, and
inexorable persecutions ordered against them, whilst in the mean time the
notorious viciousness and profaneness of others met not with the like
discountenance, but persons of such a character were put into places of
business and trust. The long settled maintenance of the public ministry, even
from those that applied themselves to no other way of worship, but continued
ordinary hearers, could not be upheld by any act of authority providing for the
same, and schools of learning so well taken care of formerly, were in most
places fallen to decay, and many more such like might be reckoned up. But we
shall more especially instance further in the particulars following, as not the
least.

1. It was as we thought a great slight put upon the council, and to the
prejudice of the good people of the territory, that whereas at the governor's
first coming a committee appointed thereunto by himself, and a full council had
with great care and several weeks trouble revised a very considerable number of
orders and laws collected out of the several law books of these colonies found
by long experience very needful and agreeable to the good of these plantations,
which laws so collected and revised, were again presented unto, and upon
further advisement approved by the governor and council and passed. Yet upon
the introducing Mr. West from New York to be deputy secretary, they were, for
what causes we know not, totally laid aside, and the people denied the benefit
of them. And this grievance was so much the greater, and a plainer indication
of the severity of some men in their intended management of things, because on
good deliberation they had also passed an order of council, that until the
council should take further order, the several justices, town-officers, and
others should proceed according to former usages, and such local laws in the
several parts of this dominion, as are not repugnant to the laws of England,
etc. Yet because by virtue of the said order some in authority have proceeded
to put forth their power for the support of the ministry, and some others did
justify themselves in some actions done by them that were not pleasing;
hereupon when a discourse only, and some debate thereof had passed in council,
but without any regular determination made, and contrary to the express word of
the said order, it was entered in the council-book concerning it, resolved that
the same was only in force till the next session of the council, and so
determined as null of itself, and that none presume to act pursuant to such
laws as are or shall be made here.

2. Whereas the act for the continuing and establishing of several rates,
duties and imposts, was one of the first of so great moment that came out in a
form under the seal of the territory, and was publicly proclaimed, we that
were present have great cause to remember what trouble and dissatisfaction
there was among the members of the council concerning the same. As that act was
framed and urged upon us, a very considerable number (and we believe we were
the major part) dissented from and argued much against it. And though the
governor expressed not a little heat and positiveness alleging his
instructions, and held the council together, unreasonably a very long time
about it. Yet when we did at last break up we could not imagine that he could
take the bill to be agreed to; nevertheless it was the next day (to our
wonderment) brought in fairly engrossed in parchment, and quickly signed by the
governor without any counting of voices either then or the day before, which
was the more needful because some did continue still to make their objections,
others that had spoken against the bill the day before, declaring their
adherence to what they had then said; and many more under so great
discouragement and discountenance, as was manifested sitting silent, which we
are sure in the regular passing of laws can never be reckoned for a consent.

3. The way and manner used afterward of proposing and passing all laws was
very uncertain and unequal, not answerable to the nature of so great a power,
nor to the largeness of the territory that was to be obliged by them, or to the
number of the counselors appointed therein; for after a little while there
were no set times appointed or given notice of for the making of laws, that so
the members of the council might attend in a fuller number to be helpful
therein. Bills of the greatest concernment were usually first consulted and
framed in private, and so unexpectedly brought into council at any time, and
then our work too was often under great disadvantages, not to advise freely and
consult about the making of a law thought necessary, but to maintain a contest
in opposition to a very inconvenient one, too far promoted and engaged in
already; and above all, there was never any fair way of taking and counting the
number of the counselors consenting and dissenting, that so the majority might
be known in any matter that admitted of any considerable reasonings and
debates, by reason whereof both laws and other orders and resolutions might be
set down as passed by the council, which ought not to have been. And when it
has been (as often it was) expressly and earnestly prayed when matters of
greater moment than ordinary were in hand, that the debate and resolution of
them might be put off till a fuller council of members from other several parts
of the dominion might be convened such motions were ever disaccepted, and
entertained with no little displacency; so that it might be too truly affirmed,
that in effect four or five persons, and those not so favorably inclined and
disposed as were to be wished for, bear the rule over, and gave law to a
territory the largest and most considerable of any belonging to the dominion of
the crown.

4. In pursuance of this way and manner of passing laws above expressed, there
were two in special that came forth, which we are sure in fuller and freer
councils would have had a full stop put to them; viz. First, The act for
regulating the choice of select-men, etc. wherein the liberty of towns to meet
for the managing of their public affairs referring to their common lands, and
all other their concernments, which they had enjoyed for so many years, to
their great benefit, was most unreasonably restrained to once a year, and all
other convening of inhabitants as a town meeting, upon any pretense or color
whatsoever, was strictly forbidden: And the other act was that entitled, an
act requiring all masters of ships or vessels to give security, in which there
were such restraints laid upon all persons from transporting themselves freely
(as their occasion might call) out of their territory, that it would have been
a mere prison to all that should be found therein, and such bond required of
all ships and vessels (extending in the practice even to shallops and
wood-boats) as would quickly have intolerably discouraged, if not ruined the
trade thereof; and all without any other ordinary general benefit of the said
act, but the filling some men's pockets with fees: And (as it might be thought
from the time of moving this act, which was when Captain Hutchinson was already
gone, and Mr. Mather was known to be intending for England) the obstructing of
such men's going home as were likely there to make just complaints, and seek
redress of public grievances; and when this act had been strenuously opposed
in council here at Boston, where it was more than once vehemently urged, and as
often denied, it was carried as far as New York, and there an opportunity found
for the obtaining of it.

5. The great matter of properties and titles to our lands is the next to be
insisted on, his majesty that granted the charter did fully invest the
patentees with right to the soil throughout the whole limits thereof, and here
on the place, the right of the natives was honestly purchased from them. The
disposal, distribution, and granting of lands by the patentees, who were also
incorporated, and made a body politic, was in such a plain, ready, easy way,
without any charge to the planters, as in the settlement of so large a country
was thought to be most agreeable: And so much of a public spirit and design
were those noble gentlemen, that (though well they might) they settled not one
single penny of service or acknowledgment to themselves and heirs of any of
their grants, a thing so self-denying and worthy, that few instances can be
given of the like. All which notwithstanding, and the possessions, descents and
valuable purchases of so many years that have passed since, the governor and
those he adhered to resolved and practiced to make all men's titles in effect
quite null and void. The purchasing of the natives right, was made nothing of,
and next to a ridicule. The enjoyment and improvement of lands not enclosed,
and especially if lying in common amongst many was denied to be possession; it
was not enough that some men that thought it convenient, and were both willing
and able, did take confirmations of their lands, the numbers of whom in time
might have been a considerable gain to them; but nothing would satisfy unless
all in general might be compelled so to do; hence those that refused were
declared intruders upon his majesty, and put in fear of having their lands
granted unto strangers. Many were solicited, and encouraged to petition for
other men's lands, and had a shameful example set them by some of the chief
contrivers of all this mischief. When some men have petitioned for a
confirmation of their own lands, a part of these only was offered to be granted
to them, and another part denied. Nor could any man's own land be confirmed to
him, without a particular survey of every part and parcel of them first made,
the great charges whereof, and of other fees to be taken would have been to
most men insupportable: Yea it has by some been computed that all the money in
the country would not suffice to patent the lands therein contained.

And yet further, a considerable quit-rent to the king was to be imposed upon
all lands, though already a constant yearly tax for the support of the
government had been laid on them.

And for all this most unreasonable vexation to a laborious and industrious
people, the only ground pretended was some defects and wants of form and due
manner alleged to be in the way of the disposing and conveying of all lands
from the patentees to the townships and people here; which whatever it amounted
to might have been easily remedied, either by an application and representation
to the king for the obtaining a general settlement of all properties (which
would have been highly worthy and generous for the governor to have engaged in,
on behalf of the people) or by some other ways that were proposed. But nothing
but the way of particular patenting as abovesaid could prevail. In prosecution
whereof all actions intended upon informations of intrusions in his majesty's
behalf, or between old proprietors and new grantees must have had their
decision at the ordinary courts of common law here upon the place where matters
of equity and of a consideration transcending all ordinary cases could not have
a proper cognizance and due influence in the decision, determination and
judgment.

6. Though sufficient courts of justice were appointed, and held in the several
counties for the trial of all offenders, yet it was too frequent upon more
particular displeasure to fetch up persons from very remote counties before the
governor and council at Boston (who were the highest, and a constant court of
record and judicature) not to receive their trial but only to be examined
there, and so remitted to an inferior court to be farther proceeded against.
The grievance of which court was exceeding great, for hereby not only the
charge was made excessive upon such persons by the notorious exactions of the
messenger, the secretary's fees for examination, etc. But these examinations
themselves were unreasonably strict, and rigorous and very unduly disparing to
plain unexperienced men. And the trials of several, were by this means
overruled to be at Boston, and not in the proper counties, and were otherwise
so far prejudged as to be rendered less equal.

The extraordinary oppressive fees taken in all matters by indigent and
exacting officers, these were at the first for a long time arbitrarily imposed
and required without any color of an establishment of them by the council.
Afterward a committee was appointed, to bring in a table of fees, that spent a
long time without finishing any thing, the reason whereof was because some
therein especially the deputy secretary West, insisted upon fees much more
extraordinary than some others could consent to. In conclusion; there was a
table of fees drawn up to be presented to the council, and signed by some of
the committee, one of whom, (whose subscription is to this paper) declaring
expressly, that by his signing he did no otherwise agree, but only that it might
be presented to the council, to do therein as they should see cause, who also
when it was so presented to the council, declared that many of the particulars
in that table contained, were unreasonable, and ought to be abated, and of this
mind were many others. But the entry after the usual manner was an approbation
thereof.

Lastly. As to those great jealousies and suspicions of sinister designs in the
governor as to our troubles by the Indians, we have to say, That although
diverse things too uncertain, if not untrue have been too easily reported and
spread concerning him, a practice which some of us have formerly with no little
prejudice to ourselves discountenanced and borne testimony against; yet there
have not wanted some other particulars that might give too great a ground for
the same. The principal of them (as far as we have any knowledge of things of
that kind) are these.

The governor's seizing and taking away the goods of Monsieur St. Castine of
Penopscot, the summer before the war broke forth, which thing has been
esteemed not a little to have stirred up and furthered the succeeding troubles.
The governor's not hastening his return to Boston when these troubles were
actually begun, but lengthening out his tarrience in places so remote till the
hostility of the Indians, and the great mischiefs thereof were too far
advanced. That during his absence he was not pleased sufficiently to empower
and instruct any to act things necessary for the safety of the out plantations
and the prosecution and suppression of the enemy, though he had speedy and true
accounts from time to time sent him of all that happened. That all that was
done to this purpose in a case of such necessity, either by the lieutenant
governor, or by the justices of the peace, and military officers in many
places, by securing and disarming of neighboring Indians, setting up, warding
and watching, garrisoning several houses for the security of the inhabitants,
especially the women and children, in case of sudden inroads and surprizings
that might be, sending some relief of men to some places that were most in
danger, and also what was done by those members of the council that were at
Boston in conjunction with the commander in chief left in the sort there, who
raised and sent some forces to Casco-Bay, where greatest harms were done. We
say, that all that was thus done, was so extremely disapproved of by the
governor upon his return back from Albany and New York, and an unaccountable
displeasure manifested against all persons that had so acted, and that he was
ready to call them to an account as high offenders for the same, and refused a
long time, though much solicited, to give any order concerning the soldiers
sent to Casco, either for the continuance of them there, where they were very
necessary, or for their dismission home. Unto all which may be added the
governor's sending messengers both John Smith the quaker from Albany, and soon
after Major Macgregory to Keybeck upon such errands and business as were not
communicated and laid open to the council. And further, his release and setting
at liberty sundry Indians that were in hold, some of them known enemies to the
English, and particularly objected against by several of the council, and that
without any exchange of our English captives then in the enemies hands.

These are the chief matters which upon this occasion (without any undue
prejudice against any man, or design to justify the defects of ourselves in the
performance of our own shares of duty, but in answer to the desire signified to
us as above) we have to set forth, professing truly that by such a state of
things as we had the experience and feeling of, the places that we held were
rendered exceeding uneasy to us, and that out of a sincere respect to the
prosperity of these their majesty's plantations, we could not but be very
desirous that through the favor of God and our superiors, all due redress
might in a good happy season be obtained; and the way of governing English
subjects in their majesty's dominions without an assembly of the people's
representatives banished out of the world for ever.

WILLIAM STOUGHTON, THOMAS HINCKLEY, WART. WINTHROP, BARTHOL. GEDNEY. SAMUEL
SHRIMPTON.

Boston in New England, Jan. 27, 1690.
FINIS.

