THE AMERICAN ALARM.

THE AMERICAN ALARM, OR THE BOSTONIAN PLEA, For the RIGHTS, and LIBERTIES, of
the PEOPLE. Humbly Addressed to the KING and COUNCIL, AND To the Constitutional
SONS of LIBERTY, in AMERICA.

BY THE BRITISH BOSTONIAN.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by D. KNEELAND, and N. DAVIS, in Queen Street.
M,DCC,LXXIII.

An ADDRESS to the Gentlemen of the Provinces of AMERICA.
GENTLEMEN,
AS the possession and preservation of every blessing that is dear to you call
for it: May I be permitted to observe that the happiness of life, especially to
men free born, consists in the full enjoyment of their natural, civil and
religious RIGHTS. These are the nerves of health, the bulwarks of strength, and
pillars of peace: Upon this foundation ALONE, the happiness and prosperity of
the people stands. So dear is this blessing, that all life, power and sacred
argument, unite in ONE to confirm it. Skin for skin, and all that a man has
will he give for his Life; for the very LIFE of LIFE is LIBERTY. What is life,
without these enjoyments, but a living death? -- Nature breathes freedom
through all the beauties of creation, from the meanest insect that moves, to
the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea. Freedom is that very breath of
life that GOD breathed into man when he became a living soul: Therefore every
man has the same natural and inherent right to every blessing of freedom and
LIBERTY, as he has to his own, existence, and whoever deprives him of the
enjoyment of his NATURAL RIGHT, is, in scriptural language, a murderer. 1 John
iii. 15.
For the inviolable preservation of the RIGHTS of the people, is so happy in
the English constitution, that no law can be made, but by the united power of
the King, Lords, and Commons. The whole legislative authority is only a power
of guardian-ship or high trust committed to them by the PEOPLE for the secure
preservation and administration of their RIGHTS. And this deligated power is
subject to be revoked whenever the trust reposed in them is violated, as they
are no more than the people's Servants, in the high trust of power, to maintain
the rights of their Charter; and whenever this end is not answered by them, the
people have a right to turn them out of their stewardship, and dispose of it to
those whom they shall think fit guardians of their RIGHTS; for the law of
nature is self preservation, which will never be relinguish'd by a people of
any soul or spirit.

As the whole authority and power of the King, Lords, and Commons, as a
legislative body, is originally, and authoritatively, the power and rights of
the people, sub^isting in them only by the people's pleasure and power, which
right, and power will always remain in the people if government was dissolved;
and this makes it lawful in them to resist whatever opposes their inherent
RIGHTS, authority, and power.

THE power of the King is so settled by the authority of the people, that he is
then, and only then secure, great, and happy while he maintains the laws and
rights of the subjects. The King can neither make, or suffer to be made, by any
authority whatever, any breach upon the rights of the people, but at the same
time HE makes the same breach upon his own rights, and thereby destroys the
dignity and security of his CROWN: So that it remains a settled point, that the
happiness of the King, and the prosperity of the people entirely depends upon
this, namely, the King's preserving inviolable firm (according to his
coronation oath) the laws, rights and previledges of the subjects; for if the
King breaks this binding engagement, he thereby looses his original right to
REIGN; nay, every plea of right, and power of authority, by which he holds his
CROWN, or ascended, the British THRONE. For the right of the King to reign upon
the throne of Great Britain, lies in his being (by the happy revolution
principles) settled by the choice of the people as their elect King, or
guardian of their rights.

BUT when these walls (which are the walls of salvation to the people) are
broken down, either (...) Kingly, or Parliamentary power, then the King right
to reign, and the obligations of the people to the King, or ministry, may
justly cease. For when the rights of the people are violated, their affections
not only become alienated, but their oath of allegiance to the K -- himself
becomes void.

THEN you will say, why are all these complaints of a free election being
controlled? -- A representative denied? -- Murderers protected? -- Juries
withheld? -- Magna Charta destroyed? -- Remonstrances unheard? -- The laws and
rights of the people violated? For, if the supreme power of authority lies in
the rights of the people, and these rights are held by the threefold cord of
the King, Lords, and Commons, who then can break them?

THIS question brings the matter to a point; and will show the original cause
of all the complaints, both of the Britons, and Americans. And the answer is,
there is an overuling arbitrary power, Some term it an enormous upstart power,
or ministerial reign, over the RIGHTS of the people.
which absolutely controuls the King, Lords, and Commons: -- This is the
usurped power that is the spring, and cause of all the distressess and
complaints of the people in England, or in America; it is a kind of a fourth
power, that the constitution knows nothing of, or has not provided against. It
is true, the people have suffered, or admitted the King, to choose his privy
counsel, ministers and favorites, but they never intended they should rule
over them, in any respect, much less in the violation of their rights. This
ministerial throne, or arbitrary power, is what the people wish to see
destroyed; because they extend their usurped authority infinitely too far,
either for the safety of the King, or the good of the people: So that it is
plain to the people, that nothing but a change of men, and measures, will save
the nation from ruin: For the British Crown always totters when the rights of
the people shake.

THIS ministerial power, are a union of gentlemen, both of Lords and Commons,
who, it is to be feared, that few of them fear GOD, or regard Man. These are
(unhappy for the people) favored to be around the King, as his council,
favorites and flatterers; and they not acting as the guardians of the British
Crown, and the rights of the people, but acting in the affairs of the nation by
their dispotic will, making it the rule of authority and power: The people are
justly alarmed at their actions, since they must intend thereby such a change
in government, that must effectually destroy their rights, if not produce an
entire revolution of the whole State. For their power and interest is so great,
that they can, and do procure whatever laws they please; having, (by power,
interest, and the application of the people's money, to placemen, and
pensioners,) the whole legislative authority at their command. So that it is
plain, (not to say a word of a particular reigning arbitrary Stuarthal power
among them) that the rights of the people are ruined, and destroyed by
ministerial tyrannical authority; and thereby, in a great measure, the people
have lost the grand intent of their royal charter, and are become a kind of
slaves to the ministers of State, the people having forgot the feeling
sensation of their original right that it is still remaining in them; yet, no
doubt but their soul and sentiment, their life and spirit, as Britons, will
again rouse, and recover the possession of them; since now to remonstrate to
the King (though they are oppressed) is deemed rebellion! -- To reason, is to
revolt! -- To complain, is to be factious! -- To suffer patiently the loss of
representation, is accounted loyalty! -- Nay, those who submit and luffer the
destruction of almost every right that is sacred, solemn and binding upon the
King; or securing to their liberties, as a people. These are called, (but
falsely so called) friends to Government.

BUT will the spirits of Britons bear this? No! not long. Oh England, how near
is thy ruin? whose prerogative it was to give laws to Kings, and power (...)
Nations.

WAS this all, Gentlemen, I would, with sympathy of soul, be solemnly silent in
tears, for the breaches, inrodes, and growing ruins of England: But as it is
too notorious before GOD, and Man, that this is nearly thy case, Oh America,
that the British ministerial power, by an unjust sovereignty, they claim over
you, have already destroyed your rights! -- Thrown down your liberties! --
Despised your charter! -- Deprived you of your spirit of trade, nay, of your
lives!!! But what is worse, they are now aiming at the final overthrow of all
your RIGHTS as a people; did I say aiming? Have they not already destroyed the
ancient rights of your forefathers, which was the life and glory of America?
Namely, the power of making your own laws, and right of disposing your own
money? This natural right, the British ministry have violently attacked, and
done their utmost to destroy.

HAVE they not already engaged your GOVERNOR, and now aim to render you JUDGES
independent upon you? And if the ministry shall think it necessary for their
base purpose, may we not expect the COUNCIL, and all executive courts will be
made independent also? Allow them this, and the golden key of the rights of
America, is then in the hands of the real enemies of every blessing, and
liberty that you possess, as a body politic. Your laws, (not to say your lives)
are then no more your own, as Juries naturally follow Judges. Allow them an
influence here, and you are not only born to bring your gray hairs, with
sorrow, to the grave, -- but your children, (if you tamely submit) instead of
calling you blessed, will be ready to say with the prophet Jeremiah, Cursed be
the day wherein I was born; let not the day wherein my mother bear me be
blessed: Cursed be the man that brought tidings to my father, saying, that a
man child is born making him very glad; wherefore came I forth out of the womb
to see labor, and sorrow; that my days should be consumed with shame.

THEREFORE, with all the tremendiousness of danger, with all the solemnities of
fear, with all the pathos of affection let me entreat you as men of refined,
and ready understanding, to see that your rights, your lives, your lands, are
all in danger; your rights, as you are taxed without your consent; your lives,
as witness the bloody massacre in your streets; witness the exile, So called in
the British House of Commons, by a great Commoner.
but military force in your castle, to rule over you and your children with the
bloody authority of WAR. -- Your lands, as no doubt a land tax is preparing, or
soon will be prepared for you. -- And will the respectable Americans,
land-holders, and farmers tamely submit to this? Let your own laws, your
rights, your children's rights, and birthrights, inspire you with life, soul,
and sentiment to let the King of England the British Parliament, or ministry
know, nay, your own governor, and judges know your power, and importance as a
people; that you will not lose your rights; that you will not be oppressed or
imposed upon by Lord BUTE's dispotic dictation in the Cabinet, or by any of the
spirit or blood of the Stuart's family, which flows through the veins of the
British ministry, that you will sooner lose your lives than your liberties. Ask
them in the name of the Most High, what right, either by the law of GOD, of
nature, or of nations, they have to rule over you? Speak to them as brethren,
as peers, and as men of equal authority with themselves: And ask,

WHAT right have they to tax you without your leave? -- Or what right have they
to destroy your freedom as a people? Know this, the King of England has no
right to do it, it is beyond his authority, as King; nay, his attempt to do it
destroys at once his right to reign over you. -- The house of Commons have no
right to do it; they are not your representatives, nor members of this
community: And where they have no right (nor can they have any) of
representation, they can have none of taxation. -- The house of Lords cannot do
it; for they are Peers of England, and not of America. This, Lord CHATHAM, and
Lord CAMDEN, have boldly, as true friends to the freedom of Englishmen,
declared, "that the British Parliament has no right to tax America; and that
the ministry are rebels to GOD, and the laws and rights of nature, in their
attempting to do it, and therefore ought to be treated as such by every man of
sentiment, or spirit of liberty": For who would nor oppose, with his whole
soul, such consummate tyranny, injustice, and robbery as this? -- Tyranny to
the last degree, to assume a power of distressing, taxing, and commanding his
Majesty's American subjects: A power which his Majesty cannot give; nor can the
British Parliament itself in justice assume it. And yet these men, contrary to
law, and reason, will dare to do it in the face of their King, as to his
safety, in the face of their country, as to their happiness, and in the face of
your rights, as Americans, at the expense of your liberties to enrich
themselves.

AND will the Americans bear this? Have you not your own laws? Your own
representatives? Your own judges? And your own council? Why then should they
command you? Is it not enough for the Americans to feed and support England
with their trade? (And are willing so to do until the English streets are paved
with American gold) but must they give away their rights, their forefather's
rights, and their children's rights to a set of Ministerial Vultures? -- Heaven
forbid it.

FOR be it known that the Americans, according to the spirit of their original
compact with the King, are a perfect legislative within themselves, and have no
connection, as to government, but only with the King of England, as their King,
to sign and ratify such laws, and immunities as the Americans may consent unto
by their own representatives. This is the pillar of thy strength, the dignity
of thy security, the walls of thy safety, On AMERICA! Loose this power, and you
are no longer free men, nor happy subjects, but American SLAVES. And why should
these people, who were never in bondage to any man, be in a state of slavery to
any power upon the earth? when you cannot but know, that your oath of
allegiance, and obedience, to the King, is only due to him, and to be continued
by you; as he acts upon his coronation oath to maintain, inviolable firm, your
rights, laws and liberties, as the fulfillment of that sovereign Kingly power,
you have reposed in him, as the royal trustee of your rights; for if your
rights are infringed, yet the power of rights, laws, and liberties, still
revolves in you as a people; then surely no man, but he who is contented, (like
that animal called an ASS, to be born a fool, and die a slave) will be silent,
if every thing valuable in life is taken from him by that PERSON, who stands
engaged, in a sacred oath, to defend him. What should we say of a father who
either oppressed his children, or his children's children, for his own
emolument? What should we call him? Or rather, what should we not call him? For
does not nature teach us that he should rather indulge his children, than
stretch his authority?

WILL not such arbitary proceedings tend immediately to alienate the affections
of his Majesty's American sons, and give them cause to look upon him as an
enemy to their happiness, and as one (by whomsoever persuaded) making war
against the peace, prosperity, and comunity of the people? And therefore if the
life of liberty, and the security of their rights call for it, no doubt (if the
spirit of their forefathers remain in them) but they will think that they have
as just a right, before GOD and man, to oppose King, Ministry, Lords, and
Commons of England, when they violate their rights, as Americans, as they have
to oppose any foreign enemy: and that this is no more, according to the law of
nature, to be deemed rebellion, than it would be to oppose the King of France,
supposing him now present invading the land.

YOUR right is founded in nature, and your examples of liberty are sealed by
the blood of your forefathers; and therefore, as they did, and prospered, so do
you. -- Love your King, but revere your rights, and liberties, above your
Sovereign -- It is said the name of the King is sacred: I hope it is meant a
political sacredness, not a divine; if so, who made his name sacred? Why the
people, in investing him with a trust of power, above another man, to preserve
their laws, and rights inviolable: Therefore all sacredness of the King ceases,
together with obedience, and allegiance, when the trust, which the people
reposed in him, is violated -- But GOD forbid that I should be thought to
mention this, my dear Americans, to alienate your affections from your King, or
draw off the least love, duty, or reverence to him; No! but only to show how
the dignity of the King, the security of his Crown, the sacredness of his
Person, the authority of your laws, RIGHTS and LIBERTIES are all essentially
from the power of the people.

AND since you see that your own power is your security which you place in your
Representatives, as the guardians of your AUTHORITY and RIGHTS, in your House
of Commons, as the bulwarks of your strength, and the walls of your defense
from any innovation. -- That your rights, as a people; your blessings, as
subjects; and your children's rights, as their inheritance, might be inviolable
secured by the GARRISON of your own strength, from all invading arbitrary
power; and transmitted down, as the flower of life, and the beauty of
blessings, to all rising generations. Let me ask,

WILL the Americans lose these RIGHTS? The rights their forefathers lived and
died, fought and bled, to obtain for them? Will you not struggle for them, with
all the life, spirit and soul of Americans? -- Or will you tamely submit, by a
spirit of cool indifferency, to loose them ALL, and admit the key of all your
previledges in the hands of an arbitrary enemy?

IF the light of the morning is sweet; if the blessings of the day is
desirable; if the happiness of the object we love, is the soul of our thoughts,
and the ardent wish of the mind: -- But what is the light of the morning? --
The blessings of the day? The ardent wish for happiness, if we have not the
liberty of enjoyment? -- Let me therefore address you with all feeling
sensation, with all the earnestness and affection of ONE, who esteems your
happiness, as one of the highest blessings of his existence, if there be any
thing dear to you in life; dear to your children, or children children in the
present state; or in the view of ages yet unborn; may I now be so happy as to
touch those sacred wheels, and make every heart burn, and every bosom glow,
with fiery zeal, and spirit, for your LIBERTY? If the lives, if the death, if
the blood of your forefathers, who waded through seas of sorrow, floods of
tears, faced dangers, and fought and died for you with a becoming zeal, and
fortitude, can inspire you:

NAY, if there be any of the noble spirit, life and sentiment of your
progenitors, remaining in you as the hereditary inheritance of your
forefathers, show yourselves worthy of such fathers, such friends, such patrons
of LIBERTY: Nor suffer the fair TREE, with all her beautiful branches, bending
with every blessing of peace and prosperity to you and your children, to be
rooted up by a power which has no more right to alter your laws, destroy your
liberties, or tax your properties, than they have to cut your throats.

Have I need now to say,

ROUSE! STAND! And take the ALARM! You are now in eminent danger of losing
(after many other losses) the life, soul, and capitol of all your right and
liberties: Namely, the power of not only making, placing, or paying, your own
GOVERNOR, but now of paying your JUDGES, who are, or should be, the guardians
of your laws, and the pillars of your political life. The plan is laid, the
foundation is fixed, to make them dependant for place and payment, upon the
arbitrary will, and power of the British ministry; upon that power that has for
years been seeking the destruction of your RIGHTS. If you suffer this, then
farewell the olive branch that has so sweetly spread; and the peaceful Dove that
has hovered so long over you; for then you and your children are Slaves at
once. Then taxation on taxation will follow, until your lands become seizable
by your TASKMASTERS, under pretense of LAW.

BUT was this destructive arbitrary power exerted by the King, Lords, or
Commons of England, as a legislative body, it might persuade some FOOLS to die
SLAVES. But when it plainly appears to be the base power of the ministry,
dictated by L -- D B -- E, who, it is to be feared, loves not the King of
Great Britain; notwithstanding he is so greatly in his favor. However this may
be, we are sure that he loves not the rights of the people; but that he has
been aiming for years, both in the House of LORDS and COMMONS, and more
especially in the ministerial CABINET, to destroy the ancient rights of the
Subjects. Has he not already so far turned the heart of the King against his
own subjects, that he will not hear them, though they petition with thears at
his feet? Has he not likewise turned the hearts of the best of subjects in too
great a measure against their King?

Is it any breach of charity to think that L -- D B -- E intends hereby the
overthrow both of King and State; to bring on a revolution, and to place
another whom he more rearly allied to upon the Throne, (for GOD knows his last
errand abroad); but however this may be at present a secret, yet if he does not
aim at the dethroning the King, yet such proceedings will end in the
destruction of the liberties of the people; and the one will certainly bring on
the other. He thinks they have too much liberty, and therefore has long aimed
to infringe their liberty, persuading the King, that he has a divine right to
be dispotic; and that the people ought to submit to his will and pleasure as
his subjects As spiritless SLAVES were used to do, in the reign of the family
of the Steward's.
.

HENCE we see the same unfeeling spirit in the K --, against the cries and
tears of his people, as there was in Rehoboam and in Charles the first, which
brought upon him swift destruction, the fate he deserved -- the fate I wish
says one, that every imitator of tyrannical power may feel. For, (says a late
writer to the King) the experiment has already been made by one tyrant, and the
event proved fatal to his family; it is my sincerest wish, (says he) that every
IMITATOR may share his fate. And sure I am, it is loyalty to revere the laws
and rights of the people, above the power of any Sovereign. How much more then
is it the right, and previledge of a people, to despise the despotic power of
any man, or men in union, who attempts by interest, power and bribery, to
destroy the ancient rights of America, by making the King arbitrary, or the
ministry despotic, and commanding their will, by a bloody military force? the
truth thereof remains sealed by a bloody MASSACRE in your own streets. --
Remember the voice is louder than that which reached to heaven! For it is not
bearly the voice of your brothers blood, which cries to you from the ground,
but it is the united voice of the blood of your brethren which speaks. Resist!
Stand alarmed! Your lives, and liberties, are all at stake. And can an American
not stand neuter, when every blessing that is dear and valuable calls him to
exert his zeal? Though you cannot prevent the unconstitutional design of the
arbitrary power of the British ministry; yet you have an undoubted right to
resist and prevent their reigning over you; or ruining you in the Violation of
your laws and rights.

WHAT, my dear Americans, will nothing but an immediate LAND TAX alarm you?
Will you wait until they do to you as they do in England, tax the light of
heaven upon you Window lights to your houses!
? The trees of the field? And every cup, and glass of mercy, that heaven
bestows upon you? Do you see no danger? Notwithstanding your harbors are
blockaded against you? Your castle secured from you? Courts of admiralty
stretched upon you? Your lives destroyed? Revenues imposed upon you? Military
power oppressing you? Your charter violated? YOUR GOVERNOR, Your G -- r should
be your Servant, not the M -- y's Slave -- for my part I always think that
Kings and Governors, are by the law of God and nature the people's servants, to
be made and unmade by them and answerable only to them.
and your JUDGES independent of you? the strength and sinews of your
constitution decaying? And the very life and soul of your liberties daily
departing? -- Can the soul of an American see this and not feel? -- And not
bleed? See this and be silent!!!! --

FOR is there not an act already made that deprives the Americans of their very
existence in America? Surely that frame, (or being, if he may be so called)
must be worse than CAIN, when banished from GOD. -- Who does not feel? -- Who
does not hear (to express the sentiment of Doctor WARREN) the voice of their
forefathers blood cry from the ground -- "Ye SONS of America, scorn to be
SLAVES."

HARK! The voice, the echo cries, -- quit yourselves like men, be strong: --
Remember the tyranny we fled from; -- the fears we had; -- the tears we shed;
(...) trials we endured; -- the LIBERTY (...). Here is LIBERTY the fair flo^^^
^or all our hope, and life of all our b^^s: Take her -- clasp her in your arms
-- keep her in your bosom -- preserve her -- and bring her with you, or see our
face no more.

FOR remember, my dear associates in life, and friends of liberty, that as the
natural body is only in health, and vigor, when every organ is desposed to act
its part: So the body politic can only be in health, and prosper, when every
member unites regularly, and ardently, to preserve the previledges of the
whole. -- Surely then you cannot but have a high relish for your national
felicity, and a due concern to maintain it against all encroachments.

ONE would naturally think, that every inhabitant of America, sensible of his
own felicity, would, with a warm, and cheerful heart, prevent every power that
may oppose it. For if you can content yourselves to think with any degree of
coldness upon the subject, and that you are, by the arbitrary power of the
British ministry, bound like Abner, the son of Ner, to a passive obedience, and
non-resistance, when they, who should be the guardians of your liberties, are
violating your laws, and disposing of your properties to agrandize themselves;
then know this, that like Abner, you may expect to die: And died Abner as a
fool dies. This will soon convince you that the interest of your right is of
more, if ininfinitely more importance to you, than the right that any
particular man can claim, supposing him to be descended from a thousand Kings.

HAD the King of England conquered this country, and put your forefathers in
the possession of it by military expense, and force, there might be some plea
of right to tax you. And some plea might be then made of holding your lands
under the tenure of the crown of England; but remember the land was only
obtained by your forefathers purchase, blood and power, and therefore the right
is in yourselves.
But when it is plain that your forefathers conquered it, without their aid, in
the face of danger, distress and deaths. Therefore every right of King,
minister, or parliament, to rule over you without your consent, must, in
justice, cease forever. And shall a people, whom your forefathers (for their
tyranny, left behind them, when they came to the American wilds, in the face of
savage frowns, to seek peace, liberty and love) rise up to tax your properties,
and destroy your rights; and take away your inheritance, as a people? -- Heaven
forbid i^! -- For what is this but robbery? -- And what is more amazing -- must
that people be suffered to destroy the liberties of a growing Empire, when it
is well known that their dignity, life, and existence, as a commercial people,
depends so much upon your remittance and treasure to them. For their life of
trade, if not their existence, as a nation, is bound up in your life, and
prosperity. And yet shall Americans suffer a death-stroke to her indubitable
rights? Stand alarmed, Oh ye Americans! And hold the scepter of your rights in
the hands of your own authority; your spirit; your military knowledge; your
arms. -- Your generalship is not unknown. Honor your mother country; break no
connection with her; nor take no privilege from her; nor let her take any from
you.

IF she is in debt, and thereby in distress, and wants money to buy bread for
her children, give her freely; but let her not STEAL the rights of your
donation. Let her American children be happy in the bossom of their mother; but
let her not forget her bowels, as a parent; nor think to be happy in piercing
the bosom, and bowels of her own children.

LOVE, reverence, and obey your King. But let it be in the full enjoyment of
your rights; and in the full possession of your charter liberties. Stand
therefore for the defense of the people, ye Bostonian sons of liberty, who are
the original political key, and capitol, of the whole Continent: Only know your
own power, and importance, and exert it. And let the world see (if there be any
need for it) that you dare to let your Governor, your Judges, and your Council
know that you ask no favor of them; you ask your own; you demand your rights.
And if they dare to deprive the people of them, or oppress them, in the
enjoyment of their liberty, by consenting to any laws, of British arbitrary
power, that infringes your rights: The consequence cannot but be fatal to
themselves.

SHOW your zeal like men; -- and your lives like a free, and virtuous people;
-- your sentiments grave and solid, like senators; -- your hearts like
brethren; -- your hands like friends; your swords like warriors (if it must be,
but heaven forbid it should;) yet rather than LIBERTY should bleed to death,
and follow you to judgment, quit yourselves like men of valor -- be strong --
unite hand, and heart: -- The cause is good -- you seek your own rights, the
legacy of your forefathers. With life and spirit set up your standard! Engrave
the motto! -- May it be thus:

LIBERTY, LIFE, or DEATH.

YET if you can, after all the alarms from the press, and pulpit, of these dark
designs against America, and in the daylight of your danger, suffer the
oppression of arbitrary power; a power, that has no right to speak to you of
law, without your consent, much less to command you to obey: If you suffer this
unjust, unconstitutional ministerial power, to violate your laws, Oh Americans,
never complain if you should live to ^et cruel Mary's, bloody Bonners, or that
accursed creature Judge Jeff^y's days revive; but suppose that mercy should
prevent such a bloody scene in America: Yet when the laws and rights of a
people are destroyed, I do not see what it is they may not fear. But be this as
it may -- you may surely fear this, namely, your estates being seized, your
goods c^nfi^^ca^^d, your persons imprisoned, your properties forced from you;
the power of Bishops established, ^^^tual courts erected, convocations and
sta^-cha^^^ (...) set^^d; when the full authority of (...) power is
accomblished. Your Governor has already though most respectably addressed,)
given you no small proof by whom he is dictated, and by what authority he is
determined to rule over you, how little he values you! I had almost said, how
much he despises you! Though perhaps he may little think that when he departs
from supporting your rights as a people, you are under no duty or obedience to
him as G -- r though the King has (which by the way was not over and above
honest in the Crown to take) a right to choose your Governor; it only impowers
the Governor to rule by your own laws; and that you are under no obligation to
obey him, if he either proposes, encourages, or acquiesces in any infringements
of your laws and rights; for have you not a right, to be justly incensed
against that Governor that does not support the rights of the people; for while
he act^ in violation to the laws of the people, they are in justice under no
obligation by law to him; for it is right in the people to revere their laws
above their Governor, or King. -- Nor can I see why a Governor who destroys the
rights of the people, and departs from the trust reposed in him, may not be
justly tried for treason against the state and community, as well as any other
subject who violates the laws. Was not King Charles tried and condemned for
breaking through the sacred rights of the people, and some persons are free
enough to wish that every King and Governor that acts with the same principles,
may share the same fate; for is it not better that one Man should die, than the
whole nation should perish? -- Therefore if there be any vein, any nerve, any
soul, life or spirit of liberty in the sons of America, show your love for it
-- guard your freedom -- prevent your chains -- stand up for your rights: For
as your late memorable orator declares "none but those who set a just value
upon the blessings of liberty, are worthy to enjoy HER". And he very nobly adds
your forefathers were her zealous votaries -- when the blasted frowns of
tyranny drove her from public view; they clasped her in their arms, they
cherished her in their generous bosoms; they brought her safe over the rough
ocean, and fixed her feat in this then dreary wilderness; they nursed her
infant age with the most tender care; for her sake they bo^e the severest
hardships; for her support they underwent the most rugged toils; in her defense
they boldly encountered the most alarming dangers, neither the ravenous beasts,
nor the more furious savages of the wilderness, could damp their ardour. --
Whilst with one hand they broke the stubborn glebe, with the other they grasped
their weapons, ever ready to protect her from danger -- God prospered their
valor! they enjoyed her while they lived, and dying bequeathed the dear
inheritance to your care. And as they left you this glorious legacy, they have
undoubtedly transmitted to you some portion of their noble spirit to inspire
you with virtue to merit her, and courage to preserve her. You surely cannot
with such examples as these before your eyes, suffer your liberties to be taken
from you by a lawless force, which must certainly be the case, if you should
suffer your Judges to become independent upon you.

IN short it is more for America to lose her liberties, than all the world
besides; inasmuch as she never was in bondage to any, and as her liberties were
dearer bought, and harder obtained, than the liberties of any nation upon
earth, and ought therefore in proportion, to be esteemed the more precious. For
if you suffer your Judges to become independent, (...) mourn in briny tears the
loss, the fatal loss of life, your natural rights and LIBERTY!

THEN in vain will be the voice and cry of your forefather's blood! Nay, in
vain they met the frowns of TYRANTS, crossed the boisterous ocean, and fought
with barbarous savages -- sought a new world -- prepared it with the labors of
life, and sealed it with their death, as the happy residence of LIBERTY. -- In
vain they fought -- in vain they bled -- in vain they died -- in vain they
settled America, if their offspring want valor to repel the assaults of their
invaders -- If your JUDGES, for their fidelity, and by their constant (...)
your courts of judicature, (...) larger salaries, like men of generous
sentiments, of merit, and fidelity, reward them according to their labors. For
is it not reasonable that the Judges o^ your Superior Court should be as (...)
independent upon the crown of Great Britain, the King, or his Ministry, as the
Judges o^ England are; that the scepter of justice might be (...) with an (...)
hand and heart between the King and the people? Surely then it must be an (...)
^^novation upon the rights of the people, to make then Judges henceforth to
depend on the Crown, and the will of the Ministry for their salaries. What is
this but taking the key of the laws and rights of Americans into their hands?
There (...) take a vigilant care of your rights, and transmit them safe to
pospostrity, remember you can call nothing really your own, while it is (...)
at the (...) dispose of another.

SLAVERY always follows sleep and indifferency, as destruction follows
division. Let there be no distinction known, but all free men. Modes of
religion are not the point, it is civil rights, and liberties that is the dea^
inheritance in question. And should any dispute, upon the beauties, and
paradise of religion, hinder these paradaisical blessing from the people;
therefore as men, as freemen firmly bound together by the sa^e rights --
alarmed by the same ^angers -- united in the same general happiness --
promoting the same blessing of liberty, should not your hearts be as the heart
of one man, firmly fixed with ardour, love and affection, upon the grand
object, with a vehement regard to preserve your rights, and liberties, like the
mountains of Zion, which can never be moved.

GIVE me leave to close my address, with those noble lines of that ever
memorable patron of the rights of America, The FARMER -- Letter XII.
whose sentiments of liberty deserve to be engraved with the point of a
diamond, and wrote with letters of gold upon the heart of every American;
especially where he says, whatever kind of minister he is that attempts to
innovate a single iota in the previledges of these colonies, him. I hope, you
will undauntedly oppose; and that you will never suffer yourselves to be
cheated, or frightened, into any unworthy compliance, or submission. -- On such
emergencies you may surely, without presumption, believe that Almighty GOD,
himself, will look down upon your righteous contest with approbation -- You
will be a "band of b^^thers," commented by the dearest ties, and strengthened
with the inconceivable supplies of force and constancy, by that sympathetic
ardour, which animates good men, confederated in a good cause. Your honor and
welfare will be, as they now are, most intimately concerned. And besides, you
are designed, by divine providence, in the (...) order of things, the
protectors of unborn AGES, whose fa^e depends on your virtue, whether they
shall rise, the generous and indisputable heirs of the noblest patrimonies, or
the darstardly, and hereditary drudges of impious taskmasters; you must
determine.

To DISCHARGE this double duty to yourselves, and to your posterity, you have
nothing to do, but to call forth into use, the good sense, and spirit, of which
you are possessed; you have nothing to do but to conduct your affairs peaceably
-- prudently -- firmly -- jointly.

BY these means you will support the character, of FREEMEN, without losing
that of faithful subjects, one of the best under a British government. You will
prove that Americans have that true ^^namity of soul, that can resent injuries,
without falling into a rage; and, that though your devotion to Great Britain,
is the most affectionate, yet you can make proper distinctions, and know how to
value yourselves, as well as her. You will at the same time that you advance
your interest, advance your reputation -- you will convince the world of the
justice of your demands, and the purity of your intentions; while all mankind
must with unceasing applauses, own that you indeed deserve liberty, who so well
understand it -- so pationately love it, so temperately enjoy it, and so
wisely, bravely and virtuously assert, maintain and defend it.

FOR my own part I am resolved to contend for the liberty, delivered down to me
by my ancestors, but whether I shall do it effectually or not, depends on you
my countrymen. However little soever one is able to write, yet when the
liberties of ones country are threatened it is still more difficult to be silent.

He adds seemingly by way of Postscript -- Is there not the strongest
probability, that if the universal senses of these colonies is immediately
expressed by instructions to their agents on the subject, and by petitioning to
the crown and parliament for redress, these measures will have the same success
now, that they had in the time of the Stamp Act?

As this essay upon liberty was intended to confirm the proceedings of the
freeholders and other inhabitants of the town of Boston, wherein the origin,
source and life of the civil rights, and liberties of the Americans, are set
forth with such engagements of mildness, force of sentiment and the beauties of
eloquence, that commands in every noble mind, the birthright passion of
liberty, right, and property.

IN the second page, the writer observes, that the natural rights of colonists
are these, a right to life, liberty, and property, and a right to defend and
support them. In page fifth they observe, that the natural liberty of Man is to
be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will and
legislative authority of Man; but to have the law of nature for his rule. In
page the eighth, that this indefeazable, natural right of the people, was
obtained by the Britons sword in hand of King John, called the British Magna
Charta; and peradventure it must be one day sword in hand again rescued and
preserved from total destruction and oblivion (...) in page ninth, that all
persons born in the British american colonies are declared to be entitled to
the same natural, essential, inherent rights and liberties, as those subjects
born in Great Britain, and that the legislative has no right to absolute
arbitrary power over the lives and fortunes of the people. And in page tenth,
justly observes, that there should be one rule of justice so rich and poor; for
the favorite at court, and the countryman at the plough.

THE supreme power cannot justly take from any Man, any part of his property
without his consent, in person or by his representative. And in page eleven,
they say, "what liberty can there be, where property is taken away without
consent." And in page fifteen, that such a power is altogether
unconstitutional, and entirely destructive to their security, which we have a
right to enjoy, and to the last degree not only dangerous to our property, but
to our lives And in page sixteen observes, thus our houses and even our
bed-chambers are exp^^^ (...) ^ran^ack'd, our boxes, chests, and tru^^ (...)
open, ravaged and plundered* by per^^^ whom no prudent man would venture to
employ as a menial servant, and yet these men as officers may under the color
of law, and the cloak of a general warrant, break through the sacred rights of
the domici^, ransack men's houses, destroy their securities, carry off their
property, and with little danger to themselves, continue the most horrid murder.

IN page nineteen, after observing, that the independency of the Governor upon
the general assembly for his support, and his dependence on the crown of
Britain, to have his salary out of the American revenue paid him with
augmentation, that thereby the ancient connection between him and this people
is weakened, and confidence in the Governor lessoned, the equilibrium
destroyed, and the constitution essentially altered: But he adds, "we look upon
it as highly probable, from the best intelligence we are able to obtain, that
not only our Governor and lieutenant Governor, but the Judges of the superior
court of Judicature, as also the King's attorney and solicitor general, are to
receive their support from this grievous tribute; this will if accomplished
complete our slavery".

THUS you see, that the despotic arbitrary power of the British Ministry are
determined (if your own spirit and power does not prevent them) to make a prey
of every blessing that Heaven has bestowed upon you.

I shall add no more, but the dying advice of an ancient warrior, near two
thousand years ago to his sons, as my best advice to you. -- "My sons (says he)
my life in drawing to an end; but I am now to charge you, upon my blessing
before I leave you, that you stand firm to the cause that your father, and your
forefathers have asserted before you, without staggering or shrinking. Remember
what I have told you, and do as I have advised you, do your utmost to support
the laws and rights of your country, and to restore the order of a nation that
wants but little of being swallowed up in confusion; have nothing to do with
those, that either for fear or interest have betrayed it. Show yourselves to be
worthy of such a father, and descended from such, forefathers, and in contempt
of all force and extremity, carry your lives in your hands, and deliver them up
with comfort, if occasion should require it, in defense of the rights of your
country; considering with yourselves, that this is the way to preserve you in
God's favor, and shall not that which Heaven and Earth has bestowed upon you be
dear to you? -- For, in consideration of so unshaken a virtue, he will in time
restore you to the liberty of your forefathers life.

OUR bodies it is true are mortal, but great and generous actions will make us
immortal in memory, and that is the glory I would have you aspire to* namely,
the glory of making the history of your life famous to after ages, by your
illustrious actions. Be sure in the first place to agree among yourselves, and
in what case soever any one of you has an advantage over the rest, give way to
every man of merit in the business of his province and talent. For example,
those who make a right judgment of things, I advise you to make your counsel --
as the best qualified for vindicating your friends, supporting your laws, and
crushing your enemies; with one heart, zeal and love, mind your rights, mind
your business, mind your blessings, and depend upon it, all men of honor and
piety will join with you."

I add, and the name of the GOD of Jacob defend you.

THE BRITISH BOSTONIAN.

To the KING's most excellent MAJESTY.
Most GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
MAY I be permitted, with reverence, love, loyalty and affection, to remind
your Majesty, of the sayings of that truly noble pious prelate of the church of
England, bishop Burnet, by whose kind interposition, (singularly so, in the
hand of providence) Having the principal hand with his Majesty King William^ in
sett^ing the british Crown in the Hanoverian line.
your Majesty fits upon the British Throne. The sayings of this pious prelate
(which (...) worthy to be engraved upon the b^east of every Prince, and
Potentate upon the earth, -- namely, that there is not any one thing more
certain and more evident than that Princes are made for the people, and not the
people for them; and perhaps there is no nation under heaven that is more
entirely possessed with this notion of Princes, than the English nation is at
this age; so that they will soon be uneasy to a Prince who does not govern
himself by this maxim, and in time grow very unkind to him. -- He likewise
adds, The Prince will be ever safe with his people, when they feel they are
safe in him.

THIS has been the safety of princes -- the security of thrones -- and the
glory of Kings in all ages. It is recorded, to the immortal honor of
Constantine the great, who was an Emperor, a King, a Briton born, that he made
the happiness of his subject; his peculiar ca^e; that his laws breathed
tenderness to the unfortunate -- were repl^^e with the spirit of liberty, and
therefore he was justly styled by the ancient citizens of London, the deliverer
of the city -- the founder of peace, and the restorer of the public wealth.
Believeing this to be the essential designs, and the natural dictates of your
Majesty's heart, in every branch of the regal scepter of power and authority:

PERMIT me, Royal Sir, to remind you of a free, a brave, a bold, affectionate
and loyal people in America, who in one of their consultation upon their rights
and blessings of liberty, thus express their loyalty and affection to your
Majesty: Our worthy Anncestors, in a rigorous reign, rather than contend to
blood with their brethren, left their native country and every thing dear in
life, crossed the wide Atlantic, and seated themselves in this howling
wilderness, that they might here quietly enjoy liberty, civil and religious,
they have encountered almost every species of danger and difficulties, and
frequently watered the ground on which we tread with their blood; they were
faithful servants to the King of Kings, and ever loval subjects to their
earthly sovereign. They also had the promise of a King, for himself and
Successors, that they and theirs should enjoy all the liberties and immunities
of natural-born subjects within the Realm of England. Encouraged by such a
promise, which they looked upon as sacred, they were ever ready, to the utmost
of their ability, yea, and often beyond it, to assist the crown; never thinking
their lives dear, when they could serve their King and country, even with the
loss of them. Such was the conduct of our pious fathers, who now sleep in the
dust, who died with the pleasing hope that we their children should live free.
(Let none then, as they will answer it another day, disturb the ashes of those
Heroes, by selling for a mess of pottage, or for a less consideration, their
Birthright)

AND as our fathers could, so can we plead our loyalty; we ever have been, we
now are ready, to spill our dearest blood in defense of our King, religion, and
constitutional laws; but we cannot but look upon it as a hard trial, yea
greater than we can bear, if we cannot be said to give full proof of our
loyalty, otherwise than by sacrificing those rights and liberties, which we
prize beyond life itself. Such a sacrifice no Potentate on earth has a right to
require, and such a sacrifice, voluntarily made, would be little inferior to
the sin of self-murder.

THESE are, most gracious sovereign, the people's, with their brethren, through
every united town in the Province, who have been misrepresented to your Majesty
as factious and rebellious, though they may justly vie with any English
subjects for loyalty, love and affection to their King. The true state of the
case is, they are aggreived and distressed in the most render part, even to the
apple of their eye; they are denied their natural rights as a people; their
rights as British subjects; their charter rights which was their agreement and
compact with the King of England.

IN this case royal Sir, where can an affectionate, but afflicted people go,
but to the bosom of their affectionate Sovereign? where can children who are in
danger of being disinherited of their birthright blessings flee to, but to the
breast of their royal Father, their friend, their guardian, I had almost said
their brother, upon whole royal favor it much depends, whether your Majesty's
American subjects are to be freemen or slaves -- whether their children, and
their unborn posterity, are to rise the sons of bondage, or sons of that
liberty, which the law of GOD and the law of nature has made them free.

THEY only ask their charter rights, and wish to enjoy the full possession of
them as english subjects, and justly think that your Majesty is bound by
promise, by compact, and by oath to secure these rights, liberties and
privileges to them inviolably firm and free from the least innovation; in the
same manner that King David stood engaged by covenant to the people, a Sam. 1.
3. "Then came all the tribes of Israel to Hebron, and spoke, saying, behold we
are thy bone, and thy flesh; so all the elders came to the King to Hebron; and
King David made a league with them in Hebron before Jehovah, and they anointed
David King over Israel". Yet when Re^oboam, David's grandson, would not ^edress
the people from their grievances, but forsook his fathers counsel, and answered
the people (...), they soon let him know, that as he had (by his had council)
broke his league and coronation oath with them, that their league and covenant
allegience to him was dissolved, though he was bone of their bone, yet their
right to be redressed, and to enjoy their liberties, was much nearer to them
than their King, 1 Kings 12. 7. And they spoke unto him, saying, If thou will
be a SERVANT unto this people this day, and wilt serve THEM, and answer THEM,
and speak good words unto THEM, then will they be the servants for ever, ver.
6. But be forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him, and
consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, which stood before
him, ver. 16. So when they saw that the King hearkened not unto them, the
people answered the King saying, what portion have we in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse, see to thine own house David.

ROYAL Sir, It is plain from divine record, that the ^ribes of Israel loved
their King, that they were loyal and dutiful subjects, but they were a sensible
people, and knew what was nearer to them and their posterity than any King,
power, or potentate upon earth. And their address to their King was
affectionate and loyal, and is the most beautiful, the most concise delineation
of the place of a King, and the power of the people, that ever was wrote, or
known, may I add, most gracious Sovereign, the Americans are equally as
sensible, and have the same feeling sensation (from the law of GOD and nature)
for their rights and liberties, as the tribes of Israel had -- and will,
without doubt, sooner loose their King, than loose their rights: Their speech
and supplication to their King and Sovereign is the same as Israel's was. 1
Kings vii. 12. And they spoke unto him saying, If thou will be a SERVANT unto
this people, and will serve them, and answer them, and speak GOOD words unto
them, then they will be thy servants forever." What can a King desire more?
what can a people do more? If (...) transgress, through freedom, most gracious
Sovereign, or in any part of this essay upon liberty, pardon me, as it is a
pure blaze and flame of zeal for the honor and happiness of your Majesty's
person, and the liberty of the Americans, that tempts me -- that commands me to
be guilty, (if it be so deemed)

THE AMERICANS, I know, will not be slaves, nor be under the arbitrary power of
any King or parliament upon earth, the union of the Towns in the Province of
the Massachusetts government, show that they strongly declare their heart and
life engaged for their rights and liberties. That deputies and congresses of
the united provinces will soon follow, without doubt, unless the royal
tenderness and power of their Sovereign interpose. It is surely worthy your
Majesty's consideration, equally the same as it was of the Roman Senate, when
an ambassador of a distressed people came to seek redress* The consul demanded
of the ambassador what kind of peace and redress he desired; and the ambassador
answered, The same they deserve who think themselves worthy of Liberty; and if
the terms you give be good, the peace will be observed by us faithfully and
perpetually; if bad, it will soon be broken. And though some were offended with
the spirit of the answer; yet the best part of the senate approved it as worthy
of a man and a freeman; and confessing that no man or nation would continue
under an uneasy condition longer than they were compelled by force, and said,
they only were fit to be made Romans, who thought nothing valuable but liberty.
Upon which they were all made citizens of Rome, and obtained whatsover they had
desired.

THIS surely is, as one well observes, most gracious sovereign, the only
rational foundation for long life and lasting prosperity to the nation, and a
source of most important blessing to mankind. But if the parliament of Great
Britain, uninstructed by the experience of past ages, regardless of the
dictates of true policy, under the influence of contracted views, and dea^ to
the voice of reason, and the remonstrances of the injured Americans, continue
to pursue their destructive plans to tax the colonies without their consent,
and stretch the prerogatives of the crown; the fatal period, which we all
deprecate, cannot be very far distant, when the political union between
Great Britain and these colonies will be dissolved, -- and she forever lose the
blessings she might have received from her affectionate children; and, being
weakened by such a loss, she may fall a prey to some of the worst tyrants of
the earth: But if she will NOW listen ^o the voice of reason, and take wisdom
for her guide, allow the colonies, and every part of the kingdom, that freedom
which the spirit of the constitution gives every member of the great political
body will conspire to promote the good of the whole. -- This will invigorate
and brace up all the nerves of the state, while every joint and member is held
to its proper place by the indissoble bond of interest. -- In this way, the
British nation may become the most glorious that ever existed since time began,
and continue increasing in glory and triumphing in the arms of freedom until
time shall end.

THAT your Majesty may enjoy every happy blessing, and the Americans their
inestimable privileges, the foregoing essay upon the rights and liberties of
the people, is with all due reverence laid before your Majesty, by your
MAJESTY'S humble Servant, and devoted loyal Subject,

A BRITISH BOSTONIAN.

To his Excellency the GOVERNOR of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
May it please your Excellency,
I AM a man, whose abilities are small, and whose talents are few; but
naturally wish that every creature that has life and being, may enjoy that
felicity of LIBERTY which the GOD of nature has given, and which it has a
natural and living right unto. LIBERTY is the beauty of heaven -- the joy of
angels -- and the happiness of mankind; -- the noble wish of the immortal mind
-- and the happy kingdom of the soul of man. --

WITH humble hope of seeing the kingdom of liberty re-established through this
province, and, like the light of the morning, spread itself through the
American empire.

I HAVE read your excellency's speeches to the Council, and the house of
Representatives, with coolness, calmness and candor; and can assure your
excellency that no one has, or can have, a greater regard for government, or a
more true loyalty and affection for his King, but if there should be any free,
bold, or indiscreet expression in the following essay, let not your excellency
impute it to any other cause than a pure passion for the preservation of the
inheritance of the blessing which GOD, and nature, Kings, and potentates has
bestowed upon us, which are the natural rights, and liberties, both of body and
mind.

BUT it is too notorious to be denied: Nay, it is as plain as the sun at noon
day that the Americans are deprived of both. But I know it is a dangerous thing
for a man to ^are to be honest, for GOD, or truth, for the liberty of the mind,
and the rights of mankind. I dare be honest without reserve, in the face of
every frown.

YOUR Excellency observes, that you know of no line that can be drawn between
the supreme authority of parliament, and the total independence of the
colonies. Sir, you are quite right here, for it is impossible there should be
any line drawn between, for if the one is supreme, the other must be dependant.
Your argument here, is clear, and convincing, and was this the point in dispute
the matter would soon be settled; but it is far from it. The point is, how came
the parliament of Britain to have, or rather assume a supreme authority over
the parliament of America? Has not the GOD of nature, the laws of
self-preservation; nay the charter of England, given the same right, authority
and power to the American parliament, and American subjects; as to the English
parliament and English subjects, to all intents and purposes whatsoever? if so,
then there is not, neither can there be, according to right and equity, any
more superiority or power (unless it be the unhappy military power) of one
parliament more than another: Has the parliament of Great Britain a right, by
virtue of being the representatives of the people, and from that right a power
to make laws, and to call upon the King to sign, confirm, and ratify those
laws? Has not the parliament of America, by virtue of being the representatives
of the people, the same right and power to make laws, and lay these laws before
the King, for him to sign and confirm -- or to disapprove the same, as the
British parliament has? if so then your Excellency may be convinced, their is
no supreme authority in the British parliament over the American parliament,
and that one parliament has from the law of GOD and nature, and from the
charter itself (unless it can be proved, that the privileges of magna charta
are a mere deceit,) as good a right, and as great authority as the other -- if
they have, why does the British parliament deny it them? If they have not, why
is it not proved? Indeed it is impossible for that which destroys the right,
power and authority of the American parliament, could at the same time destroy
the right and power of the British parliament, as they are both established
upon the same foundation, and therefore it is absurd, in the eyes of all
sensible men, for one British parliament to assume a supreme authority over
another.

IT was a good remark, worthy the consideration of every man who loves his God,
his King, or his country, that a late author makes. The people of both
countries are united in the King, who is the head of the empire, the only
coment of political bodies, to preserve union between the members of the
empire, and between them and their political head. So then it is plain, that
head and member, king and people are but one body, and are to be considered as
such; if so, then one part of these members have as just a right, power and
authority as the other, for all unites in one. And this the British parliament
were sensible of, even in the charter granted to this Province, they therefore
desired their american brethren so many years back, not to make any law
repugnant to the laws of England. Why was this included, if they had not a
power to make their own laws? and if they had not a power to make their own
laws, as much as the British parliament, wherein do they enjoy the freedom of
Englishmen -- or* why does the compact or the charter express it, if they are
not to enjoy it? but if they have a right, the same as Englishmen have, then
the King of England is under the same obligation to the parliament of America,
or of the provinces, as he is to the British parliament, and as one well
observes, when the King wants the assistance of his american subjects, he must
apply to their house of commons for grants, -- in the same way he does now to
his parliament in Britain -- the colonies finding themselves treated as freemen
by their King, and fellow subjects in Britain, and their rights established
upon a firm foundation; they will be animated to contribute the utmost in their
power to promote the honor of the crown, and the support of the kingdom. And as
the colonies increase in wealth and number, so will their assistance to their
parent state increase, until Britain flows with the riches of America -- and by
this union and harmony between the two countries, founded on freedom and common
interest, the British empire may continue firmly united, and flourish to the
latest ages. -- I only add, -- this is the only way to turn the wilderness
state of England into the garden of Eden.

YOUR Excellency's observation that for a succession of years, the general
assembly, and our predecessors submitted to the authority of the English
parliament; and engaged to make no laws, or acknowledged they had no power, (as
you express it) to make any law repugnant to the laws of England. Was not this,
SIR, a mutual compact between England and America, (though then in an infant
state) to settle and fix the bounds of each power and authority? Though America
was by this charter, or agreement, to make no laws repugnant to the laws of
England. -- Was not England bound (and did not our predecessors understand it
so) by the same honor, to make no laws repugnant to the laws, and rights of
America? Strange to me if they did not (...) And if they did, their submission
to it was natural and dutiful, while they looked upon the two powers as mutual
in each others political interest, uniting in one sole authority.

WHAT do the Americans, even the most fervent sons of liberty, ask more than
this? who are the aggressors? has the Americans made any law repugnant to the
laws of England? if it has let England complain, and see if they will find the
bosoms of the Americans calous -- but if England has made laws repugnant to the
laws and rights of Americans, and enforced them by military arms, and the power
of death -- shall not the Americans complain? have they not a right, by the
laws of GOD and nature, and nations, to remonstrate and set forth their
grievances, and to use all the strength and power; the God of Heaven has given
them to remove the yoke which neither they nor their forefathers were able to
bear.

THEREFORE, Sir, With submissive reverence I humbly think that the argument
brought to prove, that because our predecessors submitted to acts, or the power
of parliament for so long a time, that we ought to submit likewise fails, --
finally fails -- for who has made the repugnant laws? Who is the cause of all
this contention? Let England make no laws repugnant to the laws and rights of
America, and all things will be mutually happy.

YOUR Excellency's other arguments taken from Feudal right etc. etc. is very
tedious and prolix, and I humbly conceive far from being conclusive: For the
present dispute is not, whether the King of England has a Feudal right to the
lands of America -- but whether the Americans have a right to make their own
laws, dispose of their own property, pay their own Governor and Judges, enjoy
their own immunities as granted by charter to them, "as free and natural
subjects, to all intents, constructions, and purposes, without the control of
any supreme authority, of any government over them." If their right is good,
they only ask their own inheritance. But supposing it should appear clear by
those who are more adept in law phrases, that the King has a Feudal right to
the lands of America; I think the argument taken therefrom would revert much in
favor of the American subjects, but what right a few people who fled from
English tyranny, who resided in Holland, and came as strangers to the wiles of
America, to seek peace and liberty, amidst the tribes of cruel savages, can
give any parliament on earth authority or power to rule over them, I cannot
see; they appear to me from the foundation of settling America, to have a
double right to be perfectly free, not only a right by the law of GOD, but a
far greater right, than Englishmen have to their liberties, inasmuch as the
Americans obtained them at a dearer rate; they fought, they bled, they died
purely for Liberty, and shall not their children be free?

THE love of liberty runs parrallel in the human breast with the love of life,
and he that will dare to take away the one, is not fit to be trusted with the
other -- your Excellency cannot but remember, and must allow the Americans
fearless in every thought, that tremendous night, when the earth, air, and
skies were stained with innocent blood. MARCH 5th. 1770.
A night that will finally be remembered, and annually bleed afresh to the last
generations, as a testimony against unjust arbitrary power.

IT is no wonder then to see the Gentlemen of Boston so zealous for liberty,
who saw the guiltless victims of arbitrary authority expire before their eyes
-- no wonder their fire of liberty was kindled, to stand their ground, to
maintain the spot their forefathers had bought, to command unarmed their
Governor to banish the bloody band of soldiers.

NO wonder such men as these unite as a band of brethren to stand up for, and
take every prudent measure to maintain those liberties free from all
infringments, that they have a natural and indubitable right unto, and their
happiness is interested therein.

GENERALLY the unhappiness of Kings, Governors, and ministers originally arises
from a tyrannical thought, that the people are made for them, and not they for
the people; let ministers consider themselves not the churches lords, but the
churches servants, and only direct the people by the laws of GOD and they would
be happy. Let but the King consider himself, as the people's servant in high
trust, as their political head, representing their majestic power, they having
invested him with the key of their authority to rule, but let him reign in
their hearts by their own laws, and he would be happy as their King. Let but
our Governor consider himself not the servant of any despotic power, but the
people's, as the sovereignty of choice makes no alteration in his trust. That
his throne is the hearts of the people -- his power is their laws -- and that
their laws and rights are his defense; therefore says a female orator, "My
heart is toward the Governors in Israel, who offer themselves willingly among
the people, viz. to take the charge of them and their rights in the face of
every danger -- to secure inviolable firm all their privileges and immunities
-- to restore every right and privilege when they are deprived of them -- To
provide against all future danger of the loss of them -- to be tender over the
people as their father -- to convey the inheritance of liberty to them, as his
political children -- to love them, not only as their friend but as their
brother, their flesh, and bone of their bone; then no doubt, but all
contentions would cease, and your Excellency would be very happy.

Wishing your EXCELLENCY all Personal and political Happiness. I remain a true
Subject to his MAJESTY -- a Friend to Liberty, and with all due reverence and
submission, your EXCELLENCY'S Humble Servant. A BRITISH BOSTONIAN.

To the honorable the PEOPLE'S COUNCIL, and House of REPRESENTATIVES, of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
GENTLEMEN,
AS your zeal, spirit, and love for the indubitable rights and liberties of
your constituents, has pleasingly exceeded their expectation, and you have
given full proof, that you carried their Cause, and case upon your hearts to
the House, and have pleaded their cause, and laid their grievances before the
King's representative, with reverence and submission, and yet at the same time
with that SPIRIT, for the support of the natural and charter rights and
liberties of the people, that becomes the stewards of their rights, and the
guardians of their liberties; this will enoble and immortalize your names in
the annals yet unknown.

BUT Gentlemen, there is a liberty of a more NOBLER NATURE, that you have
forgot, which is liberty of Conscience: What, and shall conscience (under
oppression) bleed, faint, expire and die, and have no kind hand to relieve her,
no guardian to support her! Be astonished O Heaven at this! O tell it not in
Gath! Where are the mourners of America? Why go they not forth in their
lamentations? How are the mighty fallen! How is the gold become dim, and the
most fine gold changed! Zion (says the prophet) spreads forth her hands, and
there is none to comfort her; what, none among the sons of liberty? Have they
all forsook her and fled -- and will ye also go away?

GENTLEMEN, Have you not pleaded like men -- like stewards, like gods, Joh. x.
34.
for the natural rights and liberties of the people, and maintained the majesty
of the people's power; showing that no King, nor parliament, nor power upon
earth, has any right to tax them, or appoint, or take away their property
without their consent. And yet will you dare to make, or enforce any law, to
take away by force and power, the properties of your brethren; not only
contrary to their consent, but contrary to their own consciences, because they
will not worship the golden image, which you have set up? is not this rapine,
robbery and tyranny, by the force of arbitrary power? Does not your consciences
blush, when you plead for liberty, and bleed when you behold your brethren's
property forced from them by violence, if not they must be as calouse as Cain's
was who slew his brother Abel: What do you think the King of England, the House
of Lord's, and the British House of Commons will say, when this matter comes to
be laid before them? Will they not say, Here is a people who assume to tell us,
that we have no right to tax them, or appoint any of their properties to any
use without their consent (which God Almighty knows we have not) yet they
assume to tax their brethren, and take away by force and authority their
persons and properties, to support a religion contrary to the people's
consciences. The GOD of Heaven has made us rulers over the bodies and civil
rights of men, but what god we wonder has made them rulers over the souls of
men, that the people must attend upon, or support by taxation, even that form
of religion which they have chose for them, and which they believe is not true;
was ever such tyranny since the days of NERO.

GENTLEMEN, I hope none of you will be offended at this freedom of speech,
while the creation groans, being burdened with the weight of this oppression. I
do not mean to offend a worm, but feelingly to convince the good people of
America, that a true and real son of liberty is an heart of oak, firm and
consistent with himself, and has the same feeling regard to plead for, and
preserve free, inviolably free, the sacred liberties of the conscience of
mankind, as well as to plead for and preserve their civil liberties and
properties. Here I am moved by that grandeur of soul, that only wishes to have
the happiness of millions in view, and thereby am conscience bound -- bound by
the law of nature -- by the law of GOD, and by all the blessings of liberty not
to be silent, however little I may say. For what heart can bear, what ears can
hear, or eyes see, persons, nay brethren, dragged to prison, their property
seized, their lands sold, Four hundred Acres in one Town
their persons abused, their fences destroyed, their interest kept from them,
and be silent; especially when they repeatedly sought redress by the general
court but were denied; they asked peace of the sons of liberty, and they gave
them a sword, and told them that they had a right to make such laws as took
their property, and to keep them under it, as long as they thought fit.

DOES not such proceedings as these call for vengeance, as much as Abel's
blood, when it cried from the ground?

GENTLMEN, I do not mean to make your consciences bleed, but I mean to make
them feel for your distressed brethren. The Apostle says, no man ever hated his
own flesh. But any one would think Paul did not mean the general court, when he
takes a view of the distresses, and oppressions by law and tyranny, that your
brethren have suffered at South-Hadley, at Montague, at Shursbury, at Colrain,
at Chesterfield, at Ashfield, In the Ashfield cause of the distressed people,
your Governor acted well indeed -- like a son of liberty.
only for taking liberty to worship GOD, according to his word, and because
they will not give their property to support that worship, which they know has
not GOD for ^^s author, nor his word for their rule -- This is enough, to make
the hills to tremble, and the earth to quake: But why do I mention this? Are
you not Gentlemen now pleading with your Governor, with the King of England,
and with the British parliament for your rights and liberties -- and your own
brethren are pleading with you for liberty of conscience; was ever such a
contrast upon the earth before? Do you think that God or man will hear you,
while you are oppressing your brethren?

IT is painful to me Gentlemen, but the warm affection that I have for liberty
of conscience, which is the sole, the life and paradise of every blessing on
earth, constrains me to tell you, that I have very lately received, signed,
witnessed and authenticated under the constable's own hands, the account of
twenty five different persons in Mendon -- in Ho^^iston, and in Chelmsford, who
are now distressed in their persons, property and estates, and they say they
expect to be greatly distressed, nay, three of them were dragged and forced
from their habitations and families in Chelmsford, to Concord Goal, the 26th of
January 1773. viz, Gershom Proctor, Henry Proctor, and Nathan Crosby, by John
Robbins constable, because they could not in conscience pay for the support of
a ministry, contrary to their conscience, nor worship the golden image which
you have set up -- you call Nebuchadnezer a tyrant, but we hope Gentlemen, you
will never call him so again, lest he should rise from the dead, and look you
up in the face, -- David said concerning his brother Jonathan, "I am distressed
for thee my borther". What say you Gentlemen of this matter? Is your answer
expressed in Genesis 42. 21. And they said one to another, we are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not bear, therefore is this distress come upon us --
here I allude not only to the repeated denials of redress, which these
distressed people have met with from the general court, but the answer you gave
a brother, when you saw the anguish of his soul in distress in College Hall in
Cambridge.

BUT however Gentlemen, these distressed persons shall not (while I have a
being or talent) never want a friend to plead their CAUSE, before GOD and Man,
whether it be before the Governor, Council, or the general Court, or before the
King and council at home, if the case require it; though many of the same
denomination for whom I plead, have acted very ungrateful to me I only say,
"Father forgive them, for they know not what they do"; but when these men of
malice and murder, 1 John 3. 15.
in whose hearts satan has entered -- go to their own place, they will then
know what manner of spirits they were of -- But as they are sons of liberty,
perhaps the only mean a freedom frolic -- yet to deliver over to the D -- I --
the power of Sanhedrims, and the sons of Levi, an old friend without asking his
consent to the conveyance, is liberty with a witness, and freedom with a
vengeance; GOD Almighty forgive them.
But were they africans or Indian's thus distressed in conscience, and wronged
of their properties, I would equally plead for them.

YOU say you have a power to make such laws, that shall tax their land,
distress their persons, and take away by force their properties, for the
support of what you call the stated ministry. Now this power must be either
from Heaven, or from Men; if from Heaven prove it, if from men, show me the
tyrant who gave it you? And what right he had to give it you? And whether he
did not give your distressed brethren (whether seperates or others,) as much
right to make laws for you, to bind you to pay for their st^n^ing ministry, as
you to bind them to pay for yours. These are plain questions, no doubt
Gentlemen but you can solve them.

IT was a noble answer, which the late Mr. DAVIS returned to the general Court
a man of great understanding, and a friend to liberty of conscience, who would
not like some others be melted away with soft persuasion, and flee like a
shadow, but told the general Court what favors the Baptists would have, that
they had a right by the law of GOD, and by the law of nature, I add, and by the
Charter, a just claim to be exempted from all oppression or taxation to support
any man or minister, or form of religious worship, they did not believe A
certain Gentleman then said to him, "Sir, what, have we no power to tax them?"
Mr. Davis answered him with that spirit the cause required, and said, Sir, I
deny your power, and so will every man of wisdom, and common humanity;" however
I boldly declare in the face of every frown, and care not if every tyrant on
earth heard me; that you have no more right by the word of GOD, and by the law
of nature to tax the Baptists, or any of the separate congregations in the
Province to support a religious worship, contrary to the dictates of their own
conscience, than you have to tax the Angels in Heaven, or, to make a law for
one man to cut another man's throat -- You tell your Governor that the
parliament of England have no right to tax the Americans, purely for this
reason, because they are not the representatives of America; and will you dare
to tax the Baptists for a religion they deny? Are you Gentlemen their
representatives before GOD, to answer for their souls and consciences, any more
than the representatives of England are the representatives of America.
However, if you continue to tax the Baptists, then be forever silent, and never
tell the British parliament, that they have not a right to tax you. Thou
therefore that teaches another, teaches thou not thyself, lays St. Paul --
Strange, a man shall have right to choose his own friend, his own lawyer his
own physician, and shall he not have a right to pay his own minister, but m^st
have his property dragged away by a pack of petty officers by way of robbery,
for a burnt offering, and to support a man contrary to his conscience? this is
shuddering to nature that he must be shut up in prison, and nothing but paying
the rate or death can set him free -- O shocking! Never say Gentlemen, while
you do these things, that you have not your liberties in the province of the
Massachusetts, is not this liberty with a vengeance? Surely you have forgot
what great Mr. Lock says of this matter, his sentiments are fine, and his
reasoning is strong, To allow says he mankind as individuals the free choice of
their religion, and yet take by force their estates from them, to support a
religion or worship which they do not choose, is such oppression that would
make a moral heathen blush. I reverence your right power and authority in civil
government, and with every tie and duty of subjection will always honor it,
nor have the Baptists ever denied paying their just rates; but your power to
make laws to bind my conscience, or take away my property by warrants, to
support your way of worship to the unknown God, which you have set up, is
unsupportable before GOD and man It is true, the votes of the town have in page
28 hinted, to the offense of many judicious minds, that the general Court have
a power to make laws spiritual, as well as temporal, but this I humbly believe
was a mistake inadvertently overlooked by the Gentlemen; for if the general
Court has a power to make laws spiritual and take away my property by force for
the support of these laws, then I declare freely, all that they have said and
pleaded for is finally at an end. For surely the British parliament and power
have as good a right to act unjustly and arbitrary as any other, for if it be
just in the general Court to take away my sacred and spiritual rights and
liberties of conscience and my property with it, then it is surely right an I
just in the British parliament so take away by power and force, my civil rights
and property without my consent; this reasoning Gentlemen I think is plain:
However, I am honest if I am mistaken.

How in the world Gentlemen could it ever enter into your heads, or into the
hearts of your forefathers, (but they are a sleep, I will not awake them) to
think that you had a power to make laws spiritual? Has GOD Almighty been
deficient in this matter? does he want your help? is not his golden rule and
the law of equity plain. Mat. 7. 12. Therefore in all things, whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and
the prophets. And is not the law and rule of his church, which is his kingdom,
so plain, that he that runs may read it, Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11, 12. I shall only say
as Solomon did, "add thou not to his word lest he reprove thee" -- However, I
am of Benjamin Hoadley's mind, (who was afterward Bishop of Winchester) when
he was his Majesty's chaplain, he told the King of England in his Sermon upon
these words* "My kingdom is not of this world", that it was not in the power
right or authority of any, Pope, Prince or Potentate -- of any King, lords or
commons, of any Bishop, archbishops, Deacons, or Prebends, of any vicar, clergy
or curates of any synods, convocations or presbyteries, to make any laws for
the church of Christ, that the church of GOD, has no dependence upon the state,
nor any human power or authority, but only on the power of GOD and his word,
that it was a distinct kingdom from the world, and had nothing to do with any
worldly power -- though the King was called in a law sense the head of the
church of England, yet he had nothing to do, either by law or power with the
church of Christ -- that Christ as the King of glory, was head over all things
to his church; that his laws -- his subjects -- his immunities -- his
ordinances were spiritual, such as no King nor lords, nor bishops could give,
and therefore they had nothing to do by way of law power, or authority in the
church of Christ. For this the Bishop of London being present got Mr. Hoadly
indicted for treason against church and state, but his Majesty for his
faithfulness, and to make him as silent as Bishops generally are presented him
to the Sea of Winchester, and prohibited the convocation of Bishops sitting
during his reign.

IT is generally urged that there was a necessity for your making, and
enforcing a Law, that the Inhabitants of every new Township shall settle,
maintain and support, by a ministerial rate, or Taxation, an orthodox minister.
An orthodox minister that they hold their lands by it. -- The etemology of the
word orthodox, I do not just remember, as it is made now a days so vague; but,
if I remember right, it is one sound in the faith -- one that continues in the
apostle's doctrine, in praying, preaching, baptizing, and administering the
ordinances of the Lord's Supper. And has the General Court made this law? Yes!
Then I would say to you, Gentlemen, in the language of scripture, who of you
have kept this law? -- Not one of you! nor one of your forefathers before you,
for this hundred and fifty years! Not one orthodox minister, (though many
others, whom I much esteem) have you settled throughout the whole continent of
America; I defy all mankind to prove the time when -- the place where -- or the
person who.

YOU must know there is a vast difference between good men, and great men, so
called, and Paul's othodox preachers, who continue steadfastly in the apostle's
doctrine; I say in the apostle's doctrine, and in fellowship, etc. etc. For can
you persuade me, Gentlemen, that to hear of a GOD as a being of wrath, anger,
and vengeance, whom I can neither love, trust, praise nor adore? Was Paul's
GOD, or the christian's GOD, in Paul's days -- do you think that this was the
GOD of love mentioned, 1 John iii. 16. They tell us indeed that GOD was love to
Adam, before he fell, but when he fell he hated him and all mankind in him. But
that Jesus Christ interceeded for them, and turned the wrath of the almighty
into love, upon conditions of their repenting and being good, that Jesus Christ
died to purchase these conditions; nay, the holy spirit, and Heaven for them,
if they will, but by prayer, and tears, live up to the terms of the Gospel, (as
they call it.) Then they call you to make a covenant, to own a covenant of
their own making, to feal and renew your covenant; and if they speak of Christ,
and him crucified -- of grace and righteousness, yet you must obtain it all by
the works of the law, notwithstanding what Paul says to the contrary. Some own
a half way covenant, -- some a whole covenant, and that baptism is the seal of
the covenant. What is all this, Gentlemen, but Priest cheating -- or a solemn
lie before GOD and the people -- religious deceit -- a devout way to the devil?
But they are pretty shrines, and the people must have them, they cannot live
without them, they pay their tax for them. Nor would they be ever contented to
pay their ministerial rates, if they had not these pretty silver shrines for
it, I will only mention one instance, which lately happened -- Mr. B -- of D --
r had a few days ago three little golden calves to make to please the people,
he made two, and the people danced about them; another person held up a little
image to the priest for him to make him a golden calf of it, and called to him
to do it, but the priest being out of humor, would not make the poor man a
golden calf, and the poor man was obliged to make the golden calf himself --
but the people say, it was not made right, as the priest did not do it,
therefore they would not dance before it, but the town is in an uproar with the
priest for not doing it. Now had not the priest better have done it than (...)
displeased the people? had he had half the wit (...) had, he would have done
it, Aaron knew it was wrong to make golden calves, and call them gods, but the
people would have them, and there was six hundred thousand people to be
pleased, and what could poor Aaron do? or what could he say? see Exodus 32. 22,
23, 24. These are, Gentlemen, in general (some excepted, whom I much esteem for
their love to Christ and the truth) the orthodox preachers whom you have made a
law to settle; and would it not be unsufferable ignorance and vanity for any
one to think that their doctrine is any more akin to the apostle's doctrine
than the bible is to the al^^ran. Thus you see what work men make when they
attempt to make laws spiritual for the church of GOD, and tax the people to
support it. But I pity the Priests from my heart. -- It is true the people in
general are blind -- and yet the Priests is obliged, almost by law, if they
would be called good and quiet men, to keep them blind and yet to please them.
-- What can they do? -- To open their eyes is exceeding dangerous. To turn them
from darkness to darkness may please, but to turn them from darkness to light,
by preaching that God is love, and has revealed a perfection of Salvation
complete only in Jesus, in his person, power, righteousness, death and
resurrection; this will ruin the people's pharisaical hope -- destroy their
Dagon -- take down their Babel-building -- take away their gods, and what have
they more? They give the Priest their gold, but he must not take away their
cob-web garment, lest the shame of their nakedness appear; for if he does, may
GOD Almighty be on his side, for they will turn him out, if possible. He stands
no chance among but few men, ^^d fewer ministers. They will soon say of him as
they did of Paul, he is a mover of sedition -- a troubler in Israel. This
fellow, to be sure, say they, persuades men to worship GOD, contrary to the
law. -- This Paul has persuaded and turned away much people. Now who would do
this? I think none but those who are as mad as Paul was.

I ONLY attempted this in a very humble manner, in giving a concise description
of the people, who were first called christians at Antioch, saying no other
things than those which Moses and the prophets did say, should come from Paul's
days, to the present time, though some whose eyes are open have said they would
for a season, as soon be without bread, as without the book -- yet others are
offended and say, the man is mad, why hear ye him: but the more thoughtful say,
as the Athenians did to Paul "May we know this new doctrine whereof thou
speaks it? for thou bring certain strange things to our ears; we would
know what these things means? the Athenians were full of devotion, like the
Americans, but in all things too superstitious, and like the Israelite, who
helped Aaron to make the golden calf, they ignorantly worshipped an unknown
god. Paul declared this unknown god to the people, but they only mocked him for
it; therefore you see Gentlemen, it is dangerous to open the people's eyes, for
while the general Court supports the power and tyranny of the Priests, the sons
of America will never be free; that there is no quiet with them then, and that
man must be a fool if he intends to be popular and please the people, if he
preaches as Paul did.

REMEMBER your forefathers fled from the oppression of imposed ministers, this
was the grand original cause of the settling the extensive provinces of America
-- and yet cruel as (...) ^re to their very name, as well as to your brethren
you exercise the same oppression upon the children that their forefathers fled
from, see the case at Medfield of your own denomination, whose reasons have
confounded and silenced the whole town, yet they have taxed them. But what is
worse, and how you will answer for it before GOD, I must leave to you, which
is, you oblige the settled minister to eat the bread of violence, and therefore
I cannot see how you deserve a cup of cold water, for all you have done; nor
how a minister dares to eat or ask a blessing upon such bread, I know not -- a
minister of Christ, and tell another minister, as one (...) Ashfield, and in
Chesterfield, if he would not pay the rates, the constable should strain upon
him, for he would have his money -- and if he did not like it, he must go out
of the town! is not this a true picture of the sons of Belial, who knew not the
Lord? 1 Samuel 2. 16. Nay but thou shall give it me now -- if not I will take it
by force, and like Pharaoh who when he could not stop Israel said, Let your
flocks and your herds be stayed. Gentlemen, let these things sink deep into
your hearts -- remember how your forefathers logg'd and chained the poor
Baptists at the prison door in Charlstown, and why will you garnish their
sepulchers likewise? I have only one thing more to observe, and I hope
Gentlemen you will observe it -- It is the question which (...) Lord put (...),
when they required (...) to (...) a (...) Lord to Peter do they (...) tax,
(...) the children, or of strangers? and Peter said of (...) is Lord -- then
says Christ (...) are free. Now Gentlemen, this is the case between the Baptist
and the congregationalist, -- For if we may safely venture to believe the
scriptures of truth, the congregationalist, are the strangers, and the Baptists
the children, and consequently if our Lord was right, they are free, for they
must be near akin to the Indians in their knowledge of the scriptures, who do
not know that there were no churches, nor christians in Paul and Peter's days,
but those who were Baptists; and I will defy (...) man upon the earth to prove
the contrary, then above all people upon the face of the earth, they ought to
have their LIBERTY, from any religious taxation, having such an ancient
original, and charter right to it from the word of GOD -- For he, whose name is
truth said, "then are the children free" -- and yet the strangers who come into
the land, think they have a right to tax them -- and have the assurance to tell
them so in open court.

Now if the (...) attempted to tax the strangers, one could not so much (...)
strangers to tax them again -- But when the children are willing to let the
strangers go free, what plea but that of cruelty, power, and barbarity can they
have to tax the children. But the true (...) lies here, they have an enemity
against the truth, and are afraid of the spread of it -- If we let these men
alone, they will take away own place and nation -- Do not be angry Gentlemen.
God has intended they should, and therefore why will you raise Gamaliel from
the dead, to say to you, Acts 5. 38. refrain from these men, and let them
alone, for if this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to (...), but
if it be of GOD ye cannot overthrow i^, le^t happily ye be found ever to fight
against GOD. Therefore (...) charge you Gentlemen before GOD and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect angels, and all the world, that ye do to others, as ye
would they should do to you, upon this hangs all the law and the prophets; this
do, and the GOD of peace be with you.

I am Gentlemen with much reverence and affection, Your faithful friend, A
BRITISH BOSTONIAN.


