A SERMON Preached before the Incorporated SOCIETY FOR THE Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts; AT THEIR ANNIVERSARY MEETING IN THE Parish Church of
ST. MARY-LE-BOW, On FRIDAY February 19, 1773.

By the Right Reverend JONATHAN Lord Bishop of ST. ASAPH.

LONDON Printed: BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted: And to be Sold by THOMAS and
JOHN FLEET, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill, 1773.

Advertisement.
THE following SERMON, printed in London, and reprinted in Boston, is
admirably well adapted to lead those, who may think proper to read it, into
just Sentiments of the impolicy of the British Ministry in their conduct
toward the Colonies, and of the only effectual method they can take to promote
that love, harmony, peace, and mutual confidence, without which neither
England, nor America, can be truly happy. It has been highly spoken of, by the
best writers on the side of Liberty, in the public Papers at home, and
recommended to the perusal of all, who have at heart the real welfare of the
whole British Empire, and not a detached part of it only. As it was preached by
a Lord Bishop, and before so great and respectable a Body as the honorable
Society for propagating the Gospel, it will, doubtless, be thought eminently
worthy of the attention of Episcopalians in this part of the world; especially,
as it may reasonably be supposed to contain the real sentiments of that
Society, who have give their thanks to the preacher of this Sermon, and desired
its publication for the common good. Some parts of this Sermon relate
peculiarly to the affairs of the Society before whom it was preached; for which
reason, those parts of the Sermon might have been omitted: but it was judged
expedient to reprint the whole, lest it should be said, detached passages only
were selected, and others suppressed, with a view to serve a turn.

The EDITOR.

A SERMON Before the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.
LUKE CHAP. ii. VER. 14. Glory be to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace,
good will toward Men.
I KNOW no passage in the holy scriptures, that may be adapted with more
propriety to our present meeting, than this declaration from the angel of the
gracious purposes of Heaven in publishing the Gospel. That which was the design
of the gospel itself must necessarily be the chief object of a Society
instituted to propagate it. The generous office, we have undertaken, is by
instructing distant countries in religious truths to promote the peace and
happiness of mankind. It is by such actions that the holy scriptures allow the
sons of men to consider themselves as glorifying God; and such, we are assured,
are the most likely to obtain his favor and good will to men. Without entering
into a farther explication of the words, suffer me to desire that you will keep
in your minds the general principle contained in them; and you will find it
easily applicable to the facts, the circumstances, and the different situations
of things, which I shall take leave to mention* as being more or less connected
with the credit and influence of this Society.

The first object of our zeal was the conversion of the Indians; and it should
seem no difficult task to influence the minds of men, who have few religious
notions of their own growth, and appear to have no strong prejudices in favor
of them Such minds one would think might easily be led to receive a religion of
the most simple form, consisting of a few great luminous principles, and
inculcating plain rules of life and conduct, which must approve their
usefulness in deserts, as well as in cities. Such doctrines founded on Divine
authority, would, in all appearance be particularly welcome, where the
restraints of law and government have but little force. Yet it has happened
contrary to our hopes, that the preaching of the gospel has been of small
efficacy amongst the Indians. The sagacity for which they are remarkable seems
to be of a partial kind, and to partake more of instinct than of reason. They
can employ great art to obtain their ends; to procure what they desire; or to
gain a superiority over an enemy; but their passions and habits proceeding
always in one narrow track, they have neither relish nor discernment for the
clearest truths, to which they have not been accustomed. After showing the
greatest address and courage in subduing or surprising an enemy, they cannot
comprehend that it would be generous not to torture him; and that it would be
wise to give such treatment as they would wish to receive. They have besides an
untameable savage spirit, which has refused to hear the voice of instruction;
which has obstinately rejected the arts and improvements of the Europeans, and
has hitherto only adopted the most beastly of their vices.

For these reasons, though we ought not to remit our endeavors, yet I fear we
have little reason to hope for their conversion, till some great change in
their manners has made them abandon their savage vagrant life, and prepared
them for the discipline of law and religion.

But a more promising field is opened to our hopes, in the populous provinces
of our own colonies. The rapid increase of their numbers on every side, in a
country where the means of subsistence are easy and open, together with the
perpetual accession of inhabitants from Europe are continually forming new
congregations. Now knowledge of all kinds will probably be rare amongst men who
are entering into the first rudiments of society; and while their attention is
bent on procuring the necessaries of life, it is not to be expected that they
should be either diligent or successful in the improvement of religious
knowledge. Here therefore the instructions that are conveyed to them by the
liberality of this Society, may be of essential and durable service. This is
sowing the good seed in a fruitful soil; and what is so planted may produce
returns of an hundred fold, and afford fruit and nourishment to future
generations. Allow me to indulge a little the pleasure of contemplating to
prospect the good that may result in after times from this our labor of love.

Perhaps the annals of history have never afforded a more grateful spectacle to
a benevolent and philosophic mind than the growth and progress of the British
colonies in North America. We see a number of scattered settlements, formed at
first for the purposes of trade, or from a spirit of enterprise; to procure a
maintenance, or to enjoy the exercise of their religion, which in those unhappy
days was refused them at home, growing by degrees, under the protection of
their mother country, who treated them with the indulgence due to their
weakness and infancy, into little separate commonwealths. Placed in a climate,
that soon became fruitful and healthy by their industry; possessing that
liberty which was the natural growth of their own country, and secured by her
power against foreign enemies, they seem to have been intended, as a solitary
experiment, to instruct the world to what improvements and happiness mankind
will naturally attain, when they are suffered to use their own prudence, in
search of their own interest. I must repeat it again as an observation not
unworthy of this audience and this occasion, that there is no instance in the
records of time, where infant colonies have been treated with such a just and
liberal indulgence.

Had these settlements been left to shift for themselves, they would have
perished and been swept away by the rough course of accidents, like seeds that
are scattered by the winds, of which not one in a thousand take root and come
to maturity. Had they been planted by any kingdom but our own, the inhabitants
would have carried with them the chains and oppression, to which they had been
inured at home: they would have been subject to the schemes of ministers and
favorites, and have suffered more from their ignorance than from their rapine.
At best they could only have hoped to be considered as the live stock upon a
lucrative farm, which might sometimes be suffered to thrive for the sake of
it is produce.

But Britain from the beginning has treated her colonies in a very different
manner. She has not sold them her protection at the price of their liberty; she
has always been ready to encourage their industry, to relieve their wants, and
to revenge their injuries; and has sought no other advantage from so generous a
conduct, but the mutual benefit arising to distant countries from the supply of
each other's wants. Adhering to these maxims, she has continued to reap the
fruits of her own wisdom and moderation in a surprising increase of national
greatness; while her prosperous colonies are spreading without interruption
over a vast continent, that may in a few centuries rival the commerce, the arts
and the power of Europe.

It is difficult for man to look into the destiny of future ages, the designs
of Providence are too vast and complicated, and our own powers are too narrow,
to admit of much satisfaction to our curiosity. But when we see many great and
powerful causes constantly at work, we cannot doubt of their producing
proportionable effects. The colonies in North America have not only taken root
and acquired strength; but seem hastening with an accelerated progress to such
a powerful state, as may introduce a new and important change in human affairs.
Descended from ancestors of the most improved and enlightened part of the old
world, they receive as it were by inheritance all the improvements and
discoveries of their mother country. And it happens fortunately for them to
commerce their flourishing state at a time when the human understanding has
attained to the free use of it is powers, and has learned to act with vigor and
certainty. They may avail themselves not only of the experience and industry,
but even of the errors and mistakes of former days. Let it be considered for
how many ages great part of the world appears not to have thought at all; how
many more they have been busied in forming systems and conjectures; while
reason has been lost in a labyrinth of words, and they never seem to have
suspected, on what frivolous matters their minds were employed. And let it be
well understood, what rapid improvements, what important discoveries have been
made in a few years, by a few countries, with our own at their head which have
at last discovered the right method of using their faculties. May we not
reasonably expect that a number of provinces, possessed of these advantages,
and quickened by mutual emulation, with only the common progress of the human
mind, should very considerably enlarge the boundaries of science. The vast
continent itself, over which they are gradually spreading, may be considered as
a treasure, yet untouched of natural productions, that shall hereafter afford
ample matter for commerce and contemplation. And if we reflect what a stock of
knowledge may be accumulated by the constant progress of industry and
observation, fed with fresh supplies from the stores of nature, assisted
sometimes by those happy strokes of chance, which mock all the powers of
invention, and sometimes by those superior characters which arise occasionally
to instruct and enlighten the world; it is difficult even to imagine to what
height of improvement their discoveries may extend.

And perhaps they may make as considerable advances in the arts of civil
government and the conduct of life.

We have reason to be proud, and even jealous, of our excellent constitution.
But those equitable principles on which it was formed, an equal
representation,(the best discovery of political wisdom) and a just and
commodious distribution of power, which with us were the price of civil wars,
and the reward of the virtues and sufferings of our ancestors, descend to them
as a natural inheritance, without toil or pain. But must they rest here as in
the utmost effort of human genius? Can chance and time, the wisdom and the
experience of public men, suggest no new remedy against the evils, their vices
and ambition are perpetually apt to cause? May they not hope without
presumption to preserve a greater zeal for piety and public devotion than we
have done? For sure it can hardly happen to them, as it has to us, that when
religion is best understood and rendered most pure and reasonable, that then
should be the precise time, when many cease to believe and practice it, and all
in general become most indifferent to it. May they not possibly be more
successful than their mother country has been, in preserving that reverence and
authority, which is due to the laws? to those who make? and to those who
execute them? May not a method be invented of procuring some tolerable share of
the comforts of life to those inferior useful ranks of men, to whose industry
we are indebted for the whole? Time and discipline may discover some means to
correct the extreme inequalities of condition between the rich and the poor, so
dangerous to the innocence and the happiness of both. They may fortunately be
led by habit and choice to despise that luxury, which is considered with us as
the true enjoyment of wealth. They may have little relish for that ceaseless
hurry of amusements, which is pursued in this country without pleasure
exercise, or employment. And perhaps after trying some of our follies and
caprices, and rejecting the rest, they may be led by reason and experiment to
that old simplicity, which was first pointed out by nature, and has produced
those models which we still admire in arts, eloquence and manners. The
diversity of new scenes and situations, which so many growing states must
necessarily pass through, may introduce changes in the fluctuating opinions and
manners of men, which we can form no conception of. And not only the gracious
disposition of Providence, but the visible preparation of causes, seems to
indicate strong tendencies toward a general improvement.

And I hope that these matters, which I have presumed to dwell upon, perhaps a
little too minutely, will not appear totally foreign to the present occasion,
if we reflect that to whatever limits the population of our colonies may
extend, whatever states and kingdoms they may form; through all the progress of
their fortunes and prosperity; the labors of this Society will probably
continue to operate with an increasing influence. That sober and reasonable
sense of duty, which has been taught under our direction to a few scattered
villages, may give it is character hereafter to the religion and morals of a
powerful state. The weak and imperfect fruits we reap at present may bear no
higher proportion to the future benefits that may arise, than that of a few
scattered seeds to the fullness of the harvest.

And perhaps the disinterested zeal of this Society for the instruction of our
brethren in North America, may tend to REVIVE that union and cordiality between
the mother country and it is colonies, which for the common utility ought never
to have been interrupted. It is by no means decent from this place to censure
the conduct of our superiors, or even to suppose it blameable; but surely as
goods subjects we may wish and endeavor to heal the wounds of our country,
without enquiring by what hand they were inflicted. We may, and I think we
ought to wish, that the true interest of the whole extensive community may
govern our future contests, and regulate all our claims. Our mutual relation
was formed, and has hitherto subsisted, by a perpetual communication of
benefits. We want the produce of soils and climates, that differ so much from
our own; and they will long have occasion for the fruits of our arts, our
industry and our experience. And should they ever cease to want our protection,
which as long as we render it beneficial to them they never will; yet we may
still continue united in interest in commerce and the grateful remembrance of
old services. May the wise and good on both sides, without enquiring too
curiously into the grounds of past animosities, endeavor by all prudent means
to restore that old public friendship and confidence, which made us great,
happy and victorious. To countries so closely united it is needless, and even
dangerous, to have recourse to the interpretation of charters and written laws.
Such discussions excite jealousy, and intimate an unfriendly disposition. It is
common utility, mutual wants and mutual services, that should point out the
true line of submission and authority. Let them respect the power that saved
them; and let us always love the companions of our dangers and our glories. If
we consider their prosperity as making part of our own, we shall feel no
jealousy at their improvements: and they will always cheerfully submit to an
authority, which they find is exercised invariably to the common advantage.
During all our happy days of concord, partly from our national moderation, and
partly from the wisdom and sometimes perhaps from the carelessness of our
ministers, they have been trusted in a good measure with the entire management
of their affairs: and the success they have met with ought to be to us an ever
memorable proof, that the true art of government consists in not governing too
much. And why should friendship and gratitude, and long attachments, which
inspire all the relish and sweetness of private life, be supposed to be of no
weight in the intercourse between great communities? These are principles of
human nature, which act with much greater certainty on numbers than on
individuals. If properly cultivated they may to us be productive of the noblest
benefits; and at all events, will neither lessen the extent of our power, nor
shorten the duration of it.

When things are on so reasonable a footing, if there should happen to be any
errors in government, they will soon be corrected by the friendly disposition
of the people; and the endeavors to separate the interest of the colonies from
that of Great Britain will be received with the indignation, that is due to the
artifices of factious men, who wish to grow eminent by the misfortunes of their
country.

Even in that future state of independency, which some amongst them ignorantly
wish for, but which for their true interest can never be too long delayed; the
old and prudent will often look back on their present happiness with regret;
and consider the peace and security, the state of visible improvement, and
brotherly equality, which they enjoyed under the protection of their mother
country, as the true golden age of America.

I need not suggest how favorable those dispositions must prove to the
reception of the religious and benevolent doctrines which it is the business of
this Society to propagate. Under a mutual inclination to peace and good will,
the lessons of piety we teach will be heard with that fair attention which
always turns to the advantage of truth; and the claims we will make will be
estimated (which is all we ought to desire) by the reasonableness of them.

I own I feel upon my mind a strong impression of the public advantages that
would result from this benevolent and christian policy; and I could wish for
the interest of mankind, and of our country in particular, that it may not be
thought wholly of a visionary nature. I think I can see a strong and immediate
demand upon us for such a conduct from the situation we are in, and the unusual
occurrences that have passed before us within a few years. There seems at
present to be a great and general commotion, and tendency to change in the
minds of men. Animated by the gradual improvement of knowledge, and the
fortunate example of this country, our neighbors have had the courage to think
with greater freedom on the most important subjects, and to look for something
better in religion and government, than they find established among themselves.
And even in this land of liberty, where we have been long in possession of the
most solid and valuable truths, the spirit of enquiry is still at work, and
urging it is pursuits with a dangerous freedom, that risks more than it can hope
to gain. At the same time not only discontent and faction, but the real
difficulties of things, the extent, the fluctuation and the intricacies of
commerce afford sufficient exercise for political wisdom. Add to this a vast
accession of distant territory, the art of governing which we are yet to learn.
Our colonies are rising into states and nations. The extreme boundaries of the
world are opening to our view; and regions, unknown to our fathers, may soon
become the objects of contention. In this great shifting scene of human
affairs, the concerns of this extensive empire are growing every year into more
importance and dignity. It behooves us to adopt some plan of conduct, that shall
be suitable to our situation and the high character we sustain. The interest of
Britain, considered singly by itself, ought not at present to be the sole; and
in a few ages may not be the most considerable object of attention. We have
already tried what advantage is to be found in governing by force, and have no
reason to be proud of the experiment. What benefit has accrued to the public
from the plunder and desolation of an industrious helpless people? The whole
profit, we have reaped from so much injustice and dishonor, has ended in
fraudulent schemes, vain and extravagant expectations, ruinous expense and
luxury; attended with a general loss of credit and confidence, a sudden
suspension of commerce and industry, and an almost total stoppage of the main
springs and vital motions of society. It requires no common degree of wisdom to
deliver our country from such gains and such prosperity as this!

A great liberal commanding spirit is wanting; such as has appeared but rarely
in modern times, but was better known to the ancients; which, without computing
and calculating what is strictly due, can extort affection and gratitude by
public services; which can sacrifice little and even great interests to the
establishment of a solid permanent authority, founded on justice and
moderation: which permitting it is subjects to enjoy and improve all their
natural advantages, can always avail itself of their wealth and numbers for the
defense or the glory of the empire; and is sure to find the most powerful
resources of government in their friendship and love.

We presume not to instruct our rulers in the measures of government: but it is
the proper office of a preacher of the gospel of peace, to point out the laws
of justice and equity which must ultimately regulate the happiness of states as
well as of individuals: and which are no other in effect than those benevolent
christian morals which it is the province of this Society to teach transferred
from the duties of private life to the administration of public affairs. In
fact, by what bond of union shall we hold together the members of this great
empire, dispersed and scattered as they be over the face of the earth? No power
can be swift or extensive enough to answer the purpose. Some art must be
employed to interest all the distant parts in the preservation of the whole;
which can only be effected by serving* obliging and protecting them. It ought
not to be the first object in contemplation, what we are to get by them; but
how we can best improve, assist and reward them; by what benefits we may
procure their happiness and win their affection. But is government then
entitled to no emoluments in recompense for all its cares? I answer, that they
who have the heart to do good to those who depend upon them* will always meet
with an ample return. None are so sure to reap the benefits of the soil, as
they who have spared no expense in the cultivation. And it is universally true,
that the more we exact from our subjects, the less we shall gain from them.
BOUNTIFULNESS IS A PLENTIFUL GARDEN, AND MERCIFULNESS ENDURES FOR EVER. Let
the distant nations, that depend upon us, be made to know and feel that they
owe their peace and happiness to our protection. Let them be encouraged to
consider themselves not as our slaves, but as our friends and brethren. And let
us endeavor to wipe away the tears from the poor oppressed natives of India;
and suffer them, if possible, to enjoy some taste of the legal security and
civil liberty, which renders life dear to ourselves; which are blessings
hitherto unknown to those climates, but more grateful to the heart of man* than
all the fruits and odours which nature has lavished upon them.

This righteousness and mercy, which is due to all men* but especially to those
who are under our protection, is the law of nature, the command of religion,
and it ought to be the first and leading maxim of civil policy. But it is
amazing how slowly in all countries the principles of natural justice, which
are so evidently necessary in private life, have been admitted into the
administration of public affairs. Not many ages ago, it was customary to
engage in war without a reasonable cause or provocation, and to carry it on
without humanity or mercy. Since then, it is happily become necessary for
states to explain their motives, and justify their conduct, before they begin
to destroy their fellow creatures. And blessed be his memory who first taught
the soldier to spare the useful husbandman, and to feel a horror at the
shedding of innocent blood.

It has been the policy of government, such as it is, from the earliest times,
to keep distant provinces and colonies under the most severe restraints and
subjection. Yet when those restraints have been removed, the mother country has
always been a great gainer by the advantages she has communicated to her
subjects. Indeed it is a truth, not more important than it is evident and
obvious, that the most sure and effectual method of receiving good from men is
to do good to them; or, as St. Paul beautifully expresses it, TO PROVOKE ONE
ANOTHER TO GOOD WORKS. But the minds of men are not sufficiently prepared and
enlightened by experience to adopt it in practice. A time, I doubt not will
come. in the progressive improvement of human affairs, when the checks and
restraints we lay on the industry of our fellow subjects, and the jealousies we
conceive at their prosperity, will be considered as the effects of a mistaken
policy, prejudicial to all parties, but chiefly to ourselves. It would be a
noble effort of virtuous ambition to anticipate this discovery; to break
through the prejudices and selfish spirit of the age; to find a better path to
our true interest; and to make our country great, and powerful, and rich, not
by force or fraud, but by justice, friendship and humanity.

I should not have dwelt so long on so unusual a subject, had it not been for
the great and almost infinite importance of it. The virtue of a private man
assists and supports a few individuals; but this public virtue does good to
thousands and tens of thousands. The former relieves the distress of a friend,
or of a family: the latter acts in a higher sphere; it founds states and
kingdoms, or makes them prosperous and happy. Yet all this merit, which a
nation can never sufficiently acknowledge, at least all that we presume to
describe, consists in the right application of the plain good rules, which are
so often tepeated to us in scripture; WHATSOEVER YE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO
UNTO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO UNTO THEM. FOLLOW THAT WHICH IS GOOD TO ALL MEN. LOOK
NOT EVERY MAN ON HIS OWN THINGS, BUT EVERY MAN ALSO ON THE THINGS OF OTHERS.
BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS, AND SO FULFILL THE LAW OF CHRIST. But these
truths lie before the eyes of men, like medicinal herbs in the open field; and
for want of applying them to their proper objects, they remain ignorant of
their virtues. Yet we may say, with a pious confidence, that this has not been
our own case. This Society has thought that we could not obey these divine
precepts in a manner more agreeable to the true spirit of them, than by
teaching to distant nations the truths that are best calculated to make them
happy. Could we teach them to the great and the wise of this world, that would
be happiness indeed; that would be the most effectual and the most beneficial
Propagation of the Gospel, that the world has yet seen. Mankind would then have
an experimental proof of the salvation offered to us from above; and would
acknowledge with gratitude the propriety of that (...) from Heaven. GLORY BE TO
GOD IN THE HIGHEST, ON EARTH PEACE, GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN.

At the Anniversary Meeting of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts, in the Vestry Room of St. Mary-le Bow, on Friday the 19th Day of
February, 1773;
AGREED. That the Thanks of the SOCIETY be given to the Right Reverend the Lord
Bishop of St. Asaph, for his Sermon preached this Day by his Lordship before
the SOCIETY; and that his Lordship be desired to deliver a Copy of the same to
the SOCIETY to be Printed.

Richard Hind, Secretary.


