Instructions for the DEPUTIES appointed to meet in GENERAL CONGRESS on the
Part of this Colony.
THE unhappy Disputes between Great Britain and her American Colonies, which
began about the third Year of the Reign of his present Majesty, and since,
continually increasing, have proceeded to Lengths so dangerous and alarming as
to excite just Apprehensions in the Minds of his Majesty's faithful Subjects of
this Colony that they are in Danger of being deprived of their natural,
ancient, constitutional, and chartered Rights, have compelled them to take the
same into their most serious Consideration; and, being deprived of their usual
and accustomed Mode of making known their Grievances, have appointed us their
Representatives to consider what is proper to be done in this dangerous Crisis
of American Affairs. It being our Opinion that the united Wisdom of North
America should be collected in a General Congress of all the Colonies, we have
appointed the Honorable PEYTON RANDOLPH, Esquire, RICHARD HENRY LEE, GEORGE
WASHINGTON, PATRICK HENRY, RICHARD BLAND, BENJAMIN HARRISON, and EDMUND
PENDLETON, Esquires, Deputies to represent this Colony in the said Congress, to
be held at Philadelphia on the first Monday in September next.

And that they may be the better informed of our Sentiments touching the
Conduct we wish them to observe on this important Occasion, we desire that they
will express, in the first Place, our Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty
King George the Third, our lawful and rightful Sovereign; and that we are
determined, with our Lives and Fortunes, to support him in the legal Exercise
of all his just Rights and Prerogatives. And however misrepresented, we
sincerely approve of a constitutional Connection with Great Britain, and wish
most ardently a Return of that Intercourse of Affection and commercial
Connection that formerly united both Countries, which can only be effected by a
Removal of those Causes of Discontent which have of late unhappily divided us.

It cannot admit of a Doubt but that British Subjects in America are entitled
to the same Rights and Privileges as their Fellow Subjects possess in Britain;
and therefore, that the Power assumed by the British Parliament to bind America
by their Statutes, in all Cases whatsoever, is unconstitutional, and the Source
of these unhappy Differences.

The End of Government would be defeated by the British Parliament exercising a
Power over the Lives, the Property, and the Liberty of the American Subject;
who are not, and, from their local Circumstances, cannot, be there represented.
Of this Nature we consider the several Acts of Parliament for raising a Revenue
in America, for extending the Jurisdiction of the Courts of Admiralty for
seizing American Subjects and transporting them to Britain to be tried for
Crimes committed in America, and the several late oppressive Acts respecting
the Town of Boston and Province of the Massachusetts Bay.

The original Constitution of the American Colonies possessing their Assemblies
with the sole Right of directing their internal Polity, it is absolutely
destructive of the End of their Institution that their Legislatures should be
suspended, or prevented, by hasty Dissolutions, from exercising their
legislative Powers.

Wanting the Protection of Britain, we have long acquiesced in their Acts of
Navigation restrictive of our Commerce, which we consider as an ample
Recompense for such Protection; but as those Acts derive their Efficacy from
that Foundation alone, we have Reason to expect they will be restrained so as
to produce the reasonable Purposes of Britain, and not injurious to us.

To obtain Redress of these Grievances, without which the People of America can
neither be safe, free, nor happy, they are willing to undergo the great
Inconvenience that will be derived to them from stopping all Imports whatsoever
from Great Britain after the first Day of November next, and also to cease
exporting any Commodity whatsoever to the same Place after the tenth Day of
August 1775. The earnest Desire we have to make as quick and full Payment as
possible of our Debts to Great Britain, and to avoid the heavy Injury that
would arise to this Country from an earlier Adoption of the Non-exportation
Plan, after the People have already applied so much of their Labor to the
perfecting of the present Crop, by which Means they have been prevented from
pursuing other Methods of clothing and supporting their Families, have rendered
it necessary to restrain you in this Article of Non-exportation; but it is our
Desire that you cordially cooperate with our Sister Colonies in General
Congress in such other just and proper Methods as they, or the Majority, shall
deem necessary for the Accomplishment of these valuable Ends.

The Proclamation issued by General Gage, in the Government of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay, declaring it Treason for the Inhabitants of that
Province to assemble themselves to consider of their Grievances and form
Associations for their common Conduct on the Occasion, and requiring the Civil
Magistrates and Officers to apprehend all such Persons to be tried for their
supposed Offenses, is the most alarming Process that ever appeared in a British
Government; that the said General Gage has thereby assumed and taken upon
himself Powers denied by the Constitution to our legal Sovereign; that he, not
having condescended to disclose by what Authority he exercises such extensive
and unheard of Powers, we are at a Loss to determine whether he intends to
justify himself as the Representative of the King or as the Commander in Chief
of his Majesty's Forces in America. If he considers himself, as acting in the
Character of his Majesty's Representative, we would remind him that the Statute
25th Edward III. has expressed and defined all treasonable Offenses, and that
the Legislature of Great Britain has declared that no Offense shall be
construed to be Treason but such as is pointed out by that Statute, and that
this was done to take out of the Hands of tyrannical Kings, and of weak and
wicked Ministers, that deadly Weapon which constructive Treason had furnished
them with, and which had drawn the Blood of the best and honestest Men in the
Kingdom; and that the King of Great Britain has no Right by his Proclamation
to subject his People to Imprisonment, Pains, and Penalties.

That if the said General Gage conceives he is empowered to act in this Manner,
as the Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces in America, this odious and
illegal Proclamation must be considered as a plain and full Declaration that
this despotick Viceroy will be bound by no Law, nor regard the constitutional
Rights of his Majesty's Subjects, whenever they interfere with the Plan he has
formed for oppressing the good People of the Massachusetts Bay; and therefore,
that the executing, or attempting to execute, such Proclamation, will justify
Resistance and Reprisal.


