DIANA's SHRINES TURNED INTO READY MONEY, BY PRIESTLY MAGIC; OR, VIRTUE GIVEN
UP.

Being Remarks on Remarks on the NORTHERN PRI^^^'s Pamphlet, entitled, A -- a
known to the A -- ts.

In a LETTER to the AUTHOR.

In which is contained an impartial APPENDIX, setting forth the RIGHT of the
the British Parliament, as well as the real Advantages that would arise to the
honest Merchant, by the Prevention of the iniquitous Practice of Smuggling.

Tangeret Poculum, Denariosq tangere debet.

NEW YORK: Printed in the Year MDCC,LXXIII.

NEW YORK, June 24, 1773. SIR,
I RECEIVED your Favor per Post, with the enclosed Manuscript, entitled,
Diana's Shrines turned into Ready Money, etc. Have readily sent you the Forty
Dollars you demanded, by Mr. M -- for which desire you to give him Receipt. On
the lay you propose, (notwithstanding you have not the Consent of the Author to
publish it) on Account of the Expense you have been at, as well as the
strenuous Opposition and ungenerous Treatment you met with from one of your
BOSTON CLERGYMEN, and Threats from others, who have, on other Occasions, been
very sanguine for the Liberty of the Press) I shall send you Five Hundred
struck off by Mr. G -- who goes to Rhode Island, and from thence to Boston. If
at any Time Difficulty should arise on like Occasion, I shall be glad to serve
you.

I am your most humble Servant, H. G.
To Mr. E. RUSSELL, Printer in Boston.



DIANA's SHRINES TURNED INTO READY MONEY.
Rev. DOCTOR,
YOUR illustrious Performance exhibited to the Public on that most important
question, whether A -- a was known to the A -- s, reflects the highest honor
not only to you but to your ancient, worthy, and venerable Predecessors, and
may well be tacked as an appendix to the wondrous Magnalia: Herein is verified
that saying, Every generation grows wiser and wiser. It must afford ample
satisfaction not only to the inquisitive Gentleman you mean to gratify, but
fill the whole world with wonder and amazement at the gross stupidity and
indolence of many centuries past. Worthy and great Writers have always had
envious opponents, and in proportion to their great and serviceable discoveries
and endeavors for the welfare of the community expect their attacks: But what
shall we say of such men who are continually emitting their contagious poison?
You doubtless remember the saying of the Poet, -- Jam saevus apertam,
In rabiem caepit verti jocus et per honestas
Ire minax impune domos.


Cicero says a libel in his day, which took away a man's good name was punished
with death. By this means the honor of families are ruined, and highest posts
and greatest titles are rendered cheap and vile in the sight of the people, the
noblest virtues and most exalted parts exposed to the contempt of the vicious
and ignorant. And as this cruel practice tends to the utter subversion of all
truth and humanity among us, it deserves the utmost detestation, abhorrence and
discouragement of all who have either the love of their country or the honor of
their religion at heart. He who filches from me my good name,
Enriches not himself, but makes me poor indeed.
Shak These men together with their adherents who take pleasure in reading
them, may be justly ranked with the murderer and assassin. Every good man sets
as high a value on his name as on his life, and those who privily assault the
one would destroy the other, could they do it with the same secrecy and
impunity. How many there are of this character among us public pamphets and
newspapers manifestly evince. O tempora! O mores!

I need not here remind you of the vast disproportion between a libel against
government and a private member of community. That you may be armed against an
assault of this nature, remember that a private desire of resentment subdued
denominates a man great, And that if you are led away with the censures or
applauses of men, when wisdom shall be justified of her children you will be
found destitute of those graces which adorn human nature.

Having had an opportunity of knowing the sentiments, with regard to your
motives, of a number of persons of the above described character, I shall here
present you a specimen of a few of them for your animadversion.

Some say you have catched an epidemical distemper called by Juvenal an itch of
writing.

Some say you have long in vain been in pursuit of a Diploma from
North-Britain, but despising the modern method of obtaining it, continue
impatiently seeking it through the channel of merit.

Some say you expressed a huge fancy to be chose President of Harvard-College,
and that you are now endeavoring to convince the honorable Electors of their
egregious mistake in not calling you to that important trust.

Some say you are encouraged from the effects of a former harangue on Liberty,
productive of a boon.

Others that one of the BEST of men is the intended object of your keen
resentment.

Others that you are employed as a Popish Incendiary to foment strife.

Others are so ill natured as to say you are influenced by the fair Daughters
of Liberty, on whose account you have already suffered a dire flogging at an
ecclesiastical council.

Cum multis aliis quae nunc prescribere will not do.

These are some of the surmises of this rude herd with regard to your motives:
Nor do I find their sentiments with regard to your most excellent Performance
more favorable; for in general they say, their expectations being raised to the
highest pitch (from the name of the Author and grandeur of the subject) they
are as greatly disappointed as at the production of Aesop's teaming mountain.

You Will need abundance of grace and patience while I transcribe their arguments
against you. The learned Keckerman, you say, judges that A -- a was known to
the A -- ts. They say you begin well; but you should have let them known he was
infallible. You go on and say, if the matter be examined with judgment and
proper care and accuracy, we shall find reason to believe that this large part
of the world was really known to the A -- ts.

How honest Madoc came to take it into his head to visit A -- a you don't know,
nor how he got out of it you cannot tell; but he left monuments of the British
language and customs. What of the language found among the Indians you do not
say; nor customs, whether eating when hungry, or Priests sporting with their
female parishioners. But they ask, upon supposition it were true that Madoc was
in A -- a, does that prove your point?

As to Eslotiland, it being agreed by all to be part of A --, as you say, the
point must be given up, as it was discovered by the Frizeland Fishermen and the
Polonian, ever since the year 1456: But they say you beg the question, and it
seems they had such a knowledge of it, that they nor their neighbors ever
troubled their heads any further with it.

L. Anneus Seneca, you say, foretold that another world should be found out,
and in one of his dramatic pieces, says, Thyphis should discover new worlds;
but what that can be to your purpose they cannot tell, unless he did discover
new Worlds and A -- a was included in the number.

As to Metellius Celer, Proconsul of Gaul having a number of Indians presented
him by the Suevian King, you imagine them wafted by violent gales of long
continuance (they suppose in Indian canoes with large stores of provisions)
from Labrador or Newfoundland to the German shore. This seems to appear very
strange to 'em* and fancy they must have had wet hides now and then: But they
seem inclined to think you are not well skilled in the geography of this part
of the globe, or with the turbulence of the atlantic ocean, and rather think
they came from Lunar Hesperia, as frogs are said to descend ex nubibus in a
shower of rain. But suppose it true, what kind or degree of knowledge could the
Suevians have had from those rude savages?

Mention, you say, has been made repeatedly of two islands called Atlantides,
ten thousand stadia distant from Lybia, and called by Pliny, Hesperides, which
the learned Ortellius supposes to be the islands of Hispaniola and Cuba, and
Diadorus Siculus tells us that the people of those islands in habit places near
the ocean, and therefore they must be the inhabitants of Cuba because
surrounded by the ocean. Here were the (...) fields, the seat of the blessed,
and, as the above author says, the inhabitants were very happy indeed. Logical
arguing, deservant of a Presidentship!

Plato has given particular account, you say, of the Atlantic Island, as
published by Serranus, and of its being peopled by Neptune with children begot
of a mortal woman. They say one would think you were in one of your youthful
freaks, and imagined the gods were subject to like passions with yourself. They
say if they understand you right the argument stands thus: Neptune was an
ancient god, from his nature must have known the extent of his jurisdiction,
the atlantic ocean being bound west on the A -- an shore, of consequence he
must have known it; therefore A -- a was known to the A -- ts. That it received
its name from King Atlas, and Hercules pillars was its eastern bounds; that it
was a most broad island, had powerful kings, and what else they cannot tell,
except they had grievous wars, in which the Athenians opposed themselves and
became conquerors. Plato, you say, is not singular herein, but Strabo and Pliny
confirm it. They say you do them great honor. Plato says further, the greatest
island of the western ocean was lost, situated between the Azores and Canaries,
and that there were relics of it, you say, Becman thought, believed, and says
might be lengthily proved.

Hoffman and Bochart are of opinion that Plato's atlantis is to many A -- a:
And indeed, you say, if it was larger than Lybia and Asia it looks as if it
were really A --. Thus you are endeavoring to prove, that what is now and ever
was unknown to us a sunken island was known, in order to prove that the terra
firma on which we now dwell was known to the A.....ts.

The probability arising from the accounts of passages of vessels through the
atlantic one way and the other must be barely probable, and of Endoxus's voyage
in the days of our Grandfathers to Cales must have been round by the edges as
St. Paul's voyages were, or by lucky chance.

But now you call, they say, to a respectful notice of Hanno, the famous
Carthagenian, who wrote Periplum, which has not been your lot to see, and
therefore can make no observations. It Is a pity! But you say he gives an
account of a voyage prosecuted around the coast of Africa, and found lands in
the atlantic ocean. Surely it was a spaerical round, if he found any of the
main of A.....a.

But we must not omit to take notice, that the Phoenicians must have had the
knowledge of it, for Diadorus Siculus beforementioned in his De fabulosis
antiquorum gestis) says, that certain Phoenicians were cast on a most fertile
island opposite to Africa, and you, to accommodate yourself, note that if it
was opposite to Africa it must have been an A.....n island: But pray, Reverend
Sir, with profound submission, why not one of the Azores, or even St. Helen's?
And if so, no wonder the Phoenicians did not divulge A.....a to the Europeans.

Upon supposition that Silenas gave Midas information, as you say, that Europe,
Asia, and Africa were islands, and of the existence of another world whose
magnitude was immense and infinite, will it follow from thence that A.....a was
known to the A.....ts? Do not you Priests preach up unknown worlds, and some of
you live as though you were not willing to part with a certainty for an
uncertainty?

As for Hanuo's voyage beforerementioned, when you leave the Herculian pillars,
the ne plus ultra, you find about ten thousand stadia from Lybia the large
islands of Atlantides; but going again to reconnoitre them, on your return, say
you cannot find 'em, to your great disappointment, and conclude they are
destroyed by a flood or earthquake: Surely, they say, it must have been Cape
Flyaway, frequently seen by mariners in the atlantic ocean. And further, this
voyage has misled you a thousand stadia from your point, and no wonder, since
they must have been destitute of a compass: For leaving Lybia on the left (the
coast lying nearly north and south) and sailing thirty days (meet with
impediments, and no doubt it was very lucky if they ever found their way back,
though you don't say they ever did; but you might have made the story for them
as you did for Madoc) steer south. If Lybia was on the left their course must
have been nearly south, notwithstanding which, you imagine it probable that
they must have found some of the A -- an islands, or some part of the western
continent itself, which they say must be as impossible as for designing Priests
to receive the rewards of the faithful.

Grotius's conception of the peopling A.....a from Europe (notwithstanding what
you have said of Serranus) upon supposition that Hispaniola and Cuba were the
seats of the blessed as you imagine, and as you say the rout is possible and
not unnatural, passing from Europe through Norway into Iceland, thence by
Frizeland into Greenland, and so into Estotiland, must needs make a dreary
travel for the heavenly Pilgrims: No wonder the emigrants never returned to
give account of their situation, in this new Jerusalem. How greatly does it
dignify the Priesthood that the rewards of virtue are so much more easily
obtained in these modern days!

They readily allow that A -- a was well peopled four or five thousand years
ago, and that when Columbus arrived here he found multitudes of inhabitants:
But what is that to your purpose? You have been endeavoring to prove they
originated from Europe, and where not, though they have chosen to omit it 'till
now. But does Columbus say he found any of his countrymen among them, any
Whites, or any others that could give any account of their rise from Europe, or
any other of the known part of the globe? If he had you would undoubtedly have
snap'd at it, they say, to help you out of the sudds, and they wonder you did
not assert that he did.

As to your suppositions, conjectures, and deductions with regard to Gog,
Magog, etc. they are so various, and all drawn to help your important cause,
they say they are not worthy an answer, and had you ever read the 38th and 39th
chapters of Ezekiel. you would have been better informed. How inconsistent the
glorious rise of the western empire from that race, with the 39th chapter from
11th to 17th verse, unless your fertile brain produces a Phoenix. But however,
there seems to be one observation of Dr. Grew's worthy of note, which you seem
to hug as making much to your point, namely, that there were no Blacks found in
A.....a, and you therefore observe there could be no removes from Africa. But
pray, learned Sir, with defference to your superior knowledge in antiquity,
were there found any Whites? and if not, why does not the argument bear as much
against the supposed removes from Europe? But, pray Sir, how came the
inhabitants yellow? They are of opinion, you imagine, by their carrying on
their backs large packs of provision and necessary clothing for the
performance of their long travel, as you have chaulk'd out the road, their
hides by intermitting colds and heats were gradually tanned and became so.

As to what you advance from the Scriptures and progress of the Apostles, they
leave your best friends to judge of its absurdity. How are the sacred
Scriptures tortured and warped to base purposes! No wonder they are held in
such contempt by the undescerning part of mankind, when Priests would cram down
any thing for truth that suits their turn; and they imagine your lugging in the
Scriptures to help you (had you a common chance) would have been a great
disservice to Christianity, and overballance all the service you ever did its
cause. Thus, they say, you have been racking your brain to prove your motto
false, by proving, Aliquid tam difficile est quod quaerendo investigari non
possit. Surely by the ancients you must have meant the original inhabitants of
A -- a. They express themselves as though Brother C -- r has set you ageg to
display your luster, as he takes you now and then for a foil for his own. How
easily are inconsiderate men ensnared in the trap of vain glory! And what could
have induced you to have gone so far beyond your line, but predominant pride,
which such Priests are so ready to condemn in the Laity? of whom you take all
advantages from your pulpits, branding them with the odious epithets of
children of the Devil, while you only are the sons of light. Thou that teaches
another, teaches thou not thyself, etc. They query, if St. Paul and other
Apostles were accounted the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things,
pray what appellation are you deservant of?

APPENDIX.
AS to your Appendix, notwithstanding your zeal and strength of argument with
regard to your Remarks should recommend them to every considerate and worthy
member of A.....a, your moderation being known to all men, they seem to treat
them with undeserved contempt, and say the bitter complaint you make of the
hard treatment the A -- ans have suffered have been so often advanced and
nothing new therein brought to light, either to augment or redress them, there
needs but few observations.

As to your query, "What hurt does my writing do?" They answer, neither good
nor hurt, but your views and designs are what they detest. What hurt in setting
Britain and A -- a by the ears? the peaceful gospel you preach teaches you
agreeable thereto, for you bend it which way you please. The good esteem of the
High Sons, or in other words, a good reward is all you care for, they say.
Commending your cunning to prevent drowning, you wisely omit touching on the
tender point of Legislative Right as past your depth; but, they say, you
discover your self as well skilled in the mystery of merchandise as in the
science and art of geography and navigation, when you assert that the A -- ans
have suffered great loss by the Britons in their trade and commerce. Pray, Dr.
Knowall, who is it takes our naval stores, oil, bone, masts, timber, and other
exports off our hands? And what are the inducements but proposal of mutual
benefit? Who loses when A -- an Merchants fail thousands sterling in debt to
Britain? And though you fleer at the Legislative Authority of Parliament, by
saying, "Let its favorers call it supreme if they will," they would ask you a
few questions in their turn; "and what hurt in it?" Pray, Rev. Sir, what idea
can you form of a King or Sovereign destitute of power or authority over his
subjects?

How is the dignity of the Crown and nation to be supported? Suppose his
Majesty's ships and armies were disbanded, what a figure would Britain cut
among the neighboring nations?

How is the immense expense attending to be provided for, but by tax on the
subjects? Why should A -- a be exempt, who have equally the benefit of defense?
"Why forsooth, because they took Cape-Briton in the year 1745," though they had
the assistance of Admiral Warren, and a number of the King's ships, and great
part of their charge was reimbursed by the Commons of Britain. You further add,
it would be wisdom in Britain to lay not so much as one burden upon them: Well
judged, Mr. Dictator.

Has the insignificant Parliament of Great- Britain power to lay a tax on the
national exports? Do the A -- an Merchants voluntarily submit to such tax, when
they purchase the British exports? If so, then let the following considerations
be attended to, removing all party prejudice;

A's a Fair Trader.

B's a Smuggler.

C's a Purchaser of the Importer.

A. sends his money to Britain, and pays the King's just duties.

B. sends his money to the neighboring nations, and pays no duties, whereby his
money is sunk with regard to Britain and A -- a both.

A. and B. are neighbors, and deal in the same commodities.

C. inquires the price of an article of A. He answers 5 L. is the lowest.
Applies to B. He asks him 4 J. for the same in quantity and quality;
consequently C. purchases of B. and leaves honest A. to starve. Where is the
justice of this? Why is your pen dipped in gaul? Where is your golden rule? Are
these things right? Is it not then of absolute necessity that Government should
interpose to right themselves and the Fair Trader? And what more effectual
method than by appointing the Board of Commissioners, and sending cruizers on
the coast to intercept these Smugglers, enemies both to King and subjects. I
expect you will fly in a passion at my thus stating this affair; but look over
it again, and weigh it well. Don't view it and start back as (...), in
Magnalian days, did their horrid (...), and run away affrighted without
examining the object. Examine it well, you will (...) it flesh and bones, no
metaphysical chimera, but as conclusive as a mathematical demonstration.

How much greater burdens do the Britons bear than the A.....ans? They pay a
tax on every article they eat, drink, or wear, and even for the light of the
sun; but the A -- ans only for what they voluntarily choose with regard to
Britain. How does the honest Farmer laugh in his sleeve to hear your
complaints, who wears no clothing, nor eats or drinks any thing but his own
produce. Leave your luxury and carry on an an equitable trade, your complaints
will soon cease.

With regard to Mr. White's observation, they say it is undoubtedly true that
wisdom travels west, and the reason they assign is your traveling east. Mr.
White, your Predecessors, and other worthies of a prophetical turn always
predicted future events, looking forward for the recompense of their virtue,
but you, like Lot's wife, or the Israelites after deliverance from Egypt, look
back as loath to proceed, dreading the consequence; and well you may, they say.
They would have had me added a few strictures on the Seventh Commandment, and
the LORD's Prayer; but as to the latter, as you say it is not becoming
Christians to use, I choose to decline.

A few REMARKS on your supposed motives will finish.

By the above absurd, base misconstructions, false logic, etc. we find what a
virtuoso of an age we live in. How triumphant are the sons of calumny and
defamation! How violent are the influences of prejudice! I have had the
satisfaction of some small acquaintance with you, and could fully have vouched
for your honor and honesty, and am well satisfied of your swearing to your hurt
and changing not, which the Psalmist gives as a characteristic of a citizen of
Zion, where nothing enters that makes a lie, which is one reason of my adopting
your cause. The ingenious Anagram on your Father, by the pious Author of his
life, Tu Homo Ter Sanctus, would be improper to ascribe to you while living.

As to your first motive, they allege you have caught an itch at writing.

Can any wonder at your frequent writing, when your genius is peculiar, cash
runs low, "Providence calls to stir up your gift," your subjects always new and
alarming, Printers ready to give any price for your copies, whether your
assertions are proved or not it matters not a groat, if your ends are answered.

As to your seeking a Diploma; I expected your Dissertations on JEHOVAH and the
LORD's Prayer, etc. which you sent to Scotland would have produced it, but I
suppose they judged them not so weighty as Cash: However, hope you are not
discouraged, for I Will warrant you a D. D. (of which you are highly deservant)
very soon; although you find your North-British Brethren so insensible of your
incomparable abilities, as a new manufacture of Diploma-making is lately
established in America. Surely, Reverend Sir, you cannot fail of a homespun
one, as you have shone with such distinguished luster among some other Worthies
of the Cloth, in the defense of American Liberty.

As to their imagination of your having a huge fancy for the Presidentship; the
insinuation is an affront to your natural modesty: But however the Electors can
inform any who enquire, whether you did not give some hint tending thereto: But
suppose you had, they would find few better qualified; your inimitable seraphic
display of your forefinger in your zealous enforcing your injunctions would
yield a sublime luster to that august University: Omitting private conversation
on that subject, I cannot pass taking notice of the indignity reflected, when
instead thereof you were offered the Praeceptorship of the North Latin-school.

As to your view of a Boon; no doubt but your unwearied pains and sweat in
collecting and twisting from ancient authors (though fabulous, they say) your
several arguments, and stating the unhappy situation of A -- a, with your
seasonable and necessary hints are highly deservant of an adequate reward; and
though some men would not take the trouble of reading them over for twice the
money you have got for them, and may call it an harangue, it is most certain he
who wins has the best right to laugh.

As to a certain, GOOD MAN you mean to injure, if it is the Person I imagine you
mean, common gratitude must remove so base an insinuation, or you must have
publicly recommended that virtue contrary to your practice, which is
inconsistent with common honesty; however, herein leave you to answer for
yourself.

As to being a Popish Incendiary; its true I have known of a long
correspondence you have had at Canada, but the letters you received were wrote
in French, and though I have seen some of them, I cannot ascertain their
contents, but never imagined there was any such design on so honest a man as I
conceived you to be, but rather inclined to think those lines applicable to
you: I hate the busy plotting crew
Who make distracted times,
And shun their wicked company
As I avoid their crimes.
Tate and Brady's Ps. xxvi. 5.

As to your being influenced by the Daughters of Liberty; the wise man tacks
women and wine together as equally to be avoided, and I have always looked on it
for a person guilty of an attrocious crime to endeavor to extenuate it by
pleading his being under the influence of a Daughter of Eve, (there being no
general rule without exception) equally culpable as for another in a similar
case to plead being in his cups, for they are continually at our elbows, by
smiles, gesture, dress, etc. endeavoring to ensnare us, and how few have
escaped them, especially in youth: But imagine you must have been too knowing
to have been taken in at this time of day. And as to what they call dire
flogging, your Ecclesiastical Judges might have been as partial as the former
Judges of your country when they hung a poor bedrid Weaver to save a better
man. As to their observations on your arguments, they are evidently
insufficient to evade the force of yours, and therefore can admit of no reply.
It rests with you Sir, Gallio like to act yourself, a man of fortitude and
courage beyond the reach or notice of such envious tatlers, having performed
the task assigned yourself to the approbation of your own mind and received a
handsome gratuity from the High Sons, notwithstanding the fleers of the vulgar
and -- approbation of the more knowing you may appropriate those lines; As him
a heavenly zeal does move,
So Heaven his zealous acts approve,
To him confirming as his place,
The Priesthood he so well does grace.


I am with all respect due.
POSTSCRIPT. Should you publish this Letter with a view of indulging your
friends or for the sake of Cash, must enjoin your secrecy as Author.



SECOND LETTER
Assigns the reasons of the Author's writing for others, as proceeding not from
his differing in political principles, but to prevent too great confidence even
in the best assurances of friendship, etc. gives account of a personal dispute
with the DOCTOR, treats of the nature and tendency of ingratitude.


