Mr. Turner's ELECTION-SERMON.

MAY 26. 1773.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS HUTCHINSON, ESQUIRE; GOVERNOR: THE
HONORABLE HIS MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF
THE PROVINCE OF THE Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 26th. 1773.

BEING the Anniversary of the ELECTION of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for said
PROVINCE.

By CHARLES TURNER, A. M. Pastor of the Church in DUXBURY.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
Governor, and the Honorable His Majesty's Council.

M,DC,LXXIII.

Province of MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In COUNCIL, May 27. 1773.
ORDERED, That James Otis and William Sever, Esquires, be a Committee to wait
on the Rev'd Mr. Charles Turner, with the Thanks of this Board for his Sermon
preached Yesterday, before his Excellency the Governor, and the General
Assembly, being the Day for the Election of His Majesty's Council; and to
desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

THO'S FLUCKER, Secr'y.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
ROMANS XIII. 4. -- He is the Minister of God to thee for good.
AS God condescends to govern the creation which He has brought into
existence, His dominion, though universal and absolute, is to be acknowledged
as being, in its whole plan and numerous operations, unexceptionably wise and
moral; however it may exceed our comprehension. The most immediate government
of the world, if God had chosen such a method, could have afforded no degree of
trouble to that mysteriously perfect Being, who is necessarily infinite in
happiness: In his wisdom, however, He has chosen to use, in a great variety of
instances, the mediation of others, for carrying on the designs of his
providence. Agreeably, civil rulers, in this world, are in the number of His
ministers, or servants. They are constituted by Him. There is no power (says
the Apostle) but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. It is
agreeable to the will of God, that there should be civil government: He has
given to mankind that reason which points to it, as useful and necessary; and,
in general terms, the magistrate is raised up, and invested with his office, in
the course of divine providence.

CIVIL rulers are ordained of God; but the doctrine of their being divinely
appointed, rightly understood, no more militates against the supposition that
the people ought to have a voice in the elevation of those who are, in a civil
sense, to rule them, than the doctrine of God's appointing gospel ministers
interferes with the supposition of a right in the churches to elect their own
pastors. He never designed, mediately or immediately, to appoint rulers over
the people, in state or church, so as to debar them from the privilege of
choosing their own officers (except in a few extraordinary instances of ancient
date) and they, who attempt to deprive the people of such a privilege, oppose
themselves equally, to the will of God, and to the rights of mankind. The
People may, by a constitution, make an office hereditary in a Family, or leave
it to particular persons to appoint rulers, agreeably to a constitution
established by the whole society, when, so far, and so long as they think it
best; but still they have an unalienable right to alter such constitution at
pleasure, and to interpose immediately in the election of their officers,
whenever they judge it proper.


MAGISTRATES, that are lawful, are appointed of God, to be his ministers; but
for what purpose? -- not to manage the affairs of the world so as to increase
the felicity of the supreme Being, for He is above the possibility of being
benefited, by the services of men or Angels -- not to enslave mankind, and
involve them in misery and ruin -- not surely to enrich and aggrandize
themselves and their families, prejudicially to honest industry, as if God had
a partiality for them; but He appoints them to be his ministers, for good to
the public: mean while intending they should have, from the people, a certain
distinguishing respect and support, as the just recompense of their faithful
arduous important services, to the community.

THAT the civil ruler, and christian minister, should engross the wealth of the
world to themselves, as they have done, in many countries and ages, and live in
pride and luxury, on spoils violently extorted, or slily drained from the
people, is altogether foreign to the design of God, in setting them up. It is
His mind that both, acting in character, should be reverenced, and honorably
provided for; but His grand view, in raising them to their places of eminence,
is, that the one should do good in religious, the other in civil respects, to
the world. The condescension of God, in the number of ministers ordained for
the relief and benefit of this sinful unhappy world, is remarkable -- JESUS, a
minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched,
and not man -- civil ministers, and ministers of the Gospel; and the whole
number of virtuous Angels, are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?


THE Apostle Paul in this letter to roman christians, says, He, meaning the
civil magistrate, is the minister of God to thee for good. The sense of the
sacred writer we judge to be, that civil magistracy is designed of God for good
to the governed; and that rulers are, therefore, eventually, His ministers for
the promotion of public happiness, considered as understanding, and acting up
to the requirements of their stations, and so as to answer the end of their
investiture. To suppose that the Apostle intended here, particularly to
characterize Nero, who was then at the head of the Roman Empire, and his
servants, who probably partook of his spirit, and imitated his conduct, as if
they were benefactors to the public, is apparently absurd (unless this epistle
was written soon after his coming to the imperial crown, when he is said to
have reigned well HARWOOD, in his liberal Translation of the New Testament, at
the beginning of this 13th Chapter to the Romans, has the following Note, --
When this epistle was written Nero had the character of an excellent prince.
The first years of this tyrant's reign were distinguished for his moderation
and clemency. Being once desired to sign the execution of a criminal, he did it
with great reluctance, wishing, he had never learned a letter. Quam vellem,
inquit, nescire literas! He declared he would make the administration of
Augustus the model of his own, and embraced every opportunity of showing his
liberality, clemency, and courteousness. Vid. Sueton, lib. 6. cap. 20. p. 581.
Variorum.
) for Nero, except at the beginning of his reign, was a tyrannical malefactor
to his subjects.

GOD would have His civil ministers to prove, a terror to evil works; to punish
evil doers -- by salutary laws, honestly and honorably executed, to save the
state from foreign injurious invaders (while they are circumspectful, to leave
the people in the ample enjoyment of all rational liberties, in opposition to
any temptations they may be under to infringe the same themselves) and to
prevent the peoples suffering, from one another, as to life, property, or any
of their rights. It is also His pleasure, that they should be a praise to them
that do well -- should properly honor and encourage them. When the virtuous
and the good are frowned on and disgraced, when laudable exertions for public
utility are damped and checked, when the perpetrators of wickedness noxious to
society are not terrified and suppressed, but screened and promoted, there is a
sorrowful, and not blameless deviation from the design of the righteous God,
the father of mercies, in the institution of civil government.

To answer the purpose of Government, it is of consequence that men should be
blessed with capacity, and possessed of enlarged knowledge, respecting the
nature of their office, the extent of their power, the state sufferings, and
dangers of the people, their interests, and what may conduce to their relief,
security and happiness: but men of such greatness (like elephants in war) are
not to be depended on, as persons who will steadily pursue the public good,
unless they are possessed of that public spirit, which the charitable Gospel
infuses, and so have the end of government at heart. Avarice and ambition may
carry men considerable lengths, in measures which are for public advantage,
when they perceive that such measures will best gratify these passions; but if
they are enriched with no higher principles, whenever it so happens, that there
is an interference between the gratification of these passions, and a pursuance
of the public good, which is likely to be frequently the case, the happiness
of multitudes will probably fall a sacrifice to the vile affections of a few.
Whereas, public spirit, possessed as it ought to be, predominates over every
private worldly affection, and causes every private worldly interest,
incompatible with the public welfare, to fall a sacrifice to the general
felicity: It carries the magistrate, with firmness, uniformity and
perseverance, through his course of duty; however environed with warping
temptations: It inspires him with compassion, forbids the appearance of
oppression: It quickens to vigilance and activity, renders him a father to the
community, a minister of God, in event, for good, a God-like blessing.

IT has been said, that the ministers of the Gospel ought to have no concern in
political matters; but, that God's civil ministers ought to stand at a distance
from every thing relating to religion, we do not afirm. They have a right to
govern the ministers of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom. The clergy, instead of
arrogating to themselves an insolent papal power of deposing Kings and
Emperors, are as much obliged to be in subjection to civil powers, as other
ranks of men. The rights of conscience are to be treated with the greatest
delicacy; but if people, under a pretense of conscience, conduct manifestly to
the material damage of Society, the civil arm has a right to restrain them. It
is the part of civil powers to encourage and promote religion, as that is
conducive to the benefit of Society; particularly, as it gives people due
veneration for an Oath, which for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.
Especially, it is incumbent on the civil magistrate to cultivate the sincerest
piety in his own breast. A minister of God, who has no reverence for that great
Being whom he is ordained to serve, is a perfect prodigy. The perpetual
nourishment of godliness in the heart, is the indispensable duty of the civil
governor -- for the honor of God, for his own sake, and for the sake of the
people. A superlative respect for Him, whose absolutely disinterested goodness
brought the world into being, and who governs it so that His tender mercies are
over all His works; a reverence for the authority of the christian Legislator,
whose precepts, in favor of charity, justice and kindness, hold a distinguished
place in the new testament; an engaging regard to His example, who went about
doing good, as He came down from heaven with the most beneficent purpose, and
who condescended to die for the good of the world; together with a deeply
impressed sense of Eternity -- will have an happy and necessary influence into
that patriotism, which is the magistrate's indispensable qualification. Sincere
piety fills the soul with the tenderest feelings for mankind, and so engages
the heart in pursuit of that, which is the great end of government. Impiety,
worldly-mindedness and sensuality render the heart flinty, and insensible to
the groans of the oppressed; while godliness inspires the softest passions --
inspires the brotherly kindness and charity, which will never give their
possessor rest, 'till every rational method is adopted, for the relief of the
distressed, and the promotion of public happiness. Joseph, first minister of
state to Pharaoh, having for several days confined his brethren, found himself
insufferably pained in heart, with the thought of longer detaining a supply
from the half famished house of his father, because he feared God.

ALL the wisdom, however, religion and public spirit, which have generally
existed, or can be expected soon to take place, among the great men of the
earth, are by no means a sufficient security to the people, that the end of
government will be honorably answered. Rulers are so prone to have, vastly at
heart, certain worldly interests, inconsistent with the public, welfare and
the duty they owe to the community, that it is incumbent on the people (whose
right it is to do this, on proper consideration, and every thing else,
respecting government, which they judge will be for the salvation and advantage
of the whole) to fix on certain regulations, which if we please we may call a
constitution, as the standing measure of the proceedings of government; so
determining what powers they will invest their rulers with, and what privileges
they will retain in their own hands.

THROUGH the misguiding arts of designing men, mistakes and freakish passions,
things hurtful to society, are apt to take place in popular governments, which
might be prevented by absolute monarchy; while it ought in justice to be
acknowledged, that some absolute princes have been great benefactors to the
public: But such considerations scarcely furnish a better argument in favor of
yielding up to despotism, than the religious divisions in protestant countries,
and the degrees of service ever done to the churches by the Popes, afford, in
favor of the readmission and establishment of the papacy.

UNLIMITED power has generally been destructive of human happiness. The people
are not under such temptations to thwart their own interests, as absolute
government is under to abuse the people: and, that the public interest has,
generally and on the whole, succeeded beyond all comparison better, where the
people have, by the barrier of a constitution, retained power in a great degree
in their own hands, than it has under despotick governments, we dare appeal to
all the sensible, humane, impartial examiners of universal history.

OF inestimable value and importance are such rights and privileges as are
retained by the people, according to the English constitution particularly, and
such as were once enjoyed by this province, especially under the first charter,
-- a charter that was inhumanly murdered, and over whose grave many of the
people are now disposed to raise a fresh lamentation.

A CONSTITUTION being settled by the public consent, the magistrate, awed by
that Sovereignty which God has been pleased to invest the people with in the
case, ought ever to maintain a sacred respect to such constitution, in every
instance of government legislative or executive. The community having a right
to fix boundaries between rulers and people by a constitution, it is impossible
that individuals should have a right to remove them, however high the rank of
such individuals may be. Rulers as well as others, have an undoubted right to
make fair, and, as they judge, rational proposals for the amendment of a
constitution; but by no means to attempt an alteration of it, without the
public consent: by such an attempt, they will merit a degree of blame
proportionable to the importance of the people's fixing constitutional limits
to the higher powers, in view of the common security. To forfeit any thing of a
worldly nature, rather than bear a part in violating sacred compacts, is the
path of honor, christian virtue, and happiness.

To have constitutions so expressed, that potentates should be incapable of
putting constructions upon them, through a biassed understanding, different
from their original meaning, is impossible. Magistrates, who have no direct
design or willingness to infringe the people's constitutional rights, may,
nevertheless, be supposed to do it, and perhaps to a great degree, through a
judgment prejudiced by worldly passions; and call that by the name of light,
which the people rationally perceive to be darkness; and give that the
denomination of sweetness, which the people know to be bitter. The ruler's
designed or prejudiced invasion of constitutions has occasioned innumerable
evils, sorrowful to relate; besides the devastation and wretchedness brought on
the world by the licentious passions of absolute Princes: and the like may be
justly feared, 'till they, who are rich and great in this world, are more
enriched in faith and social virtues than they have hitherto been.

How far any persons may have been charged, injuriously, with an inclination to
promote the measures which are grievous to this Province and Country, we do not
pretend to determine. But, if the Gentlemen, on either side of the Atlantic,
who may be justly said to be engaged in pursuit of such measures, confidently
judge, that they are acting the part which becomes men appointed of God to
consult the public happiness; and find their inward tranquillity, in no
degree, disturbed by suspicions that they are infringing the rights of this
People; may it not be excuseable, nevertheless, in a proper and respectful
manner, to recommend to them a consideration of their liableness to be
mistaken? the passions, as appears by a great variety of instances in human
life, may have an unhappy influence on the understanding; and more especially
in case of controversy, which calls for the serious attention of both rulers
and people, in times of political contest. Men of eminence in life, as well as
others, may have the judgment unduly influenced by the affections. In connection
with these things, it may not be amiss to consider, that communities, if they
meet with treatment which is tolerably fair and good, will be generally found
to be contented; -- that the people of this land, who are so firmly and
generally persuaded, that their most important rights are infringed, and are so
much disposed to complain of the measures they receive from the British
Government, as endangering their most valuable blessings, if not the welfare of
Britain, have been trained up, from their cradles, in a most affectionate
dutiful respect to, and confidence in the House of Hanover, -- abhor the least
idea of giving disturbance to that which they think to be constitutional
government, -- are not wholly destitute of religion and virtue, notwithstanding
the many great sins, whereby they offend the Governor of the world, -- nor
contemptible, with respect to knowledge, Some Persons may smile at such a
representation of America, as a seat of knowledge, and, perhaps, divert
themselves on the occasion, with a reflection on the following lines of the
Roman Poet: Urbem, quam dicunt Romam, Meliboee, putavi
Stultus ego huic nostrae similem, quo saepe solemus
Pastores ovium teneros depellere soetus.
Sic canibus catulos fimiles, sic matribus hoedos
Noram: Sic parvis componere magna solebam.
Verum haec tantum alias inter caput extulit urbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.
Virg. Ecl. I.

The author is not so infatuated as to imagine, that he has any considerable
degree of learning himself; nor does he suppose that we have men here, equal in
literature to a number in several other Countries, though we have many persons
who have had a liberal education; but begs leave to think, nevertheless, at
least '^ill he receives further information, that the common people in this
land have had such advantages, and have so improved them, that they know as
much as a like number of the common people, taken together, in any other part
of the world, if not more.


if compared with the most enlightened parts of Europe; however we may have
been considered, as little superior to Indian Barbarians. May not such
considerations reasonably prevail with those Gentlemen, to examine themselves,
in reference to the power of prepossession; and to supplicate the Divine Being
for direction? If in consequence hereof, they shall think it proper to
discontinue their present pursuit, and heartily adopt the cause which now
suffers by their means, -- from worthy Patriots in Britain and the rest of
Europe, as well as from this Country, they will receive all the respect and
affection which can be due to men; and, if this people judge rightly, they will
highly ingratiate themselves with that infinite blessed Being, who is by an
inspired Apostle, justly characterized LOVE, who delights to see his creatures
virtuous, free and happy, and takes pleasure in the wisdom and honorable
integrity of those, who know how to correct themselves, in favor of the public
freedom and felicity. But if every dissuasive from the pursuance of present
measures must be unprevailing, every petition and remonstrance be treated with
contempt, and the people's burdens increased, or even continued, what may the
consequences be!

WITH great respect, and equal importunity, it is, moreover, recommended to the
Honorable General Court of this Province, to cultivate a spirit of rational
warm benevolence and compassion toward this people, who greatly confide in the
political Fathers of the two Houses of Assembly, in whose appointment they have
a more immediate concern, to be the Patrons of their rights, in their distress
and danger -- to cultivate that unfeigned piety, which is naturally productive
of an heavenly patriotick ardor, while they are properly insensible to every
worldly consideration, after the example of our self-denying Redeemer, and as
becomes those whose hearts are enobled by the highest and best of principles.
If public Spirit reigns, in contempt of every inferior seducing motive, you
will not fail, honored Sirs, according to the best of your judgment, to
separate persons to the Seat of Counsel, who are men of capacity and knowledge,
men of principle and firmness, and hearty uniform attachment to the cause of
their Country's freedom; and in all the affairs that may come before you, from
time to time, you will not be bribed off from a prosecution of your duty and
the peoples happiness, by all the temptations which such an ensnaring world and
time as this can furnish. It is hard to say, whether this country ever has
seen, or ever will see, a more important time than the present, when it seems
as if the question, whether this people and all they enjoy shall be at the
absolute disposal of a distant Legislature, is soon to be determined: Such a
time does indeed call for wise and faithful Counsel, for uncorrupted virtue in
the General Court. It is not improbable, Gentlemen, that in the circle of the
year, things of greatest moment may come under your consideration; if it is so
determined above, may God grant you grace to act the disinterested, noble
patriotick part, that future generations, as well as the present, may rise up
and call you blessed. Be pleased to suffer the most express word of
exhortation, to hold the entire system of corruption in the highest
detestation, and let it be a perfect stranger to all your proceedings. If the
liableness of all mankind to an undue influence from worldly motives; if the
symptoms of corruption which appear in the several parts of the country, in the
election of Representatives; if the known prevalence of bribery and venality in
the land from which our Ancestors fled, together with the facility wherewith we
drink in the vices of that which we have been used to call by the endearing
name of the Parent State; if the divine condemnation of the practice of giving
and receiving a bribe, considered in connection with the importance of those
things which are depending -- cannot be thought sufficient to justify such
freedom of speech; deign, Honored Fathers, to consider it, nevertheless, as
proceeding from a spirit of fidelity, and not of insolence.

THE magistrate has sufficient inducements, in reason, to a disengagement from
the world, so as to pursue the end of government with persevering fidelity. A
desire to enjoy, besides an income, the affections and confidence of an happy
people (as rulers of disinterested benevolence and tender conscience generally
will) instead of incurring the public displeasure; to have, through all the
changing scenes of life, the peace arising from a favorable testimony, instead
of being wounded with the reproaches of conscience; and to be in a capacity of
self-possession, free from horror, when exchanging this state for the world of
spirits -- may justly prove commanding to him in all his deportment.

IT will not be justifiable to forbear an express assertion, that as
magistrates are the ministers of God, they ought to act under a perpetual sense
of their accountableness to Him -- to Him, from whom none of their counsels can
be secreted. Gods they are; but not immortal: they must die like men, and, like
other men, make an indispensable personal appearance before the Judgment Seat
of Christ. Small and great, without a trace of any former civil distinctions,
must stand before God, to receive according to the deeds done in the body, and
their principles of action, whether they have been good or bad. May the
minister of God be raised from more inconsiderable objects, so as to give all
due attention to that grand decision, when the unprofitable servant shall be
cast into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth --
misery parallel to his demerit, considering the advantages he had, the nature
of his trust, and the degree in which he abused it; and when, the wise,
faithful, gracious Mediator shall adjudge an eminent crown and recompense to
him, who, from christian principles, in a superior station, has done eminent
service to the world; and to him shall say, well done, thou good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

THE people ought to have the end of government, the public good, at heart, as
well as the magistrate; and therefore, to yield all loyal subjection to well
regulated government, in opposition to every thing of a factious nature and
complexion: and, for the same reason, it is not only their privilege, but it is
also their duty, properly to assert their freedom, and take all rational and
necessary methods for the public security and happiness, when constitutional
boundaries are broken over, and so their rights are invaded. This affirmation
supposes, the People have a right to judge of the conduct of government, and
its tendency; and this again supposes them capable of judging in things of such
a nature.

To have incomprehensible mysteries in government is the Divine prerogative.
Profound secrets in human governments, inaccessible by society, are too liable
to become insufferable mysteries of iniquity. It would be safest, if the people
in general could keep a very constant sight of all the proceedings of civil
administration; but as that is scarcely to be expected, whenever there appears
any thing, in the conduct of magistracy, justly alarming, it is the duty of
those in society, who have the best advantages for full and seasonable
information, to communicate what they can learn of the state, and course of
things, to others: and mysteries in government, which the generality of the
people, after obtaining such assistance, and using laudable application, must
remain incapable of comprehending, ought to have no existence.

RULERS are, at once, ministers of God, and servants of society; as Gospel
ministers are servants of Christ, and of the Churches. And, if God has given to
the community a right to appoint its servants, it is but rational and
consistent to suppose, that the community should have a right to take effectual
care, that their servants should not counteract and disappoint the great
purpose for which they were distinguished from their fellow creatures; and if,
in any cases, it may be seen necessary for the public salvation, to give the
servants of society a dismission. That servants of the public, should not be
responsible to the public, is popery, either in religion, or politics.

IF the establishment of a constitution, together with the religion and virtue
rulers may be supposed to be possessed of, appears insufficient, it is the
people's duty to take those further steps, which may be seen proper and
needful, that the public may not suffer. The people's duty, in this respect,
arises from the regard they owe to the great immutable Law of
Self-preservation, and from the indebtments every person in society is under to
all the rest, and to posterity, by the laws of Christian Charity.

THESE are principles, we firmly believe perfectly consonant to right reason,
and to the word of God; they are certainly such principles as were adopted, and
acted upon, at the Revolution, and which cannot be consistently called into
question by those, who pretend the least regard to the continuation of our
present Royal Family in the government. The advancement of every thing of an
opposite tenor, is a virtual, secret, and treasonable undermining the Throne of
the present Chief Magistrate, in the British Dominions. If it be particularly
enquired, whether this Province, or the English American Colonies, being but a
part of the British Empire, may be justified in exercising all the rights of a
Society, for securing their privileges, in the present dispute; the
determination may be assisted by asking, whether the People of Great Britain,
being but a part of the British Empire, might be justified in securing
themselves, if the Parliaments of the Colonies should lay taxes on them, and
claim a right to make laws binding them in all cases whatsoever.


THE Apostle, in this thirteenth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, charges
every soul to be subject to the higher powers; and, the argument whereby he
enforces this exhortation, and dissuades from resistance, is, that these civil
powers are ordained of God, and ordained by Him, ministerially to convey
blessings from Him to the People. So long, therefore, and so far, as civil
powers act agreeably to the design of their ordination, and do good in their
stations, the people are obliged to subjection, and resistance will be
blameable; but if these powers forsake their proper sphere, thwart God's design
in ordaining them, disserve the people, and take measures which tend to ruin
them, the Apostle's ground of the people's subjection ceases; and, indeed,
submission becomes a fault, and resistance a virtue. If the people ought to
obey well conducting rulers, out of a regard to the public good, it must be as
much their duty, still governed by a regard to the public good, to oppose
them, when pursuing destructive methods. To suppose it belongs to the Apostle's
meaning, that it is a damnable sin to resist civil powers, because ordained of
God, though they act entirely out of character, and thwart every kind purpose
God had in ordaining them, is in the class of most palpable grating
absurdities. A pretense to ground such ideas, as those of indefeasible right,
passive obedience, and non-resistance, on the Bible, is criminal -- an high
abusive scandal to the Christian Religion, and it is Divinely inspired
Promulgators. If God had given up mankind to the will of oppressors, not
permitting the people, on pain of damnation, to attempt their own relief, it
would not, indeed, have exceeded the demerit of a sinful world; but would have
been disagreeable to the general analogy of kind providence.

IT has been thought, with great good judgment, the Apostle Paul declined
handling, particularly, real or supposed cases, of rulers departing from their
line; and giving particular directions how to conduct, in such cases, for a
very special reason; and that was, the imprudence in running the risk of
exposing the Church, in it is infant state, to the vengeance of an heathen
government.

THE people ought to be in subjection to higher powers ruling honorably, not
only through fear of human wrath, in case of disobedience; but also for
conscience sake: and, for conscience sake, they should also maintain the
assaulted blessings of freedom; as being thereto obliged, by our Savior's
enjoinment of that Charity, which is the bond of perfectness. He that resists
the faithful well-behaving magistrate, disobeys God, violates the laws of love,
clashes with the general good, the end of government, and shall receive to
himself damnation -- condemnation to eternal misery, in a future stare, unless
repentance be preventive; as well as the displeasure of civil government, in
this world. But the man who holds the reins of government too laxly, the tyrant
and the rebel, and the people who are negligent of their rights, as they all,
in their several ways, counteract, disappoint, or neglect, that which is the
great purpose of government, the public good; so they may all be supposed to
be equally guilty in the sight of God -- to merit an equal weight of Divine
displeasure. If any persons dispute, whether mere negligence can be thought so
culpable, let them recollect, of what kind the sins are, which, according to
the Evangelist Matthew, will be expressly mentioned, in the illustration of the
rectitude of the sentence of condemnation on the wicked, at the great Day of
God.

How distressing the thought of being slaves, how charming that of being free!
While liberty is fruitful, in trade, industry, wealth, learning, religion and
noblest virtue, all that is great and good and happy; slavery clogs every
sublimer movement of the soul, prevents every thing excellent, and introduces
poverty, ignorance, vice and universal misery among a people. But if a few
general terms can give no tolerable idea of the blessings of freedom, let them
be learnt from the story of the world, let their richness be estimated, by the
price that has been paid for them, in lands that have been favovred with them,
and particularly by our Progenitors. Heaven grant, that the present generation
may come by a just sense of the excellency of their civil and sacred
immunities, as may be necessary for the security of the same, at a cheaper
rate, than by experience of such sufferings as our Ancestors underwent!

THAT the people should be divided, and some of them disengaged from such a
cause as that of their countries freedom, by small private piques and
prejudicing contentions; or influenced by little hopes and fears about worldly
promotions and interests, should treat it in a nugatory manner, is entirely
astonishing! But our surprise abates, when we consider how capable human nature
is of trifling, in the most immediate concerns of religion -- in reference to
eternal life, and everlasting misery.

It concerns men of every order, station and employment, to be advocates for
their country's rights. The minister of the Gospel, in protestant lands, where
the doctrine which forbids clergymen's marrying, is not adopted, may have a
family -- posterity to be concerned for; of whose welfare, he cannot be
regardless without denying the faith, and being worse than an infidel. As a
man, and a christian, he is bound to befriend the liberties of the land; nor is
there any thing, in the special nature of his office, incompatible herewith,
more than in the several other occupation, men are particularly engaged in. On
the contrary, such are the connections of things, that, in the due and full
execution of his office, he must have a reference to political matters; and as
a friend to liberty. The scriptures cannot be rightly expounded, without
explaining them in a manner friendly to the cause of freedom, as well as of
loyalty. He ought to bear against a factious molestation of well conducted
government, and publicly to recommend all orderly rational submission; while a
constant reference is to be had to the King, and to all that are in authority,
in the prayers of the Church. Put them in mind, says Paul to Titus, to be
subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates. But that the
christian minister ought to appear an advocate for loyalty, and not for liberty
-- to frown upon rebellion, and not bear against oppression, by reasoning of
righteousness, and judgment to come, are mysteries too deep to be fathomed.

WHEN the civil rights of a country receive a shock, lit may justly render the
ministers of religion deeply thoughtful for the safety of sacred privileges;
and dispose them to all proper solicitude for the security of the former, as
necessary to the preservation of the latter: for religious liberty is so
blended with civil, that if one falls it is not to be expected that the other
will continue. May not such a connection be, in some measure, illustrated by
present appearances? While our civil privileges are in their present wounded
and perilous circumstances, let men soberly consider -- how dormant and
unexecuted, the Laws of England against popery, are known to remain -- a
roman catholic bishop at Canada -- a popish priest at Nova Scotia, as we
suppose publicly supported, and Counselors in a British American Island, of
the same religious complexion -- together with the late zealous application,
for an English-American Episcopate; and judge the religious privileges of this
country to be in no degree of danger, if they are able.

IT is greatly to be desired that, for the future, the ministers of our
benevolent impartial Lord, may pay a due regard to liberty, as well as
subjection to principalities; as a kind of atonement for the dishonor that has
been reflected on the Gospel, and the immense damages done to an enslaved world
by clergymen's excessive complaisance to men in power.

THE ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ will think it their duty to assist the
people, at this time of peculiar difficulty and danger, in a due religious
acknowledgement of the Governor of the world. Our adversity is to be considered
as the effect of providential agency, or permission -- as a righteous parental
chastisement of Heaven, for our many provocations; and a loud call for
universal repentance and reformation, according to the Gospel of Christ.

THOUGH greatly distant, we are sorrowfully infected with the irreligion and
vices, which are predominant in England; and which reign there to such a
degree, that we can scarcely forbear applying, such language as that in the
Revelation; Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues; for her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God has remembered her iniquities. A worldly spirit, discovering itself,
in numerous immoral effects of avarice, in many instances of preferring private
temporal interests before the good of the Country, and, as to some, in an easy
declension from the dissenting cause, and coincidence with a certain more
worldly, and less reformed ecclesiastical Establishment; The immoral practice
of gaming with lucrative purposes, chiefly among persons in that which they
call high life; A great neglect of public religious Ordinances, in almost all
parts of the Land; Amazing profanity, especially in maritime places; Widely
prevailing and highly excessive use of spirituous liquors, together with a
variety of high-strained modes of extravagance and luxury, more especially in
our larger and more wealthy trading Towns, -- Things which appear at such a day
as this, exceeding sinful absurd and aggravated, are in the number of those
sins wherewith our times are marked; while some persons run off into the
wildest excesses of sentiment, some concerning Faith have made shipwreck, and
others are tinctured with the spirit of skepticism. And such irreligion and
vice, whereby we offend our God and the God of our Fathers, and merit our
misery at his hands, are, in a great measure borrowed (with unaccountably fond
embraces) of the very people from whom our sufferings proceed. -- The
reflection is sufficiently painful and confounding, without proceeding to
observe that, persons may possibly be found, degenerate enough to spread vice
and wickedness among us, from a principle of Balaami^is^ policy, or to render
us an easier prey, by means of the venality, carelessness and timidity which are
the natural effects of luxury.

BUT whatever may be justly said of their origination, certain it is, that by
numerous offenses against God, we merit a much deeper plunge of adversity, than
we are now involved in; and we are called upon, by the monitory language of
Divine Providence, to consider our ways, and turn our feet unto his
testimonies, and so to give glory to the Lord our God, before our feet stumble
upon the dark mountains; and while we look for light, he turn it into the
shadow of death, and make it GROSS darkness.

IT is hoped that this People will unitedly exert themselves, in the methods
justifiable in the sight of God, for their deliverance; and so with humblest
confidence, commit their cause to the God of all grace, and mercy, and wisdom;
putting up fervent prayers, in the name of Christ, to that Being who is able to
save; and, in the mean time, practically considering the indispensable
importance of joining repentance unfeigned with supplications, as they would
rationally expect audience with Him, who loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity: And that all persons, in any places of public trust, will exert
themselves, according to the requirements of their several stations, to put a
stop to the growing infidelity and immorality, whereby we provoke the Holy One
of Israel to anger. And may the God of our Fathers make bare his holy Arm, for
our salvation!

WHILE the dispensations of Providence instruct the people, in that fear of the
Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom; we trust they will continue to pay a
due regard to the Divine Law for honoring the King; and none of them slide,
under their trials, into an habit of despising all government. To spurn at
well-conducted civil administration, because of the wrong steps of particular
rulers, is behavior as ineffably perverse and unm^nly, as it is to despise
well-behaving ministers of Christ, and deistically to reproach the excellent
well-attested religion of our Lord, because of the failings of particular
clergymen, and the false irrational doctrines which, in pretense, have been
deduced from Scripture, by the wickedness of designing, or weakness of honest
men.

FINALLY, may God grant, that, henceforth, our Government may attain the end of
magistracy, the general happiness; that our officers may be peace, our exactors
righteousness; that judgment (and not innocent blood) may run down as waters,
and righteousness as a mighty stream; that this people, ( the branch of the
Lord's planting) may be all righteous, and inherit the land, in the
uninterrupted enjoyment of freedom, civil and religious, and all the blessings
of goodness, forever.

AMEN.
THE END.

