THE TRIAL OF THE REVEREND JOHN ALLEN, Taken exact from the Proceedings on the
KING's Commission of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery for the
City of LONDON. Held at JUSTICE-HALL in the OLD-BAILEY, On Thursday the 12th,
Friday the 13th, Saturday the 14th, Monday the 16th, and Tuesday the 17th of
JANUARY, 1769.

(PUBLISHED at the Request of Many.)

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and DAVIS, in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXXIII.

TRIAL etc.
JOHN ALLEN, was indicted for falsely forging and counterfeiting, and willingly
acting and assisting in the same, a false and forged note, called a promissory
note, to this purport viz. London, 10th Oct. 1768.
Four months after date, I promise to pay to Isaac Levi, o^ order, 50l. for
Value received.

THOMAS LITTLE,
In Oxford-Chapel-Court, Cavendish-Square.

And for uttering the same, with intent to (...) the said Thomas Little, well
knowing the same to be forged, Dec. 7 h.

Thomas Little. I am a Carpenter, and live in Oxford Chapple-Court. On the 6th
of December last, the Prisoner came to me, and asked me if I had not given a
note, payable to Isaac Levi, or order? I said I had, and that I was defrauded
out of it, and till it become due I should not pay it. I said I was very busy
then, but would meet him any where the next day. We appointed to meet at the
Valiant Trooper in Oxford-Road. The next morning I went, and acquainted Mr.
Hall with it, and told him I had one of my notes come back again that I had
been defrauded out of, and begged he would go along with me to meet this
person. We went and met the prisoner, and after having pleaded poverty, telling
him I had been defrauded out of it, he desired us to go out and consult between
ourselves what I would give him: we went out, and agreed for me to give him
five guineas.


Q. How did he say he came by it?


Littel. He said he had given the full value for it, we told him, when we
returned to him I would give him five pounds; he said that it was but little
more than two shillings in the pound The note was dated the 10th of Oct. 1768,
for 50l. Some more words past between us: he said he was going out of town, and
that that note kept him in town longer than he should have done, and said, I
must make it up seven guineas against Friday night Some time after he consented
to take five guineas.


Q. Was that at the same meeting?


Little It was. This was on the 7th of December. I produced five guineas on the
table, he was very unwilling to produce the note, but at last be did produce it
to Mr. Hall. Mr. Hall looked at it, and asked him how he came by it, laying it
was (...) indorsed He desired me to look at it, and see if it was my hand
writing, I said it was not, it was forged; I took my money up, and Mr. Hall
took up the note, and put it in his pocketbook. Some time after he made a
pretense to go out to make water; Mr Hall went out after him, but I saw no more
of him till Mr. Hall brought him in again, and said the prisoner had run away,
and he had brought him back; after that, Mr. Hall desired me to go out of the
room, that they might settle between themselves; after that I came in again;
then Mr Hall asked me if the prisoner should go about his business; I said no,
he should go before a magistrate. We took him before major Spinnage


Q. How was you defrauded out of the note?


Little. I was defrauded out of two 50l. notes by a Jew. I had occasion for
money, and I gave a Jew two 50l. notes, and he was to bring me the money next
morning, but he kept the notes, and never brought the money. One was dated the
10th of October, four months after date, the same as this, and the other six
months after date. The Jew is now in the King's Bench Prison. The Prisoner told
me one of the notes was paid away, and the other might be recovered he believed.


Q. Had you any security for these notes you delivered to the Jew?


Little That Jew gave me a counter note, that is, his own note for a hundred
pounds. I have his note now.


Q. Did you know the prisoner before he came with this note?


Little. No, I did not. I never saw him with my eyes to my knowledge.


John Hall. I am a carpenter. On the 7th of December Mr. Little came to my
house, and told me a gentleman had come to his house with one of his 50l. notes
that he had been defrauded of, and that he was to meet him the next day at the
valiant trooper in Oxford Road, and he desired me to go along with him; which I
did. When we came there, Mr. Little went in some time before me, may be two
seconds; I followed after and saw him and the prisoner in a private room
together, the prisoner had got a pine of beer; the prisoner looked at me. Mr.
Little said, This is one of my friends, it is no secret, he knows I have been
defrauded out of these note. They began talking about the notes. Mr Little
asked him whether he had given credit for the note or not; the prisoner said he
had not, but that Levi had goods of him for it; and he said he wondered that Mr
Little was so simple as to give the note to the Jew, and bid him be careful
always to look upon a Jew as a thief: he farther said, Levi told him it was as
good as a Bank note. I spoke to the prisoner, and told him Mr Little was a poor
man, and not able to pay the notes when they became due, nor neither would he.
The prisoner said, that when they became due, Mr. Little must be arrested for
them, and he must bail it, and it would cost him 4 or 5 and 20l. to defend it,
and then he was to throw it into chancery, before he could recover the note,
and told us of a man that was defrauded out of some notes as Mr. Little was,
one Mr. Tailor in Bond-Street, by a Jew, and he was advised to take half the
value of the note He told Mr. Little he did not choose to hurt him, that it was
better for him to lose past of it, than all, and desired him to go out with me
and consult both together what he could afford to give. Mr. Little and I went
out together into the taproom. I told Mr. Little to offer him five guineas: Mr.
Little said, he could not for shame offer him so little as five guineas: I said
you may offer it, you may advance, if that will not do: We went in, he offered
the prisoner five guineas: The prisoner said he could not take that, that was
little more than two shillings in the pound; then there was a good deal more
talk about it: The prisoner desired Little never to trust a Jew any more: Then
he said Mr. Little must give him seven guineas. Mr. Little said if he could
stay till Monday or Tuesday he should have seven guineas, but he had not so
much then by him. I sent to a friend of Mr. Little's to borrow six guineas:
That friend came into the room and lent him the money; the prisoner agreed to
take five guineas, saying, he better take that, than go to law; and said the
Jew was in the King's Bench: The five guineas were laid down upon the table;
the prisoner had a pocketbook in his hand, out of which he took the note, and
gave it to me, and laid his hand upon the five guineas: This is the note,
(produced in court) I took it up, and said this note is not indorsed; how came
you by this note not indorsed? Said he, I would not give a halfpenny for an
indorsement of a Jew, I would not give a farthing for that: he desired us
always to look forwards, and not backwards: I said to Mr. Little, take care
that it is your own note: He said, it was not his note: I said, Mr. Little
before you judge too rash, what kind of paper did you write your notes on? He
said he bought a half-pennyworth sheet of writing paper, and wrote two 50l.
notes; and the 100l. note likewise was wrote on the same sheet of paper: I said
this is a forged note, this was torn out of a memorandum-book, for here is the
ilot-holes where it had been stitched through: The prisoner looking at me,
said, A forged note! If the rogue has paid me a forged note, i will prosecute
him, let it cost me what it will: I will go immediately to the King's Bench and
have him taken up: I said to the prisoner, I took you to be a gentleman, and a
very human man, but I am afraid you are a villain: I put the note in my
pocketbook, and Mr. Little took up the five guineas: Mr. Little said he should
go before a magistrate: Then the prisoner put his hand to the waistband of his
breeches, and turned as if going to the door to make water: I followed him to
the door: As soon as he got to the door he pulled his cloths on one side and
set a runnng: I followed him a good many yards, perhaps two or three hundred
yards; at last he turned up Chapel-court, where Mr Little lives, and run up
into a corner, and offered to dodge me: I catched hold of him, when he was all
of a tremble, and begged I would let him go home, and he would tell me how he
came by the note: I told him he should not go home; that I should take him to
the house where he came from; and then he might tell Mr. Little how he came by
it.

Going along, he told me he found it just at the bottom of Ludgate Hill, by the
Fleet market, in a memorandum-book: I said, Then why did you not tell us of it
when you came? He said, necessity obliged him to do as he had, he wanted a few
guineas to carry him abroad: I took him into the house again; and desired Mr.
Little to go into the tap room, and I would speak to the prisoner: Then I said,
he had better confess, if he had any concern with the Jew, as it would be
better for him: He said, he did not know Levi the Jew; and that he actually
found the note wrote in a memorandum-book, and begged I would let him go: I
said, it was not in my power; I would ask Mr. Little, if he would let me go, on
condition he would assist me in getting my notes. He clapped his hand to his
heart, and said, As he hoped to be saved, he would come the next day. He gave
me direction where to find him; which was, to enquire of Mr. Williams,
Linnen-draper, in Ratcliff-high-way. I called Mr. Little in, and asked him if
he would let him go; he said he would not. We took him before major Spinnage.
When he came there, he would not tell his name, but denied that to be his name
which he had wrote on the paper. When Mr. Little came to me, he told me, a
gentleman that came fifteen miles out of London, had brought one of his notes.


Cross Examination.
Q. Are you sure the prisoner said he received them of Levi the Jew?


Hall. He did tell me so; and when Mr. Little looked at it, he said it was not
his hand writing.


Q After you brought him back, how long were you before you took him to Major
Spinnage?


Hall. About a quarter of an hour.


Q. Had you any consultation about it with Major Spinach, or any body else?


Hall. No.


Q. What day did he say he found it?


Hall. That I cannot tell. He said he found it at the bottom of Ludgate hill.
He said, My dear soul let me go home, and I will tell you how I came by it.


Q What are you, a master or journeyman?


Hall. I am a master Carpenter.


Q. Is Mr. Little apt to deal in these sort of papers?


Hall. I have known him but a little time, (the note in question produced.)


John Hillam. I know Mr. Little's hand writing I have seen a great many bills
of his. ( He takes the note in his hand) I believe this is not his hand writing.


Q What are you?


John Hillam I am a victullar. I swear positively it is not his hand writing. I
am quite clear. I have seen him write many times; he signs only T. and this is
not so close as he writes.


(The note read.) London, 10 Oct. 1768.
Four months after date, I promise to pay to Isaac Levi. or order, fifty
pounds, value received. Per Thomas Little, in Oxford Chapel-Court,
Cavendish-Square.

L. 50.


Prisoners Defense.
On December the 7th, coming down Ludgate Hill, at the corner of the
Fleet-Market, I found a penny memorandum-book. It was doubled, and almost to
pieces. I took it up in my hand, and went as far as Mr. Garaway's, a friend of
mine that keeps a seed-shop in Fleet Street, with the book in my hand. I said
to Mrs. Garaway, Madam, I have picked up a memorandum-book; what is in it I
cannot tell; I have just opened it; whether they are bank notes, or what. There
is something in it. I presented it to her, after I had read this note. She took
the book and opened it, and looked at it read it, and gave it me again. After
that Mr. Garaway came in; he likewise saw the book and read the note: after
that I put it in my pocket, and finding at the bottom it was directed to Thomas
Little, Oxford-Chappel-Court, Cavendish-Square, I thought I would go and ask
him if he had real value for that note. It was made payable to Isaac Levi, whom
I never saw. I looked upon it that it was the property of Isaac Levi, and not
Mr. Little; therefore I thought in justice it should be returned to Thomas
Little again, if he had not received value for it, and leaving it to his
generosity to give me what he pleased. I went to Mr. Little on the 12th of
December, and knocking at the door, he came himself. I asked him his name, and
if he had not given a note of hand to Isaac Levi, a Jew, for 50l. value,
payable at four months? he said, I have. I said, Sir, have you had value for
it? He said he had not; he told me he had given two notes, and had had no value
for them, and that he would not pay them when they became due. I said, You need
not make yourself uneasy about it. He said he was busy in christening a child,
and desired me to call in the evening; and accordingly I went. I paused in my
own mind, that as he had not received value for it, I would return the note;
leaving it to him to give me what he pleased. When I came, some conversation
arose: he said he should not pay it, for he had not had value. I believe I did
say, That might not make any essential difference, for whoever has given value
for it, will demand the money of you. He said he should not pay. I said, very
well. Upon this I did imagine there would be nothing more said. He said, Sir,
you don't seem willing to part with it, what will you have for it? I said, How
could he think I should take any thing for a note not endorsed? I said, I do
not ask a farthing, I leave it to you. He said, I should be willing to give you
something for it. Upon which he said, what will you have? I said, I shall leave
it to you. Then they both whispered. I said, Do not whisper, as though you was
afraid of saying something before me; you are at liberty to go out and agree
between yourselves, and that shall be the thing. They went out, and came in
again* Then Mr. Hall agreed that Mr. Little should give me five guineas,
believing it to be Mr. Little's own note. I believe I might say, that was very
little for a 50l. note I said I shall leave it to you entirely. I never
insisted on any more than what they proposed to give me. Upon which they
proposed then five guineas afterward. They came to a determination to raise
the five guineas, and five guineas were laid down upon the table. Then they
asked me, If I had the note? I took it out of my pocketbook. Mr Little said,
If it is my note, it is wrote Thomas. I then replied, Mr. Little, it is, and I
believe it is yours. He said, it is dated October 10th, believing it to be his
own note. I laid it down and put my hand upon one of the guineas. Said Mr. Hall
to Mr. Little, are you sure this is your own hand writing? Mr. Little then
said, his note was wrote upon a longer piece of paper. I then declared that I
found it afterward. They began to use me very roughly. My spirit was up, and
instead of owning my name, when they said it was a forged note, I was in a
consternation about its falling into my hands, and wrote Williams on that
paper. The dispute rose pretty high, and they called names: I resented it, and
upon that consideration I did not tell them where I lived; neither did I tell
them my name that night. If I said any thing about seven guineas, it was
leaving it to his generosity to give what he pleased. I found words arose so
high, that I expected they would terminate in blows; and so when I was out of
the house I walked off. I am a dissenting minister, and my employ that of a
schoolmaster, and live in Virginia-Street.

For the Prisoner.
Mary Garaway. My husband keeps a seed shop on Fleet Street. I remember Mr.
Allen coming to our house one day, and said he had found a Book: This was
between one and two o'clock. He produced it: it was like a memorandum-book.
There was a Note in the book. He said he had just found it, and just by our
house.


Q. Did you know him before?


Garaway. I have but a very short acquaintance with him.


Q. Whereabouts is your house in Fleet Street?


Garaway. It is about the middle, between St. Dunstan's church and the
Fleet-market.


Q. Did you read the note?


Garaway. There were three memorandums in the book. I read one note; Abraham
Jacobs. I think, was one of the names.


Q. Should you know it again?


Garaway. I believe I should. (She takes the note into her hand.) This is
something like it.


Q. When did he bring that book to your house?


Garaway. It was about a week before he was taken up.


Mr. Garaway, Some time in the beginning of Dec. (but the day I do not know)
the prisoner came into my house and said he had picked up a pocketbook, and
said there was a note of 50l. in it, and showed it to me. I said, if it was of
any concern, it would be advertised in a few days, and if not, he had better
advertise it. I looked at it: I remember it was signed by one Thomas Little for
50l. (He takes the note in his hand.) I do not think this is the note. I think
that note was wrote in a worse hand a great deal, and on a larger piece of
paper.


Q. What sort of a memorandum-book was it?


Garaway. It had a marble cover. It was rather thiner than a common memorandum
book, but of the same kind. The note was wrote on one of the leaves, not
separated, to the best of my knowledge


John Kimpston. My acquaintance with Mr. Allen is but small: I have known him
about a year. I know but very little of his character; all I know is, this is
not his handwriting.


Peter Ashmore. I am not come to his character. I heard Mr. Hall say, he
believed the note was not Mr. Allen's handwriting.


Richard Davis. I come only in respect to Mr. Allen's handwriting. This is not
his handwriting.


Q. What is his general character?


Davis. I have known him some years. I never heard him to be guilty of such an
action.


Q Is his character a good one?


Davis. So far it is.


Q. Do you know any thing against him?


Davis. No, never.


Thomas Lee. I have known him about four years: he was a preacher in
Petticoat-Lane once. I know nothing of his character. I heard Mr. Little say,
he believed the note was not the prisoner's handwriting.


Richard White. I have known the prisoner between four and five years.


Q. What is his general character?


White. To me his character is as good as any man's in England, and I would
have trusted him with any thing that fell in my Way.


After the foregoing Evidences were duly examined Mr. ALLEN was Acquitted.

THE END.

