COUNSEL TO THE CHRISTIAN-TRAVELLER: ALSO, MEDITATIONS AND EXPERIENCES MADE
PUBLIC, As a TESTIMONY to the right Way of GOD, revealed and made known in this
the Day of his glorious Appearing in his People; that they may be encouraged to
walk therein to the End thereof.

THE FIFTH EDITION, REVISED AND CORRECTED.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Treatise concerning Thoughts and Imaginations, Good and
Evil; also, a few Words concerning the Life of a Christian, and Christian
Worship.

BY W. SHOWN.

EXODUS XIV. 15. Speak unto the Children of Israel, that they go forward.

MAT. X. 22. He that endures to the end shall be saved.

DUBLIN, Printed; And, LANCASTER, Reprinted by FRANCIS BAILEY, for CALEB
JOHNSON. MDCCLXXIII

To the Christian Reader.
I Do not mean to thee, that have only the name Christian, because thou have
been born in a nation called so, or because thy parents were so, and thou have
walked in their traditions, and made profession of that which is reputed the
Christian Religion. Neither do I mean thou, that art the son, daughter,
servant, or handmaid of a Christian indeed; who have been educated and
instructed in the principles of the Christian Religion, not only by precept,
but by example; and have, in honor and respect of thy parents or master,
yielded obedience so far, as to walk in some measure in the form thereof, out
of the superfluity of naughtiness that is in the world; which is commendable in
its place, time and season: Yet thou art not the Christian I here intend. But
thou art the man or woman, who have known something of the work and power of
God in or upon thy mind, and art in some measure quicked and made alive
thereby, have been made sensible of thy sore bondage and captivity, and have
cries and breathings begotten in thee for deliverance, under the sense of thy
sad state and condition without a Savior. Thou, to whom sin has been a
grievous burden, with which thou have been weary and heavy laden. Thou to whom
sin is made exceeding sinful, so that thou hate it, even as God hates it,
viz. because it is sin; and art in love with rightteousness, purity and
holiness, having felt the drawings of the Father to the Son thy Savior; and
thou art now in him, pressing hard to be wholly freed from the one, and to
become a servant, child and friend of the other.

Thou art the Christian Reader my bowels yearn toward, my care is for, and my
advice is to, that thou may persevere to the end, and escape all the dangers
in the way; that thou may be acquainted with the wiles of the enemy, and
with his mysterious working against thee, even after the strong man is bound,
his goods spoiled, and thy house swept and garnished; after thou have clean
escaped the pollutions of the world, and the errors therein, and have had much
experience of the power and presence of the Lord; even after he has brought
thee into his vineyard, into his garden, and made thee a dresser and keeper of
it, if thou will receive and keep the penny (the reward) thou must be diligent
and watchful therein. Remember, the serpent came into Paradise to deceive, and
that satan came before God, to accuse and stir him up against the righteous,
and that the great red dragon got into Heaven; and not only so, but made war
there, and stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, to devour
the child as soon as it was born. And when he was overcome in Heaven, and cast
into the earth and sea, and among the inhabitants thereof, he ceased not to be
wroth with the woman, and to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep
the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus. Read Rev. xii. This
has been his work of old, and is the same at this day.

Seeing Paradise, the presence of God and Heaven, are not exempted from the
approaches of the serpent, satan and dragon; what great need there is for thee
to be always armed against him, and to keep a watchful eye over him, especially
when he appears as a friend, as he did in Paradise, when he said, You shall not
die, you shall be as gods. As if he had said, I am so much your friend, that I
am come to persuade you to do something to better your states, and to bring you
into a greater glory: I propose nothing but what, if you obey me, shall turn to
your good. Thus he beguiled them then, and has done since, and may do thee, if
thou abides not in the light which discovers him, and all his wiles and
devices, formings and transformings. But as thine eye is single, thou will
always see and know him to be as he is, and not as he appears to be: So shall
thou never be deceived nor betrayed by him. But many assaults, trials, and
temptations, thou must expect from him. Amidst all, keep thine eye upon God thy
Savior, who has given thee faith in him; which faith is indeed very precious,
and very powerful, able to overcome and give thee victory over all thy enemies.
If thou keep it, and grow in it, it will certainly be as an anchor unto thee,
when storms attend; as a shield and breast plate unto thee, when enemies
assault. Remember the counsel of Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus, to the
Thessalonians. Let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breast plate
of forth and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation; for God has not
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by or Lord Jesus Christ. This
was the blessed end of the call and appointment of God in all ages, even that
all who hear and obey it, might obtain salvation, the end of faith and hope;
and is the same to a remnant in this age. Happy art thou that enjoyest it, and
abidest with him that has called thee to it, and wrought it in thee, and for
thee; which is God, blessed and praised throughout all generations.

Now, Christian Reader, what I have here committed to the press, is from a deep
and weighty consideration, observation and knowledge of the glorious appearance
of God in this our day, in the consciences of thousands, who have been made as
clay in the hand of the potter, ready to be formed according to his will, even
vesse^s of honor, and many have been made so, and do so remain; but some have
been marred on the wheel. Some have miscarried in the midst of the way; some
have sat down, some have fallen out (even with their brethren) by the way;
some have turned out of the way, and brought an evil report upon it, and lard
stumbling blocks in the way, and occasioned the way of truth to be evil spoken
of; whose damnation slun^bers not. My hearty desire is, that neither thou nor I
may ever be of this number. What I say unto thee, I say unto my own soul, Go
forward to perfection. Let not the enemy of thy soul beguile thee of thy
exceeding great reward, which is laid up in store for ^li that love the
appearance of God in Christ Jesus, and that join therewith, and work therein,
till all the works of God are finished, and till all the works of sin, self and
satan, are wrought out and destroyed, and thou fully delivered from the bondage
of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God. This thou
may have longed for and breathed after, and art now called to the possession
and enjoyment of; and not only so, but to the abiding and standing fast
therein; so thou shall never be entangled with the yoke of bondage again, nor
turn back in thy heart to Egypt; nor ever hunger nor thirst after the forbidden
f^^it again. So to him that is able to keep thee from falling, and to the word
of his grace (in thy heart) I recommend thee; which as thou keep unto, and
learnest of, thou will be enabled to persevere safely to the end, and in the
end lie down in peace, and know the God of peace to keep thy heart in peace.
This is the blessed fruit and effect of righteousness, of well-doing, diligence
and watchfulness; which as thou art found in, grace and peace will be
multiplied in and to thee, through the knowledge of God, and Jesus our Lord,
who has called us to glory and virtue: To whom be praise forever more.

W. SHOWN.

IF this small treatise shall come into the hand of such who account themselves
religious, and are zealous for the doctrines and traditions of their
forefathers, and can talk much of Christianity, God, Christ and the holy
Scriptures; but are highly offended with a little remnant of people that God
has raised up in this age, to bear witness to the way of the Lord, under the
name Light, Grace, Law, Spirit and Power of God within; accounting it a new
sort of doctrine, inconsistent with Christ and Christianity, giving it
despicable names, etc.

To such my earnest request is, (even in love and good will to you) seeing you
say you love, believe and honor the Scriptures; that you would show yourselves
like the Bereans, with an unprejudiced mind search the Scriptures, especially
these following. Be serious, take leisure to read them, meditate a little,
laying aside thy carnal thoughts, and that wisdom which is from beneath, which
darkneth the counsel of God, and wresteth the Scriptures. Then thou may
clearly perceive, that it is no new doctrine to preach the Light, nor error to
assent that it is the way of God, that leads all that turn to it and walk in
it, into true Christianity. If any objection arises and remains in thy mind,
concerning the way of God here borne testimony to; if any words that can be
read, writ or spoken, are able to give thee a satisfactory convincing answer
thereto, the Scriptures are those words, especially to thee that professest an
honor and obedience to them.

But this, in short, I testify, That if thou slight the gift of God, the
manifestation of his Spirit, light and grace bestowed upon thee, and given unto
thee, as one talent at least to improve, thou can not understand nor receive
the testimony of the Scriptures. If thou have any desire to understand the holy
Scriptures, and things of God, thou must come to know and love the Light, Law
and Spirit of God, and feel the operation of it in thy own heart, to fit and
prepare thee to understand the divine mysteries of his kingdom, and to inherit
them; until which, though thou may account thyself wise, rich and full, and
may be clothed with a profession of Christianity, yet thou art poor, blind,
miserable and naked; covered with a covering, but not with the spirit of the
Lord, not with a meek and quiet spirit; not with a Christ like spirit; not with
the spirit of the primitive Christians.

So thou art not in a capacity to understand their words, though thou may
profess them as the Jews did the Law and the Prophets, yet persecuted him of
whom they testified. That thou may avoid doing the same, I counsel thee to
receive the grace, light and spirit of God, which appears in thee, and shines
unto thee, in order to lead and guide thee unto everlasting life. This is the
will of God, and the desire of his people, that all men might come to the
knowledge of the truth and be saved; not only from condemnation and punishment,
but from committing sin, the cause thereof.

By this one thing, thou may know whether thy heart be right in the fight of
the Lord, whether the spirit and nature of Christianity be prevalent in thee:
If thou art not as much afraid to commit sin, as thou art of hell and
punishment; if the doing of evil is not become so odious and hateful unto thee
(because contrary to the nature and mind of God) that if there was no
punishment entailed upon the doing thereof, yet thou would not defile thyself
therewith, nor dishonor thy God, nor thy profession of his name. If it be not
so with thee, thou have great cause to question, whether thou art indeed what
thou haft a name, profession, or an opinion to be, viz. a TRUE CHRISTIAN.

The Testimony of the Holy Scriptures concerning the LIGHT which is spiritual.
Job xxix. 3. WHEN his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness. Isa. ix. 2. The people that walked in darkness, have
seen a great light: They that dwell in tho land of the shadow of death, upon
them has the light shined. Chap. lx. 1. Arise, shine; for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Luke ii. 32. A light to lighten
the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. John viii. 12. Then spoke
Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: He that follows
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Chap. xii.
36. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
light. Verse. 46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on
me should not abide in darkness. 2 Cor. iv. 6. For God, who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. Col. i. 12. Giving
thanks unto the father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light. 2. Tim. i. 10. But is now made manifest by
the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality to light, through the gospel. 1. John i. 5. This
then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God
is light, and in him is no darkness at all. Verse. But if we wall in the light,
as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Chap. ii. 8. Again, a new
commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you: because
the darkness is past, and the true light now shines. Verse. 9. He that says he
is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now. Verse.
10. He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none occasion
of stumbling in him 2 Pet. i. 19 We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. 1 Peter ii.
9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praise of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Rev. xxi 24. And the nations of
them that are saved, shall walk in the light of in: And the kings of the earth
do bring their glory and honor into it. 1 Thessalonians. v. 5. Ye are all the children
of the light, and the children of the day: We are not of the night, nor of
darkness. Ephesians. v. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in
the Lord: Walk as children of light. Verse. 13. But all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light: For whatsoever does make manifest, if
light. Isa. ii. 5. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of
the Lord. Psalm. xxvii. 1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation; whom shall I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm.
cxix 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Micha vii.
8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy When I fall, I shall arise; when I set
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, John i. 4. In him was life and
the life was the light of men. Verse. 5. And the light shines in darkness, and
the darkness comprehends it not. Verse. 7. The same came for a witness, to
bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe. Verse. 8. He
was not that light, but was sent to bear witne^^ of that light. Verse. 9. That
was the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world. Chap.
iii. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. Verse. 20.
For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. Verse. 21. But he that does the truth, comes
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in
God. Acts xiii. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee
to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation unto the
ends of the earth. Chap. xxvi. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
that is in me. Verse. 23. That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the
first that should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people,
and to the Gentiles.
The Testimony of the Holy Scriptures concerning the LAW, SPIRIT, WORD, GRACE,
LOVE and POWER of GOD within.
Psalm xxxvii. 31. THE law of his God is in his heart, none of his steps shall
slide. Psalm xl. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God: Yea, thy law is within
my heart. Isa. li. 7. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people
in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid
of their reviling. Romans ii. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the law,
do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a
law unto themselves. Verse, 15. Which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. Chap. viii. 2. For the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and
death. Verse. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that
the spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. Verse. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin, but the spirit is life, because of righteousness. Verse. 11. But if the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit
that dwells in you. Verse. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die:
But if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
Verse. 16. The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. Verse. 23. And not only they, but ourselves also, which have
the first fruits of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. Verse. 26.
Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the spirit itself makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered. I Cor. xii. 7. But the manifestation of
the spirit, is given to every man to profit withal. Chap. ii. 4. And my speech,
and my preaching, was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Verse. 10. But God has revealed them
unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God. Verse. 11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but
the spirit of God. Verse. 12. Now we have received not the spirit of the world,
but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God. Chap. vi. 17. But he that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit. 1 John iii. 24. And he that keeps his commandments dwells in him,
and he in him: And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he
has given us. Chap. iv. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his spirit. 1 Peter i. 11. Searching what, or what
manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified before hand the suffering of Christ, and the glory that would follow.
2 Timothy i. 7. For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of
Love, and of a sound mind. Gal. iv. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. Chap. v. 16.
This I say then, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
flesh. Verse. 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.
Ephesians. ii. 22. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the spirit. Chap. iii. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works
in us. John v. 38. And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he has
sent, him ye believe not. Verse. 42. But I know you, that you have not the love
of God in you. Chap. vi. 53. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. Chap. viii. 37. I know that ye are Abraham's seed, but ye
seek to kill me, because my word has no place in you. Chap. xiv. 17. Even the
spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. Chap. xv. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.
Verse. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you. Romans viii. 10. And if Christ be in you,
the body is dead because of sin: but the spirit is life because of
righteousness. Verse. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you. 1 Cor. iii. 16. Know ye
not that ye are the temple of God; and that the spirit of God dwells in you.
Chap. vi. 19. What, know you not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? Chap. xiv. 25.
And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his
face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. 2 Cor.
xiii. 5. Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith: Prove yourselves: Know
ye not your ownselves, ^ow that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Gal. iv. 15. Where is then the blessedness you spoke of? For I bear
you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own
eyes, and have given them to me. Ephesians. iv. 6. One God and father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all. Phil. ii. 5. Let this mind be in
you, which was also in Christ Jesus. Verse. 13. For it is God which works in
you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Col. i. 27. To whom God would
make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles,
which is Christ in you the hope of glory. Chap. iii. 16. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord. 2 Thessalonians. i. 12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified
in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 John ii. 14. I have written unto you fathers, because ye have know
him that is from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye
are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one. Verse. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you:
and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you
of all things, and is truth and is no lie: and even as it h^th taught you, ye
shall abide in him. Chap. iv. 4. Ye are of God, little children, and have
overcome them; because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the
world. Chap. iii. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Verse. 15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a
murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. Chap.
iv. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and ^^ in us, because he has
given us of his spirit. Verse. 15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son
of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. Verse. 16. And we have known, and
believed the love that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him. Chap. v. 20. And we know that the Son of
God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is
true: and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the
true God, and eternal life.
THOU may perceive and understand by these scriptures, that righteous men and
Christians in ages past, were witnesses of the light of God shining in them; of
the Word, Law, Power, Grace, and Love of God manifesting, appearing and
operating in them; which if thou art a stranger to, thou can neither be a
truly righteous man, nor a real Christian, profess what thon wilt.

Many who profess God, Christ and Christianity, are fallen into such gross
carnality, that to speak or write to them of the spiritual appearance and work
of God, in and by his Light, Law, Grace, Spirit, etc. and the powerful
operations thereof within upon the mind, will, understanding and conscience,
seems so strange, so new, so incredible, that they can in no wise pay any
regard unto it; but rather mock and deride thereat, as if they had never seen
nor read the holy scriptures; whose testimony thereto is as clear as the
morning without clouds. This is an evident sign, that their eyes are closed,
their hearts and ears are gross and dull of hearing, their understanding dark,
and their minds so carnal, that they are become dead; for, to be carnally
minded is death.

In this death, the carnal-minded man can talk of the fame of wisdom, but
possess and inherit folly, and lie down in forrow. This condition is much
lamented by a little remnant, who are ready to say in love and good will to
their neighbors and countrymen, Come hither and we will tell you what the Lord
has done for our souls; which were as yours are, in death and darkness, in
bondage and captivity, even while professors of better things. The end of every
true Christian, in writing, printing, preaching, etc. is, that people might
come to have the eye of their understanding opened, and know the day star to
arise in their hearts, that they may see their way out of death, ignorance and
carnality, and receive the light of life, and therein wisdom to understand and
receive the sayings of holy men, recorded in the holy scriptures; until which,
they will wrest them to their own destruction, and never truly understand nor
receive the comfort of them, nor of any words proceeding from the same spirit
of God in this age. This is the word of truth to all it may concern, which,
together with the scriptures I have quoted, I intend shall serve for answer to
all objections that shall be made by the nominal Christian, or bare professor
of Christ and Christianity, into whose hand this little book may come; knowing
assuredly, that there is no end of contending with such with pen, ink and
paper: But however, I can in truth subscribe myself their friend.

Some REASONS why the holy Scriptures are to be esteemed and preferred, by true
Christians, above other Writings, though from the same Spirit, in this
Generation.
I. BECAUSE they give an account of the diverse dispensations and operations of
God, before and after the fall, in order to lead mankind out of the fall, and
to restore him into his primitive state again. The manner, method and order of
which, is, in the depth of the wisdom of God, declared and set forth in the
holy scriptures to the man of God, more than in any other book whatsoever.

II. Because therein are recorded the testimonies and experience of many
righteous men, throughout all those various dispensations, appearances and
operations of God before the law, under the law and prophets, and also under
the Gospel; being all briefly and plainly set forth to the man of God, for the
increase of his learning, encouragement of his hope, strengthening of his
faith, and confirming of his confidence.

III. Because the nominal Christian pretends he has a great esteem for the
scriptures, and cries them up for his only rule, to walk and order his
conversation by; so that the true Christian, and Minister of Christianity, has
a great advantage thereby, in order to reprove, persuade and convince him, that
he does not obey, nor walk according to his own professed rule.

IV. Because it is the custom, nature and practice of the spirit of darkness,
deceit and persecution, to despise, slight and contemn righteous men, their
words and writings, while they live; and to garnish their sepulchers, and
profess honor to them when they are dead; so though it be but in words, that
they advance them above themselves, as their rule and guide, they are of great
service to the true Cristian and Minister of Christianity, for the detection
and conviction of gainsayers, and vindication of his doctrine and practice,
life and conversation; therefore to be esteemed above other writings, they
being in some sort as a wall of defense unto him.

V. Because the general good and salvation of all mankind, is the principal aim
and end of the true Christian and Christian Minister; and seeing in this part
of the world called Christendom, people profess a great reverence and esteem
for the writings of holy men in generations of old; not much regarding what is
written from the same spirit in holy men in the present age, though one with
the scriptures; as Christ convinced the Jews out of the law and the prophets,
and Paul the Athenians out of their own poets: So the true Christian and
Minister of Christ, who has unity with the scriptures, and with the holy men's
spirits that gave them forth, have the same advantage now against those that
only profess them in words, and live not the life they exhort to and call for.
For this reason we have good cause to value them above other books, though
written from the same spirit in this age; because those people, who want the
salvation the scriptures bear witness of, may come to be made wise through
faith unto salvation by them.

COUNSEL TO THE Christian-Traveller.
HAVE thou put thy hand to the plow? look not back; Keep it there till the
fallow ground be plowed up, and the briars and thorns rooted out and destroyed,
that the seed may grow up in thee to perfection.

Have thou known the kingdom, and the power in which it stands, like a little
leaven hid in three measures of meal? Hinder not its working, let it leaven the
whole lump.

Do thou know the field where the pearl of great price is hid? Then dig deep
and find it; and when thou have found it, sell all and purchase it, and then
thou will be the wise merchant-man indeed.

Have thou traveled out of Egypt, through the red sea and wilderness? and have
thou known the right arm of the Lord accompanying thee, and supporting thee in
thy trials, temptations and besetments thou have met with therein? Keep still
to the same arm and power that has called, led and sustained thee hitherto,
and it will bring thee into the promised land; and not only so, but he will
give thee a possession therein, and destroy thy enemies that did possess it.
Thou will have a house given thee, thou did not build; a vineyard, thou did
not plant; and a well thou did not dig, which shall spring up in thee to
everlasting life. Thou shall sit under thy own vine, and under thy own
fig tree, and lie down where none can make thee afraid. Thou shall be blessed
in thy basked and in thy store; in thy going out and coming in; lying down and
rising up. These blessings shall assuredly attend thee, as thou love the day
of small things, and art faithful in following the Lord, who has appeared by
his light and grace to thee, for thy perfect redemption, restoration and
everlasting salvation.

I say, thou will certainly enjoy and inherit these things, and receive not
only addition of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, etc. to thy faith,
but also the very end of thy faith; for faith and hope has an end, and it is a
blessed thing to receive the end thereof, even salvation; and there is none but
such as endure to the end, that can be saved, even to the end of the work of
God, of the new creation of God in Christ Jesus.

Many may begin well, and make a good progress also, and yet fall short. They
may know the first day's work. Read Geu. i. The spirit of God moving upon the
face of the waters; the appearance of light; and the division of light from
darkness; and to call the light, day; and the darkness, night; which is more
than all the wise, prudent, religious men of this world can know or do; who are
all as waters, and the whore sits upon them; and the moving of the spirit of
God they despise and disregard. The appearance of light they hate; so it shines
in darkness, and is not divided, and darkness cannot comprehend it, cannot give
true names to things, cannot call the light, day; nor the darkness, night; but
err and mistake so far, as to call the light, darkness; and the darkness,
light: This all men in the fall are prove to and found doing, under the old
heavens, and upon the old earth. -- This is a note by the way, to those it does
concern.

But to proceed; they may also know the second and third day's work; The
firmament in the midst of the waters; the waters divided; the dry land appear,
and bring forth seed and fruit after its kind, which is good. This is more than
words, names and professions. These have some standing, some foundation in the
midst of the waters. These are as trees that bear fruit, and the earth yields
its increase to him that dresseth it.

On the fourth day it is written, God made two great lights, the one to rule
the day, and the other to rule the night. The light, and the rule and
government thereof, may be known also; and as in the fifth day's work, there
may be a bringing forth and multiplying abundantly; and a flying above the
earth, in the open firmament of heaven; and the sixth day's work may be known,
Made in the likeness and image of God, blessed and endued with heaven^y power
and dominion over all; placed in a garden planted by the Lord. A restoration
into innocence and uprightness by Christ the power, light, love and wisdom of
God, may be attained to; yet in this very state there is danger; there is a
proneness to look out at the beauty of the works of God, to feed upon them, and
delight thyself with them, or to eat which is forbidden, except the law and
command of God be kept close unto and obeyed. The sun that is placed in the
midst of the works of God, must rule the day, and the children of it; and the
moon the night. He that has wisdom let him understand. The voice of the
serpent must not be listened unto. If thou will keep thy habitation, and
preserve thy dewlling place in Paradise, in the garden of God, thou must dress
it, and keep it. Keep thy heart with all diligence. If any thing appears
therein that would entice and allure thee to break the law of God, see that
thou consent not; see that thou do it not; but abide in the rule and dominion
that God has given thee, not only over the serpent, but over all the works of
his hands. In to doing, thou will understand the reason of the godly jealousy
and fear of the Apostle, who said to such as were brought to a good state, even
esponsed to one husband, in order to be presented as a chasie virgin in Christ:
(which is a state very near the marriage-union) 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3. I fear, said
he, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtility, so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. It Is thou
that art espoused and adorned as a bride for her husband; that art come to the
simplicity that is in Christ; that have escaped the, corruption that is in the
world through lust; that art restored, redeemed and brought back again into
innocence, and have a place in the garden of God, that the serpent would again
betray, beguile and overthrow. Wherefore keep in the dominion, power and
wisdom, which God has endued, armed and surrounded thee withal, and he shall
never prevail against thee. Look not at the first Adam, any otherwise than to
take warning by him, lest thou receive the same reward; but look at the second
Adam, in whom the serpent, the deceiver, the devil, has no part; though he has
power to tempt in Paradise, and to make war in heaven, and appear before the
Lord and accuse; neither could he ever deceive, overcome or prevail against
him; no more can he against thee, as thou keeps close unto him, armed with his
power, and thy mind stayed upon God thy Savior. This will bring thee into a
surer state than the first Adam had, and for a time enjoyed in Paradise; thou
may come to be not only taken and put into the garden of God, to dress it and
keep it, but thou may also be brought to have a place in his house, in the
temple of God, and also be as a pillar therein, and go no more forth. Thou
may become as Mount Sion that cannot be moved. Thy heart may be established
with grace, and fixed upon the rock that is higher than thee, against whom,
neither the devices and allurements on the one hand, nor the storms nor
tempests of the enemy on the other, can prevail. Thou may come to see eye to
eye, and know as thou art known. Thou may come to know the Lord one, and his
name one, the first to be the last, and the last to be first, and thy heavenly
rest with him, who is without beginning or end; to whom be praise forever more!
This is the blessed end of the work of God, ^^^at all are to know, wrought and
accomplished in themselves by Christ the light, power and wisdom of God. But in
the way to this end there is great danger; as thou, that have been a traveller
therein, know right well; and there are many things written for thy comfort
and for thy learning in tl^^ holy scriptures, which I would have thee esteem a
great mercy that thou have the use and benefit of them; concerning which it is
said, 2 Timothy iii. 15, 16, 17. They are able to make wise unto salvation,
through faith in Christ Jesus. He is indeed the wisdom of God, the opener of
the scriptures, the only leader into the true understanding of them; and it is
through faith in him, that the man of God comes to be made perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to all good works. It is the man of God only, that has
the comfort of the scriptures, and that has unity and fellowship with the holy
men's spirits that gave them forth. It is he alone that understands them. They
are as a sealed book to the learned and unlearned, to the professor, or nominal
Christian, and profane. Great is the mystery of godliness which is revealed to
babes, and hid from the wise and prudent schoolmen of this world, who make a
trade of the history of godliness for filthy lucre's sake, to the danger of
their own souls and others.

Now, tender friend, that thou may persevere safely in thy way, always
remember the counsel of Christ Jesus, Take heed or pray that your flight be not
in the winter, nor upon the sabbath day. These two seasons are the most
dangerous. There is much in the words: The wisdom of God spoke them, and those
that are endued with the same, only can understand them; and by the same thou
may be preserved in and through the winter, and be able to say, The winter is
past, and the summer is come, and the singing of birds is heard in thy land;
and also know the Lord of the sabbath, and rest in him, who is the
dewlling place of his people in all ages and generations: To whom be glory for
ever and evermore.

Thus I have briefly showed how the inward work, or new creation of God, holds
parallel with the history of the outward or old creation, and what danger
attends thee, when thou art a plant of God, even in Paradise itself, which man
lost through disobedience and transgression.

I have it also in my mind, bri^^y to set before thee, the method and order of
the wisdom of God in thy restoration, and the danger that attends in the way
thereto. This was shadowed forth in the history of his people, under oppression
in the land of Egypt; Their cries unto him; his coming down to deliver them;
his raising them a captain or leader his bringing them out with a strong hand,
leading them through the red sea, destroying their enemies therein, and
bringing them to the banks on the other side; his giving them a song of
deliverance and salvation; leading them through the wilderness; feeding them
with manna and quails from heaven, and water out of the rock; going before them
in a pillar of fire by night, and a pillar of cloud by day; bringing them to
Mount Sinia, and giving them his law, statutes and judgments; by whose
direction they prepared his ark, reared up his tabernacle, fas^ned the sockits,
set up the boards, and put in the bars thereof; reared up his pillars, brought
the ark of the testimony into the tabernacle, set bread in order upon the
table; the lamps lighted, sweet incense offered upon the golden altar, and the
glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle, and was their guide in all their
journeys. This was glorious in its time. And the antitype, or thing signified
thereby, the traveling Christian only understands. These were great helps,
great benefits and blessings, accompanying them in the way to the promised land.

Yet consider, notwithstanding all these things, and all their experiences of
the outstretched hand, power and presence of the Lord, his promises to the
obedient, and his threatenings to the rebellious and disobedient, yet they
forgot the Lord, turned back in their hearts, and so through unbelief,
murmuring and disobedience, fell by the way, and never entered into rest, into
the promised land that flowed with milk and honey. All miscarried and fell
short, that came out of Egypt through the red sea, etc. above twenty years old,
except Joshua and Galeb; and when their offspring came to possess Canaan, the
promised land, consider how in process of time they corrupted themselves, and
grieved the spirit of the Lord, through their backslidings and abominations,
not only before, but also after God had caused his temple to be erected, and
furnished in a most magnificent manner with vessels of gold, silver and brass,
and other costly ornaments, with holiness to the Lord, written thereon, and his
own presence and glorious appearance therein; after all this, through sin and
disobedience, they became a prey to the spoiler, and were made captives, and
carried away into a strange land.

These things are written for the learning and warning of the wise in heart,
whose eye God has opened, and to whom he has revealed his arm of power, and
done many wondrous works in and for them: that they turn not again into folly,
carelessness, wantonness, pride and rebellion against the spirit of God: that
they deck not themselves with God's jewels, and play the harlot with them, as
those did, and so receive the like reward in the mystery as they did in the
history; of which there is as great danger now in the inward, as there was then
in the outward. Likewise in the dispensation of the spirit, in the end of the
prophets, I may also hint at the work of God therein, and show that the same
danger attends mankind in the way thereof. The mystery of godliness is great,
and the mystery of iniquity is great also, and happy art thou if thou abides in
the light of God, which makes them both manifest. It is not enough to know the
light to shine; but to walk and abide in it, and be a true child of it. It is
not enough to know the spirit of truth, and the power of it; but to be led by
it, joined to it, become one with it, and to bring forth the fruit thereof. It
is not enough to know the seed of the kingdom, and the sowing of it; but its
breaking through the clods, and growing up, not only into the stalk and blade,
but into the full ear and corn; and not only so, but to be reaped and gathered
into the garner, for the use of the Lord of the harvest. It is not enough to
know one of the days of the son of man, the child born, and the son given; but
the government upon his shoulders, he reigning in thy heart, his and thy
enemies destroyed. To attain thereto, according to the phrase used in the holy
scriptures, There is an overshadowing of the Holy Ghost to be known, a
begetting and forming Christ within to be known, and a travailing to bring
forth, a being born, and a growing up from one stature to another; from a child
to a young man, from a young man to an elder, and a suffering with Christ; a
taking up his cross daily and following him: a dying with him; and a rising
with him, and a seeking those things which are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God. Thou must be risen with Christ, before thou art in a
capacity to seek those things that are at the right hand of God; but it is a
farther state to find them, and to be seated in an heavenly place in Christ
Jesus, and to sit down in the kingdom with Abrabam, Ijaac and Jacob; and the
farthest and greatest stare of all, is to know the kingdom delivered up unto
the Father, and God become all in all; where the alone safety is. Till which,
though thou art a disciple of Christ, and become as a chaste wise virgin
espoused unto him, thou must watch and pray, keep thy lamp trimmed, and thy
light burning, lest thou enter into temptation; lest thou slumber and sleep,
and the door be shut against thee; for there is a possibility, yea, a real
danger of loss in all states and growths, until thou gets into Abraham's bosom.
There the gulf is known to be fixed. There is no changing states then, as is
signified in the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke xvi. Between us and you
there is a great gu^ph fixed, so that they that would pass from us to you
cannot, neither can they pass to us that would come from thence. And to speak a
little according to this parabolical discourse between Abraham and Dives. They
that would deseend cannot; and they that would ascend cannot: The one can do
nothing against the truth, he is so governed by it, so in love and unity with
it; the other can no nothing for the truth, he is so in enmity and hardness of
heart against it; having lost his day of visitation, is become sealed up in
darkness, in a sense of his loss; for this greatly adds to the torments of the
wicked, to behold the blessed state of the righteous afar off, and themselves
in a state of torment and misery, crying and praying for mercy and relief. and
cannot be heard nor eased of their pain, the sun being set upon them, and their
day being turned into utter darkness, which is become their dwelling or
habitation, where the weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth is.

So, dear friend, thou may perceive by what I have briefly hinted, by the
current of the holy scriptures, and by thy own experience, that it is no easy
thing to be a true Christian, to go through the work of regeneration, of the
new creation of God in Christ Jesus. It is no easy thing to go through the
warfare, and be able to say with the Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, henceforth there is a crown of glory laid up for me;
and to come to the wearing of the crown, and to be more than a conqueror in him
that has loved thee.

These things to witness and enjoy, is the blessed end of all the dispensations
of God since the fall. He that is the overcomer, is more than a conqueror, he
has received the white stone, wherein the new name is written, which none
knows but he that has it. He is the wise merchant-man, that has sold all
and purchased the pearl of great pri^e, which excels all things beside. He has
a right to eat of the tree of life, which grows in the midst of the garden. He
is blessed with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. He
is a coheir, a joint-heir with him; and not only so, but he is come into the
possession of his inheritance. This is his state, though he may meet with no
better entertainment in the world, than Christ the captain of his salvation,
and his disciples did.

So it is thy enjoying of the light of God's countenance, thy being joined to
the Lord, and being become one spirit with him, thy knowing the marriage-union,
thy maker to be thy husband; that is thy comfort, thy rejoicing, thy crown and
diadem in prosperity and in adversity; in heights and in depths in the palace
and in the ^^ngeon; in all states, times and places. Thou art the only happy
man, that art partaker of these things, though thy goods may be spoiled, and
thy body in the hands of thy enemics; yet thou can really seal to the truth
of that testimony of Paul, Romans viii. 18. I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed
in us. To the^ this time of revelation is come; thou know the Lord come, and
his reward is with him an hundred fold, even in this time, and in the world to
come, life everlasting. Godliness with content is great gain; it has the
promises of all good, present and to come. They that have resigned up
themselves and all, into the hand of God, have nothing to loose, have nothing
to take care for, but to please the Lord; and it is the meat and drink of such
to do his will, and his paths are all paths of pleasantness; there is no
bitterness in the latter end of such as walk therein.

Consider and be warned, by the examples recorded in the holy scriptures;
always remember, that they tell thee of a people that came to the knowledge of
God, his laws and ordinances, and manner of worship which he himself commanded,
which while performed in sincerity of heart, he was well pleased with, and his
blessings and presence accompanied them; but when they lost sincerity,
uprightness and integrity of heart, though they kept in the exact practice and
performance of the outward part of worship, yet all their performances were
abomination to him, and rejected by him. This is testified by his prophet
Isaiah, saying, He that kills an ox, is as if he slew a man; he that
sacrifices a lamb, is as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns incense, as if he
blessed an idol. This is mighty strange to those that know not the real cause
of it, that those services commanded, should become so abominable in the sight
of him who commanded them. God looks at the heart, at the inside; if that be
gone astray, if that be corrupted, degenerated, and fallen in love with the
creatures, he accepts of nothing as well done from man in that state; his
righteousness and his wickedness are both abomination to him. This was a sore
evil the people fell into under the dispensation of the law; they kept sinning
and sacrificing, but neglected to hear and obey the voice of the Lord. Likewise
in the dispensation of the gospel, even in the first ages of it, the like evil
was creeping in. By the preaching of the Apostles, many were brought to believe
in Christ, and to make profession of him; and it soon grew to this pass with
some, that they were ready to sit down, or rest in profession and knowledge of
Christ after the flesh, and to observe the form of godliness, but deny and
neglect the power.

The Ministers of Christ, in the primitive times, had a great work before them,

First, To persuade and convince the Jews, that Jesus was the Christ of God,
the Messiah promised and prophesied of by the holy prophets, whom they
persecuted and slew in one age, and honored at least with their lips, and
garnished their sepulchers in another.

Secondly, To oppose the continuance of their temple worship, shadowy and
typical ordinances and observances, which God once commanded; and to bring them
from under them to the thing signified by them; and to believe in him who was
the end and substance thereof, who did fulfill all righteousness contained in
the law, in the prophets and John. When they had brought people to believe,
that Christ was the great prophet which God had promised to raise up like unto
Moses, how ready were many of these believers to sit down in this belief, and
to content themselves with a knowledge of Christ after the flesh; like as the
Jews pleased themselves with the temple of the Lord, and with their outward
observances, while they wanted the root of the matter, viz. An upright, broken,
contrite heart; which is and was the only sacrifice God delighted in. So they
were constrained to testify against the bare knowledge of Christ after the
flesh, Henceforth we know no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the flesh; we know him so no more: Pressing the knowledge of him
after the spirit, revealed, manifested and known by the operation of his power
and spirit within. In whom this knowledge was wanting, they were reprobates. It
was not enough to know him born of the Virgin, and to increase in wisdom and
stature, and in favor with God and men, do many outward miracles, preach many
excellent sermous, give forth many divine and heavenly precepts, go up and down
doing good, suffering by, for, and because of sin and sinners, dying, rising
and ascending into the glory of his father. It was not sufficient to know and
believe the bistory and truth of these things, in the primitive times, neither
is it now; but thou must also know and experience him in his spiritual
appearance, power and operation inwardly, and persevere therein to the end of
the work thereof; without which, thou will be as formal a Christian under the
profession of Christ, and as much rejected in the account of God, as the
outward Jew was, when he kept in the outward practice and form of religion, and
cried up the temple of the Lord and its holiness outwardly, while he himself
was a temple of unholiness, uncleanness and corruption.

So, dear friend and fellow traveller, that we may run to the end of our race,
and be certain of the crown, that we may fight, not as those that beat the air,
but as those that go on conquering and to conquer, keeping under all that would
hinder us from running well to the end, and that would deprive us of the crown,
and betray us into the hand of our enemies; that we may do this, let us always
remember the sayings of the Apostle Paul, who was a wise experienced traveller,
and an able Minister of the new covenant. I Cor. ix. I so run, not as
uncertainly; I so fight, not as one that beats the a^r; but I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself become a castaway. In the tenth chapter he gives
an instance of the Jews who were Baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the
sea, and eat of the spiritual meat, and drank of the spiritual drink, even of
the spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ; yet were
overthrown in the wilderness, and destroyed of the destroyer; because when they
did eat and drink, they rose up to play, and lusted after evil things; now,
says he, these things happened unto them for examples, and they are written
for our admonition or learning, upon whom the e^ds of the wo^ld are come;
wherefore let him that thinks ^e slands, take beed lest he fall. From which
sayings, with our own experience, we may observe and conclude, That it is the
duty of teachers and p^eachers, heare^s and learners, eaters and drinkers, even
in the spiritual dispensation, to take h^ed that they run well to the end, that
they fight well to the end, that they eat and drink worthily, lest judgment
overtake them while the meat is in their mouths; even as it has some in this
generation, who after they knew God, did not glorisy him as God, but became
vain in their imaginations; and their foolish hearts have deceived them to that
degree, that under the very form and profession of Christ, in his spiritual
appearance and work in the inward parts, they oppose and resist the thing
itself, both in themselves and others; and the mist and mystery of iniquity
has so wrought in them, that they cannot see nor understand the same. This
sore evil all shall certainly escape, who make it their daily practice to walk
in the fear of the Lord, and to keep their minds exercised in his law,
meditating upon his mercies and judgments, new and old, past and present; so
doing, no evil can prevail nor overtake such unawares.

So dear friend and reader, whose good, in writing, I chiefly aim at, I desire
thee to be weighty and serious in reading, as I have been in writing, and thou will find the benefit and comfort thereof, as I have done, ministered into thy
own bosom; and thou will not only clearly perceive and understand the
difference between the light careless reading, hearing, professing and talking
of good things, and the serious weighty possession and enjoyment of them; but
also betwixt the beginning, progress and end of the work of God in the new
creation, restoration, regeneration and salvation.

So, to the grace of God which leads unto glory, and from one degree of glory
unto another, I do heartily commend thee; which grace is sufficient to teach
thee all good, and preserve thee from all evil; and in the same I remain thy
friend and brother.

W. SHOWN

MEDITATIONS and EXPERIENCES.
I. IT is a precious thing to know what the cross of Christ is, and how to take
it up, and make use of it; for indeed, it is no less than the power that
crucifies sin, and saves from it; which Christendom too generally being
ignorant of, sets up something else instead thereof, and so sin remains alive
uncrucified, and salvation is wanted; for it is not all the gold, silver, and
wooden crosses, nor voluntary humility, in the whole world, that is able to
crucify one sin, as to the nature of it, nor to make any one disciple; nor
enable to watch with Christ one hour, nor follow him one step in the
regeneration.

II. It is a blessed state, to know the eye of the mind, not only opening, but
opened; thereby is ability and wisdom witnessed to read in the book of life,
wherein all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid; and he or she that
knows this light shining, this eye opened in them, walks and stumbles not.
This eye and light within, is that which Christendom too much despise and
reject, therefore walk in darkness and stumble, and know not whether they go.
Whilst we ourselves did so, we were darkness, walked in it, and our feet
stumbled upon the dark mountains.

That which shut and stopped this eye, and darkened this light within, in the
beginning, was sin and transgression, whereby mankind lost the sight and
enjoyment of his Creator. And this I testify, That no people upon the face of
the earth, come to witness this eye of the mind openly again, but as they come
to experience that power in themselves which crucifies sin, and saves and
redeemeth out of transgression, and are also obedient and subject unto it.

III. The remembrance of the first day's work is very precious, even the
separation of the light from the darkness within, whereby we came to know each,
its name and nature, and to have our minds turned from the darkness within, to
the light within; from the power of satan within, to the power of God within;
from the teachers and books without, to the grace, the anointing, the true
teacher within. The remembrance of this is very precious: And now what remains,
but that we walk in this light, that we may be the children of it indeed, and
that we be always obedient to this power, and learning of this anointing, till
we are fully learned. It is the substance of all; it is the end of all words
and writings; yea, it is the end of all the dispensations of God since the
beginning.

IV. The precious light which shines in the heart, is the everlasting day of
God, in which he walks, and in which he works. blessed are those that walk with
him, and work with him; they can tell of his mighty acts, and speak of his
wondrous works. Those that walk in this light, and are become children of this
day, are wi^nesses of the true everlasting worship, which is in the spirit and
in the truth. Such me come to the substance and end of all the legal
administrations and temple worship, which consisted much in daily killing, and
daily offering of bullocks, rains and lambs, etc. Now those that are come to
the worship in spirit, witness a daily dying, and a daily offering, till death
is known. Such know, that it is easier to kill a bullock or a ram outwardly,
than to kill or mortify the beastly nature within: And it is a greater work to
witness the will wholly resigned up into the will of the Lord, and the thoughts
and imaginations brought down into the obedience of the cross, than to perform
the outward part of worship commanded in the law. I testify to all, that those
who know not the beastly nature slain, and offered up in themselves, and their
thoughts and wills subjected, are not come to the end of the law, nor from
under it, nor to the one everlasting offening, Christ Jesus.

V. It is very precious, not only when we meet together, but at all times, to
feel our minds exercised by, and meditating in the law of the Lord, which is
spiritual. Those that are exercised in this law of the spirit of life, and walk
in obedience to it, no evil nor temptation shall prevail against; but they will
witness salvation for walls and bulwarks. Some were witnesses of old, that the
law of the Lord was pure and perfect. Many are witnesses of the same this day,
and know it so by the operation of it: and know themselves subjects of that
law, which is spiritual within, which judges every vain thought, and every
idle word, and brings down every vain imagination. It is a blessed state, to
be meditating in this law day and night. For I testify, that this law of the
spirit of life within, was mankind's rule, whereby he walked innocently and
uprightly before transgression entered, and before outward characters were
invented, or before any outward law was written or engraved on tables of stone.
To this again are many called, and many are coming, and come; and forever
blessed are those that walk therein and are ruled thereby.

VI. The true knowledge of Jesus Christ is very precious; to know him as he was
before Abraham was, and to know the knowledge of him after the flesh pass away.
Such know him to be the tree of life, which grows in the midst of the garden of
God, sit under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet to their
taste. They that eat thereof, know that food which the world is ignorant of,
and is beyond words. Fruit and eating are more than words. Such are come to
witness the gospel promises fulfilled, and they need no man to teach them; no
man need to say to his neighbor, Know the Lord; for the knowledge of him
abounds in their hearts.

That which make the meetings of the righteous to differ from all other
meetings in the world, is to feel Jesus the Savior in the midst of them, and
to feel their hearts and minds in unity and fellowship with him. This seeling
and knowing, transcends all words and professions; for, for a time Christ's
very disciples did not so know him, whilst he was with them in that prepared
body; therefore a remnant can call that day blessed, wherein their minds were
turned from the darkness within, to the light within, which reveals and makes
Christ manifest again, as he was with the father before the world began, and as
he was before Abraham was.

VII. It is now as truly witnessed as it was of old, That the eye of the Lord
runs to and fro through the earth, beholding the evil and the good; even that
eye which searches the heart, and tries the reins, and shows to man his
thoughts. Our happiness consists in this, that we have a testimony within
ourselves, that our hearts are upright and sincere in the sight of this eye.
This was it which God had respect unto in all ages; for when his chosen people
the Jews degenerated from uprightness of heart, notwithstanding they kept in
the outward performances and observations, as keeping appointed feasts, new
moons, and sabbath days, solemn assemblies, killing, and offering sacrifices,
etc. yet all these things, while their hearts were gone astray from him, and
were not upright and sincere in the sight of this eye of the Lord, their
performances were not accepted, but were abomination unto him.

It is a precious thing to witness, that our hearts are upright in the sight of
the Lord, or before his eye, that runs to and fro through the earth; that that
sin may never overtake us, which overtook the Jews of old, viz. to keep the
outward form, and loose the power. Our solemn assembling, our form of sound
words, and our outward demeanor, which the life of truth led us into at first;
if we feel not the same life accompanying of us, and preserving us in it, that
we may be a living people, walking uprightly before the Lord; I say, without
this, all is vain and unprofitable.

It is the honest and upright heart that is the good ground, where the seed of
the kingdom grows and prospers, and brings forth acceptable fruit.

VIII. It is a very precious thing, to witness a true waiting upon the Lord.
Many great and glorious promises are made to those that truly wait upon him.
They that wait upon the Lord sh^^^ want no good thing: This, to witness and
enjoy, is the sub^^^ce of all. While we waited upon invented means, men and
books, upon our own thoughts and imaginations, our own wisdom and
understanding, we wanted the good things; these were not sufficient to lead us
to the knowledge, nor the enjoyment of them.

Hereby may all Christendom, so called, be tried and judged, even by this one
word; they pretend a worshipping and waiting upon the Lord, but they want the
good things, and the evil things abound amongst them; so are hereby found false
witnesses, who say they wait upon the Lord, and he has not fulfilled his
promises to them. A remanant are at this day true and faithful witnesses, that
the Lord is faithful, just and true to his promises, and that he has fitted
and furnished them with the heavenly treasures, the good things of his kingdom,
as they truly wait upon him. This waiting does not begin when our solemn
meetings begin, neither does it end with them, but remains always.

IX. The Truth in itself is very precious, and the revelation and knowledge of
it in our hearts, is also very precious. It is in this Truth, that God is
worshipped with that worship which is more acceptable than all the worships in
the world, whose worshippers profess the Truth in words, but know it not,
neither are they made free by it; so are found false worshippers and false
witnesses; for the revelation and knowledge of the Truth brings to freedom,
freedom from sin; gives power over vain thoughts, over passions, over the will
and inordinate affections, and also removes the ground from whence all evil
springs.

The revelation and knowledge of this Truth, brings into that righteousness
which exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; it makes clean
the inside. All other knowledge and religion in the world makes clean but the
outside at most; but this the inside, and then the outside will be clean also.

Oh! what a lamentation may be taken up for the greater part of mankind, who
are not only strangers to the revelation and powerful operation of the Truth in
the inward parts, but also through the wiles of the enemy of their souls
everlasting peace, are begotten into a belief, That it is impossible to witness
a clean inside, and to be delivered from all evil on this side the grave. They
are easily persuaded, that the enemy of their souls is always near them, ready
on the right hand and on the left, to draw them aside into the way wherein they
ought not to walk; but have no knowledge nor faith in the heavenly Truth,
Virtue and Tower preseut, which is able to save out of all temptations, and to
deliver out of the snares of satan; and therefore are taken captive at his
pleasure.

In this state we ourselves were; but now the knowledge of the Truth is come,
and the powerful operation of it we are witnesses of. Let us persevere and walk
in the same, that we may witness the end of its work, which is to finish and
make an end of sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness. This is the
substance of all, and the end of the Truth revealing itself.

Now in the present sense and enjoyment of the revelation and knowledge of the
powerful operation of the Truth within, in our own hearts, we cannot but call
to mind the days past, in which the Lord waited to be gracious unto us, and
followed us with his mercies and with his judgments; often knocked at the door
of our hearts, and often appeared unto us, though we knew him not; and his
long-suffering was great, wherein he waited to show himself kind and gracious
unto us, standing at the door till his locks were wet with the drops of the
night, and we let him not in, neither received his kindness, because we neither
knew him, nor his love.

But now he has revealed himself unto us, he has opened that eye that can see
him, and our hearts to receive him, and is come to make his abode with us. Oh!
Friends, how are we engaged to walk answerable to this great love, which we are
made partakers of! Indeed we love him, because he first loved us. We wait upon
him, because he first waited upon us. May not we say, as some of old said, What
manner of love is this, that we should be called the sons of God, and be
inheritors of such precious promises, and possessors of the knowledge of that
one everlasting Truth which makes free!

But Friends, when the knowledge of this Truth is enjoyed, there is a
possibility of losing it again; the holy spirit which seals and establishes
in it, if it be grieved, it will not do its work, and a vain thought, given
place unto, will grieve it; an idle word will grieve it: Therefore it concerns
us all, to wait and watch in that which preserves and keeps out of all evil,
viz. the Light forever.

X. It is a blessed and happy state, to have the testimony within ourselves,
that our minds are exercised in that wherein stands the everlasting universal
worship, which is not limited to time nor place.

This worship is not like the worships which are among the sects in the world,
who pretend only to worship God in certain places, and at certain times, and
think God is pleased with their pretended serving him one day in seven; or one
hour in seven; though at other times they serve themselves and the evil one,
speak their own words, think their own thoughts, and do their own works.

Oh! it is lamentable to behold, when I look over the state of Christendom, and
see the apostasy it is degenerated into, retaining something of the form, but
denying the power.

Here is our blessedness and true happiness, that we have our minds exercised
in the heavenly light that brings to, and preserves in the true everlasting
worship which is inward, in the spirit and in the truth; which all Temple and
Jerusalem worship ontwardly at certain times, and set places, were but a type
and figure of. This worship in the spirit and in the truth, is the antitype, it
is the substance of all those typical, temporary worships. Oh! my friends, let
none of us be found out of this everlasting universal worship, which does not
begin when we meet together to wait upon the Lord a few hours, to be refreshed
together in the sense of his presence; neither does it end when we part.

And friends, this rests upon my spirit to testify, That none can enjoy true
blessedness and spiritual consolation to their souls, farther than they have a
testimony in themselves, that they walk in the precious everlasting light that
now shines. To this light our minds were at first turned, in which God dwells,
and in which the worship in spirit and truth is learned and performed, in this
age as in ages past. The way is, and has been throughout all generations, ONE,
and it is a plain pathway; the wayfaring man, though a fool, cannot err in it.

In this light, many are now witnesses that God loved them, even while sinners;
and that in the days of their darkness and ignorance he waited upon them, to
show himself gracious; though then they had no faith in him, no esteem for him,
neither could they see any comeliness in him, his visage being more marred than
any man's. Thus he appeared, till the light shined out of the darkness, and
gave the knowledge of his glory, which as they walked in, they became living
witnesses of his power in salvation, redemption and translation from darkness
and the power of satan, to the mavelous light and power of God; out of the
corrupt nature and degeneration, into the pure divine nature and regeneration;
and so became plants and trees of righteousness, bearing fruit unto God, and
giving him the glory and praise of all his works, who alone is wor^^^ thoughout
all generations, forever.

XI. It is a blessed state, always to live in the sense and feeling of that
love which first visited us, wherein our minds were turned to the light which
shined in the darkness; for we were then darkness; which light then made
manifest and revealed unto us the Gift of God given to us, which is compared to
a little leaven, to a grain of seed, to a pearl hid in the field. It is
precious to know the Leaven to work, the Seed to grow, the Field to be
purchased, and the Pearl found, bought and possessed. This is more than talk
and profession.

Now can many say, as was witnessed of old, We are come unto him as unto a
living stone, elect and precious, and we are kept by the power of him unto
salvation; and we are in him in whom there is no condemnation: Thus to road and
witness the scriptures, is beyond all the talk and notions that are in the
world which lies in wickedness, where the guilt and condemnation is.

As we continually live in the sense and feeling of that precious love which at
first sought us out, and pulled some of us as brands out of the fire, and
others as swine wallowing in the mire; as we remain sensible of this love, we
shall feel our hearts more and more engaged to walk worthy of it; and not only
profess grace, but live under it; not only profess light, but walk in it, that
we way be perfect children of it; for if we live not the life of what we
profess, sorer judgments will pursue us than many others, who are called as we
are, but have not tasted of the heavenly power as we have. Therefore it
concerns us to be watchful, and retain our first love; for it is possible,
after the house is swept and garnished, and the unclean spirits cast forth,
that they may return and enter again. Therefore it is very precious not only to
know that blessed power that casts forth the unclean spirit, and sweepeth and
garnisheth the house with heavenly treasures; but also to dwell and abide in
the fame, by it to be preserved from being defiled again. This is the substance
of the Christian Religion. This is the end of all ministering, speaking and
writing. This is more than hearing ten thousand fermons. Let us always remain
in the feeling of, and obedience to this power, and we shall never fall.

XII. It is more than words can express, to feel and enjoy that wherein the
kingdom of Heaven stands. It is written in the holy scriptures, That the
kingdom of Heaven stands not in meats and drinks, and outward washings; but in
the power and joy of the holy spirit. To enjoy this, is the substance of all;
but none come to receive the joy of the holy spirit, but such only who are kept
by the power in which the kingdom stands; which power preserves from evil, and
keeps from falling into temptation. Many may come to the knowledge of this
power, and may profess it, and have some faith in it; which is beyond all
notional sectarians in Christendom, yet if they live not obedient to it, and
witness a being kept by it to the end, they come not to be children of this
kingdom, nor to sit down in it, nor enjoy the comfort and pleasures thereof.

The bare profession and knowledge of the power is little worth, but a being
preserved by it; for if any enter into evil and temptation, such grieve the
holy spirit, so cannot have the joy of it, wherein the kingdom stands. This is
that which chiefly distinguishes us from the diverse sects in Christendom, a
being preserved in the power, and not a talking of it only. It is written in
the holy scriptures of truth, that Christ Jesus, the second Adam, when he was
tempted by the devil with sore and grievous temptations, eat nothing, but by
the power of his Father that dwelt in him, withstood the devil and all his
temptations; and when he departed from him, angels ministered unto him. The same
power which preserves in temptations, and keeps from eating or receiving the
bait of the enemy or tempter, are we all to witness in the time of trial and
hour of temptation.

It was the first Adam that eat when he was tempted. Now his eating implies a
taking or letting in something; a giving place to the devil's bait, whereby the
temptation entered. He did not stand in the power wherein the heavenly kingdom
stands, which is able to preserve, as did the second Adam: So departing from
this, he lost the joy of the holy spirt, which the kingdom stands in; as all
the children of the first Adam do, who have not faith in that power that saves
out of temptation.

This is the substance of the Christian Religion; which we are called to the
profession and possession of, viz. The power and joy of the holy spirit, in
which the kingdom stands; which power strikes at the root of all the wickedness
and evil in the world, and is the ax that is laid to the root of the evil tree,
which has grown up in the apostasy. This is that by which Christendom must be
reformed. No sound reformation but by this in the particular, and in the
general.

Friends are witnesses, and many could seal it with their lives, that there is
no other way nor means appointed of God, to come to sit down in the kingdom of
Heaven, nor to attain everlasting salvation, but by believing in the power of
God, in the light of Christ within, to which our minds have been directed.
Indeed, among the many sects in Christendom, there are diverse other means ^^d
ways invented and set up; but we know them all to be vanity. We have tried and
proved them, and know there is nothing of worth in them. We are now come to the
true and living way, the ancient path, in which the righteous in all ages ever
walked. Now this remains, that we always feel our hearts engaged to walk in
this way, and to keep sensible of that power which saves from evil, that we
may adorn our profession; for if any, that profess this everlasting way, enter
into temptation, or commit evil, they do not adorn their profession, but are a
scandal to it, and lay a stumbling block in the way of others, who are where we
were, when wandering in desolate places, and traveling in the desert howling
wilderness. The day of such will be turned into darkness, and the curse due to
him that lays a stumbling block in the way of the blind, and that leads him
out of his way, will fall upon him.

Therefore it concerns all to be watchful, and persevere in that which is good,
to be as lights of the world, and as the salt of the earth indeed; that we may
never leave shining, nor lose our savor. Whatsoever was written aforetime, was
written for our learning; and it is profitable to meditate and consider, that
many in former ages had much experience of the power and presence of the Lord,
saw many of his wondrous works, and traveled through the red sea and
wilderness, to the borders of the promised land; yet through murmering and
disobedience, entered not therein, nor did enjoy the end of the Lord in
bringing them out of Egypt's land. And many may in this age fall short as they
did, if we walk not close with the Lord, and learn by what is written to take
warning, lest by disobedience and unbelief, we fall short of receiving the
great recompense of reward.

XIII. The Bread of the kingdom, is the joy of the holy spirit felt and known
within, which satisfies and refreshes the soul. This is the bread which comes
down from Heaven. The shewbread, in the outward temple, was a type and figure
of this bread, which is indeed the antitype and substance thereof. The table,
in the outward temple of the Lord, was furnished with outward bread: As we
witness our bodies the temple of the Lord, we shall enjoy this bread, which
that was but the type and shadow of. This is the bread that fills and
satisfies the hungry, when husks and all outside things cannot.

XIV. Many are living witnesses in this day, as of old, That the foundation of
God stands sure; and that this foundation, as now made manifest, was the
foundation of the righteous in all ages; that the light, grace and spirit of
God within, which mixeth, not with vain thoughts and evil imaginations, but
discovers them and judges them, is this foundation. This is the stone the
builders in their natural wisdom reject and despise, and cry up other stones,
and invent other foundations, according to the imaginations of their own hearts.

Now it is a blessed thing, and the duty of every particular, to witness
themselves living stones, built upon this foundation, and to have their hearts
and minds united to it, and framed with it.

XV. The same grace, the same anointing, which was the saints teacher in the
primitive times, is revealed and witnessed in this our day and time. It is a
blessed thing always to learn of him; for many that have come to the revelation
of this teacher, not waiting low in that which did reveal him, that self might
be made of no reputation, and the will and selfish spirit brought down, have
been deceived, and have learned of the false teacher, the Antichrist, instead
of the true, yet under the name of the true; this has happened in some among
ourselves, since we were a people; for this know, that no people ever
worshipped the whore the mother of harlots, the beast, false prophet and
Antichrist, under those names and denominations; but being deceived, gave them
good names, and believed her to be the true woman, the lamb's wife, the true
prophet, and the true Christ. This ^ath been the state of all the Apostates in
Christendom; for as the mystery of godliness is great; so is the mystery of
iniquity great also; and there is none but those that come truly to learn of
the grace of God, the anointing within, that are able to discern between the
one and the other.

Therefore it is precious always to learn of the grace and anointing, and to
walk in the light which our minds were at first directed to; this reveals the
deep things of God, and finds out the hidden things of Esau.

The very remembrance of the time wherein our minds were turned from the ways,
inventions and teaching of men without, to the light, grace and anointing
within, is very precious; for hereby we are made partakers of a measure of the
same wisdom and revelation, which John wrote his book of the Revelations in.
The same spirit which he was led by, to give names to things, according to
their nature, and not according to their appearance, is now again witnessed.
The great whore, the mother of harlots, the beast and false prophet, and the
golden cup that is held forth to the nations, the Antichrist in the temple, and
the great red dragon that John saw in Heaven, by the same spirit are now
revealed and judged; and as we keep our hearts and ears open to this teacher,
we can never be deceived by them again.

All the nominal professors and sects in Christendom, who learn not of this
teacher, are so far deceived, that they believe the whore is the Lamb's wife,
and her golden cup, the cup of blessings, and so are greedily drinking of it;
not discerning the false prophet and Antichrist from the true, because he get
into the temple of God, and clothes himself like unto an angel of light, and
like unto the true Christ: Such take the great red dragon, that appears in
Heaven, to be the Lamb of God.

Therefore it is a blessed thing, always to keep our minds stayed, and our feet
walking in the heavenly light that now shines, which reveals the true teacher,
that teaches and diseovers all things, and gives to see to the ground and
foundation of things; to discern spirits; and keep out of that wherein the
mystery of iniquity prevails.

All the teachings of men and books in the world, are but dross and dung in
comparison of this divine teacher the Light, Spirit and Grace of God within.
This was man's teacher and guide before books were written; before an outward
law was written; and this I testify, in the word of the Lord, that the
teachings of all men, books and writings, which tend to divert the mind of
mankind from this divine teacher within, are vain and unprofitable, and proceed
from that wisdom which is earthly, senfual and devilish; and all that lend an
ear unto it, are captivated in the mystery of iniquity; ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth which makes free, so long as
they abide under such teachers.

Many are living witnesses, that as they gave up to be taught, and led by the
true teacher, the anointing within, they soon became wiser than all their
former teachers

XVI. The same everlasting power, which preserved the righteous in all ages
past out of evil, and from falling into temptations, is now revealed and
witnessed in this our day and age; even the same power and arm of salvation
that preserved Joseph in Egypt, Job in all his trials and temptations, Daniel
and the three children, and all the primitive prophets and Christians, out of
all the fiery trials, assaults and buffetings of satan they met withal.

Therefore it is a blessed thing to be truly acquainted with this power, and
always to live in the sense of it; for it is possible that people may come to
the knowledge of this power, and make a profession of it, and witness salvation
and redemption by it, in a great measure, yet if they wait not low in their
minds, till it has fully wrought the work of salvation and redemption in them,
or wholly brought every thought and imagination into the obedience of Christ,
subdued their own wills and selfish spirit, and know self made of no reputation
and nailed to the cross; I say, without this, they may fall into the snare of
the devil again, be captivated and led into temptation again: For it is about
such, the tempter and destroyer goes like a roaring lion seeking to devour,
even those, out of whom he has been cast and dispossessed. It is written, He
rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience. He needs not go about
such, being got within them; there he is in his throne.

But it is about the righteous, out of whom he has been east, be goes, who
are redeemed from under his power, and translated out of his kingdom; it is
against such he appears not only like a roaring lion, but as a subtle serpent,
and angel of light.

Therefore it is a blessed thing, always to live in the sense, knowledge and
feeling of this ancient power, which alone saves and delivers in the midst
of all trials and besetments of the evil one; as the eye of the mind and
understanding is fixed upon it, no temptation can prevail; and to know thy
faith increased in it; for faith in this power of God is compared to a shield,
which is able to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and to give victory
over him.

Now that which was our misery and loss in the time of our ignorance and
darkness, is the misery and loss of mankind in their unregenerate state. We had
no faith in the spirit of God, which convinces the world of sin. We did not
believe, that the same hand of power that smote us for sin and transgression,
was able and sufficient to heal us; neither did we regard the strivings of
God's spirit within; neither did we give heed to him that stood at the door of
our hearts and knocked, who long waited to show himself gracious unto us; and
was as a light shining in darkness, but we regarded it not, and so did not know
the virtue and powerful operation of it. In this unbelieving disobedient state,
we were children of wrath as well as others, but having obtained mercy to be
faithful, we have now, in the state above, left all the world captivated, by
reason of their unbelief and hardness of heart.

And herein is the love, exceeding kindness and mercy of God manifest, in that
he loved us, while we were enemies; and waited to show himself gracious, while
we were sinners; to be reconciled unto us, when we were in rebellion against
him; and enlightened us, when we were darkness; and often called, when we were
running from him; and was near and ready to teach us, when we were ignorant and
did not desire the knowledge of his ways. In this was the exceeding love of God
manifest to us then, and is the same to all the world now. His love is
universal to all, as is testified in the holy scriptures; God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son a light into the world, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

It is very precious to walk in this light, which does reveal the love and
kindness of God, and brings to the knowledge and experience of the means of
salvation which he has appointed; and to the feeling of that power which
saves from falling into temptation, even the same power which preserved Jesus
when he was tempted in the wilderness. Now if any that are come to the
knowledge and profession of this power, are not preserved by it from falling
into temptation, and delivered from evil, such are not obedient nor faithful to
it, so do not adorn their profession; Such do not glorify the power, but are as
spots in our feasts, and a scandal to the gospel of peace, and enemies to the
cross of Christ, which is the power of God to salvation.

Now those that live in, and are obedient to this power, are the wisest,
happiest and safest people in the world; blessed above all the families of the
earth. Blessed with an hundred fold in this world, and in the world to come,
life everlasting. Such are as the salt of the earth which seasoneth all things,
as a city on a hill which cannot be hid, and as the lights of the world indeed.

XVII. Many are living witnesses, that the law of the spirit of life, unto
which their minds have been directed, is pure and perfect. They witness it so
by its operation in them, by which every appearance of evil is condemned.

It is the happiness of every particular, to have the witness or testimony
within themselves, that they love this law, and that they meditate in it day
and night. Oh! said one of old, how I love thy law! It is only those that love
it, that are true witnesses of its purity and perfection; for it is possible,
that a person or people may not only profess and talk of this law, but come to
some knowledge of it also, and yet not love it, nor meditate in it, nor feel
the power and peace of it.

Those that love the law of God, are converted, and made wise unto salvation by
it; and though their enemies are very many, and very night also, yet they
cannot prevail against them that love this law, They are the happiest people of
all the families of the earth. No evil prevails against such; and as it has
been witnessed of old, viz. Great peace have those that love thy law. So those
are living witnesses of the same great peace in this age, who love the law,
which is light. Thy law is light, said one. He that loves the light, brings his
deeds unto it, by it to be tried and judged; and after this, the great peace is
witnessed. Peace is the reward of those that love the law of God; peace in the
inward parts, even the peace of God, which the world cannot give nor take away.

This one word or sentence may try all the sects in Christendom, and others who
profess themselves lovers of the law of God, yet have not peace in their
dwellings; these have not the answer of a good conscience, which keeps void of
offense toward God and man; have not that peace which passes the
understanding of man in the fall; know not their hearts and minds kept by it;
but are found in the evil-doing, where the tribulation and anguish is, and in
that fear which brings torment. So where the doing of evil is, the law is not
loved. Let thy talk and profession be what it will, what is written is
infallibly true, He that does evil hates the light; and he that hates the light
is wicked, to whom there is no peace; the law being no light to his feet, nor
lanthorn to his path. He walks in darkness and stumbles, and knows not at what;
and in the end lies down in sorrow.

Therefore it is very good for every particular, not only to know the law of
God, but also to live in the sense and love of this law at all times; when they
are about their common occasions in the world, as well as in their solemn
assemblings before the Lord. The love of this pure law of the spirit of life,
which judges every appearance of evil, makes wise unto salvation, wiser than
all former teachers; and to hear, love and obey his law, or word in the heart,
is the end of all words, outward dispensations and ministrations, though
proceeding from the power of God itself: For had not mankind degenerated from
the love and obedience of this law or command of God, transgression had never
entered, neither had sin had a being in the heart of man, neither had an
outward law been added or given forth; that being added because of
transgression, and has power over the transgressor, so long as he lives
disobedient, and a stranger to the law written in the table of the heart by the
finger of God; which was before an outward law was written either in a book or
on tables of stone, and before the cause of it was brought forth into the world.

XVIII. The dayspring from on high, and the everlasting light has and does
shine out of darkness in the hearts of many in this age; and they are, by the
heavenly shining thereof, come to the knowledge of the field where the treasure
is hid, and to the sight of that whose worth and beauty transcends all the
treasures and pleasures this world can afford. None are to rest in the bare
knowledge of the field, but to sell all and purchase it.

All the sects in Christendom, who believe not in the light within, and despise
the day of its appearance within themselves, are so far from enjoying this
heavenly treasure, that they are wholly ignorant of the place or field wherein
it is hid.

This is sealed in the hearts of a remnant, that there is no other way, no
other means, no other key to be found to open the heavenly mysteries, nor to
unloose the seals thereof, and to lead into the enjoyment of the heavenly
treasure, but the holy divine light, which in their hearts has appeared and
shined gloriously, to the discovery and destruction of the man of sin and
mystery of iniquity, which once wrought and ruled therein. In this light they
have believed and walked, and seen the wondrous works of the Lord in the deep,
while the people and nations, that despise and hate it, walk and dwell in
darkness, and in the region and shadow of death, where the poverty, woe and
misery is; where the stumbling, groping, falling, and wandering in desolate
places is; where the laboring for vanity, and lying down in sorrow is;
therefore are the hearts of such greatly engaged unto the Lord, to walk worthy
of the riches of his grace, light and heavenly treasure, he has made them
partakers of.

XIX. The light of the glorious gospel now shines; the day of salvation is
come, even the salvation of God, which he has prepared before the sace of all
people.

This is the day of great salvation, which many righteous men and prophets saw
afar off, and prophesied of, that is now revealed unto us. It is a blessed
thing, not only to know the appearance of the day of salvation, but to know the
joy of it, the joy of God's salvation; and to know it as walls and bulwarks, to
save and defend not only from the besieger without, but from the enemy within
also.

This is the glorious light of the gospel, that shines in this day of
salvation now revealed, which as we walk and abide in, we shall be as strong as
an army with banners, and witness victory over our enemies within, which are
our greatest enemies. To be saved from thinking our own thoughts, and speaking
our own words, and doing our own works. This is the great salvation that brings
to the sabbath of rest; to the keeping holy day to the Lord. One that enjoyed
this salvation, asked this question; How can we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? It is a question that includes an impossibility; for there is no
escaping wrath to come, by those that neglect this great salvation that has now
appeared unto them, there being no other way nor means appointed of God besides
this gospel light, or great day of salvation, which to us has appeared.

This is my testimony, That none can receive the joy of God's salvation, enter
into the sabbath of rest, or keep holy day to the Lord, further than they know
a ceasing, and a being saved from thinking their own thoughts, following their
own wills, and obeying their own wisdom; for the selfish thoughts that arise
within, are the root of evil, and as the foundation of the kingdom of darkness;
and the light of this day of salvation, is as the ax laid to the root of the
evil tree.

So it is a blessed thing for people to meet and wait together, and walk
together in this heavenly light and day of salvation, which discovers and
judges every vain thought and foolish imagination, subdueth them, and brings
them down into the obedience of Christ. In this, as they walk and abide, they
truly differ from all other families of the earth; for in this heavenly gospel
light, which judges every appearance of evil, stands the true fellowship and
true unity. It is the foundation of that church, against which the gates of
hell shall never prevail; as they walk and dwell therein, the power of death
and hell shall never break them, but they shall remain as Mount Sion, which can
never be removed. In this stands their happiness and safety: Out of this they
are as weak as other people.

XX. It is a blessed thing, to wait for the appearance of him who is the
consolation of Israel, and for the coming of his kingdom; but it is more
blessed to be witnesses of his appearance, and to know his kingdom come; and
most blessed of all, to know a sitting down in it with him, in the glory of his
father, and our father, his God and our God.

XXI. It is a blessed thing, truly to know how to wait for the appearance of
Jesus, and to know him when he does appear; I say, this is very blessed; but it
is more blessed, or a greater degree of blessedness, to be witnesses of his
appearance, and to join with him when he does appear; and so to experience the
end of his appearance accomplished, abiding with him till it be finished; truly
understanding the end wherefore he does appear, and their state and condition
at his appearance. This is the main thing chiesly to be understood and minded
throughout all dispensations.

And under them all, he is to be carefully minded and regarded, though it be in
his first or lowest appearance, which is to convince of sin, self-righteousness
and judgment; in order to destroy fin, finish transgression, and bring in
everlasting righteousness. Except people abide with him, and love his
appearance in the ministration of condemnation, which brings tribulation and
anguish upon the soul that has sinned, they can never come to enjoy and
inherit the ministration of life and salvation, nor never come to enjoy the
glory of his appearance the second time, without sin unto salvation.

This is the loss and misery of mankind, and was our loss and misery in the day
of our ignorance, that they know not how to wait for the appearance of Christ,
or the coming of the just one; neither do they, nor did we, know him when he
did appear, for he often appeared unto us, and stood at the door of our hearts,
and knocked, and waited to show himself gracious unto us; but we not knowing it
was he, did not regard him, nor open unto him; yet he was indeed the desire of
our hearts, and him whom we longed to enjoy, and is the desire of all nations,
the light and salvation of the Gentiles, the consolation and glory of Israel;
but in this was our loss and misery, that we knew not how to wait for his
appearance, neither did we know him when he did appear. So I say again, It is a
blessed thing, for a people to know how to wait for the appearance of Jesus,
the Savior, and to know him when he does appear.

But behold, this is a greater degree of blessedness, To be witnesses of his
appearance, and to know the coming of the just One, or the Rising of the Sun of
righteousness, with healing under his wings, and to be able to say, with the
primitive Christians, We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, whereby we may know him that is true, and are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternal life. This
is an high and heavenly knowledge, and a blessed state. This the mark and prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, we have been called unto; and this
is the state all are to wait for, inherit and possess, and not sit down short
of it. If this be not witnessed and enjoyed, all profession is vain, all
knowledge is vain, all religion and talk of Christianity is vain and of no
worth; for it is he that believes that Christ is come in the flesh, and that
demonstrates the livingness of his faith by the works thereof, that is of God,
and God dwells in him, and he in God. This is more than a bare profession or
verbal confession, according to the testimony of John the Divine, in his first
epistle, Chap. iv.

XXII. It was a spiritual and heavenly vision which the Prophet Daniel had,
when he saw the interpretation of the King's dream; A stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, smite at the feet of the image, and break in pieces the
iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, the gold, and become a great mountain
that filled the whole earth. A remnant in this age are come to the same
everlasting light and spiritual eye, whereby they see the power of God,
signified by that stone, prevail against all Imagery, not only without but
within also; and know the ground of it shaken and removed. The dark thoughts
and imaginations of men, are the grounds of the imagery upon the face of the
earth; and that power that breaks them down, and brings every thought into the
obedience of Christ, is the antitype of that stone, and its work revealed to
Daniel, and dreamed of by the King. In this day of light and knowledge, some
are come to witness this little stone become a great mountain, and to fill the
earth, and to be the chief foundation, and cornerstone elect and precious; the
rock and hiding place of the righteous in this, and all ages. These abide in
it, whereby they are preserved from making likenesses and images to themselves,
either of things in Heaven, or things on earth; and out of the many mixtures
prefigured by the iron, brass, clay, silver, gold, and the defiling and
corrupting themselves therewith. There is not another means of preservation,
no^ of, coming to receive the white stone, which John in his vision and
revelation saw, wherein is the new name written, which none knows save he
that has it. This is the name which is better than the name of sons or
daughters. He that reads let him understand, and give God the glory forever.

XXIII. This I testify, That the way of life and everlasting happiness, the way
that brings to the sitting down in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, which was the way of the righteous in all ages, is now again revealed
and made known. This way is the true everlasting light that now shines, not
only in darkness but out of it; which light is the thing our minds were at
first turned to, which judges every appearance of evil, every vain thought and
evil motion that arises within; and as there is a walking in this way, a
sitting down in the kingdom will be experienced: For we have been and are
called to inherit substance, to possess life, and to sit down with Christ in
heavenly places.

So it is a precious thing, for all that know this way to persevere in it, till
they possess these things, and in the same abide; which way is the light of
Christ within, and there is not another; and the walking in this way
distinguishes them from all the nominal professors upon the face of the earth,
even this light that judges every appearance of evil.

It is a precious state, to feel the mind stayed upon the Lord, walking in his
way; to know the girdle and bridle of Truth, and a being girded and bridled
with it; to know every high thought and imagination brought down and subjected
unto Christ the light, the way. This is possible to be known now, as in time
past. It is the thoughts, will and imaginations, that the enemy of man's
happiness gets and builds his strong holds; and until they are broken down,
subjected and destroyed by the power of God within, no peace, quietness and
soul-satisfaction can be enjoyed; no sitting down in the kingdom of God, nor
drinking of the rivers of pleasur ^^^^at a^^ at his right hand, can be attained
to or partaken (...).

XXIV. It is as truly witnessed now, as in days of (...), that to be
spiritually-minded is life and peace; to mind the spirit, to have our minds,
thoughts and wills exercised by the spirit of truth, is life and peace! and to
be carnally-minded is death, sorrow and trouble. These things are not only
read, but truly known, and every particular may feel both within.

XXV. It is as we meet, and wait together, in the spirit, as we live and walk
in the spirit, the worship of God in spirit and truth is performed; which all
the bare professors upon the face of the earth are ignorant of. Such as wait
and worship in the spirit, know Jesus in the midst of them to be their Savior,
teacher and leader; and as they follow and obey him, though but as one of a
family, and two of a tribe, they will be as the light of the world, as the salt
of the earth, and patterns and examples of righteousness to all that behold
them.

XXVI. It is a precious thing, for every particular to know the right arm of
the Lord, which brings salvation, and to witness a sitting down at his
right hand, where the sheep stand, where the rivers of pleasures run softly,
and to drink of the same, which refresh the whole city of God. To feel this arm
of the Lord, and to know it revealed, and to come to a sitting down at his
right hand, is the end, sum and substance of the Christian religion; such know
salvation for walls and bulwarks, and are as Mount Sion, which cannot be moved.

XXVII. It is a very blessed state, always to live, walk, meet together, and
wait in that which gives free access to the throne of grace, and which leads
into the presence of him that sits thereon; in whose presence, some of old
could witness, were rivers of pleasures, and at his right hand, joys forever
more. Oh! all that taste of one drop of this river, and partake of the least
measure of this joy, know them to overbalance and outweigh all the treasures,
joys and pleasures, this world and the glory of it can afford.

XXVIII. The light, to which our minds have been turned, was the watchtower of
the righteous in all ages, and is the same to the righteous in this age; and
all people upon the face of the earth, and all pretended watchmen in
Christendom, who watch not in this tower, watch in vain, and see nothing that
profits. This is the word of truth to all Christendom, and all people.

This light is the one everlasting way, that leads unto him that fits and
prepares to enter the kingdom of Heaven, gives free access to God, and the
throne of his grace, and presents unto him without spot or wrinkle. Many are
witnesses of the beginning of this blessed work; and have received that faith,
whereby they believe the accomplishment of it; in which, as they live and
abide, the blessed experience of the finishing of it shall be added to their
faith.

XXIX. It is a good state, for every particular to wait in silence upon the
Lord; such only come to witness obedience to those divine precepts left upon
record in the holy scriptures, Be still, and know that I am God; let all flesh
be silent before the Lord. Thus to wait and to worship in the heavenly spirit
that brings to stillness; to a standing still and be^olding the salvation of
God; to the silence of all flesh within; to the stopping all voices and motions
to evil within, and to the obeying of the voice and power of God within. This
is the worship of God in the spirit and in the truth, in the inward parts,
which God loves; even to worship and obey, and follow the appearance and
manifestation of the spirit of God within. This worship, the world and the high
professors in it are strangers to. In this we differ from them all, even as we
are found waiting and worshipping in that which silenceth all flesh, and brings
to the standing still, and beholding the salvation of God.

The spirit of truth, which convinces the world of sin, is that wherein the
universal worship of God stands, and is performed. This I testify of it, That
there is power and sufficiency in it, not only to convince of sin, reprove and
condemn for sin, but also to convert, change, cleanse, and redeem the whole
world of mankind from sin, if they would believe in it, love it, receive it and
obey it. This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into it, and
they love darkness rather, and will not bring their deeds to the light, love,
believe nor walk in it; so that saying of Christ is verified upon them, Except
ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, and whither I go, you
cannot come.

Many are witnesses of the power and sussiciency of this spirit of truth, and
of its redeeming power from sin, and the strength of it; so are not convinced
by it as the world is, being redeemed from committing of it; they know it to be
their comforter and leader into all truth. It is very precious to be found in
the true disciples state, waiting for the comfort and leading of the spirit of
truth, and witnessing the same within themselves. A remnant in this day, who
have received this spirit, and followed the leadings of it, are able to say as
some of old did, We are not come to Mount Sinai, where the voice of words is
heard, where the thunderings, lightnings, and earthquakes are, but to Mount
Sion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable
company of angels; to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which
are written in Heaven, and to God the judge of all; to the spirits of just men
made perfect; to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. This is an high and
heavenly state, which the primitive Christians were come unto, while in their
earthly tabernacles they enjoyed the heavenly treasure. Such have the witness
in themselves, that they are inhabitants and fellow citizens of this heavenly
Jerusalem, whereinto no unclean thing can enter; even while they dwell in these
houses of clay, they walk in this city, and have their conversation in Heaven
with God, Christ, and holy or just men's spirits made perfect. This, the spirit
of this world, though clothed with the name of Christianity, cannot bear.

XXX. It is a very blessed state, to be found true waiters for, and witnesses
of the second coming of Christ, which is without sin unte salvation; for true
happiness does not consist in having seen one of the days of the son of man, or
in being witnesses of his first appearance, wherein he convinces and reproves
for sin; but in waiting for, and witnessing his second coming to cleanse, save
and redeem from sin: Herein is the joy of God's salvation felt and enjoyed.

Christ's appearance is first to convince of sin; and this is a ministration of
condemnation, which is glorious in its time: but there is a ministration which
exceeds in glory, which all are to wait for, witness, and not sit down short
of. This is the mark of the high calling, the high and heavenly state which
they are called to, even to know the second coming of Christ without sin unto
salvation, and a being presented to the father without spot or wrinkle. This to
possess and enjoy, is the end, sum and substance of all the dispensations of
God toward mankind ever since the fall. This is the end of all good words and
writings, and the end of Christ's first and second appearance.

All men have sinned and come short of the glory of God, therefore must know
the ministration of judgment and condemnation fulfilled in and upon them,
before they can know the glory that is in it, and before they come to know the
second ministration, which exceeds in glory.

It is a precious thing to be inward with the Lord, and to feel our hearts
drawn nigh unto him, waiting for the appearance of Christ, that when he does
appear, we may appear with him in glory. This is the high and heavenly state
that some were in, when they could say, Truly our fellowship is with the Father
and with the Son. This to witness, is the feast of fat things prophesied of,
and the broad rivers and streams which make glad the city of God, beyond what
all the dainties of the earth can afford. This is the soul's delight, rest and
happiness, which some did enjoy in former ages, as a remnant do in this age,
praises to God forever.

To mind the spirit, or to be spiritually-minded, not only in our solemn
meetings, but at all times, is our duty, and very precious; Then will the
testimony of one in the primitive times be found true, when he said, To be
spiritually-minded is life and peace. Death and trouble are taken away, the
ministration of condemdation is ended, having done its work; the word which was
as a hammer, fire and sword, has broken down, burnt up, destroyed and purged
away the filth of the daughter of Jerusalem, and is now become as milk, honey
and balm; and as a glorious light that shines more and more unto the perfect
day; as a shield, fortress and tower of defense, where everlasting peace and
safety is; salvation being as walls and bulwarks, against which the enemy
cannot prevail, nor nothing that would defile enter. In this state some were in
the primitive times, when they could say, We can do nothing against the truth,
but for it; and it is possible to say and do the same now.

XXXI. It is a blessed thing for a man to know within himself, and from a
living experience to be able to say, as one of old did, The Lord is my
shepherd, I shall not want. Such are witnesses of the truth of those sayings of
Christ Jesus, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and
I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my father's hand. It is as this voice is heard, obeyed
and followed, that a leading out of that state, where the wants are, is
witnessed, into the green pastures, where the true and safe feeding is; where
the lying down in the valley is, where none can make afraid; where the bread is
sure and the water fails not: And this I testify, all that do not hear and obey
this heavenly voice of the true shepherd, are goats and swine, and not sheep;
let them profess what they will, they feed upon husks, and are wandering in the
dry places, and upon the barren mountains where the wants are, and the green
pastures of life and salvation they are strangers to.

XXXII. It is a very blessed thing, for people to know how to worship God
aright, and to be found in this worship, not only at set times and appointed
places, but at all times, and in all places. This is the spiritual worship, or
the worship in spirit and in truth; and these are the spiritual worshippers
which God seeks and accepts. This worship excels all other worships upon the
face of the earth at set times and appointed places, which stand in saying so
many prayers in a day, and reading and singing so many lessons a day, and
hearing so many sermons a day, and other outward observations. This worship
stands in time, place, letter and form; but they that worship God aright, it is
in the spirit and in the truth, which is pure and universal.

As people are found in this worship, they differ from and excel all others
upon the face of the earth. These worshippers know what it is to bow at the
name of Jesus; what it is to know every thought brought into the obedience of
Christ; what his rule, government and great authority is; and how all power in
heaven and in earth is given unto him, and how all are to worship him as they
worship the father, whether things in Heaven, or things on earth, or things
under the earth. These can confess with their tongues that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father, truly and experimentally being witnesses
of his heavenly power and rule in their hearts, mitals and understandings,
giving victory over all vain thoughts, self-will, carnal desires and wanderings
of the mind. These are the worshippers that know the old man put off with his
deeds, and the new man put on; the old things cast away, and all things become
(...); and what it is to enjoy the sabbath of rest, where the end is put to the
thinking of their own thoughts, and speaking their own words, and doing their
own works; and what it is to bear no burden upon the sabbath day; and what it
is to enjoy the comfort of the seriptures, and to enjoy the good things they
testify of. What the righteous in all ages did enjoy, such are partakers of and
are in unity with just men's spirits, being come to God the judge of all, who
is blessed forever.

Our peace, joy, consolation and continual happiness stand in this, in being
exercised in this worship, witnessing the power of God, the name of Jesus, over
all in ourselves; all bowing under it. and yielding obedience thereto, as in
innocence before transgression, where the earth was subdued in the dominion of
God, and the heavenly rule was over all. This the true worship in the spirit
and in the truth brings again into, and makes free from the contrary, as truly
as testified in the scriptures, If you know the truth, the truth shall make you
free; free from the evil that is in the world, from the evils within, from the
enemies within, which are the greatest enemies. Except this freedom be known,
all other knowledge is vain; all religion and profession vain; all talk of God,
Christ and Christianity vain.

XXXIII. Blessed are those who have their minds and hearts always exercised by
that which leads into the fellowship of just men's spirits made perfect. Such
have also unity with their words and testimonies left upon record in the
scriptures of truth, as is written by one in the Psalms, Blessed is the man
that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the law of
the Lord, and therein does meditate day and night. The same blessed state is to
be witnessed now, which is more than to read and sing all the Psalms; and he is
the only blessed man that does those things. If Christendom had learned this
lesson, which they have read and sung, they would not have become as a waste
howling wilderness, and as a desert which brings forth no fruit to God, having
lent their ear to the wicked one, and walked in the way of sinners so long,
till they are brought to believe, that it is impossible to walk in any other
way, while on this side the grave.

In this condition we ourselves were, while the vail of the covering was over
our hearts. We dwelt in this thick darkness, where the lending the ear to the
wicked is, where the way of the sinner and seat of the scornful is, and knew
not the way out of it. That which dispersed this thick darkness, took away the
vail from off our heart, stopped the ear that hearkened to the wicked one,
blinded that eye which led to walk in the way of sinners, and brought down that
exalted spirit that sat in the seat of the scornful; I say, that which has
done this for us, was and is no other than the power of God working in his
precious light, to which our minds were at first turned, and in which we have
believed; which as we walk and abide in, we witness such sayings as these in
the scriptures fulfilled, They that see shall be made blind, and they that are
blind shall see; and the blind shall be led by a way they know not, and the
lame shall leap as an heart; and the mighty shall be brought from their seat,
and those of low degres exalted. As this is abode with and walked in, that has
wrought these things, a delight in the law of the Lord is known, and a
meditating in it day and night.

There is nothing else able to preserve us from lending an ear to the wicked
one again, and from walking in the way of sinners again, and to keep down the
spirit of exaltation from rising again, but the delighting and meditating in
this law. This is the law of the spirit of life which has made free, and is
able to preserve us in the freedom whereunto we have attained. All that are
strangers to this law, and a meditating in it, they give ear to the wicked,
walk in the way of sinners, and sit in the seat of the scornful, let their
profession be what it will.

By this one scripture all the sects in Christendom, who profess the scriptures
to be their rule, may try themselves, whether they are in the state of the
blessed man; or in the state of the cursed man. They need not hire a school
Doctor, or learned Rabbi, to give them the meaning of the scriptures, they
being spoken by plain men, and understood only by those that are come to the
spirit. Those that obey the wicked one, lend their ear to him; and those that
commit sin, walk in the way of s^^ners.

XXXIV. It is one of the fundamental doctrines of Religion, to believe that God
is omnipresent and almighty; that is, present at all times and in all places.
This is generally professed and believed among the sects in Christendom; but in
them it is no more than a bare profession, a traditional and historical faith,
they not being true witnesses of the same. Herein is the difference betwixt
those who do, and those who do not, witness the presence of the Lord, and the
almightiness of his power: The first only know the ground and reason why Moses,
that eminent servant of the Lord, said, If thy presence go not with us, carry
us not hence.

This was the delight of the soul of the righteous in all ages and generations
past, and is now; even to feel the comfortable presence of the Lord, and to
know the light of his countenance lifted up upon them. This makes their hearts
more glad than the increase of corn, wine and oil, and is better than them all.
This was the strength and encouragment of the righteous in all ages, and made
them willing to suffer for his name. This carried them through the water and
through the fire. This made them sing and rejoice in the prison and in the
stocks, and suffer the spoiling of their goods joyfully. And Friends, except
this living presence be felt and enjoyed, known and lived in, we are as weak as
other people; and if any lose or depart from it, such will become as wicked as
others also.

Therefore it is a very precious thing, for every particular always to prize
the riches of that grace, and the glory of that light, which their minds were
at first turned to, which grace and light has led a remnant into the
presence chamber, into the banqueting house, where the banner over them is
love, and is leading others into the same; and would guide and direct all out
of the way of evil, into the way of peace. Oh! the freeness of this love and
grace, and the glory of this light which has led a remnant, that has loved it
and followed it, into the presence chamber, into the banqueting house, and to
the top of that holy mountain, where the feast of fat things is enjoyed, and
the wine well refined drank of; to the right hand, where the rivers of pleasure
are. This is free grace and love indeed. This love is stronger than death, and
better than life. Oh! the consideration of this love is able to break the
heart, to melt the soul before the Lord, and to dissolve it into an holy
resignation and pure resolution to walk to the praise, and magnifying of it
among the sons and daughters of men, that they may be won and persuaded to
accept of its tenders, and follow its leadings; that they may know the
pleasantness of its paths, and witness the virtue and operation thereof, in
their own souls.

XXXV. It is a blessed thing, and an high and heavenly state, for every
particular to be witnesses within themselves, that Self is made of no
reputation. There is not a people upon the face of the earth, that are in the
way to this state, but such whose minds are turned to the light of God within,
and are exercised thereby; which alone discovers and makes self manifest in all
his appearance, thoughts ways and imaginations, and leads those that walk in
it, to the true self-denial, without which there is no salvation.

For the destruction, loss and misery of all mankind, came in at this door,
when he gave heed, credit and reputation, to his own selfish desire, thoughts,
reasonings and imaginations; and would know of himself, be wise of himself,
etc. Then the serpent, which spoke of himself, prevailed over him; then he
entered into the temptation of the devil, and lost his dwelling place in
Paradise. Thus the enemy of man's happiness, under a pretense of advancing him
and bettering his state, and making him of some account and reputation, drew
him into a state of loss and misery. Self-reputation was the first bait of the
enemy, and will be his last; therefore watch diligently against it, for herein
his power stands, and by this bait he overcame the first Adam; therefore it is
a blessed thing to live in the power of the second Adam which makes self of no
reputation. For as sin and the devil entered and prevailed by reason of some
self-reputation, so shall he be cast forth and overcome by the power of God, in
all those in whom it makes self of no reputation. This is a principal lesson of
Christianity, which all of necessity must learn, in some measure, before they
can be so much as a disciple of Jesus, as himself teaches; If any man will be
my disciple, he must deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
Denying of self, and taking up the cross, are inseparable, and must precede
discipleship; yet this state is short of being a friend of God, and coheir
with Christ; bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and short of sitting
down with him at the right hand of God in the kingdom of Heaven; and of knowing
the Son to surrender the kingdom up unto the Father, and God to become all in
all; short of knowing it meat and drink to do the will of God, and his fruit
sweet to their taste, and to sit under his shadow with great delight, glorified
with that glory which Christ had with the Father before the world began. In
this state, self is made truly of no reputation; the first birth is slain, the
serpent's head is not only bruised, but broken and subdued; the second birth
rules, the elder serves the younger, who delights naturally to do the will of
God; and it is not a cross to it, neither is the cross to be taken up by it;
this is the sheep that know Christ's voice, and follows him with delight, and
a stranger it will not follow.

XXXVI. It is a blessed thing, for people to know the name of the Lord. They
that know it can trust in it; being as a strong tower unto them, and as a wall
of defense, within which the righteous dwell safely, and unto which they fly
when danger does attend.

It is very precious for people to meet together and wait in this name; such
find Jesus the Savior, in the midst, and know a mounting up as with the wings
of an eagle. Such know their bread sure, and their water fails not. Such meet
and wait for the better, and not for the worse; they wait not in vain; their
strength is renewed; they mount upward, and they know the name of the Lord as
precious and as powerful now, as in ages past. They know it as a strong tower
indeed, as a safe hiding place, and as precious ointment poured forth, and so
they love it, because of the sweet savor thereof, and because they have been
made clean, and are preserved by it as virgins; and can say, Thy name is as
precious ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. It was
virgin souls in ages past, that loved the name of the Lord. It is the virgins
now, that love the name of the Lord. Those that are joined to any other lovers,
cannot love the name of the Lord; though they may pretend much love thereto,
their hearts are gone a whoring after other lovers; and though they profess
love to the name of the Lord, and take it often into their mouths, and draw
nigh to him with their lips, yet their hearts are gone astray, and they do not
depart from iniquity; so though they confess and profess the name of God in
words, they deny him in works. Such confessors and professors cause the name of
God to be blasphemed among the Heathen.

This is the name of the Lord, by which he has made known himself unto us,
viz. Light. The pure everlasting light that now shines in our hearts, this is
the name of the Lord; for God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. This
is the name of the Lord to (...). As we meet in this name, and wait in this
name, live together and walk together in this name, we have fellowship with
God, and one with another; and we dwell together as in the munition of rocks,
where no evil nor enemy can prevail against us.

In this name, the light, there is no occasion of stumbling; as we love this
name and walk in it, we are so far from falling, that we stumble not. It is out
of this name the stumbling and falling is, the evil-doing is; He that does evil
hates the light, and does not bring his deeds, thoughts and words to it; so
walks, talks and works in the darkness; not knowing what he says, whither he
goes, nor what he does.

All the professors of Christianity, and all the sects upon the face of the
earth, may be tried, measured and judged by this one saying, notwithstanding
their talk of loving the name of the Lord, yet if they do, or commit evil, they
hate the light. This is an universal, infallible truth, let the prosession be
what it will. If people are found in the evil-doing, they hate the light, are
enemies to God, loving their evil deeds.

This name of the Lord, the light, which makes all things manifest, and judges
every appearance of evil, is that which the sect-masters in Christendom despise
and set at naught; and so know not the salvation that is in it; but to them
that believe in it, this name is precious, and they have and do witness the
sweetness and salvation that is in it; and this is the salvation such have
waited for, and do partake of, even to be saved from sin, from doing, speaking
and thinking of evil, while they dwell in these houses of clay, in these
earthen vessels; such have, do and may enjoy the heavenly treasures.

It is a strong delusion indeed, and a gross doctrine of devils, that has
overspread the world of mankind in the great night of apostasy, wherein and
whereby people are taught and persuaded, that it is impossible to cease from
sin, term of life; and that, though they continue and remain therein, yet they
shall enjoy the salvation of God after they are dead. This may very fitly be
called the doctrine of devils, and a strong delusion; a state wherein people
are given up to believe a lie; seeing, as the tree falls so it lies, and there
is no repentance in the grave.

This is the happiness of a remnant in this day, that they know the name of the
Lord exalted, and set above every name in them, in Heaven and in earth, and
know every thing bowing to it, and worshipping before it. Here the King of
righteousness is upon his throne; here the righteous bear rule, and the land
rejoiceth; and peace is within their borders.

This is my testimony, That none can enjoy true peace, but as they witness this
name of the Lord exalted in their hearts above every thing; above gold and
silver, house and land, wife and children, and self-reputation; yea above all
heavenly names as well as earthly; and every thought and imagination brought
down and subjected to it. There is no other name given under Heaven, whereby
men can be saved from their enemies within, which are their greatest enemies,
but as they withess this name of the Lord exalted in them; even his name who
said, I am the light of the world. This light shows unto man his enemies, and
not only so, but destroys them with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming. Power is in his name, the light, which makes all
things manifest, to destroy and expel all that is contrary to it, and redeem
mankind from under the power of it. This a remnant are living witnesses of in
this our day, and are ready, in love and good will, to tell their neighbors,
countrymen and acquaintance, what the name of the Lord, through their loving of
it, has done for their souls; that they may be persuaded to embrace it, and
come to experience the like great salvation.

Great is the knowledge that is broken forth in our hearts and understandings,
and glorious is the light of that day that now shines; what then remains,
but that all that have received this knowledge, do walk answerable to it; and
that all in whom this light shines, abide in it and love it; so a vain thought
cannot arise, nor an idle word be spoken, nor an evil deed be done, but they
are judged and condemned by it.

This light that judges every appearance of evil, is a day of judgment,
wherein men give an account for every idle word they speak.

XXXVII. It is a certain truth, testified by the Apostle, when he said, Great
is the mystery of godliness.

And this is one of the great mysteries, that God is very nigh unto the sons
and daughters of men; many of them are very far from him. God is in the world,
but the world knows him not; and God, who is light, shines in darkness, but
the darkness does not comprehend him. He is in men, and they live, move and
have their being by him; yet they are without him, without God in the world;
strangers to him, though he is not far from every one.

In this stands the happiness of a remnant, that they know God not only nigh
them, and in them, but also they know themselves nigh unto him; he dwelling in
them, and they in him. These are they that enjoy the effect of that blessed
prayer of Christ Jesus, That they may be one, as thou Father, and I am one; I
in them, and thou in me. This is the blessed unity and heavenly fellowship,
which the primitive Christians were witnesses of, when they said, Truly our
fellowship is with the Father and with his Son.

This is a state worth waiting to feel and enjoy. It is more than words can
express, and is the end of all words and declarations. None are to sit down
short of this state. This is the end of the race, and the mark of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Here is the seeing eye to eye, and the talking
with God as a man talks with his friend. Here is the seeing as thou art seen,
and the knowing as thou art known. Here is the walking with God as Enoch did;
and here is the talking with him, as Abraham, Moses and the Prophets did. Here
is the coming of the Lord to the last supper known, where the dainties are
prepared, and the wine well refined. Here is the fruit of the vine drank new in
the kingdom of God. Here is the marriage union, where the water is turned into
wine; where the bride and the bridegoom rejoice together; where the tears are
wiped off all faces; where there is no crying nor pain, death nor sorrow. Here
death is swallowed up in victory, darkness into light, fear into love, in which
is no torment. Here is the truth of that saying witnessed, love casts out
fear. This is the love which is greater than faith, greater than hope, the end
of faith and hope, and remains when they are gone. This was the first, and will
be the last. Blessed are all that dwell and abide in it; no evil can enter
their dwellings.

XXXVIII. It is the blessing of all blessings, to know the low valley, where
the green pastures are, where the safe feeding is, where none can male af^^^d;
the feeding in this low valley, where the fatness of the Lord's house is, where
the greenness and safety is, where the ravenous beast cannot come. The feeding
here is more than words; it is the end of all words and declarations. It is the
end of the Lord, in sending his messengers of the everlasting gospel among us;
it is their crown and rejoicing to find us feeding in this low valley, where
the Idolshepherds and their flocks cannot partake with us; they know not the
way that leads thereto.

The very remembrance of the time, wherein the call of the Lord reached us, and
called us out of the holes of the rocks, and off the high hills and barren
mountains, into the valley of Jehoshaphat, where the pleading with all flesh
with fire and sword is, and where the judgment is known, by which Sion is
redeemed. I say the remembrance of this day is very precious to a remnant, and
the ministration thereof was glorious in its time; but this is more glorious,
to dwell in this low valley, where the green pastures of life and salvation are
fed on; where the growing is unto the stature and fullness of Christ; where no
fear is; where the cause of it is taken away; where the pleasant rivers run;
where the tranquillity of mind, peace and full satisfaction is enjoyed. This is
the blessing of blessings, and the portion of a remnant in this the day of the
Lord's love, and exceeding riches and kindness; and those that truly enjoy the
least measure of it, esteem it above all the world, because they well know,
that all things therein are not sufficient to purchase the least dram thereof.

XXXIX. It is a very blessed thing for every particular, within themselves, to
feel and know the spirit of God bear witness with their spirits, that they are
true waiters upon and worshipers of him.

Many glorious things, according to the testimony of the Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles, do accompany those that wait upon the Lord, and are enjoyed by
them. One could say, They that wait upon the Lord shall want no good thing.
This one sentence is sufficient to try all the pretenders to wait upon the Lord
in Christendom, who profess a waiting upon him in ordinances, yet are found
wanting the good thing. Poverty, blindness and nakedness, leanness of soul and
barrenness of heart, are their daily companions; so, instead of wanting no good
thing, they want all good things relating to their inward man. Another could
say, They that wait upon the Lord, their strength shall be renewed, they shall
mount upward as upon eagles wings, walk without weariness, run without
fainting. No bare formal professor in Ch^istendom can be a living witness of
these things; such may infallibly conclude, that they are deceived and mistaken
in the cause, when the effect does not follow; for this is the testimony of
truth to all the sects in Christendom, and the diverse worshippers elsewhere in
the world; let them profess what they will, yea, though it be the truth itself,
if they enjoy not the good things, if they feel not their strength renewed, so
as to run without weariness, and walk without fainting; if they grow not from
grace to grace, from knowledge to knowledge; if they increase not with the
increase of God in the inward man; they deceive their own souls with a vain,
dead, fruitless profession, which profits nothing, but will vanish like smoke
in the day of the Lord.

XL. It is a precious thing, to be witnesses of the presence of Jesus in the
midst, as a peaceable Savior; for those that know him so, live, abide and walk
in him, are of the number of those which need no repentance. Indeed it is an
high and heavenly state to come to this degree of knowledge. None come hither,
but such who have first known him as a judge and reprover, as a refiner with
consuming fire, and as an ^vercomer of all their enemies in them; the great
dragon bound, the mouth of the bottomless pit stopped, and a standing upon the
sea of glass mingled with fire; being witnesses of victory over the beast and
his image, and over the mark and number of his name. These are they, that come
to sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, not only upon the banks of salvation,
but in the midst of Jerusalem, which comes down from God out of Heaven; and
before the throne of the Lamb, who is the light thereof, and has redeemed them
from the earth, and faved them with a great salvation.

XLI. That which was lost is now found; the precious pearl that was hid in the
field, a remnant in this age has dug deep and found it, and many rejoice in
the sight and knowledge of; but let all understand this, that it is not
sufficient to find the heavenly treasure, the precious pearl, but to purchase
it and possess it; even by selling all, parting with all for it. Nothing in our
hearts, nothing in our esteem, must stand in competition with it; all must be
laid down for it. It is a true saying spoken by Jesus, If any man love any
thing more than me, he is not worthy of me. He alone must reign and rule, and
have the government in our hearts. We must know him to be the foundation,
corner and top-stone, elect and precious.

It is not sufficient to know him as a little stone cut out of the mountain
without hands, smiting at the feet of all imagery; but to know him grown and
increased to an exceeding great mountain, and to fill the earth, and to become
all in all; to know every thing to bow at his name; every high thought, every
imagination, every vile affection, selfish will and desire denied, brought down
and subdued into obedience to the name, to the power of God. This is the
blessed state of all, that have not only the knowledge of the field where the
pearl is hid, but have also dug deep therein and found it, are to wait for
and experience; and not to sit down short of this in the fight, knowledge and
profession of the precious pearl, but to purchase, inherit, possess and enjoy
it; that they may be able to say, My beloved is mine and I am his; here is the
feeding among the lillies, where there is neither toiling nor spinning.

XLII. That which makes a people blessed, above all the families of the earth,
is, that they in their solemn assemblies, and at all times, are sensible of
that power that Phil. ii. 7, 8.
makes self of no reputation, even self in its innocence; for such a self
Christ had, which was humbled and made obedient to the death of the cross; and
this is the way to an high and heavenly exaltation, which as people come to
walk in, as the Captain of our salvation did, the serpent that beguiled in
Paradise, by drawing mankind into self-exaltation and self-reputation, cannot,
nor shall ever prevail against them.

For the worship which this power has led us to, begins not when our solemn
assemblies begin, neither does it end when we part, but is in that which is
without beginning or end, even in the spirit and in the truth, into which the
deceiver cannot come.

It is a precious state, an high and heavenly condition, to witness self made
of no reputation, and to have unity with that power that has made it so. They
that remain and abide in it, no temptation can prevail against. So the whole
duty of those that are come to the knowledge of this power, and to have faith
in it, is always to cleave unto it with their whole hearts, and to fix their
minds upon it; that in the midst of all temptations and trials, they may
witness deliverance and salvation by it, and such shall never miss of the same;
for it is said when Christ was tempted, after the temptation was over, Angels
ministered unto him. The same is witnessed now by a remnant, in measure, praises
to the Lord! Such experience the blessedness that attends enduring temptation,
and do magnify the power, over the power of the evil one, and walk to the
praise and glory of it; and herein they differ from others; a talk and
profession only differs not, but a living in the sense and obedience of that
power, which makes self of no reputation.

Self became of some repute, when temptation at first entered mankind; the
giving credit to the devil's saying, You shall be as Gods, etc. begot a selfish
hope of a selfish gain; so being deceived, a vain desire of self reputation
sp^ang and increased, disobedience to the command and power of God, and a
selfish hope and confidence were immediate companions in the beginning, which
all the children of the light, that are come to a dwelling place in Paradise,
are to watch against, lest as the serpent beguiled Eve, he beguile them.

XLIII. The night is far spent, darkness is past, and the true light now
shines, the day of God is dawned, the day star is risen in the hearts of
thousands.

This state and knowledge is very glorious in its time, and is more than all
the bare professors in Christendom know or understand. But that which we are to
wait for and press after, is a further thing, or a knowledge of the same thing
in a greater degree of glory, even to know the sun of righteousness arise with
healing under his wings. This is more precious, and a greater degree of
knowledge, even to experience the healing virtue of the sun of righteousness;
this ministration succeeds that of discovering, reproving, convincing, smiting,
correcting and wounding; this binds up and hea^s, this comforts and consolates
the soul, refreshes and glads the heart, and ministers the joy of God's
salvation. To live in the sense and feeling of this healing virtue, this saving
and preserving power, not only in our solemn assemblies, but at other times, is
very precious. This cures all diseases and insirmities, and takes away,
disperseth and removes the cause of hurts and wounds; the cause of smiting,
convincing and reproving; and preserving from falling into the same again; so
as we live and abide in it, we can never err, nor ever need reproof, smiting or
wounding. It is the world that lies in that state, where the spirit of God
convinces for evil, reproves, smites and wounds for transgression; but to
us salvation is now nearer than when we first believed, and the great day of
salvation is come; the maker up of the breach, and the healer of nations is
come. blessed are all that do experience the healing virtue thereof, and the
blessed effect of his appearing with heavenly healing under his wings; so that
they can say, their soul-sickness is cured, and their wounds not only bound up,
but healed, and they cleansed and made sound, both in soul, body and spirit.
Such are fitted and prepared to have their conversation with God in Heaven, and
sit there in the enjoyment of the light of his countenance, which is better
than the increase of all other things.

It is the taste of the rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand, and of
the wine in his kingdom, that engages those that drink thereof, to wait to
partake more and more of the same. It is because of the savor of his good
ointment, that the virgins love him.

If there was no good savor, if there was not something felt and witnessed, of
greater worth and value than the treasures and pleasures this world can afford,
the souls of the righteous would not long after it, and become sick of love,
nor be encouraged to wait to enjoy the increase and aboundings of it.

In this stands our happiness, daily to experience and partake of the virtue of
this healing, saving and preserving power, to feel our hearts and minds joined
to it, united to it, become one with it. Herein is our everlasting blessedness;
and this truly distinguishes such from all the bare prosessors in Christendom,
even as they walk and abide in this blessed light, and sun of righteousness,
that is risen and now shines, and in the witnessing the healing virtue thereof.

XLIV. It is a precious state to be of a tender spirit, of a soft heart,
prepared to wait upon the Lord. Such are in a capacity to know when good comes;
they are not like the parched heath, nor barren desert, but like the tender
herb; they are sensible of the dews from Heaven, and of the gentle rain that
falls, and the fruitful showers that descend upon them; they can feel the
droppings down of divine love, and sprout forth and sing for joy in the sense
thereof. But those whose hearts are stony, and whose spirits are hard, they
cannot taste and see how good the Lord is; such are not prepared to wait upon
the Lord, nor to draw nigh unto him, and partake of his divine refreshments,
neither have they the sacrifice wherein his soul delights, which is a broken
heart and contrite spirit. Oh! it is a blessed thing for people to meet
together, and wait in the sense and feeling of the tendering power of the Lord;
even that power that sought us out, and gathered us in the beginning, to have
our hearts exercised in this tendering power, which is now with us, and attends
upon us, for our good and preservation. This is that which makes us and our
solemn assemblies differ from all the bare professors of Christianity. They
that so meet and so wait, sit as at the table of the Lord, feeding upon that
which is meat indeed, and drinking of the wine that the has prepared, feeding
upon life itself, and the substance itself. This is better than to sit at the
table of Princes; all the banquets and dainties of the earth are not to be
compared to it. As every mind and heart keeps in the sense of the tendering
power of the Lord, they are living witnesses of the preciousness of it. Here
none can forget the loving kindness of the Lord, nor let his benefits slip out
of their minds; but are in a capacity to praise and magnify him for all his
mercies and heavenly blessings, and wonderful kindnesses and deliverances that
he has wrought for them, even as great as for any people in any age of the
world. They can say, He has not only brought them out of Egypt, through the
red sea and wilderuess, but also into the good land, and has divided their
inheritance unto them; and they can say, Their lot is fallen into a good place;
feeling the slowing of the milk and honey, they eat and drink, and praise the
Lord in the sense of all his mercies, blessings and salvation that they are
accompanied and surrounded with.

This is the mystery of our fellowship, and the bond of our unity; as our minds
and hearts are exercised in the tendering power of the Lord, especially in our
solemn meetings and waiting together upon him, as every one keeps close unto
this, and are united unto it. Oh! this is a precious state, herein stands our
blessed unity and fellowship, herein we are strong, even as Mount Sion, as a
threefold cord that cannot easily be broken. As we keep and abide in this, the
gates of hell cannot prevail against us, no evil can hurt us. In this stands
our joy and preservation in our meetings, and in our partings, in all times and
places, as we feel our hearts and minds in unity with the spirit of the Lord;
then not convinced, reproved and condemned by it; but justified and commended.
This is sweet and precious indeed, as all that are in it know full well.

XLV. It is he that stays at home, that divides the spoil of his enemies. It is
he that stays at home, that obtains the blessing. The wanderer and hunter does
not: He toils and wearieth himself, and sells his birthright.

It is the retired mind, the staid mind, the mind whose loins are girded with
the girdle of truth, staid upon the Lord, that receives the blessing, and knows
a being kept in perfect peace, according as it was witnessed of old; Thou will
keep him in perfect pea^e whose mind is staid upon thee. This to enjoy, is the
mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, which we have been and are
called unto, even to enjoy perfect peace, to be entire, wanting nothing. This
to enjoy, is the end, sum and substance of the Christian religion.

It is those that are witnesses of a retiredness and a stayedness of their
minds upon the Lord, that inherit substance. It is those that have known the
candle of the Lord lighted in them, and have swept their own house, and found
the piece of silver, and that rejoice therefore.

This heavenly light that now shines, discovers the vanity and emptiness of
all things below the sun; and by the same, our minds have been redeemed from
under them, and are become living witnesses, that neither all the treasures,
pleasures, opinions and religions that are in the world, nor the bare
profession of truth itself, was able or sufficient to stay or satisfy our
souls; We have found them all prove a very vanity and vexation of spirit.

For the soul of man is in itself more excellent, more noble, and of greater
value than all these things, and is superior to them all. The lesser cannot
satisfy or fill the greater; nor that which is inserior, ignoble and less
excellent, stay or satisfy that which is superior or more worthy, noble and
excellent in nature, capacity and being. As the soul of mankind is above all
created sublunary beings, therefore all things under the sun, instead of food
and satisfaction unto it, prove vanity, emptiness and vexation of spirit.

So blessed is the remembrance of that day and time, wherein our minds were
turned to the true everlasting light that now shines, which has discovered
the vanity and nothingness of all things below the sun, and has redeemed the
children thereof from under them all, up unto him who is in them, through them,
and above them all, God blessed forever. And brings into the one true
everlasting universal worship, which stands in the spirit and in the truth.
Here God who is light, and dwells in the light, is bowed unto, worshipped and
obeyed.

XLVI. It is a blessed thing, and those are the people who have attained to a
heavenly state, who can experimentally witness and seal to the truth of that
ancient testimony in the holy scriptures, Darkness is past, and the true light
now shines.

I say, it is a blessed thing to witness the truth of this, or to be able to
say, Darkness is past. Those that have known what it is to dwell in darkness,
and to work and travel in the land thereof, and have been surrounded therewith,
and encompassed with the thick mists and fogs in the dark region of the shadow
of death; such can remember that their steps were made in solitary places, and
their habitations as where Dragons, owls and bats were their companions; and
therein were stumbling and groping, like blind men for the wall: These have
been in this state, who are come to know redemption and deliverance from it,
and can say in truth, that Darkness is past, and the true light now shines in
and unto them; these can say it is a blessed state indeed; and that it is more
to witness and experience the truth of these three words, Darkness is past,
than only to hear and read thousands of good words. There is much in the words;
those that know Darkness is past and gone, are come to the everlasting day of
God, to the rising of the glorious sun of righteousness, which has caused the
very shadows of death to flee away; and they know the very womb in which is,
and has been bred and generated, all the evil and wickedness that comes forth
in the world of mankind, made barren, removed and vanished away. They are come
to the springing of that day, and to the arising of that sun, that disperseth
all the mists and fogs, clouds and errors, that did encompass them about, and
made them to walk in the shadow of death. Their hearts are made to rejoice in
the feeling and enjoyment thereof, their eyes become satisfied, with seeing the
glory of the true light that now shines, and they find their hearts engaged to
walk in the same; not only to profess and talk of it; but to walk in it; and
become not only children of it; but young men, fathers and elders in it.
Walking ^n the light, implies no less than being led and guided by it, than
bringing every thought, word and deed to it, to be tried, not only in our
solemn meetings and assemblies, but at other times; in our affairs, dealings
and converse among men, even in our common occasions; and as all are found
herein, they are in the true worship of God, whether together or asunder.

XLVII. They are true and faithful sayings testified of old, That there remains
a rest, and the believer enters into it; and he that is entered into this
rest, has ceased from his own works, as God did from his. This is the
substance and antitype of the Jews sabbath; and this rest is inward and
spiritual, even a stay and rest for the soul, wherein that blessed state,
spoken of in old time, is witnessed, viz. Thou will keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is staid upon thee. This is a blessed state indeed, to be kept in
perfect peace; those that know an entrance into this rest, and abide in it,
know a ceasing from their own works, from following their own thoughts, and
doing their own will: Such keep holy day to the Lord; and do know that the day
of the Lord, long spoken and prophesied of, is come, and that the glorious
light thereof now shines.

This day is the day of the great sabbath, in which Christ stands up as a
teacher of his people, and they hear and understand his voice, and follow him,
and shut their ear against the many voices that are in the world. This is the
teacher we have been directed to from the beginning. We have not been called to
a noise or sound of words, nor to a bare profession; but to inherit substance,
to enjoy rest, even that rest which has been prepared of old, for the people
of God, and which does remain, and is very glorious, as those that have entered
into it can witness: And this is my experience and testimony, That none can
enter into this rest, but as they know a ceasing from their own works, their
own willing, running and thinking, and every thought brought into the obedience
of Christ; no further than this is effected, can any entrance be witnessed by
any into this rest that is prepared, and that does remain, let people's talk
and profession be what it will.

XLVIII. This is a great truth, that where a bridle to the tongue is not known,
and a chain to the will, affections, lusts and passions witnessed, the religion
of such is vain; though such may talk of rest and peace, yet they enjoy none.

John the Divine saw an angel come down from Heaven, having the key of the
bottomless-pit, and a great chain in his hand, who laid hold upon the dragon,
that old serpent, which is the devil and satan, and bound him. This, every
particular is to see and know effected in the revelation of God, before they
can witness an entrance into, and a sitting down in that rest which is
glorious, and which the light of this glorious day leads the children thereof
into: So it is precious to wait upon the Lord, who dwells in the light, and
leads the children thereof into the enjoyment of rest.

XLIX. Certainly it was the joy and delight of the righteous in all ages, to
draw nigh unto the Lord with their hearts; to be inward with him in their
minds; and it is the joy and delight of the righteous in this age, who, by
drawing nigh unto the Lord, experience the truth of that testimony, Those that
draw nigh unto the Lord, the Lord will draw nigh unto them, and are witnesses
of his heavenly presence, and partake of the joy of his salvation, having their
conversation in Heaven, where God dwells; and walk with him as Enoch,
A^raham, Moses, and the Prophets did. This is witnessed by a remnant in this
age, as in ages past; for the day of life and salvation is come, and the
blessed way that leads thereto is known, and evidently made manifest to
thousands in this our own native country, and island of the Gentiles, on whom
the glory of the Lord is risen.

It is a blessed thing to know the way of life and salvation, but it is more
blessed, and a greater degree of happiness, for every particular, to whom it
has appeared, to know themselves fitted and prepared, by walking in the light
thereof, to possess and inherit the same. This is that which is worthy to be
waited for, and is the blessed end of all holy writing, reading, preaching and
believing, even to possess the thing read, writ and preached of. Such as are
taught of the Lord, and established in righteousness, not only know it, and
profess it, but are established in it. This is the mark of the high calling,
which all that are but in the way that leads thereto, are to press after,
that they may come to the enjoyment thereof.

It is the tasting and seeing how good the Lord is, that raises and quickens
desires to enjoy him, and more and more engages to draw nigh unto him, and to
wait upon him. It is the tasting of the streams of the river of life and
pleasure that is at the right hand of God, that alone renews strength; and
such only are witnesses of the truth of that saying, They that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength, and mount upward as upon the wings of an
eagle, run without weariness, and walk without fainting, even in the way of
God's commandments with delight; being become more natural and pleasant so to
do, than ever it was to do the contrary.

This is the blessed state and privilege of many, to draw so nigh unto the
Lord, as that they not only taste and see the goodness of the Lord, but are
also filled and satisfied with the renewings of strength, divine refreshments,
and heavenly consolation in their souls, whereby they are made more and more in
love with him, and engaged continually to wait upon him. And in this stands the
happiness and preservation of all, even as the eye of their minds is kept
looking unto the Lord, and waiting upon him, even as the eye of a maid is upon
the hand of her mistress, and much more. Where this tasting, seeing, drawing
and waiting is wanting, weakness, weariness and fainting abounds, and the enemy
of their soul prevails, let the talk and profession of religion be what it will.

L. It is a blessing, yea, the blessing of all blessings, for every particular
to know and feel within themselves, that the spirit of God hears witness with
their spirits, that they are the sons and daughters of God, that they are
begotten by him to a lively hope; whereby they purify themselves even as he is
pure, and that they are Christians indeed, Israelites indeed, in whom is no
guile. This I say is the blessing of all blessings, for every one to have the
spirit of God to witness those things unto them; and this is precious to wait
for and enjoy; for he that has called us is holy, harmless and without guile;
so as we follow and obey him, we shall be like him, as the primitive Christians
were, who said, We know that when be does appear we shall be like him. This
testimony of the spirit of God is more than a thousand witnesses. It was the
only comforter of the righteous in all ages past, and is the same now.

It is good to mind the spirit and its testimony, so as to become
spiritually-minded; then life and peace is known, and death and trouble
vanishes away, and the truth of that saying is witnessed, To be
spiritually-minded is life and peace, but to be carnally-minded is death.

Of a truth, the spirit of grace and truth is come, and many are living
witnesses of its appearance and power, not only to reprove and convince, but to
comfort and consolate those that have and do wait for its appearance, and are
in love there with, and have their ear open to its teaching, and their minds
and hearts exercised in it. In this stands the everlasting joy, peace, comfort
and consolation of the righteous, even as they continually learn of the spirit
of grace, and are witnesses of the leading of it, and guidance of it, out of
all evil into all good. As they keep in the sense and exercise of this spirit
of grace, they excel all the bare professors in Christendom. This alone makes
them differ from them, even as they grow in spirit, from one degree of grace
unto another, from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from strength
to strength, from children to young men, from young men to elders and fathers,
even to the stature and fullness of Christ, having his mind; doing always that
which pleases God. Such are sons of God without rebuke, and are able to say,
as some of old did, viz. We can do nothing against the truth. This is an high
and heavenly (...) indeed, which all are to wait for and press after, which is
possible to be attained unto, even in this age, as in ages past; and such can
say, Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world; and are daily
witnesses of his strength, in preserving them out of the evil of the world,
though they live and labor in it, and daily converse with the children thereof.

This is that which keeps us a living virtuous people, even as we abide in him,
increase and grow in him, who at first appeared unto us, and unto whom our
minds were at first directed. Herein we shall be preachers of righteousness,
lights of the world, and as the salt of the earth indeed.

LI. It is a precious thing to wait, walk, and dwell in the light, even in that
which makes all things manifest; and those that wait and walk in it, are led by
it to the rising of the Son, even the everlasting Son of righteousness, whose
glory, light and virtue, does as really disperse and drive away the vain
thoughts, dark imaginations, fogs, clouds and mists of ignorance and darkness
within, as the outward sun does expel, extinguish, and cause the fogs, mists
and darkness to vanish away outwardly: This many are witnesses of.

The very remembrance of the first discovery of truth under this name Light, in
this our age, is very precious. The truth is but one, but it has many names;
and this name Light, to a remnant, is very excellent. Many righteous men and
Prophets, in former ages, foretold of the glory of this day, or Light that now
shines, and prophesied of its-breaking forth unto a people that sat in
darkness, and that were covered with the shadow of the night, and dwelt in the
region of death. We see the fulfilling of these things; for we sat in darkness,
and wandered in desolate places, and were encompassed with the region and
shadow of death. Oh! how sweet was the light when it first sprang unto us, and
caused us to see over the tops of the high mountains of darkness, and
discovered unto us the secret chambers of imagery, and the hidden things of
darkness, and guided our feet out of the mine and clay, and set them at
liberty, to walk in that path which leads out of the way of death and
darkness.

This is that manifestation of light, by which all these things are effected,
to which our minds were at first turned; which light judges every appearance
of evil, and leads all, that walk in it, out the same. This is the pathway,
that not only leads into innocence, but preserves in it; for there is a
possibility in this age as of old, that people may lose a good state, be
tempted out of innocence and a virgin's state, after they have attained unto
it. This made Paul exhort those he wrote to, To beware lest the serpent
beguiled them as he did Eve. How was that? Why, draw or allure them out of
innocence, out of harmlessness and a sinless state, into sin or breach of God's
commandments, to the loss of Paradise. This he has done, and may do again.
People may lose a good state, yea, their place in Paradise, if not watchful;
therefore good is it to wait and watch in the light, which not only leads
into the garden of God again, and brings to the tree of life, and gives right
to eat thereof, but also preserves in the same; discovers and gives dominion
over the tempter, and keeps from falling into the temptation.

It is no wonder to us, why the old enemy of mankind rages against the truth,
under this name Light; and that he gives it so many approbrious and despicable
names, that people might not regard it, nor believe in it as it is; knowing
that it undermines his kingdom of darkness, and discovers him and all his
works, and destroys them also. We are witnesses of the power and virtue of
faith in the Light, that it is able to break all the chains of darkness, and
deliver out of the fetters of death and hell; and we also know, that there is
not any other way or means under Heaven appointed of God, that is able to
effect this work. All other ways, means and inventions of men, are not able to
break one link of the chains of darkness. It Is faith in Christ the Light, which
reproves the world of sin. Though this light shines in the world in wicked men
in darkness, yet they having not faith in it, believing not in it, as that in
which God dwells, they never know the saving power and virtue thereof; yet its
reproving and condemning power such shall not escape.

LII. It is a blessed thing, for People to know the name of the Lord, even as
some in ages past knew it, and have left their knowledge and experience upon
record; who could say and witness, that the name of the Lord was as a buckler,
as a shield, as a tower of defense, yea, as a strong tower, into which the
righteous fled and were safe. It is very precious for people so to know the
name of the Lord, and to meet together in it; such are in a capacity to enjoy,
possess and inherit all the blessings that ever were promised, and to avoid and
escape all the curses that were ever threatened.

The glorious light of the gospel, that now shines, is the name of the Lord,
whereby he has made himself manifest to us in this our day and age. As we wait
together, and walk in this name, we are witnesses and experiencers of the
fulfilling of that promise, Where two or three are met together in my name,
there am I in the midst; such know their teacher, their Savior, in the midst,
and their eye is toward him, and their ear open to his voice, who is a
teacher, one of a thousand, who teaches to profit indeed. Many, that have
learned of him, can say, They soon became wiser than all their former teachers.
Thus to hear and learn of him is the blessed end of all preaching, hearing and
believing; and of all the ordinances, ministrations, dispensations and
appointments of God, ever since the fall of man, even to hear and obey the
voice of the Son of God, who is light, and dwells in the light, wherein the
righteous in all ages had fellowship with God, and one with another.

To know this name, is more than talk and a bare profession. To know it as a
safe hiding place, a sure rock, and tower of defense when the enemy assaults,
when floods of temptations attend, when arrows fly by night, and cease not in
the day; when storms descend, and winds blow. This was and is the blessed end
of the knowledge of the name of the Lord in all ages, to save and preserve them
that have it, from all dangers that attend them at all times and in all places,
from the enemy of their souls, that his fiery darts may not hurt them, nor his
floods drown them, nor the storms and winds overthrow them, nor the enemies of
their own house prevail against them.

This was the reason why those that knew it, compared it to a strong tower,
etc. They often meditated in it, and thought upon the name of the Lord, and
thereby found strength to abstain from every appearance of evil, and to resist
the devil in all his attempts. This is a happy state indeed, which those only
that know the name of the Lord, and can trust it, do enjoy.

By this may all the bare professors of all the various names in Christendom,
so called, be proved and tried; who talk much and profess much, of the name of
the Lord, but do not depart from iniquity, do not cease from evil, do not know
his name as a strong tower, to save and preserve them from the strength and
power of the enemy of their souls; so notwithstanding their great profession of
the name of the Lord, they do not depart from iniquity; and though they take
his name into their mouths, they hate to be reformed by him; which is a great
abomination to the Lord, and stinks in his nostrils. For this I testify in the
name of the Lord, that all people upon the face of the earth, let their name
and sort of religion be what it will, who profess the name of the Lord, and are
found in evil doing, their profession is vain, and their religion a lie. In sin
they live, and in sin they will die, except they come to know that repentance
which is never to be repented of; till which, they can never come to know the
name of the Lord as a strong tower, buckler or shield; but are led captive and
ensnared by the enemy of their souls, even at his pleasure.

LIII. In this stands our blessedness and everlasting happiness, as our eye is
kept always looking to Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, and not
only to know him the author, the beginner of faith, but the finisher, the ender
also; to know the end of faith, which is the salvation of our souls; such know
salvation nearer than when they first believed. It is a blessed thing, to have
and know that says which Jesus is the author of, the least measure of which,
is very precious and very powerful; though it be but as a grain of
mustard seed, it removes mountains, and does wonderful things. Many are living
witness;ses in this age, as in ages past, of the power of faith, even in the
beginning of its work; but it is an higher state to know the end of it, the
finishing of it, to know the work thereof done; to know the heart purified by
it, and the victory over the world obtained; the wicked one subdued and
overcome, brought down and destroyed. This is a blessed state indeed, and that
which all are to wait for, press after and witness. The only way to attain it,
is always to look to Jesus, to keep the eye of the mind toward him, and the ear
open to him, who alone teaches to profit, even in silence, when no word is
spoken outwardly. This is the blessed end of the ministry and ministers of
truth the Lord has sent amongst us, and of all preaching, writing and
printing, even that every one's eye might be turned to Jesus, always looking to
him who has begun the good work, and who alone is able to finish it.

LIVE. It is a blessed state, to be as a stranger and pilgrim on the earth, and
to be able to say in truth, as some of old did, We have here no continuing
city, but we seek one to come. I say, this is a blessed state; but it is more
blessed to find the city sought for, to know the heavenly city to be come, to
know the heavenly Jerusalem come down from above, from God out of Heaven, and
to be a citizen of it; such dwell in a quiet habitation; such are redeemed from
the earth, who dwell in this heavenly city, where no unclean thing can enter;
they dwell not upon the earth, neither do they inhabit the dark corners
thereof, where the woe and misery is, as it is written, Woe to them that dwell
upon the earth: Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, for the devil is come down
amongst you, etc. Oh! let none that talk of, and profess themselves citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem, be found inhabiters of the earth! but let all travel
Sion-ward, until they come to dwell therein, and become free citizens thereof,
who are not fellow citizens with the saints in light, w^^^d well not within the
gates thereof. Oh! press forward to the same, that a sirting down in the
kingdom you may witness. This is the end of our pilgrimage; the end of seeking
a city that will continue, whose builder and maker is God, who is worshipped in
this city in the spirit, in the truth, and has everlasting praise from all the
inhabitants thereof.

The outward Jew, the outward Jerusalem, the outward temple, the outward
furniture thereof, and the worships and worshippers therein, were shadows,
figures and types of these things. Jerusalem was the place of worship, and all
were to repair thither to worship, to make their offerings, and offer their
sacrifices; and wherever the people were, when they prayed or worshipped, they
were to turn their faces toward the city of Jerusalem. To be witnesses of the
coming down of the heavenly city of Jerusalem, and being a fellow citizen of
the saints in light, is the antitype and substance of those things, and of all
the blessed promises relating thereunto, and is that which all are to wait for,
who have not attained thereto, but are in the way thereof.

LV. It is a true saying recorded in the holy scriptures, that the Word is
nigh, in the mouth, and in the heart; none need to ascend or descend to fetch
it down, or bring it up. This was the word of faith preached and believed by
the primitive Christians, and is now again preached and believed in by a
remnant in this age. Blessed are all those that know, experience and abide in
the same, that hear and obey the voice and teachings thereof, that are learning
of it, not only when they meet together in one place, but at other times and
places, in their common occasions to lend their ear unto it, and receive its
instruction. Such assuredly will be made wise unto salvation. Such will not be
always learning, and never learned; neither will they be laden with sin, not be
led about by diverse lusts, but will witness the powerful salvation of God
through faith in the word, which is quick, sharp and powerful; quick to teach
and instruct in all that is good; and to reprove and condemn all that is evil;
and sharp and powerful to cut down and destroy that which did formerly load
with sin, and led into the things that are evil.

The hearing and obeying this word of life, this inspeaking word of God, that
is nigh in the mouth and in the heart, is the only ground of all true learning
and knowledge; and all that despise the voice of it, and shut their ears
against the teachings of it, and have not faith in it, though they may be
furnished with all the academical learning in the world, and be diligent
hearkeners to the voice of men and books, yet will they remain strangers to,
and ignorant of the pure sanctifying, satisfying wisdom, and peaceable
salvation of God, and under the burden and power of sin, under the command of
their lusts, wills and passions.

The want of faith in the word and power of God within, and the neglect of
hearing the still small voice thereof, is the ground and cause of all
ignorance, errors, darkness and confusion among men, of all sects and sorts of
religion upon the face of the whole earth.

LVI. It is a precious thing to have faith, and to be always looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of it; and to be growing and increasing in it, from one
degree unto another. They are the blessed people who wait, walk and live
together in this faith, which Jesus is the author of; and is the same which was
once delivered to the saints; being the gift of God, and not of man. The least
measure of which is very powerful, though but as a grain of mustard seed, it is
able to remove mountains; and all that know the growing and increase of it, and
persevere therein, come to know Jesus not only the author, but the finisher of
faith; not only the beginner, but the ender of it; for faith has an end, even
the salvation of the soul; and all that attain to that end, can rejoice in the
salvation of God, which is come nearer unto them than when they first believed.

Let all the sects in Christendom, who talk of having faith in God, try and
examine what their faith has done for them. If it has not removed mountains
of darkness and ignorance; if it has not purified their hearts; if it has not
given them victory over the world, saved them out of the evil thereof, enabled
them to please God, to live unto him, and to find acceptance with him; if they
know not these things wrought in them and for them, they may infallibly
conclude their faith is dead, and is none of that faith which is the gift of
God, once delivered to, and received by the primitive saints, which Jesus was
the author of; but is a faith of their own making, and is like the faith of
devils who believe and tremble; the only fruit and effect of the faith of
devils and wicked men.

LVII. It is a blessed thing to know and witness a meeting and waiting together
in the name of Jesus; such as meet in this name, and know Jesus the peaceable
Savior in the midst of them, know the heavenly adorning of a meek and quiet
spirit, the prince of peace, and his peaceable government, the Lamb upon the
throne, the righteous bearing rule, the land rejoicing, and heavenly peace in
their borders.

It is the true waiters and meeters in this name, that enjoy all the blessings
promised. It is they that know their strength, faith and confidence in God
renewed; their wisdom and knowledge increased with the increase of God; they
know the light to shine more and more unto a perfect day, as was witnessed of
old, The just man's path is as a shining light, that shines more and more unto
a perfect day.

But before this day is known, Jerusalem must be searched as with candles, even
Jerusa^em the chosen beloved city, and every inhabitant of it; and the blessed
end of searching, is to cleanse and purify it. Judgment begins at the house of
God, to purge away and sweep out all that does defile, and to lay waste
Babylon, the city of confusion, the mystery of iniquity. These things are to be
known and experienced in every particular, even Jerusalem searched and
cleansed, and Babylon wasted and destroyed; and the increase of the kindom of
Heaven within, the power, light, and glory thereof shining more and more
within. As in this name we meet and abide, we feel the kingdom come, and the
will of God done; and whatsoever we ask in this name, we receive, according to
Christ's promise; for we have not been called to a sound of words, to figures,
types and shadows, nor to depend upon the lips of others, though enabled to
make long declarations of the truth itself; but to inherit substance, to feel
Jesus the truth in the midst, the tree of life in the midst, and to eat of the
fruit thereof, and to sit under his shadow with great delight. These things are
a remnant come unto, and do enjoy. This is the crown and rejoicing of the
messengers and ministers of the Lord, when they come among us, to find us
feeding on the bread of life; enjoying and possessing substance, peace, life,
and everlasting salvation: And it is their sorrow and trouble to find a people
under the profession of truth, always learning, but never learned; always
hearing, and yet ignorant of the voice of the word of life in themselves, and
of that living bread which comes down from Heaven.

LVIII. To them that believe, Christ is precious, even him whom the nations
despise, and the master builders set at naught: I say, to those that believe he
is precious, he is become the head of the corner. They love him in all his
appearances, manifestations, dispensations and operations; whether he appears
as a judge, a convincer, a reprover, a refiner with fire, and a fuller with
soap; or a comforter; savior, or prince of peace. In all these he is precious
to those that believe in him, because they know and believe, that the blessed
end of every appearance and operation of his spirit in them, is in order to
make them happy.

It is very blessed to know him appear as a judge, a reprover, a refiner and
fuller, etc. This is more than a bare profession, and beyond all the nominal
Christians upon the face of the earth; but it is much more blessed to know him
a finisher of the work, to know judgment brought forth to victory, to know a
being refined, a being purified, a being sanctified and saved. This is a state
that every believer is to wait for and experience; without which, they cannot
be Christians indeed, Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile.

For this I testify, That this is the end of the blessed appearance of the Son
of God, the Light, Grace, Spirit, Power or Love of God within; which is all one
thing, though under different names, so to work and operate in every true
believer in him, and lover of him as to make an end of sin, finish
transgression, and bring in everlasting righteousness. This is the blessed end
of all his operations.

The titular Christian that talks of Christ and his offices, as King, Priest
and Prophet, Savior and Redeemer, etc. and knows him not first as a refiner, a
fuller, as a purger of the floor, and a burner of the chaff with unquenchable
fire, deceives his own soul with a vain talk and profession; so never
witnesses sin made an end of, nor transgression finished, nor everlasting
righteousness brought in. Except this be known, all professiis vain, and people
cheat themselves with the name Christian, the nature thereof being wanting.

It is very precious and absolutely needful, for every particular that
professes the name of Christ, and faith that he is a believer in him, to feel
and know his heart and mind truly in love with every appearance of him in his
soul; to follow it and obey it, and to enjoy the end thereof, viz. Everlasting
salvation brought in, sin made an end of, that he may appear the second time
without sin unto salvation. This is worthy to be waited for; and as every one
loves the appearance of Christ, and joins to it in their hearts, against every
appearance of evil, they are in the way that leads thereto, even to
everlasting life, peace and salvation. This is the new and living way, and
there is not another. All that are out of this way, are strangers to it in
their minds, their hearts being alienated from it, never come to inherit
substance, nor to know everlasting righteousness brought in, unrighteousness
finished and cast forth, the house swept, purged and cleansed, and they made an
habitation for God in the spirit, but do remain as a cage for unclean birds,
and a place for dragons; though they may talk of the fame of wisdom,
sanctification and redemption, righteousness and salvation, yet they are found
in the contrary; in captivity and bondage, though they talk of freedom and
redemption; in unholiness and corruption, while they talk of sactification and
righteousness. Let all concerned consider hereof.

LIX. It is a blessed thing for people to meet together in one place with one
accord, all minding one thing, every mind exercised in the spirit and in the
truth, wherein alone God is worshipped. This is the worship a remnant are
brought unto, which worship does not always begin when their solemn meetings
begin, neither does it end when they part. It is as every one is found therein,
that they and their worship differ from all the formal worshippers upon the
face of the whole earth, whose worship stands in the traditions and inventions
of men, in set times, and at certain places, in saying certain prayers, reading
diverse lessons, preaching and singing, etc. Every mind being exercised in the
truth, every thing that is contruy thereunto, is made to bow and bend unto it;
every thought, every imagination, every desire and affection made subject to
the truth, worshipping or bowing to the name of Jesus. This is more than bowing
the knee, or all bodily exercise whatsoever; more than all Mountain and
Jerusalem worship, of all the diverse modes in Christendom. For while the mind
is carnally exercised, the heart corrupt, the conscience defiled, the
understanding darkened; all is but will worship, self-work, and voluntary
humility, and has no acceptance with God.

LX. It is a true saying which Christ spoke to his disciples, when he said, If
I go not away, the Comforter will not come. There is much in the words; many
have read them, but have not understood what they read; for it is a blessed
thing, to know the going away of Christ after the flesh, and to be able to say,
as one of old did, Know I him so no more. They are those that know him come
again in the spirit as a comforter, as a Prince of peace, and are witnesses or
his peaceable government in their souls, and can say, He is come, and we ^ook
not for another.

LXI. Of a truth, the times of refreshing are come from the presence of the
Lord, the showers from Heaven are falling, and the heavenly manna is rained
down, and many are livingly refreshed therewith, and are become as a well
watered garden: Who were as a desert and wilderness, are now blossoming as a
rose; and those that were barren, now bear and bring forth fruit unto God. This
is the Lord's doing, and is mavelous in the eyes of a remnant.

Blessed are the people that can meet together with one accord, and sit before
the Lord waiting upon him. Such at times are favored to sit as at a banquet,
and have a table richly spread before them; they eat and drink and their souls
are satisfied. Their everlasting happiness and blessedness stands in this; in
feeling their hearts and minds continually drawn nigh unto the Lord, and staid
upon him, not only in their solemn meetings, but at other times. In this they
are preserved in a capacity to partake of the mercies and blessings of the Lord
daily. This is a blessed and safe state indeed; to know a stay to the mind, to
know the heart fixed, joined, settled upon the Lord. Such cannot be easily
moved, neither can the enemy prevail against such, nor the stranger intermeddle
with their joy. Their bread is sure, and their water fails not. They are
witnesses of the truth of that Prophet's words, who said, speaking of the Lord,
Thou will keep them in perfect peace whose minds are staid upon thee. What can
any desire more than perfect peace? Peace that is entire, wanting nothing, full
of satisfaction, and rejoicing in the inward man. Oh! what would a remnant have
given in times past, to have known a stay to their minds, to have known the
heavenly treasure which is sufficient to satisfy, refresh and consolate their
souls! This is the pearl of great price. This is the eating of the tree of life
indeed, and is the only way and means to come to the possession of all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge that lie hid in Christ Jesus, and to inherit
all the blessings that attend the Christian religion we profess; but those that
are of a wandering mind, their thoughts, wills and affections unsubdued,
unmortified, they are in that state wherein they know not when good comes, and
as broken cisterns that can hold no water.

So this is the main thing, wherein our safety and happiness stands, viz. to
know our minds and hearts drawn nigh unto the Lord, our eye fixed upon him:
that after we have partook of his blessings, and been refreshed with his
presence, we may abide in a frame of mind, ready to receive of him that which
does satisfy our souls, and minister true content to our minds. Nothing is able
thus to do, but the daily bread. What we eat today, will not serve tomorrow.
Give us this day our daily bread. Bread every day fresh from the table of the
Lord. Hereby is the growing from grace to grace, from faith to faith, from one
degree of glory unto another witnessed, even till we all come unto the stature
and fullness of Christ. The more any thus truly wait to enjoy, the more they
feel their strength renewed with heavenly encouragement, so that they can run
and not be weary, and walk and not be faint.

LXII. That which makes a people blessed and happy, is, that they hear and obey
the still small voice, which says, This is the way, walk in it. This is the
voice of the true shepherd, and the sheep know it, follow it and obey it, and a
stranger they will not hear not follow. In this lay the safety, strength and
blessedness of the righteous, in all ages and generations past, even in hearing
and obeying the voice of the Lord. Herein they gained victory over their
enemies, and knew them all confounded and brought to naught. This is the
strength and blessedness of the righteous in this age and generation, by which
they overcome their enemies. As we hear and obey this voice, we grow strong and
prevail against all our enemies, even those of our own house, which are our
greatest enemies. In obeying this heavenly voice, which calls out of all the
crooked ways and bye-paths of sin and transgression, into the strait and living
way of the Lord, and preserves in the same, that we return not into them
again, that we enter not into the way of sin and transgression, that we are not
captivated in the way of darkness and error, out of which we have been called,
and from which we have been redeemed and saved with a great salvation. Praises
be to the name of the Lord, who has caused his glorious day to dawn, and his
heavenly voice to be heard and known, from all the voices that are in the
world, and from the voice of the serpent, though it many times speaks very low
and small. Yet blessed be the Lord, we hear and know it from the voice of our
enemy, from the voice of the stranger, because it calls out of all evil and
error, into purity and holiness; out of all self-will, thoughts and
imaginations, into the heavenly stilln^ss, self-denial, deep humility, and
lowliness of mind; which is the low valley where the fresh pastures are, and
the springs of life are known, where satisfaction is enjoyed, and peace and
tranquillity of mind possessed. This is the substance of all. This is that we
have been and are called to, in this the glorious day of God's appearance, in
this his visitation of us with his dayspring from on high, which shines
gloriously to a remnant: Praises to God forever.

LXIII. Those are the blessed people, who have not their teacher to see^, their
Savior and Redeemer to seek; but their eye beholds him, and their ear hears
his voice; witnessing and enjoying what one of old knew, when he said, I know
that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand last upon the earth. This is
an heavenly state, which a small remnant witness, even to see their their
Redeemer stand last upon the earth. He was the first upon it, and is known to
be the last also; subduing all under him; the earth to be his footstool; all
earthly mindedness, earthly desires, earthly affections, trodden down and
trampled upon by him; every vain thought and lofty imagination subdued under
him, all our enemies destroyed by him. But no people nor person upon the face
of the earth, can witness these things effected in them, but as they travel
through the work of regeneration, and come to know that their Redeemer lives
not only in himself, but also in them. Then transgression is known to be
finished, and everlasting righteousness brought in. Then the Prince of peace
and righteousness reigns, sits upon the throne and rules; where the prince of
the power of the air and unrighteousness did rule. Then does the land rejoice,
and heavenly peace abounds in their dwellings; which peace cannot be enjoyed by
any, let them profess what they will, though it be the truth itself, unless they
experimentally know their Teacher, their Savior, their Redeemer.

LXIV. The very remembrance of the time, wherein our minds were turned to the
true light that now shines, not only in darkness, but out of it, is very
precious; in which God dwells, in which we are living witnesses of his presence
and appearance, which ministers more consolation, refreshment and gladness in
our hearts, than the increase of corn, wine and oil. The exceeding love and
kindness of God, in fitting and preparing instruments in his own hand, and by
his own power, to turn and direct our minds to the light of Christ within, to
the power of God within, is never to be forgotten. The waiting in which, and
the obedience to which, makes us and our assemblies to differ from those who
are strangers thereunto; the which, as we wait in and obey, we never have our
teacher to seek, our guide and instructor to seek, though no word be spoken
outwardly.

It is a precious thing to love this light, and to walk in it. That is the only
way to be a child of it. It is the highway that was prophesied should be cast
up, wherein the wayfaring man, though a fool, should not err. There is no
stumbling in this way, nor no occasion of stumbling. As we walk and abide
therein, we are, and shall be the most contented people, the wisest, strongest
and happiest people upon the face of the earth: but out of it, we are as weak
as any; and after we are come to the knowledge of this way, if we abide not
therein, we may also become as wicked as any.

There is no other way to be looked for, no other gospel to be preached than
this, to which our minds were turned at the beginning, viz. the Light, the
Grace and Power of God, the Pearl, the Treasure, the Kingdom within; in which
the key is known, that opens not only the mysteries of godliness, but the
mystery of iniquity also; and brings our eye to be satisfied with seeing, our
ear with hearing, and our heart with understanding.

Oh! how are we engaged to walk in this way! to walk worthy of this love which
is shed abroad in our hearts, which we are made partakers of, that we may adorn
our profession with all holiness of life and conversation; to the praise of him
that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. To whom be glory
forever.

LXV. It is a blessed thing, to know the kingdom of God to be come, even the
same kingdom which Christ long since taught his disciples to pray for; and
which he in this age has taught his disciples to pray for. It is a blessed
thing to know this kingdom to be come, but it is more blessed to know a sitting
down in it, and partaking of that wherein it stands, viz. Peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost; which all the kingdoms of this world cannot give, nor take away.

Now the cause why we in time past, as well as others, were ignorant of the
coming of this kingdom, and wanted the enjoyment of that wherein it stands, was
because we disregarded its appearance, and over-looked the seed of it, and
slighted the operation of it; which is like the working of leaven in meal. This
was the cause, even because we did not regard the day of small things; we had
no faith in the holy power and spiritual appearance of God within, which always
wrought against evil, and the author of it, and his kingdom of darkness, though
but as a little leaven or small seed.

And all the sects and sect-masters in Christendom, who overlook the seed of
the kingdom, which works like leaven in all that have says in it, and despise
the appearance and operation of the light and spirit of God within, the^ never
know the coming of the kingdom of God, nor the sitting down in it. They inherit
vanity, reap sorrow, and lie down in misery, let their talk and profession be
never so high. This is the wora of truth to them all.

But all that know the coming of this kingdom, and a sitting down in it, and
the enjoyment of that wherein it stands, which is peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost; they are living witnesses of their being gathered from the east, west,
north and south, and of sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of God, and can say as some of old could, which the author to the
Hebrews wrote to, when he said. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the
ci^y of the living God; the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are
written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect; and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant; and to the blood
of sprinkling, that speakerb better things than the blood of Abel. Were not
these things written in the holy Scriptures, it might or would be counted
unlawful, if not blasphemy, to speak or write after this manner. But the
kingdom and power of God is one and the same throughout all ages, and was the
dewlling place of the righteous in all generations; even the same our minds
were at first turned and directed to, whose first appearance was as a light
shining in a dark place; as a little seed springing out of a dry ground; as a
little leaven working in the meal, according to the parables and teachings of
Christ Jesus. This was the lot and inheritance which the holy men and holy
women in ages past waited for and received, and glorified and praised God for
the enjoyment thereof, in the midst of all afflictions and fiery trials, and
over them all. This was their joy and crown, and the righteous in this age
desire no other.

LXVI. We have been and are called to inherit substance; and all that have
obeyed this call, and abode with him that has called, are witnesses of that
bread which nourishes up unto eternal life; and do experience the preciousness
and pleasantness that there is in eating of that bread which comes down from
Heaven. The outward bread, upon the outward table in the outward temple, was a
type and representation of this heavenly bread, which nourishes those that
feed thereon up unto eternal life. To meet together, and sit together at this
table, and eat of this bread, is better than to sit on thrones with Princes,
and to eat of their dainties. All the treasures and pleasures of this world,
are not to be compared with it; for there is nothing able to content the soul,
and to stop its hungering and thirsting after those things that perish with the
using, but the eating of this bread: And the more any eat of this bread, the
more they hunger after it. There is a pleasure and blessing in hungering and
thirsting, when the treasury of living bread and water is ready at hand to
supply; and it is the taste of the crumbs which fall from the children's table,
that begets a cry in the hearts of a remnant, Evermore give us this bread.

LXVII. Blessed are all who have their eye unto the Lord, and their ear open
unto him at all times, and in all places, and in all states and conditions; for
of a truth, God is come to teach his people himself, as was long since
foretold. All that have learned of him, and are guided by his spirit, are
thereby led to within the vail, into the holiest of holies, and know the vail
to be taken away, not only the vail of Moses, and the vail of the outward
Temple, but also the vail of the flesh of Christ; and are come to behold him,
and dwell with him, who was before the cause of vails had a being; before the
cause of the law, the labor of the Prophets, and suffering of Christ had a
being. This state is precious to behold, and very delightful to enjoy. This is
the light of his countenance indeed, which is better than corn, wine, oil, or
all visible things.

This is the blessed end of waiting upon God, as the handmaid does upon the eye
of her mistress. Whether thou art as a babe, as a child, as a young man, as an
elder, or as a father; thy duty is, in all these states and growths, to have
thy eye unto the Lord, that he may lead thee from the one into the other, and
preserve thee therein by his grace, which is able and sufficient to teach thee
all good, save and defend thee from all evil, lead thee into glory, and
establish thee in the kingdom thereof forever.

LXVIII. It is a very blessed thing, and those are the people that are come to
a blessed state and condition, who can say in truth, that their bodies are the
temple of the Holy Ghost. These are they whose eyes behold their teacher; their
eye is inward unto him, who teaches in his temple, and whose glory appears in
his temple. These are the blessed people that have this knowledge; and all that
have it, know how they come by it, and how they became so, having been the
temples of the unclean spirit. They know the temple that was defiled and
polluted, cleansed and purged, and the unclean spirit and his works cast forth.
These are a watchful people against all that would defile the temple again, and
these are the true temple worshippers in this day and age, and this is the
temple in which every one speaks of the glory of the Lord, of the power of the
Lord, and of his wondrous works wrought therein, even in his temple not made
with hands.

This is the antitype and substance of the outward temple built by Solomon, and
the various worships and services therein; even when people are brought into
such a state, as to know their bodies the temple of the living God; that he
walks in them, and dwells in them, according to the ancient prophecies of holy
men. These are an habitation of God through the spirit.

These are the worshippers in spirit, in truth, not only in appointed places
and solemn assemblies, but at other times and places, bowing to every
appearance of God in his temple, in the spirit and in the truth in the inward
parts, which God loves, accepts and delights in.

The outward temple, after it was finished and sanctified, became defiled,
polluted, and made as a den of thieves, therefore it became robbed, and spoiled
of all its treasure, and so in the end destroyed. This was or came to pass in
the figure, and is written for our learning: Let all be watchful and take heed,
lest after they know their bodies the temples of God, sanctified or made holy,
they become polluted and defiled again. Such God will destroy with woeful
destruction.

It is very precious when people are come, not only to know their bodies the
temples of the Holy Ghost, which knowledge is absolutely needful, for without
it there is no being a Christian, but also are come to know an heavenly
stillness, an heavenly silence in the temple, no buying and selling, nor
exchanging; no noise of the workman's iron-tool in the temple, for that defiles
the temple, and pollutes the altar, if it be but lifted up upon it. The best
parts, inventions and arts of man in the fall, has nothing to do in rearing an
altar, in building a temple, nor in setting up a worship, or offering
sacrifices to God. His righteousness and his wickedness are both abomination to
the Lord.

LXIX. The gospel is the power of God unto salvation. This gospel was preached
in Abraham's time, yea in Enoch's and Alam's time, and salvation was obtained
in it and by it. Those that obeyed this gospel, the power of God, in those
ages, were saved by it from evil, made just and holy men, friends of God and
walked with him. Thus it was before the law, under the law, through the
Prophets. All that obeyed the spirit and power of God, obeyed the gospel, and
were redeemed and saved by it from sin and transgression, which mankind being
fallen into, had need of the gospel to be preached unto him; had need of
redemption and salvation by it; and as it is received and obeyed, it is known
to be the power of God to salvation by such.

Paul's testimomy was, Col. i. 23. that he was a Minister of that gospel which
was preached in every creature under Heaven; which was indeed the universal
light, love and power of God, appearing for the salvation of man. All that are
true ministers of this gospel, are like their heavenly father, whose light
shines for all, whose rain falls upon all, whose love extends to all. They are
not like the Jewish Rabbis, Doctors and Priests, or Ministers of the letter;
who preach not the power of God, that brings salvation to all that receive and
obey it; neither do they bring their disciples into true love, ^eace, unity,
good will and brotherly-kindness one to another, and to all mankind, and put an
end to the contrary.

Oh! the miserable state poor mankind is brought into, and hold captive in,
through the mystery of iniquity working in many of the nominal professors in
nominal Christendom! where, under the name and profession of the Prince of
peace, love, good will, innocence, patience, kindness, and all holy virtues, is
realy found and practiced, wars, fightings, cruelty, violence, envying, hating
and destroying one another; which are not the fruits of the gospel of God, nor
of the ministry thereof; but of men, of the prince of confusion, and of
Babylon, and of those who have drank of the whore's cup, whose wine of
fornication has made drunk all nations. He that can understand, let him.

LXX. Blessed are all those that know themselves members of the true church,
which is built of living stones, elect and precious, and are made an habitation
for God, in the spirit and in the truth, who meet together, and wait upon the
Lord in silence, and worship in spirit and truth, without a book, or dependence
on a man-minister.

So blessed are all that are of the true church, living stones, a spiritual
house and habitation for God, who know him to dwell in them, and to walk in
them as in his temple, teaching and ruling in their hearts. These are fellow
citizens of the saints in light, and know the heavenly city Jerusalem come down
Heaven, and themselves inhabitants thereof. These have known redemption from
the earth, and the tongue of the Egyptian sea dried up, the seat of the whore,
and the mystery of all her harlotry, under all her various dresses and
sumptuous array, and golden appearances discovered; and these are they that
cannot be deceived longer by them. These can sing Hallelujah, salvation and
glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord their God. These can say, True and
righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants at her hand. These can say, Praise our God all ye his servants, and ye
that fear him, both small and great, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns; let
us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife has made he self ready, being arrayed in fine linen, clean
and white, which is the righteousness of saints, and is the wedding garment
that all are to be clothed with, wi^o are called to the marriage supper of the
Lamb, who are members of his body, which is his Church.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THOUGHTS and IMAGINATIONS.
EVIL thoughts and imaginations, are great troublers of the world; and it is a
great misery which man is accompanied and surrounded with, who is given up to
follow and obey his own evil thoughts and imaginations; or to walk according to
them: It was a sore judgment pronounced against the disobedient rebellious
Jews, in the word of the Lord by Jeremy, saying, Hear O earth, behold I will
bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts. And the Lord by
the Prophet Isaiah says, I have stretched out my hand all day to a rebellious
people, which walked in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts,
which are thoughts of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Also
it is written, Every thought and imagination of man's heart are only evil, and
that continually. And very great is the misery, bondage, and slavery of mankind
in this estate; he is an enemy to God, and to himself, and to his neighbor and
brother, Wasting and destruction are in their paths, who have not God in all
their thoughts.

Now reader, that which is principally on my mind, is, to set before thee a
certain infallible way, how thou may come to be saved from following or
obeying thy own thoughts, and to gain strength against, and get victory over
all thy imaginations that are evil; and also how thou may attain to good
thoughts and heavenly meditations in the room thereof; and how thou may come
to know every good thought and desire brought into the obedience of Christ, and
every evil thought and imagination destroyed, and consumed with the breath of
his mouth, and the brighness of his appearing. And when thou art restored and
brought into the same estate man was in before transgression, even into the
garden of God, how thou must then dress and keep the garden. Thou must then
watch over, and in the wisdom and power of God, govern thy thoughts, lest the
serpent beguile thee as he did Eve.

First, thou must understand that from the ground evil thoughts and
imaginations arise from, spring all the briers, thorns, and thistles, and other
hurtful weeds in the world of mankind, in whose heart they began to spring,
grow and increase, even so soon as he began to lose his faith in God his maker,
and incline to hearken to the voice of the serpent, and give credit to his lies
which begot a vain thought; from whence a false hope sprung, that they should
by eating the forbidden fruit, better their conditions, be as Gods, according
as the serpent told the woman, the weaker vessel, and by this false hope,
grounded upon the thoughts and imaginations, entered the first transgression;
then when the temptation was entered into, and sin committed, thoughts and
imaginations began to multiply and fill the disobedient earthly heart of man,
who having now turned his back upon the heavenly, slighted the voice and
command of God, who was his teacher and lawgiver, and lent his ear to the
wicked one, and gave up his mind and heart to obey him, even with thoughts it
was all for the best. Thus poor man being deceived with vain thoughts, and
false hope, lost his habitation and dewlling place in Paradise; which after he
had transgressed, he still thought to keep; for he was soon convinced he had
done amiss in eating the forbidden fruit, and fear possessed his heart, when he
heard the voice of God in the cool of the day, and therefore sought means to
cover and hide himself from the sight of God: But herein his thoughts were
vain, and his endeavors to no purpose; the woman, man, and serpent, all
received the fruits of their own doings; nothing but life, good and blessings
were known before; now death, evil and cursing, the fruit and effect of
disobedience, (which as I have said, entered first by giving place to a vain
thought and desire, in hope to gain and better their estate) became the daily
companions of mankind, who found and finds by ^oful experience, that saying
true, When sin is finished it brings forth death.

So man having lost his place in the garden which God planted, through
neglecting his work which God appointed him to do, which was to dress it, and
to keep it; for the garden needed dressing and keeping before the forbidden
fruit was eaten, innocence, was lost, and sin was committed.

And this arises in my mind, to testify to all the wise in heart, that after
they are come to find that which was lost, to witness a restoration and
regeneration, and a returning into Eden, into innocence, they have work there
to do; dressing and keeping are two very significant words. This was the
business of man in the beginning, in the state of innocence; if he had not
neglected this work, slighted the light, power, wisdom and glory of God, with
which he was replenished, he had never fell; when the temptation got into a
thought, if he had watched in the light and wisdom of God, he would have seen
and discovered the tendency of it, and have prevented its coming to a desire
and act: But first giving place to a selfish thought, it soon sprang to a
hunger or desire, thence into act, this is the beginning and progress of sin at
this day, which mankind in innocence had; and has power and wisdom from God to
prevent, if he abide in it, and keep in his watchtower, the light and strength
of God, which is as near him as the temptation can be, and sufficient to
preserve him: And where this work is neglected, men, yea, holy men fall, and
sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression, and are beguiled as the
serpent did Eve, drawn out of innocence, and a sinless estate after they have
attained unto it; therefore let none be high-minded, but fear and take the
second Adam for example, who when he was tempted, did not desire after the
things presented, though very specious in appearance and accompanied with very
large promises; even as the first Adam had: But it is written, while the
temptation lasted he eat nothing; he let nothing in, gave no place to selfish
thoughts, and enticements of the enemy: So when the temptation was over, angels
ministered unto him: Let this be the example of all the children of light, and
as they do thereafter, the powerful salvation of God shall surround them, And
neither heights nor depths, angels, principalities, nor powers, things present,
or things to come, shall be able to separate them from the love of God in
Christ Jesus. This is a word by the way.

Now evil thoughts and imaginations are of a multiplying nature, and do mainly
increase and take root in the generality of mankind; who through evil works are
estranged from the life of God, remaining a degenerate plant, sprang from the
seed of the evil doer, and dwells and labors in that ground which God has
cursed, and knows not the seed of the woman to bruise the serpent's head, and
to redeem and preserve him from following and obeying his own thoughts and
imaginations, which are evil, and that continually. And indeed in that state
can be no otherwise, whether they lead into self-saming or self-righteousness,
both are abomination to the Lord, and destructive to the well-being of mankind,
both temporal and eternal: For all the wickedness that has been brought forth
and acted in the world since the beginning, began or appeared first in the
thought; and the thought being cherished and joined to by the mind, will, and
understanding, it increased, and increases into words and actions. That which
is clean cannot proceed from that which is unclean; the heart of mankind in the
fall is universally corrupted, and desperately wicked: And, as has been said,
the thoughts and imaginations thereof are evil, and that continually: And
before it can be otherwise, there is an absolute neceffity that every
particular man and woman know and experience for, and in themselves, their
hearts cleansed, purged and purified, and created new; the ground must be made
good, before the seed, the heavenly plant can grow, increase and flourish
therein; before good thoughts, heavenly thoughts and meditations can arise,
spring and remain therein. And when this estate is known, and enjoyed, then to
abide with him, dwell and walk with him, who has wrought these mighty things
in thee, and for thee, and in his wisdom and power to dress and keep the
garden, the heart, with all diligence, that that which would defile enter not,
creep in again, as it did in the beginning, which is possible. Therefore what
the spirit of God put man upon in the beginning, when he was a noble plant in
Eden, wholly a right seed, viz. to dress and keep the garden; so the spirit of
God now in this age says, Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation; take
heed, lest as the serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtility, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

Now this I testify from certain knowledge, that God has ordained means,
whereby mankind, whose heart is so corrupted, that nothing that is good
proceeds out of it, neither any thing that is heavenly, and of God, springs up
in it, that can live a moment, being so foul and so dark, even like a foul dark
piece of earth outwardly, on which the sun never shines, nor the rain falls,
that man in this miserable state may come to know and experience his foul heart
cleansed, purged and sanctified, as the Christians in the primitive times did;
Such were some of you, but now are you washed, cleansed, and sanctified, etc.
The fallow ground may be plowed up, and bear seed, and the wilderness may
become a fruitful field, and streams may break forth in the desert, and the
desert may come to rejoice and to blossom as a rose; crooked things may be made
straight, and rough places smooth; great heavy dark high mountains may be
brought down and removed, yea melted at the presence of God, and the low
valleys may be exalted; yea the wilderness may become like Eden, and the desert
like the garden of the Lord. All these mighty works and wonders has the Lord
wrought in this age, in and for a remnant, who are come to the fulfilling of
the prophecies, are living witnesses of the same, and do in his holy spirit,
and power, proclaim that the love and mercy of God toward lost man, is
universal, and that his hand is stretched forth to help him out of the snare,
pit, and deep dark dungeon, wherein he is fallen; out of which he cannot by all
his strength, wisdom, and invention, help himself; and to set him at liberty,
that he may run the ways of his commandments with delight, and that he may come
again to stand upright, as God made man in the beginning; and lay aside all his
thoughts and inventions, wherein he corrupted himself; and to bring him into
such a state and condition, that he may be able to do all things that are good,
to think good thoughts, speak good words, and do good works; and so eschew and
avoid the contrary: This to know and be able to do, in the one thing needful,
without which all men are miserable, let their knowledge, wisdom, and
profession of religion, opinion and invention, be what it will.

Therefore my mind is in good will to mankind, having received knowledge and
understanding of the means of God has ordained for their good and salvation:
And being something acquainted with the two great mysteries of godliness and
iniquity, and the way and working of each, to impart and signify something of
the same in a few words, to instruct and inform those to whom this my testimony
may come, how they may attain thereunto, and how they may come to be rid of
those troublesome companions, viz. evil thoughts and imaginations, that arise
in their hearts, while corrupted; and how the same may be purified and made a
holy habitation for God, as it was before sin entered, before innocence was
lost, before the serpent deceived the weaker vessel, when all was good, yea
very good.

The way that leads thereto, I declare to be as follows; and whoever thou
art that have a mind or desire to find that which is lost, observe, believe,
and receive what I say or write, as truth; not received or learned by
tradition, but by the experimental powerful work and operation of the spirit of
truth in my own mind: And what I have said, or shall say, is, and shall be
according to the holy scriptures, and witnessed to by them, for I cannot write
contrary to them, being in unity with them, and with the just men's
spirits-that wrote them. First then know thou O man! whoever thou art, and
whatever thy thoughts and imaginations are, how far soever thou art run into
corruption, darkness and degeneration from the state of innocence, purity, and
holiness; yet there is a measure of divine light attends thee; though thou art
darkness, it shines in thee, in order to show thee thy way out of it; though
thou art degenerated and run from God into the earth, yet this pure light and
spirit of God follows thee, and calls thee back; and thou may in this state
hear it as a voice behind thee, saying, Return, return, this is the way, come
and walk in it; this is the kindness and love of God to thee in his Son, who is
the light of the world, and lights every one that comes thereinto; if thou
hear and obey this voice of the light of the Son of God, though thou were dead
in sin, and buried as in a grave, thou shall arise and come forth and live
before him; the bars and gates of hell shall not be able to retain thee: But if
thou slight and despise the light of God that visits thee, and shuttest thy ear
against its voice, it will be as a thousand witnesses against thee, while thou
rebellest against it, and art found following thy own thoughts and
imaginations, and doing the thing that is evil; for this light I speak of, is
the eye of the Lord, that runs to and fro through the earth, beholding the evil
and the good, and that discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart; it is
the word that is nigh in the mouth and in the heart; which is quick and
powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword, and of the joints and marrow: This
is the candle of the Lord that searches Jerusalem, and gives light to the
sides of the earth, and corners of the world, from whom the shadow of death
cannot hide, nor the tocks and mountains cover or defend; for he that forms
the mountains, and creates the winds, and declares or shows unto man what
is his thought, that makes the morning darkness, and treads upon the high
places of the earth, the Lord, the God of Hosts is his name. This is the spirit
of truth that convinces the world of sin, and that sets men's sins in order
before them, and reproves and smites in secret for evil, and that brings to
judgment the hidden things of Esau: From this eye or light of the Lord, thou
can not hide thyself no more than Adam and Cain could, though thou should
hate the light, which shows thee thy thoughts, and love the darkness so as to
dwell in it, yet the light or eye of God will pursue thee and find thee out;
hell nor the utmost parts of the earth, and darkness, cannot secure thee from
the just condemnation of God; because thou hate the shining of his light, and
stoppest thy ear against the voice and teaching of it, and love the darkness,
and dwell in it, while thou do so, thou choosest the way of death, and
neglectest the means of salvation that God has ordained: For this is the
Condemnation of the world, that light is come into it, and men love darkness
rather, because their deeds are evil.

Now at the first step toward restoration and everlasting happiness, thou art
required to turn thy mind from the darkness in which thou dwell, to the
light, eye or spirit of God, and to decline the power of satan that works in
the darkness and embrace the power of God; and when thou do but begin to do
so, thou will find the scales to fall from thy eyes by degrees, and the vail to
be taken off thy heart, and the fetters and chains of darkness to be loosed,
and thy prison doors opened, so when thy candle is lighted, and thy eye opened;
thou will discern thy way out, and see the angel of the Lord go before thee,
and guide thee in the same: And thou will also perceive what is in thy house,
and clearly understand what has lodged in the dark room of thy heart, and when
thou come to see things as they are, Mistake in the understanding concerning
the nature of things that do present themselves before mankind, is the cause of
error. Thence it is that some call darkness light, and light darkness.
thou will receive wisom to give them names according to their nature, and to
judge righteously corcerning them: And as thou love this light, thou will be
enabled by it to divide betwixt thought and thought, and begin to make
conscience of a thought, and to hate every vain thought; and when thou can
not be easily rid of them, nor remove them from their old lodging place, thou will breath and cry to the Lord in the spirit, as one of old did, who was
burdened and oppressed with their company; Search me and try me, O God! and
know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. This is the cry which the Lord
hears, and will answer in due and needful time. And Jeremiah's cry to Jerusalem
was, Wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall
thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Now the only way to dislodge them, and to
be rid of their company, is to show them no countenance, make no provision for
them, give them no entertainment, but by the light of God which discovers them
to be thy enemies, judge them, and keep thy mind exercised in the light and
power of God, that it is turned to; and though they do and may arise, pursue
and compass thee about like bees, yet thou keeping thy eye fixed in the light
and power of God, which is as nigh thee as thy thoughts are, and shewe^h them
unto thee, thou will see them in due time scattered as chaff before a fierce
wind, and destroyed as stubble before a devouring fire.

Now as thou come to be a believer in the light, and to trust in the power of
God, to which thy mind is turned, thou will become in very deed a child of it,
and soon be able to say, Darkness is past, and the true light now shines, by
which thon can see and judge every thought and motion that arises and
stirs in thy mind, whether evil or innocent, hurtful or harmless, and have
wisdom to order them accordingly. And this is that primitive wisdom mankind had
in the beginning, but he abode not in it, through looking at the temptation and
beauty of the thing presented to the eye of his mind. The woman was deceived in
her thoughts; in her judgment and understanding was she beguiled before she
obeyed the tempter; it appeared Genesis iii. 6.
good for food, pleasant and desirable, and able to make one wise, before she
eat, or gave to her husband. Paul says, 1 Timothy ii. 14.
the woman being deceived, was in the transgression subjected to vanity; Romans
viii. 20.
not willingly, but through hope; she hoped to find the serpent's words true;
and to become more wise, and more happy, by taking the serpent's counsel; but
instead thereof, fell into the depth of misery: The same danger attends the
children of light; the sons and daughters of God, for Adam was a son of God
before transgressiion. And it is only such who are in the restoration, children
of the light, and of the day, that are capable to fall as Adam and Eve did, and
to fin after the similitude of Adam's transgression, and to lose innoceney,
purity, holiness and uprightness as they did, and be driven out of the garden
of God, as they were. Such as were never in it, nor never dwelt in the state of
restoration, innocence, purity and holiness, cannot be said to fall from, or
lose it; children of darkness, and children of the devil, who have gone astray,
and dwelt in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death, never knew what
the life of purity and holiness is, nor what the simplicity of the gospel of
Christ is, so cannot be beguiled as the serpent did Eve, of that they never
knew, nor had, as men and women now in the world; yet such are beguiled by the
serpent in another sort; not of what they have had, and did once enjoy, but of
what they might have and would enjoy: And this he effects by keeping the eyes
and minds of people abroad, and by persuading them to follow any thing, and
walk in any way, rather than to turn the eye of their minds inward to the
Light, word, power, and spirit of God, which shines, which speaks, which works
in man, in order to lead, to teach, to guide and direct him into the way of
life, and salvation, and to bring him into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God, into a perfect translation from darkness to light, and from the kingdom
and power of satan, to the kingdom and power of the Son of God, and to know
Christ made unto him wisdom, sanctification and redemption.

This is the blessed end of God in sending his Son a light into the world, even
to enlighten the Gentile, Jew, professor and profane; and that through him
they might believe and receive eternal life, and enter into that blessed reft
that God has prepared, which the primitive Christians who believed entered
into; where they did not speak their own words, nor think their own thoughts,
nor do their own works, their heavenly father spoke in them, and their thoughts
were thoughts of God, and be wrought all their works in them and for them. This
is a blessed state indeed; and none are entered into the reft which God has
prepared, but such as are come to witness and experience these things now in
this age, as the primitive Christians did in ages past.

For while any are found thinking their own thoughts, speaking their own words,
and doing their own works, though under a profession of Christ and
Christianity, they cannot enter into the rest which God has prepared, though
they may create to themselves false rests and kindle a fire, and walk by the
light of their own sparks, but in the end lie down in sorrow.

True rest and peace is obtained, or comes through a true selfdenial: A dying
to self-sinning, and self-righteousness, selfthinking, and working, contriving
and inventing, self-wisdom and understanding also: All these things must be
denied, annihilated or brought to nothing, and confounded: The feeding The
feeding on the forbidden fruit, which was good in itself, though not for food;
occasioned, and occationeth at this day, all the miseries that attend mankind.
upon these things occasioned and occasioneth the curse, and all the labor,
trouble, sorrow and torment that has attended and does attend mankind since
the fall; to the death must they all come before a sitting down in the kingdom
of God can be witnessed, or before any can cease from their own works, as God
did from his.

Now thou who art a child of light, understand this one thing for thy comfort
and encouragement in thy warfare against evil thoughts; that notwithstanding
multitude of thoughts do arise in thee, and troops thereof attend thee, which
are in themselves sinful; yet if thou join bot with them in thy mind, will and
understanding, they are not thy thoughts, neither shall the evil thereof be
imputed unto thee, if thou love the light, and keep thy mind joined to the
spirit of God, or appearance of Christ in thee, that discovers all
temptations unto thee, in the very thought, and first appearance of them; then
thou art helping the Lord against the mighty; being joined unto him, art
becoming one with him in thy mind, and spirit, though in thy members there is a
law, a power that wars against thee, and as thou abidest with the Lord, waiting
upon him, even as the eve of a maid waits upon the hand of her mistress; he
will save and deliver thee, and subdue all thy enemies, even those of thy own
house, which are the greatest enemies.

Though temptations may, and will attend thee, yet it is no sin to be tempted,
though with inward temptations; neither art thou to account thyself, nor to be
accounted a finner, because sin and vain thoughts may present themselves in
thee, in thy warfare estate, yet thou may say as Paul did, It is no more I,
but sin that d^ve^^th in me; and that in me, that is in my fiesh dweils no good
thing: Which flesh thou art now in the way to know withers as the grass, and
the glory of it becomes as the faded flower of the field, and sin that dwells
therein destroyed, and the creature of God's making preserved, the earthen
vessel that holds the heavenly treasure sanctified and saved, and delivered
from the yoke of bondage the whole creation of God groans under. And this thou
shall certainly arrive at, as thou keep thy eye upon thy Savior, thy light,
thy way, thy Captain, whom thou will see go before thee conquering and to
conquer, till all his and thy enemies are subdued, brought under and destroyed,
and thou made as a King, as a Priest to God, Lest thou should stumble at
those sayings, contider that John was the greatest Prophet that was born of a
woman, yet the least in the Kingdom was greater than he.
and as the primitive Christians were, who could say, as he is, so are we in
this present world, pure as he is pure, holy as he is holy, righteous as he is
righteous, harmless and innocent as he was, in all resigned up unto the will of
God: Not my will said the second Adom, but time; though his will was as
innocent and harmless as the first Adam's was before the fall, and did excel:
When thou come up hither, thou will understand and and receive what I say,
till then it will be as a mystery and hard saying to thee.

And in thy way take heed of thinking, willing and running, that obtains not
the prize, stand still and see the salvation of God; mind above all, the arm of
his power in the thee, which is able to suppress thy thoughts, mortify thy
will, stop thy running, and give thee perfect strength to resist the devil, and
make him flee, and to furnish thee to every good word and word, and give thee
dominion over thy own spirit, whose property is to be swift in thoughts, eager
in desire, and restless in the accomplishment thereof.

Now it is written, he that has rule over his own spirit, is stronger than he
that takes a city; Consider the family, and in the light ^y and compare thyself
therewith, and thou will and the truth there of.
and he that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a city broken down, and
without walls: When the righteous bears rule, the land rejoiceth; but when the
wicked, the land mourns. These things are infallibly true; while the usurper
keeps the throne, the prince of peace and his peaceable government is not
known. Tribulation and anguish comes upon every soul of man that does evil,
that thinks and imagines evil, and that yields his members servants to
unrighteousness, let his opinion profession and talk of religiou be what it
will, he that commits sin is of the devil: And without returning from it, a
finishing or ending of it, and righteousness set up in the room thereof, will
have the wages and reward of the same, and possess the fruit of their own
thoughts and doings.

Now it is a heavenly estate to live under the government of Christ, to know
and experience him, swaying the scepter in the heart, and established in the
throne thereof: But this none come to enjoy, till they have first known him, to
sit as a resiner with fire, and as a fuller with soap; and as a spirit of
judgment and burning; and as the stronger man to dispossess the strong man,
spoil all his goods, sweep and cleanse the house, and to furnish it again with
heavenly goods, thoughts, desires and meditations, and all things else that
becomes the house of the Lord: Holiness to the Lord was written or engraved
upon the crown and plate of gold, and all the furniture of the outward temple
was sanctisied, of which this is the antitype, or substance, as he that enjoys
it well knows.

And now it is the duty of a Christian to watch in the light against evil
thoughts, and to use the ax of God, which is laid to the root of them, that
their springing again may be hindered, and the end of them prevented, so also
it is the duty of every one, when good thoughts and desires spring in the room
thereof, to cherish them, to join with them, and to keep their eye unto the
Lord that begat them, or raised them up in the heart; being thoughts of purity,
thoughts of peace and righteousness, thoughts of holiness and joy, in the
inward man; which thoughts thou of thyself cannot think: These are comfortable
thoughts, Good thoughts are of God's own begetting, and very comfortable to a
Christian, and are the fruit and effect of keeping and obeying the law of God
within the heart, Romans ii. 14, 15.
justifying and excusing thoughts, thoughts that will stand approved in the
light, and the end and tendency of them is good, even as pleasant fruit to the
soul; so that such can say as David once did: How precious are thy thoughts
unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them! If I should count them, they are
more in number than the sand; when I awake I am still with thee. As thou love
the light, and delightest in the law of God, and meditates therein, these good
thoughts will multiply, and increase in thee, to thy great content and
satisfaction. Prove. xv. 29.
But the thoughts of the wicked are sin, and sin brings trouble, anguish and
torment; men are accused or excused in their thoughts. It is said Belshazzer
was so much troubled with his thoughts, Dan. v. 6.
that his countenance was changed, and the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote together. Many are the amazing, tormenting thoughts that attend
the wicked, Isa. lix. 7, 8.
whose fret run to do evil, and make haste to shed innocent blood; their
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths;
the way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings.

Now the thoughts of the righteous are right, and those that commit their way
to the Lord, their thoughts shall be established: And that is a blessed state
indeed; to have good thoughts established in the heart, in the mind, such can
go forth, and come in, in peace, lie down and rise up in peace, live and walk
in peace, and praise the God of peace, who is blessed forever more: And this is
the peace, the inward peace, which the world with all its treasures and
pleasures cannot give, nor by its frowns take away, and is the portion of all
that get victory over their own thoughts, imaginations, lusts, desires and
affections; and that do also keep in the wisdom and power of God, that when
good thoughts are established in them, and are so made partakers of the divine
nature, that they naturally think good thoughts, thoughts of love, peace, and
obedience, as they did while in the degeneration think the contrary, yet in
this state of innocence and harmlesness to be diligent in the wisdom of God, to
dress and keep the garden, lest thou having found honey, eat more than may
suffice to nourish the right birth, lest thou feed thyself without fear, eat
and drink and rise up to play, growidle and wanton, through plenty, and so
forget the Lord, and let his benefits slip out of thy mind, and slight his
commandments, and let pride and exaltation in thy selfish spirit grow up again,
as the first Adam and others did, mentioned in the holy scriptures, which are
written for our 1 Cor. x. 11
Learning and admonition; upon whom the ends of the world are come; therefore
let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Concerning the Life, State and Enjoyment of a TRUE CHRISTIAN.
THE life of a Christian, of an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, is a
life of innocence, peace and content; quietness and true satisfaction abounds
in the inward man, so none can harm him; he lives in the fear of God, which
taught him to depart from iniquity, and now preserves him out of the same, he
loves God and his neighbor, and hates no man, so fears not what man can do
unto him; his bread is sure, and his water fails not: If he has wife or
children, house or land, or the increase of corn, wine and oil, he looks upon
them as things below, so does not set his heart and affection upon them; he
looks upon them as they are, and loves them in their places, but not more than
Christ; he loves the Lord above all, he loves to keep his conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward man above all; and if he cannot enjoy his
estate and relations according to the will of God, he is ready and willing to
part with them, and can say as Job did, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away; blessed be the name of the Lord. He is not afraid of evil tidings; the
ruffling of the winds, and the roaring of the sea, does not amaze nor affright
him; he lives the life of faith, which gives him victory, and enables him to
overcome all things, he keeps on the helmet of it, and the breast plate of
righteousness, and the sword of the spirit, so is always armed against all
assaults of the world, flesh and the devil; and he knows the name of the Lord
as a strong tower, as a shield, as a buckler, as a wall of defense, and is
prepared to suffer and endure all things, like a good soldier with a settled
countenance, and holy resolution: And though by men he may be accounted smitten
and forsaken of God, and not sit to live upon the earth, yet he enjoys heavenly
consolation, pure tranquillity of mind, refreshment, comfort, and joy in the
inward man; the King's daughter is all glorious within, and all things that do,
or can befall a Christian on this side the grave, are not worthy to be compared
to the glory that is and shall be revealed in him: And if there was no reward
on the other side the grave, he would not exchange his life and condition, for
all the gory, riches and excellency the world can afford, seeing and accounting
it all vanity and vexation of spirit, yea, Isa. xl. 17. -- Psalm. lxii. 9
less than nothing and lighter than vanity. Having found the precious pearl,
which the swine regard not, he is willing to part with all for it, knowing the
wunderful virtue, riches and power thereof, bids adien to all the fading
treasures and pleasures of Egypt; choosing rather to suffer affliction and
persecution for righteousness-sake, than to enjoy the court-pleasures of
Princes; and he is a great gainer hereby, even in this life, on this side the
grave, a hundredfold: He finds by experience, that saying true. 1 Timothy vi. 6
Godliness with content is great gain, 1 Timothy iv. 8.
and is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come.

So though the true Christian seems, in the judgment of the wise in their own
conceit, to lose the enjoyment of his life, honor, riches, profit, pleasure,
preferment, relations, etc. in stend thereof he finds them all; (...) in the
true self-denial enjoys them all, and is able to say as ^aul did to the
Corinthians, speaking of himself and other Christians, As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things; having learnt to be content in all estates and conditions, knowing how
to suffer want, and how to abound, every where, and in all things. And where
there is true content, there is no want, no poverty, no sorrow, but what is
turned into plenty, riches, and rejoicing. Makes him rejoice in sorrow, sing in
the stocks, makes a dungeon a palace, bonds and chains, liberty; makes poverty
riches, turns loss into gain, darkness into light before him: These and many
more are the virtues and powerful operations of the precious; pearl, the white
stone, the elect and precious stone, the chief cornerstone, which the wise
master builders set at naught and stumble at, and will not use in their
building; but to the Christian indeed he is precious, he is his foundation,
corner and top-stone also; and as a treasure better than mountains of gold, and
as a rock out of which issues the water of life, that makes the river of
pleasure, that never cease running at the right hand of God: These things are
known and enjoyed by the true Christian, as he arrives at the mark of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, and they who are but travelers therein, taste
of the same in the way thereto; but the bare professor, or titular Christian,
knows nothing hereof: For,

The life, riches, and enjoyment of a Christian is inward and hidden; his life
is hid with Christ in God, none knows it but he that has it; his
conversation is with God in Heaven, and his treasure is laid up where he walks
and dwells, and where he sits in heavenly places with his Savior Christ Jesus,
who is made unto him wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and
not only so, but he is come to see what is the fellowship of the mystery which
from the beginning of the world bath been hid in God: He is come to know the
Lord one, and his name one; to the one body, one spirit, ^ue hope, one faith,
one baptism, one way, one truth, one life, one God and Father of all, who is
above all, through all, and in all. This is the blessed end of all the
appearances, manifestations, and dispensations, under all the variety of names,
and various working of the one eternal God, toward mankind ever since the
fall, mentioned throughout the holy Scriptures, and witnessed to by the true
Christian, who really enjoys the end of Paul's Ephesians. iii. 14, 15.
bowing his knees, or prayer unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
the whole family in Heaven and earth is named.

Now when the true Christian has known a being dead and buried with, and a
rising with him; and not only ^eeking those things that are above, but has
found them, having known and experienced Christ in all his offices, as the
great ordinance of God, as a mediator, reconciler, intercessor, maker of peace,
healer of the wound, and maker up of the breach the first Adam made, as a
quickening spirit, and Lord from Heaven; as a King, Priest and Prophet; as a
Savior, Sanctifier and Redeemer; as a purifier and maker of an end of sin, and
bringer in of everlasting righteousness; and as a High Priest to present to God
without spot of wrinkle, or any such thing: When he is thus known to perform
all these offices in and for his people, he is then by such known to sit down
at the right hand of God, having accomplished the work the Father gave him to
do, having put all things under, and restored all things into their primitive
order; he then is also known to surrender up the kingdom to the Father, and God
to become all in all: Here the first is known to be last, and the last first;
the beginning the end, and the end the beginning; and the heavenly rest with
him who is without beginning or end: I say, rest with h^, in a pure celestial
stillness, from all self-working, willing, running, and thinking; and though an
innocence, or innocent self be attained unto, and a harmless will known, yet
that must not act, work, will, run and think of itself, as the true Christian,
who has traveled and experienced, as before is hinted, knows right well;
saying to his Father, Not my will but thine: Herein he receives wisdom to dress
and keep the garden, power and strength to resist and overcome the serpent in
Paradise, and the dragon in Heaven, and to keep his habitation in the heavenly
city Jerusalem, which comes down from God out of Heaven, whose walls are
salvation, and whose gates are praise forever.

Concerning Christian Worship, what it stands in, and bow it is performed.
THERE is a great contest in Christendom among the diverse sects and bare
professions of Christianity about worship; and many are the modes and
ceremonies that are cried up among them; every sect conceiving their way to be
right, all being full of dispute, contention and quarelling one with and
against another, envying and hating one another, fighting, killing and
destroying one another about them, when they are all but of their own devising,
forms and images of their own making, mostly from the example of Jews, Gentiles
and apostate Christians, and are not led thereto, nor guided therein by the
unerring spirit of God, as their fruits makes fully manifest, to the great
scandal of the Christian Religion.

Now the true Christians worship is in the spirit, and in the truth, not in the
letter, nor in the form barely, but was before all letters and outward laws and
prescriptions, inventions, errors, and the spirit of them was: This was the
worship in Paradise; when mankind neglected this worship he fell into evil,
into invention, into error, which was the cause of the outward law, and all
other dispensations of God, for the recovery of lost man: And before he can
witness a return out of his lost estate, he must come again to the same worship
in the spirit and in the truth, even the truth in the inward parts, for that is
it which God loves; to the word in the mouth, to the law in the heart, and the
fear in the inward parts, from all fear toward God, taught by the procepts of
men, from all traditions of men of corrupt minds, from all devices and
inventions of men: This is the blessed estare the true Christian is come into,
and is the end, sum, and substance of all holy writings, forms and holy
traditions, ministrations, and dispensations before the law, under the law, and
the Prophets: Wilderness, Jerusalem, and temple-worship which stood in diverse
bodily exercises, outward works and services, variety of offerings, observing
of times, days, months, and years, meats, drinks, outward washings and
purifications, new mons, fasts, feasts, solemn meetings, and general
assemblies once a year at Jerusalem; all these things were but shadows and
typical: And this is the antitype and substance shadowed forth by them all. To
come to the worship in the spirit, in the truth, to Mount Sion, the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to come to the general assembly and
church of the firstborn, written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
the spirits of just men made perfect. To know the heavenly city that comes down
from God out of Heaven, even Jerusalem the mother of all the living citizens
thereof, whose law and covenant is spiritual, and writ in their hearts; whose
love, fear and obedience to God, is engraven in their inward parts: And from
hence arises the true worship in the spirit, and in the truth.

This is the worship the primitive Christians came to, and were exercised in;
they prayed in the spirit, not at any set time, or appointed place only,
according to the exhortations, pray always, pray continually, pray without
ceasing; I will that men pray every where, listing up holy hands without wrath
or doubting: Breathing to the Lord in spirit, though never a word be uttered;
in the closet when the door is shut, the Lord hears and answers this
prayer. And many times they were, and are also led forth to pray in words
publicly, but mostly for the sake of others, and in the behalf of others, as
Christ Jesus did.

The true Christian is also a preacher of righteousness, not only in words, at
^et times, and appointed places, but in life and conversation; in this he is a
preacher, a teacher of that which is good, as a candle burns and set in the
right place; his lamp trimmed, and his light shines, as a city upon a hill, as
the salt of the eartin, and light of the world, to season and give light to
others, by holy example, which preaches louder than words.

The true Christian's singing or rejoicing is also in the spirit and in the
truth, and not in iniquity, and with a good understanding; he needs no art nor
invention to bring words into meter or rhyme, that they may make a pleasant
sound, and a joyful noise; his music does not stand in outward sounds, made by
art and air, but his melody is in his heart, in the spirit, in the inward man,
in the hidden man of the heart, which is the antitype and substance of all
outward music used in the time of the law, under the first covenant, in the
worship and service of God; and as far exceeds it, as the substance of a thing
does the shadow thereof: And he that has this heavenly inward rejoicing, and
pleasant melody in the heart, will never invent to himself instruments of music
like David, nor delight in the sounds thereof. Where this heart-melody is lost,
the outward invented music is set up, among Jews, Gentiles and apostate
Christians; for the true Christian is come to know Christ Jesus as a Prince of
peace, as a peaceable Savior, as the consolation of Israel, and joy of
generations; as a giver of peace, which the world cannot give nor take away,
which far surpasses all the delights of the sons of men, which by nature, art
and invention, they can attain unto.

Now the spirit of God is universal, and the truth is universal, and the true
Christian worship that stands in it, is also to be universal; not only when
people meet together in a solemn manner to wait upon God, but every hour and
every day, bowing in spirit, worshipping in the truth, which make free from all
error, from all evil, from all vain observations, literal traditions, and human
inventions about the worship of God, from all carnal ordinances, as musics,
meats, drinkings, washings, feasts, fasts, days and times, which perish with
the using, though significant in their first institution; these things are not
to be touched, nor tasted, no nor so much as handled by the true Christian;
these things are but beggarly elements, and worldly rudiments, which had a
beginning, and must have an end.

And the root or cause of a Christian, which is Christ, is the end of the law,
and all the types and shadows of it, and fulfils all the righteousness of it,
of the Prophets, and of John also, and is a bringer in of a better hope, a
better law, a better covenant, a better worship; which hope, law, covenant and
worship, is inward and spiritual, and not outward and carnal, formal nor
traditional: And all that are come to this worship in the spirit, and in the
truth, which is one pure eternal principle of light, life and power, and have
their hearts tendered by it, and their minds exercised in it, their thoughts
and meditations guided by it, they are come to the mystery of the fellowship of
the gospel, to the blessed unity wherein is no strife, no wrangling, disputing,
or contention; no treachery, wars, cruelty or violence; because they are all
minding one thing, learning of one teacher, following of one guide, viz. the
grace and spirit of God: And though they have diversity of gifts, and are
attained to different degrees of faith, of grace, of knowledge, growth and
salvation in the same; and are some as a foot, some as a hand, eye, ear and
mouth, yet are all as members of one body; and the meanest has unity with the
more noble, the greatest with the least, the lowest with the highest, the
strongest with the weakest. Nor is there any jar or schism in this well framed
body, of which Christ the unction, the anointing, is the head and teacher.

This heavenly unity is the antitype of the seamless coat of Christ, wove from
top to bottom, which the soldiers did not rent, tear, or divide, but cast lots
for, and of that law that forbad weaving linen and woolling together, and
sowing mingled seed.

Now there is no concord betwixt light and darkness, sin and righteousness,
Christ and belial; these things of a different and contrary nature, cannot
unite, cannot agree, though they are nigh to each other, sown in one field. God
has sown a good seed in the field of mankind; the enemy has sown an evil
seed, and in many it has taken root, and sprang up above the good seed, even
among those professing Christianity itself; and from hence arises and grows
all the evil will, envy, hatred, strife, cruelty, violence, bloodshed, wars
and murders, in the world, and till the head of this evil seed be not only
bruised, by the promised seed which God has sowed, but rooted out also of the
heart of man, all these things will grow up; these evil effects can never cease
till the cause be removed, and taken away, as the true Chris^tan knows right
well by experience.

Now the Christians indeed, as they live and abide in this pure internal
principle of light, life, spirit, and truth, they have unity one with another,
and fellowship with God; they are the brethren whose living together in unity
is comely to behold, who have the one mind, one heart; and have their minds and
hearts always governed, ruled and ordered by the good spirit of God: As every
one lives and keeps this order, and under this heavenly government, they cannot
choose but live together in unity, in love, in good will, in peace, heavenly
concord and agreement, every one within himself, with God, and with each other,
and in love to all mankind; here is the end of strife, wars and fightings come
unto, both within and without; and this is the time and state wherein
instruments of war and cruelty are turned into instruments of necessary use:
And as they abide herein, they can learn war no more, according to the blessed
fight and prophesy of Isaiah, that evangelical Prophet. Here Jerusalem is known
a quiet habitation, the inhabitants thereof being established in pence and
righteousness, far from oppressing, the cause of war and oppression being taken
away, which is evil-thinking, evil-speaking and evil-doing; and this every one
must know and experience before they can be established in peace, before they
can know the peace of God which passes all understanding, to keep their hearts
and minds, and to rule in their hearts, and to know the aboundings of it, and
to delight therein; as it is written, The meek shall inherit the earth, and
delight themselves in the abundance of peace; the earth, nor earthly things
shall not inherit them; they tread upon the high places of it, and reign like
Kings and Princes over all the glory thereof. Oh! this is a blessed state
indeed; wait all to possess and enjoy it more and more: This is the blessed end
of the gospel of peace, and of the Christian Religion. My breathing is, that
all that profess it, may come to inherit peace, righteousness and joy in the
inward man, even to lie down in that peace where none can make afraid, and to
dwell on that holy mountain where no destroyer is, and to inhabit that city
whose builder and maker is God: To whom be praise and glory forever more.

A few Words added to the sensible Reader.
THOU who art awakened out of the sleep of death, and risen out of the grave of
sin, and sea of corruption, and art come to the exercise of thy spiritual
senses, so that thou can hear, see, taste, and handle the things of God, thou
well know that the blessed end of all holy men's words and writings,
testimonies and declarations, proceeding from the love of God, is, that others
that are yet unholy, wandering about in and after the vanity of their own
minds, thoughts and imaginations, upon the barren mountains, even as sheep
without a shepherd, may come to be gathered and brought home to the fold of
rest, where safety, peace, and satisfaction is to be found for their weary
souls, who have long wandered in desolate places, seeking rest, but finding
none; spending their time, labor, and money for that which does not profit,
feed, and nourish up to eternal life. I say, to direct these strangers,
wanderers, laborers and unsatisfied travelers into the way of rest and peace,
is the blessed end of all words and holy writings, even that such may come to
possess, enjoy, and inherit the things spoken, and written of; without which,
all hearing, reading, seeking, enquiring, toiling, laboring, spending time and
money, is to no purpose.

Now it is the soul of man that wants rest, that is gone from its center, that
has lost its stay, habitation, and dewlling place in God; and innumerable are
the thoughts, imaginations, devices and inventions, willings and runnings that
poor mankind in this estate is exercised in, and carried away with, both Jew
and Gentile, professor and profane, upon the face of the whole earth: For in
all sects and sorts of Religions, those who are sincere and devout therein,
propose this end to themselves in the exercise thereof, viz. to attain a state
of happiness and felicity at last; Many are the ways, means, and precepts,
prescriptions, directions, and observations, that men give and receive from one
the other, enjoin and persuade one the other, and sometimes compel one another
by violence, to walk in, and make use of, in order to arrive thereto, as they
think and imagine; but it is in this age, as of old, the guides and teachers of
the people cause them to err, cause them to go astray, and wander from the
right way of the Lord; they err in vision, judgment and ^^derstanding
themselves, and cause all that follow and obey them to do the same, being
unskilful guides, and blind watchmen, are but as the blind leading the blind,
and so both fall into the ditch together.

Now the way to everlasting happiness is but one, both to Jew and Gentile;
which way is Christ, who is the wisdom and power of God, the truth and the
life; and the appearance of this Christ, of God, is within men, in their
hearts: Its first appearance is as a light shining in darkness, and as a pure
spotless spirit, that consents to no evil but reproves and convinces all
that are found in it; and to this light or spirit, all who write or speak for
God, and the good of mankind, do turn and direct the minds of men, and
endeavor to persuade them to regard its reproofs of instruction, as being the
way to life, and to obey its counsel and teaching, as the only means of
salvation, and way of returning to the rock from whence they were hewn, and to
the hole of the pit from whence they were dug, to their habitation and
dwelling place in God again, and many thousands in this island and other
places, can give testimony that this is the only way and means God has
ordained for the recovery, return, and restoration of lost man; and that all
other ways and means which they had been wearying themselves in, availed
nothing; but walking in this heavenly way, the light, the spirit and grace of
God within, and learning of the anointing within, they witness salvation come
to their house, and to surround them as walls and bulwarks, and to witness the
fulfilling of that divine prophey, Isa. xxxii. 18. and Verse, 3, 4
My people shall ^well in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in
quiet resting places. The eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears
of them that hear shall hearken, the heart also of the rash shall understand
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
These are the blessed effects of walking in the way and paths of righteousness,
which a remnant are living witnesses of, and can praise and magnify the name of
the Lord in the sense thereof.

But none enjoy this blessed estate, nor inhabit this heavenly dewlling place,
but as their minds come truly to be exercised by and in the light of the Lord;
and that by walking and abiding therein, come to have their minds established,
settled and stayed upon him who is indeed the alone stay of his people. and
rock of his inheritance.

And nothing can be found in the heavens above, nor in the earth beneath, that
is able to satisfy or stay the mind of man, but the Lord; the mind or soul of
man is more noble, more excellent than all visible things, so they are not all
capable to fill or satisfy his soul, or stay his mind, though he might possess
or have the whole world to himself, yet in the end will be made to cry out and
confess with the preacher of old, Eccles. i. 2.
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. But to have the mind
stayed upon the Lord, there is pleasure, peace and content, truly found and
enjoyed, according to the testimony of that divine Prophet Isaiah, who said,
speaking in the name of the Lord, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose
mind is stayed upon thee. This is a truth, that none knows but he that has
it; it may be soon writ, read or spoken, but to enjoy that estate is more than
words; it is the end, sum and substance of all that can be said or done, and is
the reward of the righteous from the immediate hand of God, viz. To be kept in
perfect peace: It Is the end of all holy breathings and desires, it is the end of
the preaching the gospel of peace and salvation, even to know and feel, and
experience the peace of God to keep the heart and mind, and to rule there.

This is a blessed state indeed, worthy to be waited for, and pressed after, by
all that have a sight and sense thereof, and are in a way that leads thereto,
though not yet arrived thereat; go forward in the name of the Lord, even in
that name Light, by which he has made himself known unto us in this age, by
which light thou saw the wandering the unstableness of thy mind, and the
multitude of thy thoughts, imaginations and inventions; persevere in the same,
and thou will become not only a child of it, but also grow from a child's
estate to the estate of a young man, elder, and father; keeping the faith, and
firmly believing, that which shows thee the wandering and unstableness of thy
mind, will be as a shepherd's crook unto thee, and in due time will bring thee
back into the fold of rest; and that holy light that discovers, and shows
unto thee thy thoughts, and inward enemies, will also by the brightness of in
arising, disperse and destroy them for thee, and bring thee into that estate
thy soul desires, pants and looks after, even into the presence of the
Lord, where the fullness of joy is, and where the rivers of pleasures run; where
the reaping and returning with joy is, where the singing for joy of heart is,
and the joy of God's salvation felt, the blessed light of God, or Son of
righteousness, in whom thou have believed, is the only way to possess and
inherit those things. And thy walking, abiding, and persevering in it, is the
means, and there is not any other way or means appointed of God, to bring man
back into that paradifical state of silicity he lost by transgression, and to
the establisbing him in it.

But all that walk not, nor abide and persevere therein, after they are come
into it, never attain to that blessed end of its appearing and shining to them;
for a bare knowledge of the truth, and a profession of the light and spirit of
God within, if they walk not in it, and are not guided and led by it, it avails
nothing, but rather draws down fierce wrath and vengeance upon the head of
such, who know their master's will and do it not, who talk and profess well,
but are found doing evil, and thereby lay a stumbling block in the way of the
blind, and cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and the name of the
Lord, by which be has made himself known in this age, to be blasphemed, by
reason of their ungedly deeds, under a profession of godliness, and cloak of
righteousness; such their damnation slumbereth not.

And this I testify and declare to all people to whom this may come, which may
serve also as a caution and warning to them, that if they meet with any under
the name, form and profession of a Christian, in contempt called a Quaker, who
in his converse, trade and dealing, commerse and assairs; does not let his yea
be yea, and his nay, nay, but breaks his word and promises, there is need to
have a special care of that man, and look upon him as one falss and deceiful to
the holy principles of truth, and as a hypocrite under the profession of it. He
that is false to God, cannot be true to men; thou had better trust and give
credit to a heathen or insidel, than to such a^one. No wickedness beyond that
which is acted under a peculiar cloak of Religion. Such who gain credit and
repute by wearing this cloak, and get widows and orphans moneys into their
hands, to create great trades by sea and land, are some of the worser sort of
robbers and cheats, and the cry of the poor fatherless and widows, cries loud
against them. This is a short testimony arising in my heart against this sort
of wickedness, wherein I have a little eased my mind, and in the truth remain a
friend to all men.

W. SHOWN.

FINIS.

