Mr. Robbins's REPLY TO Mr. Cotton's ESSAYS On the Practice of Owning the
Covenant.

A REPLY TO SOME ESSAYS Lately published by JOHN COTTON, ESQUIRE (of Plymouth)
Relating to Baptism.

Wherein it is attempted to show, That the Practice of Persons OWNING THE
COVENANT, (as it is called) and enjoying Baptism for their Children, while they
neglect to come to the Lord's Supper, is unscriptural and of dangerous tendency.

ALSO, A Vindication of the Author from several injurious Aspersions contained
in Mr. Cotton's Remarks on some Letters that passed relative to this Point.

By CHANDLER ROBBINS, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in PLYMOUTH.

EADEM est ratio utriusque sacramenti.

Turetin: Qui Christum non sequitur, quomodo se OVEM EJUS dicere audebit?

Augustine: Psalm. L. 16. Unto the wicked, God says, what have thou to do, --
that thou should take my covenant into thy mouth?

Luke VI. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND JOHN FLEET, 1773.

To the Reader.
IT IS with great reluctance that I am thus forced to enter the field of public
controversy. Neither had I the least desire or expectation of it, when I at
first proposed the question to our church, which is the subject of the
following pages. It was far from being agreeable to me, that it had been so
public as it was before, when debated amongst ourselves, at our
church-meetings. Especially in the manner in which these meetings were
conducted and protracted from time to time. For I could perceive no peaceful or
good effects likely to be produced by them, but the contrary: Which the church
in general perceiving, they finally voted to dissolve the meeting. It was at
these several meetings that Mr. Cotton (formerly a minister at Halifax in this
county, but now a member of this church) delivered these Essays. I heard
nothing of any design of publishing them, till immediately after the last
church meeting was dissolved. 'Twas then given out with some warmth, that "now
all he had read should be printed." And doubtless he had a right if he thought
proper to print his arguments, or sentiments on this or any other subject. But,
what has been very surprising to almost every one amongst us, is his publishing
those private letters with his essays. Which certainly, it is not to be
supposed, could arise from any friendly, benevolent spirit; or answer any good
end. And it was thought, hardly to look well, that this matter was kept such a
profound secret, as that the subscribers for his essays should, in general, be
ignorant of any such design; who have since, some of them, said, had they known
these letters were to be printed, they never would have subscribed at all. It
is certain that the publishing these, has been the occasion of more trouble and
uneasiness both to himself, as well as others (from some particular unhappy
effects of them) than any thing that has taken place amongst us, relative to
this debate. And whatever Mr. Cotton has said, or may say, to justify it, this
must certainly be allowed to be a maxim of common sense as well as civility and
good manners, viz. That every man has a right to say, whether his letters shall
be published to the world or not, let the occasion or subject of them be what
it will. I should therefore have been exceeding glad to have excused both the
reader and myself, the trouble of the last section in this reply -- which, it
must be acknowledged, contains matters, with which the public have no
immediate concern. I think it a great pity, that personal differences should be
intermixed with a subject of common and public concernment. Nothing should
have induced me to it, had not Mr. Cotton published my letters, with his
remarks upon them; whence it appeared to me necessary to say something, in
order to set some matters in a more just point of light, which, I think Mr.
Cotton has not given a fair representation of; and to vindicate myself, (as it
was, by my people, judged needful I should) from some very unkind aspersions
which he has cast upon me; which otherwise, might have a tendency to hurt my
character or usefulness among those who have only read Mr. Cotton's book, and
are unacquainted with affairs in this place. I have shown freely, wherein I
think he has misrepresented me or my sentiments; or those of the brethren on
the same side with me -- and have taken notice of those things wherein I think
he has injured me: This was necessary. And I have also endeavored to show the
weakness or fallacy of his arguments. But I have endeavored, as much as
possible to avoid that unchristian heat and bitterness of spirit, which many
have complained of, as too manifest in my antagoni^^ especially in his remarks,
etc. If the reader should discover any thing of this, in this reply, I don't
ask him to justify me in it, whatever provocation I have had. -- I condemn it
myself. -- As to the grand point in debate, it must be owned to be a matter of
great importance; and as such no doubt justly demands the attention of every
one. It Is a question somewhat new perhaps, to many of the present generation in
this province. But since it is now become public, though by means unexpected, I
think it may be carefully attended to by every one, and thoroughly examined by
the only unerring rule, the holy scriptures. The practice of owning the
covenant, though it has prevailed as much perhaps in this government, as in any
place, yet, we have reason to think, is by many, little understood, but
received and gone into, as a tradition or customary thing. While some others,
who have thought more seriously of the matter, are greatly stumbled and
perplexed at it -- especially when they see persons, whom they have no grounds
to think, have had any saving acquaintance with religion and the way of
salvation by Christ, stand up and make the most solemn vows and promises of
devoting themselves to God, to walk in his ways and obey his commands -- and
yet after this, live in the habitual neglect of one of the most distinguishing
and important commands of Jesus Christ, (Do this in remembrance of me) perhaps
all their days. If this be right, and agreeable to the will of Christ -- if it
can be supported from scripture, let the practice be continued and prevail. But
if not, why should it live? And why should not ministers and churches join to
abolish a practice, which has no foundation in the word of God, and which has
been the occasion of so much grief and perplexity to many, and ('it is to be
feared) a snare to multitudes of others, who have been led (agreeable to
custom) to vow and promise to the Lord, they know not what. The endeavor to
show the unscripturalness and dangerous tendency of this practice, is the
design of the following reply. How I have succeeded in this attempt, must be
left to the judgment of the impartial reader. And may the God of truth and
father of lights, lead and direct us in all our enquiries, to the advancement
of his glory, and our own spiritual knowledge and comfort, for Jesus Christ's
sake.

A Reply, etc.
The Introduction.
IN replying to Mr. Cotton's Essays, it may be proper in the first place, to
give some brief account of the RISE of this Debate in the first church in
Plymouth -- Then of the arguments I have made use of, in the course of the
debate, against the half way practice, or admitting persons to own the covenant
and have baptism for their children, without coming to the Lord's supper -- In
the next place, to answer some objections and enquiries -- After which, to make
some more particular Remarks on Mr. Cotton's performance, his manner of
reasoning, in support of the scheme which he is endeavoring to maintain, and
the various methods he has taken from time to time, for that purpose.

Of the Rise of this Debate in this Church.

THE practice that has prevailed in many churches in New England, of admitting
persons to own the covenant (as the usual phrase is) and have baptism for their
children, without coming to the other ordinance, so contrary to the original
plan of these churches, in the days of our ancestors, has ever appeared to me
attended with some difficulties, which I could not easily get over. However,
not attending so thoroughly to the arguments that were used in support of this
scheme, as I have endeavored to do since, and being educated in the practice,
I did submit to it here for a number of years after I was ordained; though still,
not without some uneasiness in my mind, at times, on account of the impropriety
which there appeared to me in it: which at length (being also under better
advantages for it than before) bro't me to a determination to study the point
more closely than I ever had done, and see what light and satisfaction I could
obtain. To this end, I procured what authors I could, on both sides of the
question -- endeavored to understand and compare their arguments with the
scriptures, the only sure, unerring standard of truth; not without earnestly
seeking for light and direction of the great fountain of truth, from whom
comes every good and perfect gist.

The result of my most diligent enquiries, for many months, was a full
conviction, in my own mind, that this practice has no foundation in scripture
to support it, but (as it had been carried on especially in some places) it
appeared to me, to be an unwarrantable prostitution of a sacred ordinance of
JESUS CHRIST.

In these circumstances, I thought it my duty to desist the practice. Though I
never did reject or refuse any person that came to me with a particular desire
to own the covenant; as is repeatedly suggested by Mr. Cotton.
For it had always appeared unaccountable to me, when I have heard ministers
declare their opinion against the practice, as not warranted by the word of
God, that they could notwithstanding persist in it; or what sort of prudence
that is, which induces persons to compliances, (in things of this importance)
which are contrary to the scriptures? The case is very different, indeed, with
those who think there is scripture warrant for thus dividing the seals, or
making such a distinction between the two ordinances.

As I could not conscientiously, in my present view of things, continue any
longer in this practice, I attempted, in several discourses in public, to show
that it was not warrantable by the word of God, and offered some reasons why I
thought it of dangerous tendency.

In the winter 1770, at a church-meeting, called by the desire of many of the
brethren, to consider some things relative to church discipline; among other
matters, I proposed for their consideration, this question; whether the
practice was scriptural; in the terms mentioned at the beginning of Mr. C.'s
essays. What reason he had to say "I was strenuous" in the affair, I cannot
imagine. I am sure I manifested nothing of this kind, at that time: I did but
propose it for their deliberation. I never requested or expected the various
meetings that followed; and which were attended with such unhappy effects and
brought so much difficulty, in the end. The question was not much debated at
that time, but it was desired it might be referred, for further consideration,
to another opportunity. Afterward, we had several church meetings; at which
Mr. Cotton delivered his several essays, much in the form, in which they are
published. Since therefore, this controversy, "through the importunity of his
friends," (he tells his readers) is become public, though very contrary to my
desire or intention, it seems necessary that I also should show mine opinion,
and give a brief sketch of the arguments I have made use of, in support of that
side of the question which I have espoused; which I shall do, with some
enlargements, in the following section.

SECTION I. Reasons for not continuing the Practice.
I. Because I can find no text in the whole word of GOD, to justify the
practice; nor any example of a person's being allowed to covenant with God and
make a solemn profession of religion, and yet neglect to attend one of the
special and most distinguishing commands and ordinances of God. His covenant
people, both under the old and new Testament, not only were expressly
commanded, but it is evident they always looked upon themselves bound by
covenant to observe all divine institutions, and to "walk in all God's
ordinances and commandments;" and that they had no warrant to make any
exceptions or limitations, under any circumstances, or upon any pretense
whatever.

Accordingly, God's ancient covenant people, profess with one voice, in the
most solemn manner, Exodus xxiv. 7. ALL that the Lord has said, will we do, and
be obedient. This was the very import of the covenant, on their part; and it is
plain they always understood it so by their frequent, solemn professions of the
same nature from time to time. See Josh. xxiv. 25. Jer. xlii. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. xxvi.
17, 18. Josh. xxiv. 21. They never imagined they could, consistent with their
covenant relation and engagements to God, live in the neglect of any one divine
ordinance. They were as much obliged hereby, to keep the Passover, as to
circumcise their children; and thus they practiced universally. So under the
New Testament, all that professed love and discipleship to JESUS CHRIST, were
constantly taught, "to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded." There
is no intimation in the gospel, of any thing that looked like a double
admission into the Church of CHRIST; or of persons, professing faith in CHRIST,
being admitted to one ordinance while something further and higher was
necessary for their enjoyment of the other; as seems to be the case, upon our
present plan. When John Baptist, and the Apostles had, through their preaching,
brought any to Faith and Repentance; upon their profession hereof, they were
received into the visible Church or communion of Saints; and were looked upon
as disciples; allowed to enjoy the privileges of such, and were commanded to
live and walk answerable to their profession, in a careful observance of all
Christ's commands. See Matt. iii. 8. and xxviii. 20. John xv 14. Luke vi. 46. 1
John ii. 4. Col. ii. 6. This was evidently the plan the Apostles and first
ministers of CHRIST went upon. Where do we hear of their dividing the seals, as
the manner is in our present practice? Where do we find them insisting upon
lower or " negative evidences" of Grace, as qualifying for one ordinance, and
higher, positive evidences, as necessary for the other? I could never find any
such distinction, in the word of God, nor any precept or example on which such
a distinction can be founded. And if so, what good reason can be given for the
practice pleaded for, or how can we be justified in persisting in it? It
appears somewhat strange, that Mr. C. should charge me with acting "like the
Anabaptists," because I required a Text of Scripture, to support the practice.
I never did indeed demand "a direct scripture in the case." All I insisted,
was, that he should produce a Scripture that would justify the practice, or on
which it might be fairly grounded. If this is thought unreasonable or
anabaptistical, all I can say in answer to it, is, that I had rather my faith,
in this point, should stand in the wisdom of God than in the inventions of men.
He has said, indeed, the practice can be vindicated by scripture consequence,
but has no where proved it, as I have observed; and until he can do it, I think
it is but reasonable to expect some other evidence than his bare assertion.


It Is objected by some, that the apostles did divide the seals, as they
baptized, without ever so much as acquainting the disciples of the other
ordinance. I answer, if this be true, it is certainly a sufficient reason for
their not attending the other ordinance, when they had heard nothing about it.
Yet it don't prove that they would not be obliged, by their christian
profession, to attend it whenever they should be made acquainted with it, and
had opportunity; nor that any other qualifications in kind, were necessary,
than those which they had exhibited in order to Baptism.

II. Another reason is, I apprehend this practice has a tendency to lead
persons to a direct breach of their most express covenant engagements. Which, I
think will appear, if we consider the nature of those engagements. What is the
meaning of that solemn transaction? What do persons promise and engage to do,
when they own the covenant? Is it not "to behave as becomes a true disciple of
JESUS CHRIST," and to live and walk as such an one? The Covenant imports
nothing, if it does not imply a promise of subjection to CHRIST in all his
ordinances and commandments. This certainly is implied in covenanting according
to the Gospel. Therefore if a person does not engage this, (by the help of God)
he does not own God's covenant, and therefore can have no right to Baptism
either for himself or child; for Baptism is a seal of no other Covenant. Will
it not then, from hence necessarily follow, that when persons own the covenant
with a view to enjoy Baptism for their children, and do not propose to go any
further, but allowedly live, (as many do, all their days) in the neglect of
that express command of CHRIST, Do this in remembrance of me, that such, I say,
do in a direct manner counteract their own covenant engagements? Does not such
a conduct look like something worse than trifling? Has it not the appearance of
solemn dissimulation in a matter of the highest importance? Is not the plain
language of it this -- "I solemnly avouch the Lord to be my GOD, and JESUS
CHRIST to be my Savior, and promise to walk in all his ordinances and
commandments, except one, blameless; as to that one, I pray thee have me
excused." How absurd, how shocking is the thought! Yet, as it appears to me,
something like this, seems to be the import of this practice, however the
person may be far from being aware of it when he owns his baptismal covenant,
And this leads me to observe,

III. That this practice has a tendency to lead persons to think there are two
covenants, in some important respects, different from each other; viz. One,
that a person may safely enter into, who don't look upon himself to be a real
Christian. The other, none must enter into, but those who have good evidence
that they are true Believers. I may appeal to hundreds for the truth of this,
in those places where it is practiced. Many would not dare to make the
profession which those persons do who join to the Church; but yet think they
may safely own the covenant. And why? Because they think they are fit for the
latter, but by no means for the former. And if you still enquire the reason;
the answer is, they don't think they are good enough. Thus they plainly make a
distinction between these two professions, as if, in their nature and design,
they were different covenants.

It has been said, I know, that this is the fault of the minister: He should
instruct them otherwise, and let them know that there is but one covenant. -- I
answer, not all the instruction in the world. will remove the difficulty, in
the minds of some. After the utmost pains taken by the minister, to correct
their mistake, and to show them the nature of covenanting with GOD, yet there
are some, who cannot be fully convinced, but will retain the distinction
between the covenants, and think that one requires different kind of
qualifications from the other. And it is not at all to be wondered at, where
persons have been, from their childhood nursed up in this practice. It appears
to me, it has a natural and necessary tendency to such an effect. Mr. C. indeed
has proposed a method in order to get rid of this difficulty, i. e. to lay as^^
the practice of owning the covenant, for those that only would have their
children baptized -- that they shall make no explicit profession, but be
allowed to bring their children, without; provided they have been baptized
themselves, and are not scandalous. Upon which, I would observe, 1. This would
be as much an innovation, as any Mr. C. complains of; and contrary to the plan
proposed by the Synod, which is so much insisted on. This might therefore,
perhaps, be thought by some a sufficient reason to set it aside. Yet 2. It must
be confessed this would seem more consistent than the other method. Any one
would think, that if persons must have their children baptized, whether they
themselves are real christians or no, it must be less sinful to bring them
without making any Covenant at all, than to make such solemn promises, and
break them immediately. But 3. It would not, at all help the matter, really; or
in the least remove the difficulty, it is intended for. For whether these
persons own the covenant verbally, or not, yet the very nature of the action of
a parent, in offering up his child in Baptism, implies a solemn covenanting
with God; (as Mr. C. acknowledges, p. 8.) It Is as much as to say, "I
acknowledge the Covenant of which Baptism is a Seal, to be God's covenant, and
the terms of it wise and gracious, in token of my compliance with which, I now
seal the Covenant, by actively dedicating my child to to God, in this holy
ordinance, thereby choosing him for my God and the God of my child." So that if
it be unlawful or inconsistent for a graceless person to own that solemn
covenant in words, it must also be so to offer his child in Baptism, which
necessarily implies a covenant tranfaction.




IV. The same essential qualifications, which the scriptures make necessary for
one ordinance, are required for the other. Neither the Forerunner, nor the
Apostles of CHRIST, have said any thing, on which such a distinction can be
justly founded, as is now made. As they insisted on repentance and faith as
necessary in order to acceptance with God and remission of sins, so they
insisted upon the profession of them in order to their being admitted into the
visible kingdom or church of CHRIST. They baptized none, but upon this ground.
Those who appeared, to a judgment of charity, to have these qualifications,
they admitted to Baptism, and those only. See Mat. iii. 6. Acts xvi. 14, 15.
and viii. 37, 38. and xvi. 31 -- 33. and xix. 4, 5. And no other, or higher
qualifications did they require for their admission to the other ordinance of
the Supper. Upon this profession, they were admitted into the Church or visible
Family of Christ once for all; and entitled to all the Privileges of visible
Believers, as long as they appeared to act agreeable to the character of such.
In a word, from the whole tenor of the New Testament, it is plain, that nothing
less or lower than a Profession of Faith and true repentance, was required in
order to a person's enjoying the privilege of Baptism; and nothing more, or of
a higher kind, was necessary for admission to the Lord's Supper. The
distinction of higher and lower qualifications for the two ordinances, and the
notion of negative evidences (which in this case is, in fact, no evidence at
all; for as it is a negation of that which would merit censure, on the one
hand, so it is a negation, or the absence, or want of that which is a proper
ground of charity in this case) being a sufficient qualification for Baptism,
was never learnt from the New Testament, but is, doubtless, of mere human
invention. If this point were to be decided by human testimonies, as it is not,
I could produce scores of Divines, who have insisted as above. However, as it
may give satisfaction to some, to know what Mr. Boston says on this head; I
will transcribe some of his words. -- "None (says he) have a right to Baptism
before the Lord, but such as have actually a saving interest in Christ: this
the Scripture plainly bolds forth. So also, none but such as appear to have a
saving interest in Christ have (...) right to Baptism before the Church. For
(says he) Baptism is a seal of the righteousness of faith; but none have right
to the Seal, but such as have interest in the thing sealed. Therefore where
it is given to one that has no saving interest in Christ, the ordinance to him
is abused; for, as Witsius teaches, God seals nothing to such a one that is
truly good." Again he says, "None ought to be allowed Baptism, out visible
DISCIPLES of Christ. They must be servants of the great master, before they get
on his badge and wear his livery. And none can be esteemed Christ's DISCIPLES,
but those that appear to have learned of the Father and come to Christ. Nay,
says he, Christ tells us plainly what it is that makes a man a Disciple. "If
any man hate not his father and mother -- and whosoever will not bear his cross
and follow me, cannot be my DISCIPLE." And whoever did this that was not truly
regenerate? (and as a proof that baptism alone does not give right to that
privilege for their children, without the parent be truly gracious, he produces
that text Ezekiel. xliv. 7. No stranger uncircumcised IN HEART, nor uncircumcised
in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary; which was a Type of the Gospel
Church.) To this Doctrine (says be) agree those famous Divines, Ursin, Calvin,
Witsius, Zanchy, W^nde^^ne, Baxter, etc. He adds further, "If the parents have
no right to the Lord's table, then the infant has no right before the Church,
to Baptism; and hence, says he, it has been a piece of difficulty to me to
reconcile the practice of admitting men's children to baptism, and in the mean
time debarring themselves from the sacrament of the Lord's supper," And in
another place, he speaks of it as a melancholy thing, "that the holy ordinance
of baptism, which is a seal of the same covenant with the Lord's supper, should
be so visibly degraded and put so fa^ below the other sacrament, as it is by
the promiscuous admission of infants thereto: there should be a more beautiful
harmony in the subjects receptive of both."


V. I look upon this practice, not only to be unfounded in scripture, but of
very bad and dangerous tendency; especially on these two accounts. 1. That it
tends to lead persons to think they can covenant with God, and that he accepts
of and is pleased with them, and will admit them to the special privileges of
his children, even while they are really unbelievers. Than which doctrine,
nothing can be more pernicious to the souls of men, or more directly subversive
of the scripture account of such persons; which teaches, that " they who are in
the flesh CANNOT PLEASE GOD;" and that, " the carnal mind is ENMITY against
God." Whereas, by the other doctrine, we confound all distinctions between the
regenerate and unregenerate, converted and unconverted. We used to be taught,
that none but Believers could, in truth, call God their God -- that none but
such were in favor with God. But if unregenerates may safely "avouch the Lord
for their God" -- where is the material difference between a believer and an
unbeliever? And why do ministers ever represent the state of the latter to be
so infinitely dangerous and dreadful? as being the daily objects of the wrath
of God? But this is not all, for 2dly, There is reason to think, this practice
tends to promote a careless, secure spirit in the persons themselves. If the
truth could be known, I doubt not, it would appear that it has had this awful
effect, in a great many instances, where persons have, before, appeared to be
under some serious impressions; yet, having owned the covenant, their
consciences seem to have found something to rest upon, and they presently grow
secure. Neither will this appear at all strange, when we consider how natural
it is for persons, who have some convictions of their miserable and dangerous
state, to seek for something to quiet their consciences, short of CHRIST. If
they are allowed and encouraged, under such circumstances, to come and covenant
with God; and are told that they are thenceforward to be looked upon and
treated as Saints, and have a right to all the visible privileges of such, how
naturally will their concern lessen, till their convictions are worn off; and
notwithstanding all the cautions they have had not to rest there, but to press
forward and make sure of an interest in CHRIST, yet all don't avail; through
the temptation of Satan and the natural pride of their hearts, taking occasion
from their being called visible christians, they grow careless, and at length
"return like the dog to his vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wa^lowing
in the mi^e." I cannot but be afraid, this practice has had this ruinous effect
upon multitudes of souls. And surely ministers and churches have no need to add
to the temptations that sinners are under to carnal security, or do any thing
that tends to soothe and lull them to sleep, in their infinitely dangerous
circumstances. What can be the cause, that such persons stop here -- many
neglecting all their days to come to the other ordinance? Must it not be,
either that they had no just sense of what they were about, and of the promises
they made at owning the covenant; or if they had then any religious
impressions, that they are, by this means, worn off? And indeed it must be
allowed that such breaches of solemn vows, as many are guilty of, have a
natural tendency to fear the conscience and harden the heart to a great degree.

For the foregoing reasons, with many others that might be mentioned, I cannot
think the practice warrantable, but unscriptural and therefore of dangerous
tendency.

SECTION II. A further illustration of the Point, in some familiar Questions
and Answers.
Querist. MUST a person be in covenant with God, in order to enjoy the
privilege of Baptism for his children?

Ans. Yes, undoubtedly. None can have right to the seals of the covenant but
those that are in the covenant.

Q. What is it that constitutes a person in covenant with God?

A. His being born of christian parents, and being baptized in infancy.

Q. Is this all then, that is needful in order to his being admitted to the
privileges of the covenant; Baptism for his children, in particular?

A. Yes, provided he is of a sober, blameless life and conversation, and "does
not carry the Devil's mark, i. e. a profane life."

Q. Why do you make this proviso in the case? Then Baptism of itself, is not a
sufficient qualification?

A. No: a person may be a baptized member of the church, and yet be
disqualified on account of his immorality and open wickedness.

Q. But why is that a sufficient reason to exclude him, if he be a "complete
member" of the church and in covenant, by his baptism?

A. God has made it a bar; he forbids such, and only such to come.

Q. On what account, can it be supposed, that God forbids scandalous persons to
bring their Children to Baptism?

A. Because such sins are an Evidence of their Hypocrisy -- and that they cannot
come in sincerity, to that ordinance; it would be a profanation of it for such
to bring their children.

Q. Then it seems, that which God is displeased with, and disallows, is,
persons coming to this ordinance merely in Pretense and Hypocrisy?

A. Certainly God disallows and always forbids Hypocrisy, in that, and every
duty.

Q. How then can they come lawfully or safely, if they are in Heart,
hypocrites, and have no true love to God?

A. The Church have nothing to do with their Hearts, in this matter.

Q. But I speak of Lawfulness in the Sight of God and their own conscience. If
they are conscious to themselves that they are graceless, and do not pretend to
come under any notion of their being gracious persons, but from "a principle of
Love to their Children," how can they come (according to what you have said)
with safety or a good conscience?

A. They have a right, and may safely come, if they are members of the visible
Church of Christ, and free from heresy and scandal: and their being baptized in
Infancy makes them Members of Christ's visible Church.

Q. But you own that God forbids persons coming in Hypocrisy and pretense, that
he requires sincerity of heart, in those that come to this ordinance.

A. They may come in sincerity, and yet have no saving grace.

Q. What! be sincere, and yet at the same time, not think they have any true
love to God in their hearts, and don't come under any such notion?

A. Yes, if they come in obedience to the command of God, and from "love to
their children," they may be sincere, and lawfully come.

Q. What kind of obedience, or sincerity is that, which an unregenerate sinner
exercises? If God requires sincerity in opposition to hypocrisy, it must be
such a kind of sincerity as God is pleased with and accepts; otherwise he may
as well come in hypocrisy as in sincerity. You say, scandalous sinners are
forbidden; that they cannot come to this ordinance in sincerity -- but that
others may; though they be not gracious persons. Which implies, that they can
attend the ordinance in a manner which God allows and accepts. Now what sort of
sincerity is that which an unconverted man, one who is entirely destitute of
love to God and holiness, exercises; and which qualifies him for a lawful
attending on this ordinance? It alters not the case here at all, for a person
to object, That this method of reasoning will prove, that God is no more
displeased with the most scandalous, profane wretch, than with one of a sober,
regular life and conversation. (Though this will by no means follow, from what I
have said) The argument is grounded on this, viz: That God disallows of, and
forbids persons coming to special Ordinances, in Hypocrisy. Now if it can be
proved, that an unregenerate man, though baptized, and outwardly regular, can
come to this ordinance without hypocrisy, then the argument is overthrown. But
if not, it is nothing to the persent purpose to say, that a moral, sober,
impenitent Sinner, may come, because he is not so bad a man, or so odious to
God as an open, scandalous sinner. I grant there are degrees in hypocrisy, and
one may be more guilty or it than another. But still, if reigning hypocrisy,
disqualifies a person, it disqualifies the lesser as well as the greater
Hypocrite.


A It Is a common, moral sincerity, as distingufshed from gracious: If he is not
a "willful hypocrite," or does not come with a design to mock God with a
pretense, but from a sense of duty, his sin would not be so great, nor would he
"offend God so much, by coming, as staying away, though he be no^ regenerate."

Q. But can there by any real sincerity, such as God will accept, where the
heart is wanting? does he not require the Heart?

A. Yes; he requires it in every duty. But a person may be heartily sincere,
even though he be not truly gracious.

Q. Pray what do you understand by unregenerate? I have ever thought, and
orthodox divines have always described unregeneracy, in t^^ very nature of it,
to consist in the total alienation or opposition of the heart to God. Therefore
I would again enquire, what kind of hearty sincerity that person can exercise,
in his approaches to God, whose heart is entirely against God, full of reigning
enmity to him, and one who, according to CHRIST'S own account, ^ateth both him
and the father? who is an enemy to the covenant of grace and refuses to submit
to it?

A. Well, then according to this, an unregenerate sinner must not read nor
pray, nor attend public worship; for he can do none of these in a gracious
manner. It puts an end to all means of grace, as being of any service to the
unregenerate. But I say, the "total neglect of these duties is much more sinful
and provoking to God, than the undue performance," and the contrary doctrine
destroys every thing at once, and leads to the most open licentiousness.

Q. You either misapprehend me here, or else you don't argue justly. I do not
hold that an unregenerate person must not read or pray or attend public
worship. Neither does it follow from any thing I have said. And I add, neither
will it follow, that because unsanctified men may lawfully attend these common
means of grace, reading, hearing, etc. that therefore they may attend upon the
Sacraments -- Baptism, or the Lord's Supper. If there is any weight in your
objection, or if it proves any thing, it is this; viz. That which makes it
lawful and right for a man to read, pray and attend public worship, makes it
also lawful for him to come to special ordinances. But you, yourself, I trust,
will not give in to this proposition. You will not assert, that nothing more is
required in order to a lawful attendance on the latter, than the former. For
you will allow that an unbaptized person may lawfully go to meeting, hear the
word, etc. but you don't think it lawful for an unbaptized person to bring his
child to baptism. So that your objection is of no weight, yourself being judge.
Therefore it is unreasonable for you to say, that because I insist that some
special qualifications are necessary in order to a lawful attending on the
Sacraments, therefore a person must not attend upon any other means of grace,
without these qualifications. It does not follow that because unbelievers
cannot attend on covenant transactions without hypocrisy and lying, therefore
they cannot say or do any thing without lying. Whatever implies this, they
certainly ought not to do.

Therefore, I think it is manifest, that the objection, that this scheme tends
to destroy all obligations on sinners to attend the means of grace is without
the least foundation; and that, from the necessity of gracious sincerity, for a
person's lawfully attending on special sealing ordinances, it can never be
argued that a person ought not to attend on the common means of grace, while in
an unregenerate state.

And I am humbly of opinion, that from what has been said, it will also follow,
that we must either deny Baptism to be a seal of the covenant of grace -- Or
affirm that a parent is not active in sealing of it, when he solemnly offers up
his child to God in that ordinance -- or else grant that no person while
unregenerate has a right, or (knowing himself to be so) can lawfully, and
without wicked dissimulation, come to that ordinance -- unless we will rather
give up one of the most essential doctrines of Calvinism, and assert, that
unregenerate men are not totally depraved, nor wholly enemies to God and his
covenant; but can, as such, do something that shall be pleasing and acceptable
to God; or in other words, that they who are in the flesh can please God; in
direct contradiction to the express declarations of God, Romans viii. 8. etc.

SECTION III. Answers to several Objections and Enquiries.
Obj. I. SAYS the Parent, though I am not satisfied that I am in a gracious
state, or that I belong to the invisible Church of Christ; yet by my baptism, I
was made a member of the visible Church, and therefore, whether I can claim
saving Blessings or no, yet I have a right to visible, outward Privileges, and
such I have right to demand, particularly Baptism for my Children.

Ans. 1. Granting all you say; This will not prove the lawfulness of our
present practice, of admitting to one ordinance, end not to the other. If there
be any force in your argument, it will prove that you have as good a right to
the Lord's Supper, as to Baptism; for one is as much a visible privilege of
the covenant, as the other. If therefore, your being baptized, gives you a
lawful claim to Baptism for your child, it certainly gives you a right to the
Lord's Supper for yourself. And not only so, but it makes it your bounden duty
to come to both ordinances. So that here is no room left for dividing the
seals. For that which gives any person a right to a christian privilege,
doubtless makes it his duty to attend upon and enjoy that privilege, when he
has opportunity. How then can you think yourself at liberty to neglect one
special ordinance of Jesus Christ, as well as a precious privilege? But,

2. It Is true, by Baptism in infancy you was initiated into the visible church
of CHRIST; i. e. by your parent's act, you was introduced into the number of
God's visible vovenant people. But then it is but reasonably expected of you,
that since you are now prown up to adult age, you should make your parents act
your own, by an open christian profession. So long as you refuse to acknowledge
your consent to the covenant, to confess Christ before men, professing a
readiness to obey all his commands, what right have you to be received and
treated as a christian in good standing? He that is not for Christ, is against
him. And do you not renounce what your parents did, when they dedicated you to
Christ in baptism?

Obj. II. My attending the public worship and ordinances of God, and desiring
baptism for my child, are a sufficient evidence that I do not renounce the
covenant I was brought into by my baptism, but own and consent to it.

Ans. This, of itself, can be no proper evidence of it to the church at all.
For that which is found in persons who make no pretense to real, saving
religion; who know and own themselves to be enemies to God and his covenant,
cannot certainly be any proper evidence of compliance with it in another
person; or afford a just ground of a visibility of true religion, in a judgment
of rational charity. That which is common to both good and bad, gracious and
ungracious persons, cannot possibly be looked upon such a profession of
religion, as Christ makes necessary in order to admission to sealing
ordinances, or to the special privileges of his disciples. The truth, in short,
is, none do conform to their baptismal covenant, but those who do all things
whatsoever Christ has commanded. Your attending on God's worship and ordinances
in some instances, and neglecting others, as important, and as plainly
commanded -- your offering your child to baptism, while you refuse explicitly
to confess Christ and come to the holy supper, is rather against you than for
you. It imports an ^^surdity; and shows you to be too ignorant of the nature of
that transaction, of offering up a child to God in baptism; than which, nothing
can simply a more solemn covenanting with God.

Obj. III. Well, says the parent, I am willing then, publicly to own the
Covenant, and make a profession of religion -- and thus make my Parents Act, my
own. What hinders me now from enjoying baptism for my Child?

Ans. You will not think me unreasonable here, if I tell you, two things are
very necessary for you, in this case. One is, that you ought to understand what
you do, and to know what you are going about, in such a solemn affair as this
is, covenanting with the great Gods. And the other is, that if you do vow and
promise to the Lord, you ought to perform what you promise; otherwise it will
be but solemn mockery. You ought at least, to purpose and intend to perform, by
the help of God.

1. You ought to know and well understand what it is to covenant with God,
before you go about it; and not go on blindfold in such a solemn transaction.
Now if the case be truly as you say, i. e. if there be such an heart in you, as
far as you are able to judge, upon the most careful and serious consideration;
I trust none will object to your coming, and owning your baptismal covenant; I
am sure, none ought to refuse you. (Obj.) But don't you hold that assurance is
necessary? I have heard you held it; and that none can safely come but such as
know they are truly gracious. (Ans.) No, I do not hold this. I do not think you
ought to wait till you have assurance of your regenerate state. I never held or
taught such doctrine; neither will this follow from my principles. I think it is
your duty to come, if the case be with you, as described above; and the duty of
the church to receive you; for we are not to break the bruised r^^d. But then
you ought, on the other hand, to be careful that you do not mock God, by making
a show of covenanting, when you do not do it in sincerity of heart; and have
reason to think you have never really chosen God for your portion. A
conscientious person, surely would be afraid to come and profess before God,
Angels and Men, that he does this day avouch the Lord for his God, when he has
good reason to think that he is to this day an enemy to God, has no saving
knowledge of, or love to him. Perhaps when you say you are willing to own your
baptismal covenant, you mean, you are willing to stand up, as the manner is,
before the congregation, and hear the common form of covenanting read by the
minister, bow your assent to it, and then bring your children out to baptism.
But I must tell you, this is not all that is meant by owning, or entering into
covenant with God. If your heart don't go along with the words of the covenant;
if you have reason to think the disposition of your heart does not agree to the
words of your mouth, it is all but a piece of formal hypocrisy, and must be
very displeasing to a holy God. Such persons might well expect that awful
demand in Psalm. l. 16. What have thou to do -- that thou should take MY
COVENANT in thy mouth!

But if you have reason to think, upon the most diligent and prayerful
examination of your state, by the rules of God's word, that there is such a
heart in you, that you find in yourself a freedom, and willingness to give up
yourself to God through Jesus Christ, and devote your all to him forever,
according to the tenor of your baptismal covenant, I would encourage you, as a
minister of Christ, to come and do it, and God be with you. There can be no
reasonable objection to your being received to all the privileges of that
covenant, which was sealed to you in baptism. But then,

2. You ought to be careful to perform as well as promise to God. For better is
it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. Eccl.
v. 5. By owning your covenant, you engage, by a solemn vow, to live and walk as
a disciple of JESUS CHRIST, to submit to all his institutions and to walk in
ALL his commandments and ordinances blameless. This, as has been before
observed, i^ what is implied in the very nature of covenanting with God. How
then can you think of doing this, when at the same time you do not intend, or
think it your present duty to attend upon that special ordinance and command of
Christ, Do this in remembrance of me. And how can a Church, consistently uphold
a practice, which has a direct tendency to make persons think they may lawfully
covenant with God, and yet lawfully neglect one of his known Commands? What is
this, but virtually encouraging them in a manifest Breach of their solemn
covenant Engagements? And do we not evidently do this, when we plead for such
doctrines and practices as these; That a person may lawfully own the covenant,
if he has no grace -- that "the doing this, would be less offensive to God,
than the omission, even if he should be really unregenerate." That a person may
lawfully be admitted to a covenant transaction with God, if he has no other or
higher "principle than love to his children" -- and that he may lawfully be
admitted to baptism for his child, though he does not at present, intend, or
think it his duty, to come to the other ordinance, so expressly commanded by
JESUS CHRIST. -- What is this, but being, in some sense, accessory to, and so
partakers of other men's sins? There is not one truth in the New Testament,
plainer than this, viz. That it is the indispensible duty of all the Followers
of Christ, to partake of the Lord's Supper, in remembrance of him. But
certainly they who own or enter into covenant with God, do profess to be his
Disciples and followers -- therefore are bound by the most sacred ties, to
attend that ordinance, upon pain of forfeiting the Character and all the
Privileges of his Disciples. And therefore, no Person, Church or Power on
Earth, can lawfully dispense with such attendance. And it appears equally plain
to me, that no church can lawfully (by a public vote) establish, maintain or
continue a practice, which, by plain construction, does imply such kind of
forbearance or dispensation. From all which I think it evident, that the
practice pleaded for, cannot be justified or supported either from Scripture,
or the reason and nature of Things.


Obj. IV. The Jewish church had all their children circumcised; and were
commanded by God to do it, or they should be cut off. And none can suppose they
were all gracious persons -- or that they were required to make a public
profession that implied it: And why may not all children be baptized now, of
those in visible covenant -- I mean the children of baptized parents; inasmuch
as all allow baptism comes in the room of circumcision?

Ans. 1. Should all this be allowed, yet this will not justify the practice we are
speaking of. Nay if this argument has any weight at all, it is directly against
the Practice. For you, and every one must allow, that the Israelites were as
much obliged and commanded to eat the passover, as to circumcise their
children. So that your argument, if any thing to the purpose, proves it to be
the indispensible duty of all that bring their children to baptism, to come
themselves to the Lord's table. And here, I pray that it may be carefully
observed, that the circumcised adults in Israel, were not admitted to the
privilege of circumcision for their children, but were cut off, by the express
command of God, from all the Privileges of his covenant people if they
neglected or refused to attend on the Passover. See Numb. ix. 13. But the man
that is clean, and is not in a journey and FORBEARETH TO EAT THE PASSOVER, even
the same soul shall be CUT OFF from his people. Whether this excision intends,
being put to death, or not, yet none deny that it intended at least, their
being cut off from all the special privileges of God's covenant people, or
visible Saints. Now I think it but a reasonable request, that those, who are
for running back to the Jewish dispensation, and build so much upon that, for
the support of this practice, should endeavor to reconcile it with this text.
I think it affords a very strong argument at least, for not treating those
persons as visible saints, who refuse or neglect to attend the Lord's Supper,
and for denying them the privileges of God's covenant people, if not for
casting them out. But,

2. Those are evidently mistaken, who assert that, the Israelites were not
required to make a public profession of their covenant engagements to God. It
is manifest from scripture, that they were commanded solemnly to renew
covenant, in a public manner, even the whole congregation, every seventh year.
-- So that none could have children to circumcise, who had not before made a
public profession of religion. See Deuteronomy. xxxi. 9 -- 12. And Moses wrote this
law, and delivered it unto the priests, the sons of Levi which bare the ark of
the covenant of the Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel; and Moses
commanded them saying, At the end of EVERY SEVEN YEARS in the solemnity of the
year of release -- when all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God,
in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read THIS LAW, before all
Israel, in their hearing, etc. Now that this intends a public renewal of
covenant with God, is manifest, not only from this, that the law or ten
commandments, are frequently called God's covenant, as the law, summarily
contained that covenant, so that whenever there was, among that people, a
public, solemn profession of obedience to it, by God's institution, it must be
looked upon as an explicit covenanting with God -- but it will be evident,
beyond all reasonable doubt, that in this place such public renewal of covenant
is meant, if we will compare this passage and its connection with the xxix
chapter, 10 -- 15 verses. Ye stand all of you this day before the Lord your God
-- that thou should ENTER INTO COVENANT with the Lord thy God, and into his
oath. That which is here called GOD'S covenant and oath, is in the
forementioned place called his law. And whoever will be at the pains to read
attentively, these three chapters, viz. from the xxixth to the xxxiid, must
see, that what the people of Israel were commanded to do every seven years, in
the xxxist chap. was the same which they had before done in the plains of Moab,
mentioned in the xxixth. If the latter was a public renewal of covenant with
God, so was the former; for it is plainly spoken of as a repetition of what
they had so solemnly transacted in the forementioned place. Whence it appears,
that none, among that people, had grown up to such an age, as to have occasion
to circumcise their children, but they had before, personally and explicitly
entered into covenant with God.

As to the other part of the objection, that they were not all gracious
persons, who brought their children to be circumcised; I would observe, It Is
most probable, yea, there is no doubt, many of them did come to this ordinance
in a hypocritical manner -- did externally covenant with God, and seal their
covenant when they had no true love to the God of ISRAEL. It is very certain,
that in many periods of the Jewish state, the greater part of the people were
notoriously wicked, grossly hypocritical -- fell into scandalous idolatry:
Insomuch that God speaks of them in general, and calls them a hypocritical
nation, and the people of his wrath, Isai. x. 6. But will any one argue from
all this, that they had a right to come to God's ordinances in the manner they
did -- or that God ALLOWED THEM to come with such a character, much less,
commanded them? Will any person reason after such a strange sort as this; that
because the Israelites were commanded to attend the Sacraments, and many of 'em
attended them in abominable hypocrisy -- therefore we may do so likewise? And
because they flattered GOD with their mouth, and LIED to him with their tongue,
therefore it is lawful for us to do the same now? This would be, indeed, a
surprising way of arguing. God did enjoin that people, it is true, to circumcise
their children and eat the passover, on penalty of excision; But it does not
follow from hence, that God enjoined or allowed them to do it in an ungracious,
hypocritical man^^r. Therefore it must be acknowledged, to the honor of the
divine purity, that those Israelites had no right to attend those ordinances,
in the manner that multitudes of them did.

But furthermore -- It may be observed, that this objection, taken from the
Jewish church, does militate full as much against those that make it, as
against us. For they hold, that none have a right to come to either ordinance,
but such as are free from scandal. But it is certain, as before observed, tha^
vast numbers among the Jews, attended their Sacraments, without this
qualification; when they were scandalously immoral, and lived in open
wickedness and idolatry. How continually were they falling into that sin? and
yet we have no account, at such times, of their leaving off circumcision or the
passover. So that, for persons to plead, that the Jews were expressly commanded
to attend these ordinances, and therefore might do it without gracious
sincerity -- or to urge that true holiness was not what God required of them,
because the command was so universal; if of any weight here, will, in the end,
prove every whit as much against themselves, as against us; viz. That God did
not require, so much as moral honesty, or freedom from scandal, in those that
came to his ordinances. For there is no more exception, in the divine command,
in one case, than in the other. The truth undoubtedly, is, though God did
command them to attend on these duties, yet he never commanded them to do it in
a graceless hypocritical manner. It Is impossible he should -- it would be
inconsistent with the infinite, unchangeable holiness and perfection of his
nature, to do it. Therefore, what they actually did, is no rule by which we are
to judge what was right; but what God commanded.

If any should say, God knew they had no grace, many of them, and that it was
impossible for 'em to come in a gracious manner, and therefore he could not,
consistent with his justice, command them to come with a qualification which he
knew they had not, and could not get. I answer -- 1st. It may as well be said,
that God knew many of them were scandalous, and could not come to the ordinance
without being of such a character -- and therefore, when he commands them so
universally, he could not intend they should be free from immorality when they
came. But 2d. The command of God to attend these ordinances, was no more
universal, or absolute, than the command to love him with all their heart. So
that it may, as justly be objected, that God cannot, consistent with his
justice, require men to love him, or to repent and be converted, because they,
at present have no heart, or moral power to do it. -- But I conclude all
orthodox persons will allow, that God may justly command all men every where to
love him, and to repent of their sins, even though they have at present no
gracious principle, or moral ability to obey. And if so, where is the
absurdity, or injustice in their being commanded to profess their Love to God,
or to attend those ordinances, which are, in their nature, a profession of
love, repentance, faith, etc.

For persons to plead, that a man cannot be to blame for coming to sealing
ordinances without grace, when he has it not; and that it would be hard to
punish persons for not having a qualification, which it is not in their power
to get, and which God alone can bestow, I apprehend, is just as much as to say,
a man cannot be to blame for not loving God, when he has no Love in his Heart to
him; and that it would be hard to punish a poor creature, with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, merely for his continuing in
impenitency and obstin^te rebellion against God, when he cannot but he of such a
temper. T^^ objection, in short, seems to be nothing but an implicit casting
all the blame of a sinner's enmity and alienation of heart from God, upon the
DIVINE BEING himself.

"If God may justly require that of a sinner, which, while he is in an
unregenerate state, he has no moral power to perform, then he may require those
things which are dependant on it; and which, if the other be done, he would be
able to do and might do, and without which, he may not do it. So, if God may
require an unsanctified person, while such, to love him, then he may require
him to testify that love, as every Christian does in attending on either of the
Sacraments; and yet it not be lawful for him to testify and profess love, when
he has it not." God's requiring all Israel to enter into Covenant with God, and
to seal their covenant in special ordinances. will not prove that it was lawful
for any to avouch the Lord to be their God," and promise to perform universal,
persevering obedience, when at the same moment, they had no love to God, and
even then while speaking the words, continued in an habitual, willful
disobedience to God's commands, and were willing slaves to the devil (as all
graceless men are.) Nor will it follow from these commands given to the
Israelites, that God ever did, since the foundation of the world, appoint or
command any other covenanting with him, than a giving themselves to him wholly,
without reserve, both soul and body, both heart and life. Or that he ever
appointed any covenanting, which impenitent, graceless sinners could do,
wherein men give a part to God, and keep back part; give him the outside, and
keep back the noblest part, the heart, will and affections, for sin and satan:
Or that there is any such command of God in being, or that such covenanting has
not always been as much without foundation in the word of God, as any of the
spurious sacraments of the church of Rome; or that it has not always been
strictly forbidden of God, or that it is not absolutely and in itself sinful
and unlawful, as truly as the act of Annanias and Sapphira. Mr. Edwards.


Thus the argument brought to support this practice, taken from the Jewish
Church, which has been so much insisted on among us, appears to be inconclusive
and without any weight. For, it is abundantly manifest, as has been shown, that
they were not allowed to enjoy the privilege of circumcision for their
children, nor any other privilege of God's covenant people, or visible saints,
if they neglected to attend the Passover; but were to be cut off. Moreover it
appears, they were all obliged personally and publicly to renew covenant with
God -- And that, however some of them came in Hypocrisy, yet that God never
allowed, much less commanded them to attend ordinances in this manner, but
always forbid it -- and that their conduct therefore, is not to be the rule by
which we are to determine what was right. If thousands under the Jewish and
Christian dispensations should own the covenant in hypocrisy, and avouch the
Lord for their God, while yet they are enemies to him in heart, it can never
prove that it was then or is now, lawful to do it; much less, agreeable to the
will of God and his design in having a visible Church in the world, as some
have plead.

Obj. V. Why may not persons be admitted to the privileges of Baptism now, as
universally, and with no other qualifications than those had who came to John
the Baptist, to be baptized? It cannot be thought they were all gracious, or
made a profession of saving faith.

Ans. Several things are evident from this account, viz. 1st. That John
preached repentance and faith in the approaching Messiah, Math. iii. 2. REPENT
ye for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And Acts xix. 4. That they should
BELIEVE on him that should come after him. 2dly. It Is evident also, that they
who came to him and were baptized, made some public profession of faith and
repentance. Math. iii. 6. And were baptized of him CONFESSING THEIR SINS. And
Acts xix. 5. When they heard this, they were baptized IN THE NAME OF THE LORD
JESUS. That is, they were baptized by John himself; for to what purpose should
these persons be rebaptized by the apostle Paul, who had before been baptized
with John's Baptism? Pol. in loc.
3dly. It is not reasonable to suppose that they made profession of another and
different kind of repentance from that which John preached and had inculcated
upon them. But 4thly. It Is very evident, that was not a legal, but a saving,
evangelical repentance. For it was repentance for the REMISSION OF SINS. And
there is no remission of sins promised, or that can belong to any repentance
but that which is gracious and saving. Therefore there is nothing that can be
gathered from John, or his Baptism, that will warrant our practice, or prove
that it is lawful for unregenerate persons to come to special ordinances.
Whether those that he baptized, were all true penitents or not, ('it is plain
some of 'em were not,) yet this was what they professed, and upon this
profession, he baptized them. For he had no authority to judge their hearts. He
went by what was visible, as all ministers and churches ought. If persons
profess true repentance toward God and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
nothing appears in their lise and conduct to contradict it, they are to be
admitted. God has given us no other rule to go by, than this.

As to the numbers that went to John to be baptized -- All Judea and Jerusalem;
by these expressions, it is plain nothing more is meant, than that there was a
great resort, much people from those places, that went out to him. The word ALL
there, can no more intend all the inhabitants of those places, young and old,
than the like expression of the Apostle Paul, when he says ALL MEN FORSOOK ME.
Whereas it is evident he was not forsaken by every individual of his friends: Or
than the same expression in Luke xvi. 16. Since that time the kingdom of God is
preached and EVERY MAN PRESSES INTO IT.

Obj. VI. Well, if this practice of owning the covenant, is laid aside, what
will become of our poor children? If none have a right to the ordinance of
Baptism for themselves or children, without covenanting with God, and if none
ought to do this, but those whose hearts are right with God, i. e. gracious
persons; if I ought not to "avouch the Lord to be my God," unless I have reason
to think I have heartily chosen him for my God; if the case be so, what a dark
and melancholy prospect does it give, of the rising generation? In a few years
more, the greater part of our children will be unbaptized -- and go without so
much as the external mark or badge of christianity; be as Pagans, Infidels and
Heathen. And what a reproach will this be to the children, and the families
they belong to? Must they be treated as "dogs and not as lambs of the flock" --
What a terrible consideration is this! and what shall be done in this case?

Ans. In the first place, not take ungospel methods to remedy the difficulty.
However dark the prospect may be, and however great our concern for our
children, yet we may be sure of this, that it is not the right way, to get rid
of this evil, to go out of the rules which Christ has given us with respect to
baptism. Neither can we expect a blessing, either on us or them, if we should
do evil that good may come; or if we should be guilty of dissimulation and
hypocrisy, in order to get our children baptized; as that person must be, who
solemnly covenants with God, when he has not such an heart in him.

But as to the reproach brought upon our children, by going without the outward
badge of a christian, because they remain unbaptized through the parents
neglecting to make a profession of godliness -- Such an objection will appear
to you, I trust, to favor of great unreasonableness and even stupidity, if you
do but attend to the nature of it. And here I ask leave of the reader, to
insert the following quotation, though the passage be somewhat lengthy; to
which I humbly and earnestly ask the serious attention of the reader, and
particularly the people of my charge; not only because I think it contains a
solid and full answer to the objection made, but also some truths, of the
greatest importance, which I could wish, may be deeply impressed on the minds
of all that are concerned about this controversy -- especially the parents in
question.

"Such a kind of objection (says he) will savor of a very unreasonable spirit.
Is it not enough, if God freely offers men to own their children and give them
the honor of baptism, in case the parents will only relinquish their enmity to
him, turn from sin, and heartily give up themselves and their children to him,
and take upon them the profession of godliness? -- If men are truly excusable,
and not to blame for remaining in an unconverted state, in not turning to God
through Christ, and in not believing with their hearts and confessing with their
mouths, why don't we openly plead that they are so? and why don't we openly
teach sinners, that they are not to blame for continuing among the enemies of
Christ, and neglecting and despising his great salvation? -- But if, on the
other hand, they are not at all excusable in this, if it be owing wholly to
their own wicked hearts and indulged lusts, that they refuse sincerely to give
up themselves and their children to God, then how unreasonable is it in them to
complain that their children are denied the honor of having God's mark set upon
them as some of his? If parents are angry (says he) and think hard of this,
such a temper shows them to be very senseless of their own vile treatment of
the blessed God."

"And besides, is it not very much owing to parents, that there are so many
young people grown up, who can make no profession of godliness? They have
themselves therefore to blame, if the case be so, that (proceeding upon the
principles that have been maintained) there is like to rise a generation of
unbaptized children. Though they cannot change their hearts, yet if ancestors had
thoroughly done their duty to their posterity, in instructing, governing and
praying for their children, and setting good examples before them, according to
their covenant engagements, there is reason to think, the case would have been
far otherwise than it is."

"The insisting on this objection, seems also to savor of much stupidity as
well as unreasonableness. For the objection seems to suppuse the country to be
full of those that are unconverted [as they cannot make a profession of
godliness] and so are exposed every momeat to eternal damnation; yet it seems,
we don't hear such great complaints and lamentable outories concerning this.
The cry is, they are unbaptized; have not the outward mark: not hat they are
enemies to GOD and in danger of H^LL^^. Now why is it looked upon so dreadful,
to have great n^muors among as going without the name and honorable badge of
christiadity, when at the same time it is (...) more laid to heart, that such
multitudes go without the thing; which is surely infinitely more dreadful? Why
are we so s^eut about this? What is the name good for, without the thing? Can
parents bear to have their children go about the world in the most odious and
dangerous state of soul; in reality children of the Devil, and under
condemnation to eternal burnings; when at the same time, they cannot bear to
have them disgraced by going without the honor of being baptized? A high honor
and procious privilege this is, indeed, to all the proper subjects of it; yet
how can parents be contented with the sign without the thing sig^^ied? Why
should they covet the external honor for their children, while they are so
careless about the spiritual blessing? Don't this argue great sen^les^ness of
their own misery as well as their children's, in being in a christless state?
If a man and his children were together bitten by a Viper, dreadfullyswollen,
and like to die, would it not argue great stupidity in the parent to be
anxiously concerned about his child's having on; at the same time, a dirty
outside garment, and angry at others for not putting some external ornament
upon it? But the difference in this present case, is infinitely greater and
more important. Let parents pity their poor children, because they are without
Baptism, and pity themselves, who are in danger of everlasting misery, while
they have no special interest in the covenant of grace, and so, have no right
to covenant favors nor honors, for themselves or children. -- No religious
honors, that are obtained in any other way than by real religion, are much
worth contending for. And in truth, it is no honor at all to a man, to have
merely the outward badges of a christian, without being a christian indeed. Any
more than it would be an honor to a man, that has no learning, but is a mere
dunce, to have a degree at college: or for a man who has no courage or valor,
but is a grand coward, to have an honorable commission in an army; which, by
listing him up, only serves to expose him to the deeper reproach, and sets him
forth as the more notable object of contempt.

But it is said, The form is better than nothing; and better have our children
baptized, if their parents cannot make a profession of godliness. For to deny
them the outward mark, has a tendency to make them cast off all restraints, and
so in the end will tend to general profaness and immorality -- as they are
denied any portion in the Lord.

To this it may be answered, "That CHRIST is the best judge of the tendency of
his own institutions. -- But it will be found, moreover, that this is a very
great mistake; contrary to scripture, reason and experience. -- Indeed, I
acknowledge it would have such a tendency, were they to be shut out from having
any part in the Lord, in the same sense that the two tribes and a half were. --
Josh. xxii. 25. or to fence them out by such a partition wall as formerly was
between the Jews and Gentiles, i e. to tell them, that if they were never so
much disposed to serve the Lord, he was not ready to accept them, according to
that notion the Jews entertained of the uncircumcised Gentiles. -- But only for
us to forbear giving them honors they have no title to, and not to compliment
them with the name and badge of GOD's children, while they profess or pretend
to nothing but what is consistent with their being his enemies; this can have
no such tendency, as is complained of in the objection. But rather the contrary
practice has very much this tendency. For it is found by constant experience,
through all ages, that blind, corrupt mankind are strongly disposed to rest in
a name instead of the thing -- in the form instead of the power; and to make
themselves easy in the former, in the neglect of the latter."

"This way of proceeding tends greatly to increase the negligence of parents,
and to confirm the stupidity and security of wicked children. If Baptism were
denied to all children, whose parents did not profess godliness, and in a
judgment of christian charity, appeared to be real friends to CHRIRT, it would
have a tendency to excite pious heads of families to more thorough pains, and
care in the religious education of their children, and to more fervent prayer
for them, that they might be converted in youth, before they enter into a
married state; and so, if they have children, the entail of the covenant, be
secured. And it would also tend to awaken young people themselves, as yet
unconverted, especially when about to settle in the world. The thought of their
having no right to christian privileges for their children, (should they
become parents) would tend to lead them, at such a time, seriously to reflect
on their own awful state, which, if they don't get out of it, must lay a
foundation for so much calamity and reproach to their families. And if, after
they are parents, they remain in such a condition, they would have this
additional motive to stir them up to seek grace for themselves and their
children. To this exactls agrees Mr. D^stor, in s^^i^sap. ci^.
Whereas the contrary practice, as it has been carried on generally, has a
natural tendency to quiet the minds of persons, both in their own and their
childrens unregeneracy. Yea, may it not be justly suspected, that the way of
baptizing the children of such as never make a profession of saving grace or
religion, is an expedient originally invented for this very end, to give ease
to ancestors with respect to their posterity, in times of general declension
and degeneracy?"

"This way of proceeding tends greatly to establish the stupidity and
irreligion of children, as well as negligence of parents. It is certain, that
unconverted, graceless parents, never do truly give up their children to God,
since they don't truly give up themselves to him. And if neither of the parents
appear truly pious, in a judgment of scriptural charity,' (or any otherwise
than by mere negative evidences) "there cannot, in this case, be any grounds to
expect that their chilwill be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, how solemnly soever the parents may promise it. The faichfulness of
Abraham was such as might be trusted in this matter. Genesis xviii. 19. But men
that are not visibly godly, i. e. who have not the profession or appearance of
real saints, upon what grounds are they to be trusted? It would be but
presumption to expect that those children, who are never really given up to
God, nor brought up for him, should prove religious and be God's children.
There is no reason to expect, but that such children, ordinarily speaking, will
grow up in irreligion, whether they are baptized or not. And for persons to go
about with the name and visible seal of God, and the sacred badge of
christianity upon them, having had their bodies, by a holy ordinance,
consecrated to God as his temples, yet living in irreligion and ways of
wickedness, this tends exceedingly to harden them and establish them in an
habitual contempt of sacred things. Such persons, above all men, are like to be
the most hardened and abandoned, and most difficultly reclaimed. As it was with
the wicked Jews, who were much more confirmed in their wickedness, than those
heathen cities of Tire and Sidon. To give that which is holy to those whom we
have no manner of reason to expect, (from the circumstances of their parentage
and education) will be any otherwise than profane and irreligious, is not the
way to make them better but worse. It Is the way to make them habitually trample
holy things under their feet, yea, even to turn again and rent us, and be more
mischievous and hurtful enemies to that which is good than otherwise they would
be." Edwards's Enquity, P. 127.


And now to close this head of objections; if after all it should be said, that
saving grace, and a hearty disposition to give up myself to God in Christ, is a
thing out of my power, I cannot change my own heart, and that it cannot be just
that my child should suffer for my sake. -- I would seriously ask such an
objector, what is the real language of the objection? Is it not a secret
casting all the blame of the parents remaining in impenitency and opposition to
God, upon that Being who he supposes can change his heart? I think those who
attempt to uphold this practice, should be a little cautions not to uphold
sinners in objections of this kind. How much more sad is (...) when they make
them for 'em; and thereby virtually just^fy them in their c^^tinued impenitency
and unbelief! This looks like something worse than apposing the tenets of
Calvinists -- even like pleading the cause of the enemies of God, which
perhaps, such persons would not, for the world, be knowingly guilty o^
I conceive there would be just as much reason, in saying, It Is a hardship that
I should be punished with eternal misery for not loving my Maker, and not
complying with the Gospel with all my heart: Or it is unreasonable that I should
be to blame for disobeying God's commands, when it is my very nature to do it
Whereas this is the very thing, in which the sinner's inexcusable guilt and
wickedness consists -- that he has such a heart, and that it is his nature to
be, or in other words, that he is so willingly, opposite to God, chooses and
takes pleasure in that which is infinitely wrong and contrary to God. In this
lies the essence of a sinner's guilt and blameworthiness, for which he justly
deserves, from the hand of the Lord, not only to be denied every privilege of
the covenant, but to be eternally cast off from God, and to lie down in sorrow.

Wherefore, the only effectual way to have the difficulty removed, and which, I
conceive, is the only way which God himself points out is, for parents to
renounce their unreasonable prejudices and opposition to CHRIST and the gospel,
and yield a hearty compliance with, and consent to the covenant of grace. This
is their present duty, as well as highest interest -- to repent and be
converted -- give up themselves wholly to God through Jesus Christ; and then will
they be entitled to all the privileges and blessings of God's covenant people
here, and in the world to come. And as for those among us who profess to be the
true followers and friends of Christ, methinks, instead of urging or
encouraging parents to come and covenant with God, and give up their children
to him in baptism, when they have no reason to think they ever did give
themselves up to God, or were ever real friends to Christ in their hearts; and
instead of teaching them that they may lawfully perform such solemn
transactions, with no higher principle than "love to their children," which is
certainly consistent with reigning enmity against God; would they not act much
more becoming the christian character and more agreeable to Christ, if they
should be more engaged to keep up that godly discipline, and attend those
rules, which Christ has enjoined in his church; and be more earnest and
frequent in prayer to God, with whom is the residue of the spirit, crying in
the importunate language of the Prophet, O Lord revive thy work! And if God,
who is the bearer of prayer, should be pleased in his infinite mercy, to pour
out his spirit in his saving influences, upon parents and children, how soon
would the present complaints and perplexities be happily removed? And men,
becoming new creatures, their hearts being sanctified and brought to the love
of God and faith of Jesus, they would no longer plead for a covenant, which a
graceless sinner may lawfully enter into, but their gladsome voice, one to
another, would be like that in Jer. l. 5. "Come let us join ourselves to the
Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shall not be forgotten." -- " I will go
also."

SECTION IV. More particular Remarks on Mr. Cotton's Essays.
I Cannot but observe that Mr. C. in the greater part of his essays, seems to
have entirely lost sight of the question which was first proposed, and which is
the ground of the debate. The question, as he has rightly stated it in the
beginning of his book, was, "Whether the half way practice of admitting persons
to own the covenant and have baptism for their children, without coming to the
Lord's Supper, be warrantable by the word of God." Mr. C. undertook to prove
the affirmative. Had he done this, from the word of God, he would have
established his point, and I must and would have freely given it up. But the
attentive reader will easily observe, that in a very little while after he had
first stated the question, he goes off, to endeavor to prove another point,
viz. that persons who are unregenerate, (if baptized) have a lawful right to
bring their children to baptism; and that their coming, in such circumstances,
(if outwardly regular,) would be less offensive to God than the omission would
be. That it is not their being gracious persons, that the church is to have
respect to, in admitting them, but their being baptized, and so in visible
covenant -- and that this gives them the right, whether they are gracious or
no. This appears from those words of his, in the 2d page "Neither does CHRIST
so much as intimate that they were gracious -- thereby letting us know, that it
is visible membership gives the right." i. e. Such a membership as a person may
have, without any need of the supposition of his being truly gracious. For the
drift of his whole argument is to prove that unregenerate persons me complete
members of the church, (if baptized and regular) so as to give them a lawful
right to ordinances. And he must mean a right in the sight of God, as well as
the church; for he says, p. 12. "From this we infer that it is not contrary to
the mind of GOD, that the children of persons unregenerate should have this
ordinance administered to them, if their parents be in covenant relation to
God." And indeed, that this is a point Mr. C. holds, is evident not only from a
multitude of passages all over his book, but from his appearing in opposition
to my declared sentiments in this matter. There would be no room or foundation
for opposing me here, if he was not of the principle above. For I have always
held that we have nothing to (...) to judge hearts, or to insist that they
shall certainly be gracious, or else not be admitted; far from it; we may, and
often are deceived no doubt. But if persons profese to be real friends to
Christ, and appear to be sincere in what they profess, and their lives are
agreeable, they are to be received, not only to Baptism, but to all the
privileges of visible saints. Whereas Mr. C. supposes, according to his book,
that it is lawful for graceless persons as such, to come to this ordinance, own
the covenant, etc. and that, there is no necessity of their being gracious, or
professing grace, in order to give them a right. Otherwise he could not say,
"'It Is the will of God," they should come, provided they have been baptized; or
that such profession is " only a prudential of the church."

And yet strangely, Mr. C. seems to hold, in many other places, that which is
directly contradictory to this. As in p. 30, 65, etc. of which, more hereafter.
But it is evident from what has been observed, that Mr. C. has forsaken the
original question, which was -- not whether unregenerate parents have a right
to bring their children; but whether it is warrantable from scripture for
persons to own the covenant and be admitted to the privilege of baptism for
their children, (thereby treating them as visible saints) while they neglect to
attend the other ordinance. It was his going off from the point in controversy,
that obliged me, in the course of our debates at the church meetings, to answer
some objections and bring sundry arguments to prove the unlawfulness of
unregenerate men's partaking of covenant privileges; for which Mr. C. has
charged me with " misstating the question," p. 65. And tells me, with an air,
rather suited to his magistratical than brotherly character, "Wherefore I
desire to hear no more about qualifications." But if persons will themselves
ramble from the point, I know of no other way but to ramble after 'em. But I
will now invite Mr. C. back again, and endeavor for a while to attend to the
question we set out upon; and consider what he has said upon it; and whether
any arguments he has bro't, when weighed in the balance of the sanctuary, will
appear of sufficient weight to establish what he undertook to prove.

His arguments seem to be chiefly founded on the parents being complete members
of the church, in good standing. He owns that notwithstanding their membership
by baptism, they may be guilty of that which disqualifies them for enjoying
baptism for their children. That by their unchristian conduct and behavior they
may forfeit their right. He holds, in many places, that none have the right,
but visible christians or believers, p. 70, etc. that is, those that profess
and appear to be real christians, true believers.

Now it is granted that persons baptized in infancy, are thereby initiated into
the visible church of Christ, and have a proper membership in it; and as such,
have a visible title to the ordinances and privileges of such, provided they
behave like christians and do not exclude themselves by their unchristian
conduct; or in other words, as long as they appear to act agreeable to the
import of their baptismal covenant engagements; or do not practically renounce
them. Mr. C. suggests, in his preface and elsewhere, that I had formerly
allowed, but now denied the membership of infants. This is so contrary to the
truth of fact, that it must have arisen from his ^usapprebending my meaping;
not from any wilful design, I trust. I never denied or thought of denying that
the infant seed of believing parents, were, by baptism, introduced into the
visible church of God. I can see no sort of propriety or meaning in Infant
Baptism, should this be denied. Therefore it is unaccountable to me, how Mr. C.
could understand me in the light he did. I believe, and ever have believed that
they have a proper membership through means, or on account of their relation to
their visibly believing parents. But what I denied and do still, is that
baptism makes them members in such a manner, as to give them a gospel right to
covenant privileges, whether they (when adult) make a profession of godliness
and be^^^^ agreeably to their covenant engagements or not.
But if, when grown up to adult age, they appear not to live and walk agreeable
hereto; particularly, if they refuse to confess Christ before men, and obey
that special command to all disciples, "Do this in remembrance of me," the
question then is, whether this, if persisted in, is not such a violation of
their christian bonds, and such disobedience to Christ, as to make them forfeit
the charater of visible friends and disciples; and a just ground of denying
them the special privileges of such; so that they cannot rightfully demand or
expect them. The dispute therefore, is not whether baptized persons who behave
well, (i. e. answerable to their baptismal engagements) are members of the
visible church, and have a right to baptism for their children: I allow they
have. For I suppose, if they act up to their engagements, they will heartily
comply with the terms of that covenant, and publicly own it before men. And
upon their professing it of appearing so to do, no person or church have a
right to refuse them, but they ought to be admitted to all the privileges they
expect or desire. But the question is, whether persons, baptized in, infancy,
who refuse to profess their consent to the covenant of grace, and habitually
neglect coming to the Lord's Supper, have a right to the character of visible
saints, and ought to be allowed their privilege, notwithstanding such refusal
and disobedience? I suppose the negative, Mr. C. asserts the affirmative; but
he has said nothing hitherto, as I have observed, that can, by any means, be
said to prove it; though his whole building rests upon this foundation: So that
if this is removed, all he has said and done, falls to the ground. And this, I
conceive, may be easily done, if we will be willing to lay aside all prejudices
and attachments to human invention and traditional opinions, and attend
diligently and only to the scriptures, the only unerring standard of truth.

I would be far from endeavoring to depreciate the characters of the fathers,
or speaking disrespectfully of those venerable divines who have been upon the
other side in this controversy; of whom my late reverend and pious Predecessor
Mr. LEONARD, was one; whose name and memory are justly dear to me, as well as
to the people of my charge. Though I have been often told, by those well
acquainted with the affair, that when t^^s practice was bro't in, it was as
dark a day, on account of the deciension of religion, and decay of powerful,
vital godliness, as was almost ever known in th^s town; and that Mr. Leonard
himself has frequently said that about that time of his ministry here, and some
years after, he had not that lively sense of divine things, or sweet experience
in religon, which afterward he enjoyed to the day of his death. And
accordingly I find, by the Records, that during that season of deadness and
forma^^^ before mentioned, more persons owned the covenant (...) one year (...)
1736, that in the whole eighteen years of the last part of his (...).
But in a matter of this nature, we ought to call no man on earth master. To
the law and to the testimony. Let that devide the point; by that I am willing
to stand or fall, in this debate. And if we will but sit at the feet of Christ,
and be willing to learn of him, we may easily find, who are visible christians
-- who those are, whom HE accounts, and whom he would have us account his
disci^^^, and treat as such. And we shall there learn also, what that is, by
which they forfeit this character, and which, in CHRIST's account, ^enders them
unworthy of the privileges of his visible church and people; of which Baptism
of children is one. He has not left us in the dark in this matter, or obliged
us to spell out by "negative evidences" who are, and who are not proper persons
to be ranked among his visible friends. His words are as plain as can be
expressed. Let us turn to some out of many of them.

Those words of our Lord in Math. xxviii. 20. Mr. Cotton produces, in order to
prove that baptized children are disciples. It Is granted they are, and continue
to be such, as long as, or provided they come up to the character there
described, and submit to the injunctions and discipline which CHRIST in these
very words appoints; (which Mr. C. has left out in quoting this text) viz.
Teaching them to observe ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER I have commanded you. But what
if they did not submit to this, but refused to observe some important commands
of Christ? Had the Apostles, in this case any right, by their commission, to
number them among the dis^^ples of Christ, or visible saints? Nay would they
not hereby, have acted in direct opposition to it? Here we have the character
of a visible christian, drawn by CHRIST himself. To apply it therefore to the
point in debate; we must either say, CHRIST has not commanded his diseples to
attend that holy ordinance of the Lord's Supper and confess him before men, or
else assert, in direct contradiction to our Lords words, that a person may be a
good disciple, and ought to have the privileges of such, who lives in the
constant, visible neglect of a plain, express command of Christ; and which he
acknowledges such. Surely he who teaches, that such persons are visible friends
to Christ, teaches for doctrine the commandments of men.

In John xv. 14. our Lord confirms the doctrine taught in the abovementioned
text. He says, Ye are my FRIENDS if ye do WHATSOEVER I command you. As if he
had said, "This is the touchstone, the test, (not only by which a man's real
grace and sincerity is to be determined, and whether he belongs to the
invisible church of Christ or not, but) by which you are to judge of visible
discipleship. This is the mark by which you are to ground your charity, in the
admission of persons into my visible church and kingdom. If any call themselves
my friends, and yet keep not my commands, whatever outward advantages, relation
or profession they may boast of, they are none of mine; neither have they any
right to expect or enjoy the privileges of my friends.

FURTHERMORE, by a visible disciple of Christ, is meant, one that professes,
and visibly appears to be a lover of CHRIST. But our Lord says, John xiv. 15.
"If ye love me, KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS." And verse 21st. "He that has my
commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me." 23d v. "If any man
love me, he will keep my words." Now, by what right can a person call himself a
visible christian, or lover of Christ, and expect to be treated as such by
others -- or how can any teach, that they are and ought to be looked upon as
such, and that they are abused if they have not the honors and privileges of
christians, when they live openly and constantly in the violation of one of the
most important of all CHRIST's institutions and commands, without being guilty
of opposing and contradicting CHRIST, in these express and repeated
declarations of his? -- St. John says, "He that says I know him (or professes
discipleship to him) and keeps not his commandments, is a liar and the truth
is not in him." 1 John ii. 4.

Again; those words of CHRIST in Luke vi. 46. are directly against such claims.
"And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say." Why do you
come with such a vain pretense to be my disciples; why do you pretend obedience
and subjection to me, as if I was your Lord, and yet live in disobedience to
me. As long as you refuse to obey me, your claim to visible discipleship is
good for nothing -- neither have you any right to be treated as such." These
words will forever stand as a bar against admitting persons to the character
and peculiar privileges of visible saints, who keep not the commandments and
walk not in the instituted ordinances of JESUS CHRIST. But such are they, who,
after proper instruction and admonition, refuse to attend on the Lord's Supper;
as they do herein openly disobey CHRIST in a most important article which he
has strictly enjoined on all his disciples; and by which they are to be visibly
distinguished from the world.

ONCE MORE, agreably to what has been said above, CHRIST tells his disciples
plainly, who those are, that are to be looked upon as his enemies, that have no
love to him, John xiv. 24. "He that loves me not keeps not my sayings." q.
d. By this rule you may know whom you are not to receive or treat as my visible
friends, viz. them that will not keep my sayings. Wherever you meet with one,
habitually of this character, know, that he has no right to the name or
privileges of my disciples; neither ought he, or any one else, to think him
wronged, that he is denied them. Mr. Stoddard expressly declares, that those who
have been baptized in infancy, and owned the covenant, are bound to come up to
the Lord's Table. This he says, not merely from his peculiar principles about
the Sacrament, but founds his argument upon their covenanting. Therefore he
adds, "'It Is a scandal if ^hey do not, and the church may call them to an
account for their neglect."
Innumerable other texts might easily be adduced to the same purpose; but what
have been mentioned, appear to me, abundantly sufficient to determine this
question, beyond all reasonable objection. And that if we will allow the
New Testament to be of divine authority, and the great head of the church to be
a proper person to determine the point, we must conclude, that none ought to be
looked upon as visible believers or christians, or to be allowed their
privileges, who live in the constant, allowed neglect or violation of any of
Christ's commands and institutions. And therefore, if we allow the Lord's
Supper to be an instituted ordinance of Christ, and a public confessing of him
before men, to be a commanded duty to all his disciples, then we must grant
that those who live in the habitual neglect of them, do not come up to the
character CHRIST has given, and therefore have no right to the special
privileges of his disciples.

None, I hope, will mistake what I have said, as if I supposed a profession of
religion and coming to the Lord's Supper were enough to denominate a man a real
christian or true believer; or as if this was enough to satisfy a man's own
conscience, that he was in a safe state. This would be a very dangerous
doctrine. For thousands, no doubt call Christ Lord, and eat and drink in his
presence, to whom he will say, " Depart, ye workers of iniquity, I know you
not." But what I intend is, that this is what we are to judge by. And that we
have no right to call persons visible christians, or grant them special
privileges but those who do make such external professions and obey that
possitive command of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me.

But it is objected, that their neglect of the ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
is not owing to any "contempt" of Christ's command; it arises from " scruples
and tenderness of conscience" -- therefore we ought to bear with them and let
them "come as far as they will go." That is to say, we should look upon them in
good standing, and treat them as very good disciples of CHRIST, though they
cannot see their way clear to walk in all his ordinances and obey his
commandments. In answer to this, I pray the following things may be observed.

1. That we find no warrant for such a distinction or exception, in the word of
God, let the plea for it be what it will. Is it not probable we should have had
some intimation of it from CHRIST or his Apostles, if there had been any
reasonable grounds for such an excuse for neglecting a plain institution of
Christ? Whence comes it to pass, that we never find, in the New Testament, any
account of disciples excusing themselves from this command of Christ, from
scruples of conscience? I cannot find that this was ever though it to be a
sufficient ground, till since the Apostles days; perhaps not till within 200
years, for admitting persons to the number and privileges of disciples, who
lived in the neglect of that distinguishing command of Christ. Have we not
reason then, to look upon this, not of divine approbation, but as an invention
of men, to palliate, if not to excuse persons, in their disobedience to the
commands of Christ, while yet they may pass for his disciples and goods
christians?

2. But what are these scruples of conscience, which will suffer a person to
engage in the most solemn transaction in the world, (as they do when they own
the covenant) and yet will keep him back from the Lord's Supper, a plain
instituted ordinance of Christ? Is there not reason to think, at least in many
instances, that these "scruples" are in reality, an inward consciousness that
all is not right within; a consciousness of their unfitness for such a covenant
transaction? or that they are satisfied in themselves, however the church may
have charity for 'em, that they have no true love to JESUS CHRIST; that they
are in a state of polluted nature. -- Yet, since there is such a practice in
the church as owning the covenant without coming to the Lord's Supper, they
will venture to comply with it, for the sake of their children; hoping
secretly, all the while, that it is not really the covenant of grace that they
own; nor of the same nature, in point of obligation, with that covenant which
persons make, when they come up to full communion. Is there not great reason to
fear this is truly the case with many, in those places where this practice is
upheld? -- Which leads me to say,

3. If they do not scruple to do the greater, why should they scruple to do the
less? Their tender consciences will not scruple to own the covenant, which is one
^f the greatest and most solemn transactions a person can perform on this side
death and the eternal world. For he therein calls God, Angels and men to
witness his vows and the dedication of himself to God, and engagements to be
the Lord's, to walk in all his ways. I say his scruples don't terrify him from
this -- he can do this with a safe and easy conscience; and yet he scruples to
come to the Lord's table -- i.e. scruples whether it is safe for him to fulfill
what he has just before bound himself in covenant to perform. For our opponents
say there is but one covenant; so that they who own the covenant are under the
same obligations to walk in all ordinances, that those are, who join in full
communion. It may also be enquired,

4. Why these fears and scruples don't operate as strong to keep him away from
one ordinance, as from the other, equally solemn and important; and to the
right attendance on which, love to CHRIST is as much required? There is as much
a profession of love to CHRIST, and as much of a covenant transaction in a
person's offering his child to God in baptism, as in his coming to the Lord's
table. And if any parents think otherwise, they are greatly mistaken. Therefore
should they persist in pleading scruples of conscience for neglecting the
ordinance of the Lord's Supper, while yet they demand Baptism for their
children, will not such gross inconsistence show, either that they are too
ignorant of the nature of Baptism and the import of it, to be admitted to
baptism for their children, until better instructed; or else, that they do not
act from any love to CHRIST in insisting upon it; but from some worldly views,
such as the honor and credit of it, or some other sinister motive? And if so,
ought a minister or a church to prostitute a ^oly ordinance of JESUS CHRIST to
^^^^ify such a temper as this? But,

5. Let us for a moment turn the tables, and suppose a parent should come, who
had never been baptized himself, and should desire baptism for his child, and
to be admitted to the Lord's Supper himself. You tell him he cannot be admitted
to either, till he is himself baptized, He replies, he is afraid to come to
that ordinance; baptism appears so solemn an ordinance, that he dare not
venture; he scruples his fitness for it. Now must be he borne with, and
admitted to the Lord's Supper under a notion that we should let him come "as
far as he can go," and so bear with him as to baptism, till his scruples are
removed? Who would think this reasonable or lawful? Would not every one say he
is sit for neither, till his scruples are removed and he better instructed. --
Some perhaps will say this is not to the purpose, because there never was such
an instance; and that it cannot properly be supposed.

I answer, it is a fact, that in the fourth century, about 330 years after
CHRIST, in the reign of Constantine the great, people had much the same opinion
about Baptism, that many among us now have, about the Lord's Supper. They
looked upon it so awful and sacred an ordinance, that if they were not holy
persons, or fell into sin after they had been baptized, their baptism would
seal their damnation; therefore they dare not approach to that ordinance, but
put it off till they were just going to die, that they might ascend pure to the
celestial regions. M^s^^^^ ^^les hist.
Now what church could think that such scruples of conscience as these -- though
uttered with the greatest possible solemnity and apparent conscientiousness,
would be a sufficient plea for admitting him to the Lord's Supper should he
desire it, while he neglects the ordinance of Baptism? Would any plead for him,
"'It Is hard he may not come to one duty, because he cannot come to all; will you
force a man to be baptized, when he cannot see his way clear, and dare not in
conscience do it; and say, he shall not have the Lord's Supper, till he comes
to the other ordinance; i. e. he shall not come as far as be can with a good
conscience, unless he will do that which is directly against his conscience?"
What kind of arguing would this be? Yet there is, at least, as good reason to
admit it in one case as in the other.

Obj. But is there not some allowance to be made for weak, tender rainds? All
cannot see alike. Though there is no just ground for persons scruples about the
Lord's Supper, if they are sit to offer their children in baptism, yet it is
difficult, yea impossible perhaps to convince some of it. And may not there be
real good christians, that may be under these scruples? You would not debar
communicants from the Lord's table or baptism, should they be under doubts and
fears; or condemn them as graceless. Why then may not a person be a true
christian, and see his way clear to offer his child, but not dare to come to
the Lord's Supper?

Ans. I am far from supposing this impossible. I doubt not it has often been
the case. And all possible tenderness is to be used with conscientious though
fearful christians, lest we should quench the smoking flax. But I can by no
means think it is any act of tenderness, to do that, which tends to establish
and keep them along in their mistakes. It Is acknowledged, their scruples arise
from some wrong notions they have got about the nature of the two ordinances;
or from their misunderstanding certain texts of scripture, particularly,
oftentimes that in 1 Cor. xi. 29. It may be justly presumed, that these persons
never would have been led into this notion of scrupling their fitness for one
ordinance, while they have none about their fitness for the other, had it not
been for some wrong notions or instructions they have received, and from this
halfway practice, which tends to keep up a distinction between the ordinances,
which they have been always used to, from their childhood. I cannot but think,
that if ministers would be painful in declaring what is the truth in this
matter, and determine no longer to submit to a practice, which themselves, many
of them, acknowledge carries in it an inconsistency; and if churches would join
in abolishing this unscriptural practice, which has tended so much (I speak
from my own knowledge) to mislead and bewilder honest, enquiring minds with
respect to covenanting with God, there is no doubt but the prejudices and
scruples of all honest, conscientious persons would soon be removed; and they
would see that they might as safely come to the Lord's table as offer up a
child to God in Baptism; or it would be as difficult to persuade them to come
to the latter as the former.

Mr. C. indeed seems to urge a distinction to be made between the two
ordinances; and intimates, certainly in many places, as if the same essential
qualifications were not required in both. But what proof does he bring? He
"says, the church has in all ages been larger in admitting to baptism than the
Lord's supper." Mr. C^s. so frequently appealing to the decisions of Men,
reminds me of the observation of the celebrated ec^lefi^stical historian,
before mentioned. Some (says he) laying aside the sacred writings, from whence
all the weapons of religious controversy ought to be drawn, refer you to the
decisions of the ancient rulers of the church. Others think that the antiquity
of a doctrine is a mark of its truth, and plead prescription against their
adversary, as if they were maintaining their property before a civil
magistrate. Than which method of disputing, nothing can be more pernicious to
the cause of truth.
And has mentioned the practice of the first century, concerning the
catachumeni, baptizati, etc. What he has said here, I apprehend may posibly
lead some into a mistake. The truth of that matter was this, according to the
best church history extant; "None were admitted to baptism till they had, not
only firmly professed their faith in CHRIST, but till they had manifested
satisfactory proofs of their piety." And the baptizati were not kept back from
the other ordinance upon trial (as Mr. C. has misapprehended) but "upon
baptism, were admitted to ALL the mysteries of the christian faith." Mosheim,
Vol. 1. p. 94
But had it been so, that the church in some ages have made this distinction,
can it be proved, that they held it in the apostolic age? I am sure I could
never see the least hint of it in the new testament, but the clearest evidence
to the contrary. And here I cannot but observe, Mr. C. has very few with him in
this peculiar opinion, that the same qualifications are not necessary for one
as for the other. Though there are many churches who practice upon the plan, yet
there are very few, that I have heard of (who have thought much of the matter)
but will own there is a great impropriety and even inconsistency in making such
a distinction, though their sentiments may be various with regard to
qualifications. I know of a number of Ministers who are in the practice, but
not for it. They say it has no foundation in the word of God; and that men's
scruples must arise from wrong notions they have imbibed about the ordinances;
and that they continue in the practice, only in condescension to the
infirmities and misapprehensions of the people; but should be glad with all
their hearts to have it laid aside.

There have been various expedients invented to have the children of those,
baptized, who are not, according to the rules CHRIST has given us, visible
believers. One has been to have Sponsors, to profess and promise instead of the
parents. There was, no doubt, care taken at first, that they should be persons
of visible piety and holiness; but it is well known and lamented by all sober
people, that this practice is reduced to a mere ceremony, or rather solemn
farce, in some instances at least.

This was matter of great grief, it is well known, to our piou^ ^^^cestors, the
first settlers of New England; and they rejected the practice as absurd and
unscriptural; and accordingly when they came over to this place, they took
their practice for the baptizing of infants, purely from the holy scriptures;
and allowed none that privilege, but those and the children of those, who were
visible christians according to the gospel description of them; viz. those who
professed Faith in CHRIST and "walked in all his commandments and ordinances
blameless." I take notice Mr. C. often speaks of this, as a new plan, my new
scheme, etc. This is not a little surprising. Need HE be told that all the
Churches in New England were first settled upon this plan? And that the Church,
of which HE is a member, the oldest in New England, were on this plan for more
than a hundred and ten years after their coming over; and that the innovation
was made, not 42 years ago; and then that the difficulties were so great
against it, that the Church was near seven years upon it, before it could be
accomplished! --
But after some time, when the country increased, and children that had been
baptized grew up, and did not come to the Lord's table, though they had families,
many were terrified at the thoughts of having a generation of unbaptized
children; and therefore at a Synod called in the year 1662, among other things,
the major part of the Synod came to an agreement to baptize the children of
those who solemnly renewed covenant and were looked upon as real christians,
having "justifying faith," (as one of the most learned and godly among them,
expressed it) though on account of some darkness and fears, they did not see
their way clear to come immediately to the other ordinance. This was the Synod
s plan; and this is what has been the occasion, (though contrary to their design)
of such a melancholy prostitution of that holy ordinance of Baptism, in so
many places; where owning the covenant, is dwindled into a mere piece of
formality, and persons are allowed to bring their children to baptism, who
don't so much as look upon themselves to be real christians, true disciples of
Jesus Christ. That Synod, who were a number of godly and excellent men, no
doubt, little thought this would be the consequence of their agreement. It is
evident that they had no notion of pleading the lawfulness of "unregenerate
sinners coming" to that, or either of the ordinances; or that they would "sin
more in staying away than in coming." For Dr. I. Mather, who was at last, full
in the Synod's plan, has these remarkable words, "It is only a justifying faith
which gives right to baptism before God, so it is the profession or visibility
of this faith which gives right before the church." And again, "If he does not
consent with HIS HEART that this God shall be his God, he has no right to
Baptism." The reader may now judge whether Mr. C. has or has not warped off
from the sentiments and original design of the Synod, while he asserts the
lawfulness of unregenerates coming to this ordinance, and that "we have no
business to prevent their coming, because the ordinance is often blessed to those
in state of unregeneracy."

SECTION V. Wherein the inconclusiveness of many of Mr. Cotton's Arguments is
shown, from their inconsistency one with another, or with his declared
sentiments.
TRUTH is always self consistent. Therefore when a person advances any scheme
or position, and in his arguments to support it, is inconsistent with himself,
it affords, at least a strong presumption that his scheme or position is not
true. Whether Mr. C. has not fallen into this difficulty in attempting to
support his scheme, I shall, after pointing out a few things, leave the reader
to judge.

It Is evident from all Mr. C.'s essay, th^^ the grand point he is aiming at is
to prove that it is lawful for persons that have been baptized and are not
scandalous, to own the covenant and have baptism for their children, though they
neglect to come up to the other ordinance; and that churches ought to admit
them to the former, though they refuse the latter. That is, the church ought to
dispense, (at least for the present) with the parents omission of the Lord's
supper; though he acknowledges it a commanded duty to all disciples of Christ.
And yet in p. 22d, in answe^ to an expedient which I had proposed, (which was
this, "If persons must be borne with, on account of their scruples about the
other ordinance, I prop^se that they should own the covenant, profess their
faith, and let the church receive them as members in full; not half members;
and then let their children be baptized, though their scruples detained them for
the present, from the Lord's table") I say, Mr. C. in answer to this, says,
"This I look upon to be a right popish dispensation, dispensing with the
command of God, which is one of the worst things we charge upon the Church of
Rome." And yet, Mr. C. to establish the lawfulness of this very popish
dispensation, has wrote a whole book: For he owns it is a command of Christ to
all his visible disciples, Do this in remembrance of me; yet the whole plan he
is upon, pleads the lawfulness of dispensing with this command.

Mr. C. abundantly assert that baptized persons are real members -- complete
members of the church, in good standing, etc. and that they are visible
christians, p. 27. and many other places. Yet in p. 29. he in effect calls them
a "carnal generation," who would "rush into the church as the horse to the
battle," if they were not allowed to own the covenant and have their children
baptized, without coming to the Lord's table. To say, that he only means
scandalous persons, by that carnal generation, would be but a mere evasion. For
none ever plead the lawfulness of such coming to either ordinance. So that, it
seems, those who, in one breath, are called "visible believers, disciples,
complete members" -- are in the next, "a carnal generation," and therefore best
they should be kept together by themselves, by keeping up the half way
practice, least they should, to get their children baptized, "rush in" among
the communicants. And what is further remarkable, Mr. C. owns he should be
willing to receive these very persons into communion. For he has repeatedly
said, when asked why the church will not admit them in full? "The church would
willingly do it, but the difficulty lies in their own breasts, not in ours."

Mr. C. allows, as has been observed, that no person ought to come to either
ordinance, un^^^ he is a visible believer, p. 27. 65. He also grants, p. 30,
"that it is real grace that entitles to the ordinance in the sight of God, and
visible grace -- in the sight of the Church." Therefore if we have not some
satisfying evidence that a person is gracious in a judgment of scriptural
charity, he ought not to be allowed Baptism for his child. And elsewhere, that
if a person knows he has no gra^e he has no right to offer himself to renew
covenant. And yet he says p. 12, "It is not contrary to the mind of God that
children of persons unregenerate should have this ordinance administered to
them, if in covenant relation to him." If the unregenerate have to right in the
sight of God, as he just now acknowledged, then pray what sort of "covenant
relation" is that, which gives them a right, while unregenerate? He holds also,
that persons who are admi^ted to this privilege, must have a visibility of
grace, i. e. must be received as visibly regenerate, Yet in p. 17. he says,
"Why should we be so anxions to exclude every unregenerate person from this
seal?" And that they are less sinful, and offend God ^^th in coming than in
staying away. (p. 4. 68.)

Yea Mr. C. advances that, in his zeal for this practice, which destroys all
distinction between saints and sinners, visible christians and scandalous
persons; and which gives the children of all, a right to baptism, independent
of the character of their parents. So that there seems to be no necessity of
their being so much as moral in order to have their children baptized. For he
says, p. 19. "The children's membership is a distinct thing from that of their
parents; -- and to punish them because their parents do not immediately come to
the Lord's table is hard and injurious." i. e. (if there is any argument or
meaning in the expressions) As the membership of children does not depend on
the character or conduct of the parent, or his membership, they ought to be
baptized, let the parent be what he will. The child has a right to the
ordinance, because it has a complete, distinct membership of its own; therefore
it is "hard and injurious to punish the child" by denying it baptism, because
the parent is of (...) scandalous character.

In p. 16 and 17, Mr. C. has a number of particulars, showing in what respects
baptism is a seal. And among other things says, "Baptism seals saving blessings
to the unregenerate conditionally." It Is not easy to find out what he means by
this expression. If he means that those who are baptized have this truth
confirmed to them. that if they believe they shall be saved; it is no more than
what all unbaptized persons enjoy, who live under the gospel and have their
bibles. If he means, God has bound himself by covenant to bestow saving
blessings on those that comply with the conditions of the covenant; in this
sense, all mankind are in covenant with God. He may be said to have bound
himself to them ALL, conditionally, whether baptized or unbaptized, Jews,
Deists or Mahometans, if they have heard of the gospel. For the gospel confirms
and proclaims that truth to all the world, He that believes shall he saved.

The same kind of confusion, it appears to me, there is in his idea or
description of a seal in p. 67, with which word, he says, "People are so
continually dinned and drowned." It certainly seems as if this, or something
else, has had this effect upon his mind, if we attend to his account of a seal
in this place. He says first, " Prayer is a seal of the covenant of grace." And
how does he prove this? why thus; or to this effect; because true believers,
when in the exercise of faith, say in prayer, Our Father which art in heaven,
(for none else can say it in the manner he there speaks of) they set to their
seal that God is their father. Therefore unregenerats men may seal the covenant
of grace, because it is lawful for such to pray. For this is the drift of his
argument here, as appears by his saying, a little after, "Must then all
unregenerate men be debarred from these ordinances?" He says further, " Hearing
is a seal," by this he means that hearing which the unregenerate are capable
of; for he is speaking of this, as an ordinance which none are to be "debarred"
from. And what is his proof of this? It Is in these words, "Because when we
heartily believe the truths delivered, we set to our seal that God is true," i.
e. because saving faith seals the truth of the gospel, therefore hearing the
word is a seal. Or because true believers in hearing the word, ^ix faith with
it, and so set to their seal that God is true, therefore hearing, without
faith, (as all unregenerates do) is a seal likewise. I think this must be the
meaning of the words, if there is any meaning to them. For he is here showing
what ordinances unregenerate ^^ners may lawfully use, viz. Prayer, hearing,
etc. and from thence argues the lawfulness of their coming to sealing
ordinances, particularly Baptism; since other ordinances are seals, equally
with this. I would not willingly pervert his sense. But if this is not the
purport of what he says here, I confess myself totally at a loss for his
meaning.

To the same purpose he adds, " reading is a seal," and to prove it, says, they
that " apply the law or gospel to their souls (this must be by faith) seal the
truth of it." Therefore, the inference must be this, as the unregenerate ought
not to be "debared" from reading; so they ought to be allowed baptism; as one
is no more a seal than the other. If there be any weight in such kind of
reasoning, it certainly proves that all sorts of men, good and bad, even the
most scandalous sinners living, have a right to the ordinance of baptism. For
none will deny that such may lawfully read and hear the word.

But let us attend a little further to his manner of arguing in p. 18. He
insists, that if grace be necessary in order to persons lawfully coming to
ordinances, then a person has no right to come, unless he has assurance, or
knows he has grace. And if he has this, he says, in another place, what need he
come at all. Mr. C. in various parts of his book, especially in p. 10, seems to
entertain very strange notions about assurance: That persons, as soon as they
have arrived to a full assurance, are then come to a slop. As if the grand
point, the main thing that God and man are ^im^ng at, and for which ordinances
were appointed, was to ascertain the person of his own safe state; and that
this once obtained, there is (...) growth. Hence he says, "if we have this
(assurance) before we come, what need we come at all? at least we need not come
-- to get our evidences and comforts strengthened. "It appears to me, that by
what Mr. C. has wrote upon assurance, in this performance, he has very low and
unworthy conceptions of the nature and tendency of this precious grace: And
that what he has advanced, i^ unfound, and really of dangerous tendency. Is it
not evident from scripture, that the end and design of GOD, in bestowing this
grace upon believers, is to give a clearer manifestation of the glory of his
perfections, particularly of his love and grace in CHRIST, that the soul may,
by beholding his glory, be more conformed to God, more quickened to duty, more
than ever engaged in the love and service of God, and in a constant, cheerful
obedience to all his commandments and ordinances; in a word, that he may hereby
be enlarged to run the way of God's commands; and better fitted for his
attendance on all the duties of the christian life? Surely the soul, when it
has obtained such precious manifestations -- when GOD has given it an assurance
of his love, is far, very far from thinking that at " need not come at all to
the Lord's Supper;" or that it needs no further strengthening or comfort. For
the more the soul knows and enjoys of God, the more its capacities are
enlarged, its love enslamed, its desires increased, and the person strengthened
both for duty and sufferings. It is so far from thinking that it has "arrived
at its full strength" or growth, that it counts not itself to have yet
apprehended. however full his assurance, or however high his seize may
be. Is there not a progressive knowledge of God, and conformity to him, both in
the life of grace, and in the life of glory? and consequently a progression or
advancement in spiritual "comforts" and in all the graces of the spirit? -- Mr.
Cotton, are thou a MASTER IN ISRAEL, and know not these things?
This consequence, says he, hangs like a dead weight upon this opinion." And
yet in p. 30, he holds that grace, "real grace" is necessary; and that no
person has a right in the sight of God, without it. Nay, what has always
appeared very strange and inconsistent to me is, that it is well known to be
Mr. C.'s professed principle, that no person should come to the Lord's Supper,
but those that are converted. So that it is certain, this "dead weight" lies
full as heavy on himself as on us. Let him tell how he gets from under it
himself, and he will remove it from us. It has always been surprising to me,
that any should boast of this as an invincible argument against us; when, if it
has any weight, it falls as heavy on every scheme, even their own, as on ours.
For on every plan, some mental, inward qualifications are insisted on as
necessary to give a right to sealing ordinances. According to them, no person,
therefore, must come to either ordinance, till he absolutely knows, and is
assured he has that qualification; let it be moral sincerity, or whatever. But
do they ever require this absolute knowledge? If a person comes and tells them,
that as far as he knows his own heart, after careful examination, he thinks and
believes he has that qualification; will they turn him away, because he is not
absolutely certain he has it? They must do it, according to their argument. The
truth of this matter undoubtedly is this. To confess Christ before men and come
to the Lord's Supper, is a commanded duty for every true disciple of Christ,
and none else; according to Luke xxii. 19. To abstain from this, if I am in
heart a friend to Christ, is sin. To do it in hypocrisy, is also sin. Therefore
in such a case, a man's conscience will lead him to act according to his
prevailing judgment. He is obliged to do so. Mankind ever do thus, in all
doubtful matters. The reason why there appears any weight at all in this
objection, is doubtless this; Men are apt to consider the Lord's Supper as a
Privilege only, and not a Duty. If it were only a Privilege, which I am
allowed to take, upon certain qualifications in me; and forbidden, if I had not
those qualifications; In such a case, it would certainly be safest for me to
abstain, till I know I have the qualifications. But supposing I am strictly
commanded and enjoined by God, to take, if I have those qualifications; then it
is equally dangerous to neglect on uncertainties as to take on uncertainties.
The danger is equal both ways. If the question were only what I have a right
to, I might forbear till I am sure; But the question is, not only whether I
have a right to this ordinance, but whether God also has not a right to my
attendance there. If I am a real d^sciple of Christ, I am commanded to attend,
therefore to refuse it, would be disobedience and sin, whether I am assured of
my love to Christ or no. His command is not, "If ye know ye are my disciples,
do this, etc. But if ye are my disciples, do this in remembrance of me."
Therefore in a case of this complex nature, a man must act and be governed by
the best judgment he can form if he is not absolutely certain as to his state;
otherwise he sins against the ^^^^t of his own conscience and judgment; and
wilfully and with his eyes open runs into the which he thinks the greatest
danger of the two.


Yea he goes on further and says, "It is a certain maxim of truth that if a man
declares upon oath more than he knows, he is guilty of perjury, though it should
happen afterward to be true; if a man then publicly professes that God is his
God, and that he has saving faith, and does not know it to be so, though it
should appear afterward to be the case, he solemnly, and as it were, upon oath
declares that to be true, which he does not know but may be false, which is the
very essence of a lie, consequently there can be no covenanting with God upon
this new scheme, without a certain knowledge of a man's gracious state." P. 66.
And yet in the same page he holds, that a person when he offers his child in
baptism, must say, "that as far as he knows his own heart, he is sincerely
willing to give up himself and his children to God," which is as high a
profession as ever any in the new scheme (as he terms it) insisted upon in
order to their coming to any ordinance. So that if the person professing this,
has no saving faith, no "real grace" (which Mr. C. holds a necessary
qualification in the sight of God) or if he has it and don't know it, he is,
according to Mr. Cotton, guilty of perjury.

Moreover, it is absolutely necessary, according to Mr. C's reasoning, that the
forms of covenanting made use of all over the country, and formerly by himself,
should be all immediately abolished, and some new one found out. For they all
with one voice, according to Mr. C. conspire to make men perjure themselves;
nay all that ever joined to a church, have already been guilty of downright
"perjury and lying," unless they had full assurance that they were truly
gracious. For they have solemnly as it were upon oath avouched the Lord for
their God, and given themselves up to him, etc. when they did not know it was
true, which Mr. C. says is the "very essence of a lie."

Yet notwithstanding all this, he says, p. 4. "They do not come with a lie in
their mouths if they act conscientiously, and if, as far as they know their own
hearts, they are sincere in what they profess." A direct contradiction to his
account of perjury, just quoted. For according to what he says now, if they
sincerely believe, what they profess, to be true, they do not lie, whatever
profession they make; whether they have assurance or no. But it would be
endless to follow Mr. C. in all the contradictions and inconsistencies, which
he seems necessarily to run into, in vindicating his plan.

Mr. C. strenuously and repeatedly insists, that Infant baptism cannot be
maintained upon the plan he is opposing, but must be given up. P. 2, 62. But
this he asserts on a supposition entirely without foundation, viz. That we deny
infant membership: Which is a very great mistake in him; (to call it no more) I
never denied or though it of denying that they were made visible members of the
church, by that initiating ordinance. As I have before observed, all that I
ever held, was that Baptism in infancy, did not so constitute them members, as
that nothing else was necessary, when they grew up, in order to their being
admitted to special ordinances; or that they might enjoy these privileges,
whether they made any profession of faith in Christ and obedience to him or
not, or walked in all his commandments or not. This I denied; and do still.

It might with great truth and justice be retorted, I apprehend, that the
practice he is so fond of, tends to bring infant baptism into disgrace, and
that it can never be vindicated on his plan. Infants are baptized, considered
as parts of their believing parents, and as one with them, as Mr. C. owns, p.
13. The right to the external seal is argued from Genesis xvii. where God promises
to be a God to him and to his seed. Which the Apostle quotes, Acts ii. 39. The
promise is unto you and to your children, i. e to you who are the children of
Abraham and have the faith of Abraham; and to your children, as parts of
yourselves. For the Apostle says, Gal. iii. 29. "If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." There are no promises made
in the covenant of grace to unbelievers, or to their children. Whereas we may
find promises all over the bible concerning the seed or children of believers.
That God will bless their seed for their sake. See Psalm. cxii. 2. The
generation of the upright shall be blessed. So Ps. ciii. 17, 18. Deuteronomy. vii. 9,
etc. And allowing these to be indefinite promises, yet they respect none but
the seed of the righteous. Where do we find any such promises to the seed of
unsanctified men, the enemies of Christ and servants of Satan? The baptism of
infants is the seal of these promises made to the seed of the faithful, or true
believers. And on these principles, some rational as well as scriptural account
may be given of infant baptism. But there can be none, upon Mr. C.'s scheme of
the lawfulness of persons coming to this ordinance though "really destitute of
grace;" and that "their coming so, will be less offensive to GOD, than the
omission would be." On this scheme, I may be bold to say, no warrant can be
found in scripture, for infant baptism; it is a "mere nullity." For promises are
the only warrant for privileges. But there are no promises in the word of God
to the seed of impenitent, unregenerate sinners.

Mr. C. indeed, in other places says, persons must be visible believers, in
order to bring their children to baptism. But it has been shown, I think
clearly, that they are not so, according to CHRIST's description of visible
disciples or believers. And therefore the children of such, can have no right
to baptism, considered as children of believing parents. From what quarter
then, do they derive their right?

It might further, be well observed here, that pleading for lower
qualifications for baptism than for the Lord's Supper, tends greatly to lessen
the solemnity and importance of that ordinance; and administering baptism in the
latitude pleaded for, tends to reduce it to little more than a mere ceremony.
And I verily think, there is nothing in the world has contributed more to
prejudice many, against infant baptism, and to increase the number of
Anabaptists among us, than this half way practice, and the lax method of
baptizing the children of any that come and own the covenant; though, in many
places, they are in no other respect distinguished from the world. I would not
be understood by this, or any thing else I have said, to impeach the characters
of any in this place who have owned the covenant since my acquaintance with
them. It must be acknowledged they are, to all appearance, persons of good
characters and exemplary conversation, God alon^ knows the heart.
Serious persons, when they see those (who give no grounds to think they are
truly religious) stand up and make the most solemn vows and promises before
God; and then view their lives and conversation afterward, they are shocked.
"How can this be right, say they?" Can it be agreeable to the word of God that
the infants of such parents should be bro't to that holy ordinance? Can it be
lawful for such persons to offer them up to God? Surely no. This can never be
an institution of God, or agreeable to his will." And thus many serious people,
are gradually led to give more and more into the Antipoedobaptists notions --
This induces them to listen to their teachers, who appear, many of them, to be
men of real religion and zealous in the cause of God -- who, by specious
glosses on various texts of scripture, establish them in their prejudices
against the baptizing of infants; till finally, they leave their former pastors
and principles, and become thorough proselytes to anabaptism.

I shall conclude this section with observing, that Mr. C. in defending this
practice, (as many others have done before him) has naturally, and I think,
upon his plan, necessarily, warped off from Calvinism and run into sentiments,
respecting man's natural depravity, exactly agreeable to Arminian writers. Which
he would not have done, undoubtedly, had he been aware of it. Whether my
observation is just, I leave the reader to judge by what follows.

He frequently represents natural men, as truly desirous of avouching the Lord
for their God; as sincerely entering into covenant with God and giving up
themselves and their children to him in covenant. See p. 4, 66, 68, etc. Not
only so, but he represents the conversion of sinners as owing, sometimes at
least, to their not resisting the Spirit of God. For speaking of the benefits
of infant baptism, he says, "As for those that grow up, it is a seal at least
that they shall not only have the offer of CHRIST, but the strivings of his
Spirit, which, if not resisted, will prove effectual to their conversion." p.
17. This, at least, supposes, that in some instances, the Spirit of God is not
resisted by such persons, and that this non-resistance is the reason why his
strivings are effectual to their conversion. Is not this a plain, implicit
denial of the doctrines of total depravity and irresistible grace, which have
been reckoned such important doctrines of Calvinism? If this had been
consistent with sound calvinistic doctrine, it is inconceivable ^o me how it
came to be placed among, and condemned as one of the five grand errors of the
Semi Pelay^ans, See ^^o^heim, Vol. 1. p. 426. or Ba^^age hist, de l'Egl^se,
^om. (...). p. 69^.
It is doubtless true, that if sinners do not resist the strivings of the
Spirit, they will be effectual to their conversion. But where was ever the
instance, since God has been, in CHRIST, reconciling the world to himself, that
a sinner did not resist the Spirit of God; whether he had been baptized or not?
And did not Mr. C. use to preach up such doctrine formerly? What can he intend
here then, by intimating that baptized unregenerates may sometimes not resist
the Spirit of God, and so, by that means become converted? Is not this the
plain sense and scope of his argument in this place? If it be not, I am utterly
at a loss what sense can be put upon it.

Therefore, further to support this sentiment he has quoted the words of a
writer, not the most noted for Calvinism; in which, I would also observe, he
espouses the doctrine of promises of saving blessings to the unregenerate. For
he quotes with approbation, the following words from that author: "The Lord
will as assuredly ingrast us into Christ, and cloth us with his righteousness,
as we have the outward washing, IF we deprive not ourselves thereof by our own
carelessness," p. 17. The carelessness here intended, must be the carelessness
of the unregenerate, which they may put off, and yet be unregenerate still.
Otherwise there is no sense or meaning in the words. If, by putting off this
carelessness he means faith in Christ, or believing to salvation, none ever
denied that such would be "clothed with the righteousness of Christ" -- and
therefore this would be quoting the passage to no kind of purpose for the
argument he has in hand.

Mr. C. further supposes, that men while unregenerate do endeavor to believe,
repent and obey; in confidence of God's help and assistance. And that these
endeavors are gospel duties, which unregenerate men diligently perform, p. 17,
marg. "One end of this ordinance is to quicken our dullness, and excite our
diligence in performing gospel duties, viz. our endeavors to believe, repent,
and obey, in confidence of God's help and assistance." According to this,
graceless persons, (for he is speaking of those that are destitute of the
"spiritual washing") do with diligence perform gospel duties. And these
evangelical duties are, "endeavors to believe;" to which endeavors, there are
promises of assistance; for without this, certainly there could be no ground of
"confidence" of it.

He has also plainly asserted p. 19, that in infants there is no resistance or
opposition to God's grace. Speaking of infants, he says, concerning most of
them, "they have not the grace of the covenant, though there be no resistance or
opposition on their parts." This is to say, they are not depraved and have not
original sin, if our assembly of divines have given a right account of it. For
they say expressly, that "original corruption is that whereby we are MADE
OPPOSITE to all good," (Conf. of faith.)

May not Mr. C. with great propriety be advised to look round himself, and see
into what company he is fallen, by attempting to vindicate his scheme? Surely
it is a bad cause that can be defended with no better weapons than these, and
thus leads a man unawares, into the mire. It can be no great matter of
surprise, if Mr. C. should now meet with the approbation and applause of some,
for his performance, whom once he did not esteem the greatest friends of
Calvinism, and of what he has called experimental religion.

And this leads me to observe, that they who will consistently hold the
doctrine of man's total depravity by nature, and will adhere to the scripture
account of the character and state of unregenerate sinners, as being without
strength, their carnal minds enmity against God -- full of opposition in their
hearts to all holiness -- as having no real desires after it -- but naturally
opposing the Spirit of God; and as being voluntary in all this, and therefore
entirely to blame, and wholly without excuse in their continued impenitence and
unbelief; such, will naturally drop all notions of unregenerate men's sincerely
covenanting with God; and will be most likely to come into the true scriptural
plan of infant baptism. While those, who would be called half way Calvinists,
may oppose it zealously, and in their opposition, (without design perhaps) give
up some of the most fundamental doctrines of Calvinism. So that it will perhaps
appear, at bottom, that the dispute is, really, more about doctrines than
discipline, and that if we were entirely agreed in the former, there would not
be much difficulty as to the latter.

SECTION VI. Showing wherein Mr. Cotton has, in some instances, misapprehended
me, and in others misrepresented Things, both respecting me and the Brethren on
the same side of the Question.
1. I Cannot think it quite a fair way of proceeding, for Mr. C. so frequently
to represent it as our opinion, that a man must know he is in a gracious state
-- must have assurance that he is converted, before he presume to come to these
ordinances. It Is a doctrine we never held, but have over and over disclaimed,
in public and private. Neither does it follow that assurance is necessary, any
more from our principles than his own. And yet how often does he represent us
as holding this opinion? P. 6, 7, 9, 10, 20, etc. and indeed throughout a great
part of his first essay, and in many other places.

2. In p. 6. he plainly intimates that I "vehemently urge persons to come into
full communion." And p. 26. That I am for "obliging them to come immediately
into full communion." As if I would merely force them in, whether willing or
no. This is a very hard and unjust representation. I appeal to all that have
ever come to talk with me on that head, whether this has been my method, or any
thing like it. The most that I have ever said to them in these cases, is, they
if they found a heart to give up themselves to God in Christ, as they profess
to do in owning the covenant, I apprehended they might as lawfully and safely
come to the Lord's Supper, as to Baptism.

3. I have good grounds to think Mr. C. is mistaken in the representation he
has given of the manner in which this practice was first introduced into this
church by Mr. Leonard, p. 26. The fact was this, my venerable Predecessor
proposed this plan to the church first, in July 1726. He gave his reasons for
it, which are upon record. But the church acted nothing upon it at this time.
It is certain there was a great number of the church against the new proposed
plan; I have reason to think the bigger part. For the affair was in agitation,
before it was accomplished, near six years. In December 1731, there was a vote
obtained for it; not by a unanimous voice, but (as the records say) by "a very
considerable majority." And though there was a calm spirit, no bitter contentions
at the meeting when it passed, yet there were some, and of the most respectable
members too, who were against it to the last; and at the very time it was
obtained, some "objected against it," as Mr. Leonard himself has recorded. And
there is now living an aged and worthy member, who was then present and has
told me it was matter of great grief to him and many others of the brethren;
that they never could approve of the practice, and several he knew, bore it as
their burden to their dying day.

Mr. C. frequently charges me with making an innovation in the church -- and
represents me as to blame for endeavoring to bring in a new scheme, etc. and
intimates that the church were all very well contented with the former
practice. In this he is certainly greatly mistaken. It has been far from being
agreeable to the minds of all the church or congregation, for many years past.
Numbers have told me, long before I ever mentioned the affair at the church
meeting, that it always appeared a dark, unaccountable affair to them; that
they never could see into the lawfulness or propriety of this half way
practice, of persons making such a solemn profession of religion, and never
coming up to the Lord's table.

But why should I be charged with making an innovation in the church, any more
than Mr. Leonard before me? Mr. C. has never, that I know of, looked upon it as
a crime in him, or that he disturbed the peace of the church, by proposing this
practice; when indeed, it might with much greater propriety be called an
innovation at that day; for it was a thing entirely unknown to the church, from
their foundation to that time. Neither is there the least appearance, but that
the church were quite contended with the good old way they had always been in:
And that the alteration entirely originated from their pastor. (Not that I
think he had no right to make the motion, as he was conscientiously of that
opinion.) Whereas my proposal was, only to return back to the original plan of
this church and of all the churches in New England, respecting Baptism.

4. Mr. C. must have greatly misapprehended me, in that he has represented me
in p. 55. as holding that "the baptism of children, and of adults is quite of a
different nature;" and that "adults, by baptism, were entitled to all the
privileges of the church, whereas infants were not." I have said, and do still
hold, that Baptism alone, does entitle, neither i^ (...) not adults, to all
church privileges, without a profession an^ ^^^ctice conformable to their
baptismal vows and obligations. In short this long string of arguments in his
last essay, seems to be founded entirely upon a mistaken supposition that we
had denied infant membership (...) a sense, in which we never thought of
denying it.

But he will object, perhaps, of what advantage then is infant baptism? Those
that have never been baptized, have a right to all church privileges, upon
their making a professon of faith, and a practice agreeable. Ans. This
objection suppose either, 1. That unregenerate persons have a right to special
ordinances, provided they have been baptized; which is directly repugnant to
his declared sentiments, p. 30. Or 2dly. That baptism actually confers grace;
and that it is a regenerating ordinance. Otherwise how can their baptism in
infancy give them a lawful right, when he acknowledges none can have this right
without "real grace?" Therefore insisting on this objection, is only running
himself into a direct inconsistency. But I think there is a further, and easy
answer to be given to the objection. The advantages of infant baptism are much
every way. They are hereby initiated into the visible family or church of God;
solemnly devoted to God by the believing parent, who lays himself under the
most sacred engagements to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. They are hereby declared children of the covenant -- visible heirs of
eternal life, by virtue of the believing parent's covenanting with God, in
which covenant, the parent takes hold of that divine promise, "I will be a God
to thee and to thy seed." So that they are visibly introduced among the saved,
the holy people of God, and (as to men) have a visible right to all covenant
privileges and ought to be admitted to them, when capable of them, unless by
their own conduct they discover the contrary, and exclude themselves by a
manifest refusing to own the God of their fathers for their God and to subject
themselves to Christ in all things according to the tenor of their baptismal
covenant. They are, moreover, by their baptism, taken under the special watch
and care of the church -- entitled in a more peculiar manner to their prayers,
as well as to the painful instruction, admonition, care and prayers of the
parent; who is under covenant bonds to these things. Are all these a "mere
nullity?" Is such a child in no better condition, and under no more advantages
than those whom Mr. C. calls " Pagans, Infidels and Heathens?" And if the
discipline of our churches was not dwindled almost to nothing, if parents and
charches were ^^^entious to act up to their covenant engagements respecting
baptiz^^ ^hildren, would they not then, be under any better advantages for
their souls, than the unbaptized? And if when they grow up, and through the
negligence and wicked carelessness of their parents and other means, they
appear not to have the fear and love of God in them, but live in the habitual
neglect or violation of those commands which Christ has enjoined on all his
disciples as distinguished from the world; I say, if this be the case with
baptized persons when grown up, must we be charged with " unchurching and
excommunicating them" if we don't allow them the special privileges of
disciples? And must we be represented as treating them like "dogs," and abusing
them, when they are denied these privileges, merely on their own account, viz.
because they will not act up to the character and obligations laid upon them by
their baptism? If they will only do this, and there be the visible appearance
of it to the church, we are ready, with all our hearts, to grant them this, and
all privileges. If they will not do this, the sin lies, not at our, but at
their own door. It would be unreasonable, in the highest degree, to blame the
church, or those who are for not granting privileges to persons who do not
come up to the character CHRIST himself has given, of those unto whom such
privileges belong.

5. What a new and surprising exposition has Mr. C. given of that text in Jer.
iii. 14. Turn O backsliding children for I am married unto you. P. 59, he says,
"'It Is abundantly evident that this is spoken of unregenerates." It Is the first
time, I confess, that I ever heard such a construction put upon these words.

Whoever will be at the pains to read the context, will see, that these words
were spoken to a people in covenant with God; visible believers, and in that
character only; whatever their inward state was. God speaks, as to true saints,
those whom he had chosen and called, and had bro't near to himself. Therefore
he is not ashamed to be called their father. Hence he speaks to them in that
endearing manner, verse 4th. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, MY
FATHER, thou art the guide of my youth, etc. Yet, notwithstanding this dear
relation, and their obligations to God, they had shamefully backsliden from
him. Wherefore, with the bowels of an affectionate husband, with inexpressible
tenderness, he calls to them in these words; enough to melt their hearts into
tears of silial sorrow and shame; Turn ye backsliding children, for I married
unto you. God is speaking to them here, evidently after the manner of men. Loath
to give them up, notwithstanding they had ungratefully departed and gone out of
the way, he is inviting them to return. They were in the case of a wise, who
has forsaken her husband, and gone after other lovers. Her husband, instead of
divorcing her, as he justly might, is using means to reclaim her; and kindly
promises, upon her return, freely to forgive her, and to remember her
iniquities no more. For he remembered the kindness of her youth and the love of
her ESPOUSALS, and is willing to be pacified toward her.

Can it be wondered at then, that I should endeavor (as Mr. C. tells his
readers I did, soon after) to rescue these words from, what I thought, so
glaring and dangerous a misapplication; especially when it was delivered with
so much confidence, and in so public a manner, to the people of my charge?

6. I come now to take notice of a very cruel instance of his
misrepresentation, in (p. 62) Where, (though he does not call me by name) yet he
plainly intimates that I have spoken, with the most shocking contempt, of the
ordinance of baptism, in those words, "What signifies it to have an infant
sprinkled with a little water?" Any person by reading this sentence, and
observing the manner in which it is bro't in, would naturally think me guilty of
that, which was not much short of a blasphemous assertion. And very justly too,
had I spoken with that ridiculous contempt of a sacred ordinance of Christ, as
he there represents. For he has never given his readers any account of what was
said before or after the expressions he has put down. Mr. C. cannot but know
that he has not herein acted, as he would that others should do to him; but has
greatly abused me. The utmost that charity itself can do, in excuse for him,
is, to suppose or hope that, in the great perturbation of his spirits, he did
not attend to what I was speaking of at the time I suppose he refers to. Let it
be observed then, Mr. C. had then been insisting on the great privilege of
infants baptism; and had, as I though it, carried the matter too far; even so far,
that people would be in danger of thinking that they were actually regenerated
by baptism; and therefore all that were not baptized must consequently be lost.
Moreover, insisted that all baptized persons had a right to this privilege,
whether regenerate or not, if they were free from heresy or scandal, etc. etc.
In answer to which, I said, to this effect,, "That the baptizing the infants of
believing parents, though it made them visible members, yet it is certain that
many of these, when grown up, appear to be not real christians. And it would be
very dangerous to view them as such. "For circumcision avails nothing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature." And as to baptizing the children of those,
who make no profession of real religion, and appear to have no other
qualification than only their having been baptized themselves and free from
open wickedness, I apprehended they had no scripture warrant for it. And if so,
what right have we to baptize such? What good will baptism do their children,
if administered without a divine warrant? Of what advantage can it be to the
souls of their children, barely to have the external washing, or water
sprinkled upon them? Will this save them? will it entitle them to any of the
special privileges of God's covenant? If not, why should this matter be pushed
so vehemently, as if the salvation of their souls depended upon their having
this outward sign administered to them -- and therefore they must be bro't, and
the church must receive them, whether they have a lawful right according to
Christ's rules or not." This was the substance and scope of what I said in
answer to Mr. C. at the meeting. I meant nothing more. How injurious therefore
must it be, for Mr. C. to insinuate, that I had cast such sacrilegious contempt
upon that holy ordinance of Jesus Christ, as he evidently does, by the manner
in which he mentions the above passage. Such treatment is exceeding unkind; and
none can think it ought to pass without proper notice and resentment.

7. Mr. C.'s fondness for adducing human testimonies in support of his scheme,
has led him to assert with confidence, a proposition, which I am confident he
will be put to some difficulty to prove -- unless his asserting it should be
deemed sufficient proof. The proposition is this, p. 63, "This has been the
universally received opinion of ministers and churches, from Christ's time to
this day; except Mr. Davenport, Mr. Street and 2 or 3 others in the time of the
Synod; and a few Connecticut ministers, etc. in our days." By "opinion" here,
he cannot intend, merely their opinion concerning the membership of infants; for
those ministers whom he has struck off from his list, never did deny, (that I
have ever heard) infants being members; initiated by baptism. So that it must
be concluded he means they were all of his opinion in this controversy.
Therefore the proposition needs no comment. The judicious reader, who has had
the least acquaintance with ecclesiastical history, will form his own judgment,
concerning the probability of the truth of the assertion.

Mr. C. in the same page, in his manner of summing up the matter, would induce
his readers to imagine, the point I have disputed for must be given up, upon my
own concession -- (see bottom of p. 63) -- his consequence is, Therefore "it
undeniably follows that the children of such as have been baptized, are to be
baptized; and none can lawfully deny them this privilege, UNLESS they have
forfeited it by their wickedness." I allow it all -- And what advantage has he
got by the concession? I humbly conceive, that instead of overthrowing the
scheme I have endeavored to establish, he has implicitly, but effectually
given up his own, unless he will deny it to be "wickedness" to live in the
habitual and continued neglect of, and disobedience to the express command of
JESUS CHRIST; which enjoins all his disciples to openly acknowledge and confess
him before the world, and walk in ALL his ordinances, upon pain of a just
forfeiture of the character and privileges of his disciples, or visible
christians.

What Mr. C. has said, in his "challenge," p. 64, concerning Arminianism --
Atheism, etc. must be judged of by the impartial reader. After what I have
already remarked concerning the tendency of this practice, I am free to submit
it to the Calvinistick world to judge, whether it can be supported, without
running a person directly into Arminian sentiments, respecting the great and
peculiar doctrines before mentioned. But why he brings in the Apostle James in
this argument, I cannot devise; nor the pertinency of it to what he would prove.
I confess I don't see why he might not have bro't any verse in Nehemiah or
Exodus, and it had been about as much to his purpose as this. Besure I think he
has exhibited a remarkable talent at argumentation in this page. Because I
supposed, that this plan, in its necessary consequences, tended to support some
of the Arminian tenets, therefore, I am accused of charging Mr. Leonard, Mr.
Cotton, the Apostle James and myself, with being direct Arminians. Pray may not
a person hold to some things, which in their consequences, involve a denial of
or giving up some Calvinistic doctrines, without being justly called an
Arminian? And when, if he saw these to be the necessary consequences of his
principle, he would immediately renounce it? -- In no other sense then this,
did I ever charge Mr. C. with being an Arminian -- And I have repeatedly told
him, that I did not think him an Arminian, but the contrary; as I believed he
was not aware of, what appeared to me, the unavoidable consequence of his
sentiments upon this practice. And yet Mr. C.'s representation of this matter
is such, as must necessarily lead his readers to think, I had set him forth to
my people (as he expresses it elsewhere) as "a soul-destroying Arminian and
deceiver, unfit ever to preach any more;" and that I did this, with no other
design, neither, than to "throw out a bugbear and scarecrow, to prevent people
listening to his arguments." Is there no "conseriousness" or "uncharitableness"
in this? I would ask Mr. C. whether he thinks I might not, with some propriety
here, exclaim in his own language, and say -- He represents me "as merely
acting a part -- that all was grimace and farce -- that my discourse was
calculated to impose on the auditory -- to make them believe what I knew was
not true -- Lawyerlike, using craft instead of argument" -- by trying to make
them believe he was an Arminian, when I knew he was not, but only meant it for
a "scarecrow." To the same purpose, Mr. C. often speaks of my "management" --
as if it was all a piece of art and tricking. And of my insisting upon grace in
this dispute only out of "pretense," p. 29, 65, etc. Why might I not, upon
this, with equal reason, cry out, as he has done, -- that he has charged me
with dissembling with my brethren, and made me a "designing, finished
hypocrite." And then add -- "What assuming the prerogative of God -- the
rankest separate never exceeded you in censoriousness" -- then appeal to the
world whether my treatment of him does not resemble the " scratch of a pin" --
and his -- "the stab of a dagger through the vitals?" There is one observation,
which many have made, during our debates here -- and which could hardly escape
the notice of those who have been acquainted with Mr. C.'s manner of conduct
through this affair -- that is, It Is the nature of some people to be of VERY
QUICK SENSATION, when injuries are done to THEMSELVES -- while at the same
time, they are perfectly CALLOUS and insensible to the injuries THEY do to
OTHERS.

8. There is one instance more, wherein Mr. C. has exceedingly misrepresented
our sentiments; which is all I shall particularly remark upon at this time:
it is in p. 65. where he expressly asserts that we insist "upon the highest sort
of evidence of grace, as necessary" in order to a person's enjoying ordinances,
etc. What color of foundation he had for this assertion, I cannot conceive;
when it is directly against my repeatedly declared sentiments; and I have
reason to think, against the sentiments of every member of the church on this
side the question. I have publicly, in all our church meetings declared the
contrary, viz. That the very least degree of grace entitled a person to all the
privileges of the covenant, in the sight of God -- and as to the church, that
where a candidate exhibited the lowest rational evidence of it, or such an
outward manifestation as rendered it probable, on scripture grounds, that they
were sincere friends to religion, they ought to be admitted. I never was for
straining things, in the manner Mr. C. represents. I never though it a church
should insist on the " highest sort of evidence" in this case. Indeed, I never
though it it was scriptural to admit them upon " negative evidence," or no evidence
at all, it is true. I cannot suppose it any evidence at all of a person's being
gracious, merely that he is not a drunkard -- nor a thief -- nor a murderer --
nor an adulterer, etc. These are, indeed, an evidence that a man is not an open
scandalous sinner -- but are no proper evidence that he is a saint; or upon
which, the scriptures will warrant such a presumption of it, as will make it
lawful for us to treat them as such.

SECTION VII. On the Subject of the Letters, etc. and Mr. Cotton's Remarks upon
them.
I Think there is just cause for some apology to be made to the public,
especially to chose who are unacquainted with the peculiar circumstances of
affairs in this place, for troubling them with matters which are merely
personal, between Mr. C. and myself. A stranger may well say, "what have we to
do with these letters?" The question in debate is of public importance, it is
true. -- But what concern have the public, with private letters; which relate
to some difference between two persons at Plymouth? How came these letters to
be pala^ed upon the world, along with the arguments?" This has been the enquiry
and surprise of many. And I can make no other answer to the question for the
reader's satisfaction, than that they were published entirely without my
knowledge or consent. He never so much as asked whether I was willing my
letters should be printed with the ess^ys: or even hinted to me that he had it
in view -- neither did I ever suspect they would be published to the world, any
more than my yesterday's conversation, till after they were gone to the press.
But, contrary to all the rules of politeness, humanity or christianity, he has
made them as public as he could, without condescending to ask my leave. The
world will judge whether such conduct is justifiable, or whether it is not
below the character of a man of benevolence and uprightness. This alone is that
which has constrained me to trouble the reader with this section on the
letters. Mr. C. has, I am informed, endeavored to excuse this part of his
conduct to some, by saying, 1st. That I had read or communicated his letter to
many persons before -- and that people had wrong notions about it; therefore
'twas necessary he should publish all, to vindicate his character. As to this
-- I can say truly, that although these letters were soon handed about, and the
subject of them in almost every one's mouth; yet it was not through my means, but
his own. I never showed them to four persons in the world, till I had heard he
had given off copies of them to persons, who, I am told, made it their business
to propagate them through the town and to various parts of the county. And I have
no doubt of the truth of it, from some curious remarks and speeches which, it is
said, were made by some of his -- acquaintance at a distance, in consequence
hereof. So that, if these letters were made, in a measure, public, before they
were printed, it was owing to himself and not to me. But 2dly. Another method
Mr. C. has taken, I have been informed, is, by endeavoring to prove that they
were not private letters. Because I had given this as a reason of my writing to
him at first, viz. "That I had not time to make a reply to his 3d essay, in
public, at the church meeting." Whence he argues, that my letter is to be
looked upon, as though it had been spoken or read at the meeting before the whole
assembly -- not as a private letter, but as a public answer to his essay,
which he had been reading in public. Well, supposing it had been so, does that
give him a right to print it without my knowledge or consent? If a minister
should preach a Sermon, (which is a thing of a more public nature still) and a
person should be able to take it all down in writing, so that he is possessed
of the whole, as it was delivered; has he, even in this case any right to go
and publish it, without the preacher's consent? When we preach, or when we
write letters, we should be glad to know, and perhaps be consulted, if they are
like to be sent to the press, as soon as they are out of our hands. So that I
can conceive of no plea in the world that can justify Mr. C.'s conduct, in the
freedom he has taken to print my letters, unknown to me. I am willing to leave
it to the whole impartial world, whether it be christian, or manly treatment:
or doing as they would be done by.

As to the contents of my first leter to Mr. C. it contained my real sentiments
upon his manner of conduct and the things he had advanced. And I have never yet
met with any just cause to alter my sentiments upon them. After stating a few
facts, I shall leave it to the reader's judgment, whether I was wrong, in
writing what I did.

The grounds and reasons of my writing to him were these three, viz. 1. His
having delivered several things which I really though it of very dangerous
tendency, before a large number of the people of my ministerial charge. 2. His
having grossly misrepresented us. 3. Taking undue and unfair methods to support
his scheme, and prejudice the brethren and others against our sentiments.
-- These were the real grounds of my letter. I thought it was my duty, in
these circumstances, to do as I did. If I was mistaken, it was an error of
judgment, not of will. And truly if I had had a thought beforehand that it
would have had such an effect on him, and caused him to put such a construction
upon it, as he had done, so different from what I ever intended or though it of --
and to rave at me with such vehemence of spirit, as he has done in that
remarkable postscript to his first letter -- I should not have wrote at all to
him, but have taken some other method. For notwithstanding his intimations to
the contrary, I had no design in my heart, or desire to "pick a quarrel with
him." --

1. The first ground or reason of my writing to him, was, his having delivered
several things, which I looked upon of very dangerous tendency; such as these.
His teaching that it was lawful or safe for unregenerate men to covenant with
God. That all who have ever been baptized, are visible christians -- that is,
are to be looked upon as believers, if they are but free from open profaness
and scandal. P. 27, etc. etc. Such doctrine, is directly contrary to what I
have always taught my people. I look upon it as sewing pillows under armholes
-- that it has a natural tendency to quiet sinners in their unregeneracy -- and
flatter them with vain hopes that their state is safe, when it is really
infinitely dangerous. Whether it has not this tendency, let those judge, who
experimentally know the deceitfulness of the human heart, and how extremely
prone sinners are to rest in any thing short of CHRIST, and to flatter
themselves in their delusions.

Moreover, his applying the promises of God to those that never made any
pretense to, or profession of saving religion or faith in Christ: As he has
evidently done in that text, p. 29, "God shall appear to your joy." Not, of
those who have given their names and hearts to Christ. He was not speaking to
such; but to the baptized only, who had never made any public profession of
religion, or so much as renewed their baptismal covenant. -- Now had I not
reason to say, (when I heard such things delivered, so publicly, which were so
contrary to what I had ever instructed this people into) that they were of
dangerous tendency, and in my view, destructive of some of the great truths of
the gospel and of Calvinism, and tended to support the contrary doctrines?

2. The next thing mentioned, as the ground of my writing to Mr. C. and which I
charged him with, was, that he had misrepresented us. Of this also, let the
readers judge, not only from what has been already observed, in the 6th Section
-- but from what follows, -- he represents p. 26, as if I was for " obliging
persons to come immediately into full communion" contrary to my sentiments and
universal practice, ever since I have been ordained as before observed. In p.
30, he says, "Mr. Robbins owns it is a matter of indifferency" whether persons
make relations or not; and "that a church may be rightly constituted without."
And in another place he says, I have " spoken slightingly of them." This is a
gross and injurious misrepresentation; without all foundation. All that I have
ever said, was, that I though it relations ought not to be made essential terms of
communion, for if so, we condemn ourselves and act contradictorily; as we admit
those from other churches, to our communion, who have never made any relations.
As to a church's being "rightly constituted" without them, I trust Mr. C. would
not care to expose himself to the charge of ignorance of the nature of a
church, so much, as to assert, that relations are absolutely necessary to the
very "constitution" of a church; so that they are not to be looked upon as
"right" or regular churches, who don't insist on them.

Another instance of this kind, is in p. 32, where he represented, as if we
held that persons must not bring their children, unless they have a certain
knowledge or assurance of their gracious state. That "our plan supposes it
necessary." This is not a little unkind in Mr. C. when we had publicly and
constantly declared directly the contrary all along. What could be the design
of such a representation, if it was not to prejudice the brethren against our
sentiments? And had I not just ground, therefore, to say, that "he must
certainly know, we held no such thing?" For he must have heard me frequently
declare against it, as I had done at all our meetings. If the expression is
though it, by any, to carry the matter too far, I am willing to say, instead of it,
that Mr. C. had good reason and sufficient opportunity to know the contrary.
For I cannot absolutely be certain, but that he might have turned his face and
attention another way, every time I had declared my sentiment as above.

Mr. C. represents as though I was for driving the matter on with violence. I
have nothing more to say upon this, than only, that they who were present at
our meetings, are the best judges, who appeared with most violence and temper.

3. The last thing mentioned, as the reason of my writing the letter aforesaid,
was the unfair methods he took, working upon people's passions, instead of
reason, in order to establish the point in question. Of which I shall give a
few instances, and submit it.

In p. 29, he represents to the brethren, as if we were going to excommunicate
their children -- to unchurch them, and make Pagans and Heathen of 'em. Surely
this must appear a terrible thing to a parent that has any love to his child.
The thought is enough to frighten him from being of our opinion; if we are such
cruel, unnatural sort of people. But what does he ground this upon? Why truly
this. Because we hold, that if persons do not own Christ before men, and walk
in all his commandments and ordinances, they ought not to be admitted to the
privileges of Christ's visible disciples. This in all the unchurching them,
that we are guilty of. And for this, we are charged with excommunicating --
making them Pagans and creating them as "dogs and not lambs."

But this is not all -- As if he was determined to prevent the brethren from
daring to "hold up their hands" to vote to repeal the practice, he signifies to
them, that they would hereby deliver their children over to Satan. For these
are his very words, p. 29. -- "Your children are no doubt dear to you, and --
will you, with your own hands lifted up to heaven, deliver them to Satan?"
Dreadful thought! What parent, in his wits, would do this? And yet this is what
you will do, brethren, if you vote with Mr. R. and his brethren. Is not this
the plain import of the sentence? And can this be called a fair, upright way of
managing a cause? Is such a method, generous, in a disputant? If this is not
"appealing to men's passions" instead of their reason and judgment, I
acknowledge I know not what is.

But we have still more of the same kind, in the same page. "If they must be
discovenanted, I cannot help turning myself to them" -- (and then he turned
round and looked up to the galleries, full of people; and with great Pathos
addressed those that were baptized in their infancy, in these words) Isai.
lxvi. 5. Your brethren that cast you out [pointing to me] for my name sake,
said, let the Lord be glorified -- (i. e. as he explains it in the next line
but one, they PRETEND they are aiming at the glory of God -- this is only a
"pretense.") -- But he shall appear to YOUR joy, but THEY shall be ashamed. i.
e. Your minister and those of the church that think as he does; for he directed
himself to us, in these last words. Now whoever will be at the pains to turn to
this chapter, will immediately see, that in these words is contained, a
terrible threatening or curse, on the one hand; and a precious promise, on the
other. On the one hand, God threatens confusion and shame to the enemies of his
people -- on the other, he promises JOY and confort and salvation to his
children. And this was the text Mr. C. made use of, in the manner above
described: Applying and directing the promise of it, to the unregenerate, i. e.
to those who never made any pretense or profession of grace -- and the curse or
threatening of it, to me, and those of the church that were with me in
sentiment. Let the reader then judge, whether I had not good reason to say,
that he wrested or misapplied scripture, to a bad purpose.

But least the brethren should not be sufficiently terrified from voting out
the practice; he has a finishing stroke, in p. 32, which is, that they must not
presume to vote, unles they "can say upon their consciences, that the practice
sprung from HELL." -- Such was Mr. C.'s manner of treating this affair, at the
church meeting. And all the while, appeared to be in as great heat and
vehemence of temper, as I ever saw a man, on any such like occasion, in my
life. This was not barely my own, but the observation of multitudes that heard
and saw him. These are facts, which should never have been made more public by
me, had not Mr. C. really obliged me to it, to vindicate myself from those
charges which he has thrown out against (...) in his bitter remarks upon the
letters; which have made it necess^^^ that I should thus let the world know the
particular reasons of my conduct, especially in writing that letter, which he
has endeavored to represent to his readers, in such terrible colors.

And now I beg the reader's patience, while we take a view of the ANSWER Mr. C.
returned to my letter, and his conduct thereupon. There are a great variety of
things suggested in his letter, which have no just foundation. It Is intimated
particularly, here and elsewhere by him, that I had turned away, or refused
persons who came to me to desire to own the covenant. He instances in one
person, by name, toward the beginning of his letter -- but without his
knowledge, I am well assured. And who he had his information from, I am not
able to say. For that person, (who is a man of an unexceptionable character, so
far as I know, or have ever heard) has told me since, that he never had told
any person whatever, that I had refused him; neither did he even look upon it
that I had denied him, any more than I had denied the whole congregation. He
has indeed frequently discoursed with me on the affair in debate, as many
others have -- and has wished that it might be peaceably settled -- and if so,
that he should be glad to enjoy the privilege of baptism for his children. But
as Mr. C. has represented the matter, there is not the least foundation for it;
as the person himself will willingly declare, (as he has told me) to any one's
satisfaction.

Mr. C. has also, in this letter, given a very wrong turn to an expression of
mine, concerning the most godly among us, being on our side the question. It
will appear, I think, to every one who will attend to the whole of what I said
there, that I had a plain and principle reference to those in the church, who
cannot act in the affair. (See postscript of my first letter.) But if any
should think, my manner of expression conveys an idea of judging or condemning
any of the church; or a public preferring one before another, who are
professed christians -- I neither intended nor allow of any such thing; nor do
I think it justifiable, whatever our private judgment may be.

I don't know what reason Mr. C. had to insinuate that I am "not enough
acquainted with my people to judge who are experienced, good christians and who
are not." If it be so, I trust he will not say, he asserts this from his own
knowledge or acquaintance with them. Neither do I think he would have uttered
such a sentence, if he had felt good natured, or of a christian temper.

As to what he has said respecting the women of the church -- it has been
hinted to me, that some have understood his expressions, as if he designed to
cast some reflection or odium upon my character -- If that was his design, I
have a right to expect and demand an explanation from him. Though I acknowledge
it did not enter into my mind, that that was his intention, or that any one
would understand the words in such a light.

But what surprised me most of all was, that group of extravagant expressions
in p. 41, where he speaks of my "thundering Anathema, authoratively denounced
against him, for advancing such pernicious, soul-damning, destructive
doctrines." Will the reader believe it, that not one of these violen
expressions is contained in my whole letter? But what was it then, that caused
this vehement outcry? Why truly, 'twas because I was so audacious as to say, "I
could not in conscience encourage the instructions of those who advanced such
doctrines, among a people, the charge of whose immortal interests was committed
to me;" because I looked upon them of dangerous tendency. This was the
thundering anathema, and this was all.

Furthermore, what a strained construction does he put upon the abovementioned
expression of mine, saying 'it equally involved the brethren, and that I had
virtually excommunicated half the church at once." What I because I looked upon
his doctrines as dangerous in their consequences and tendency, therefore I
charge the brethren with embracing them. When, in truth, I was so far from it,
that I did not even suppose, that Mr. C. himself, was aware of those
consequences, or would espouse them.

Again, I cannot but take notice of that unchristian reflection in p. 43. where
he insinuates, that I am guilty of partiality in admitting persons to own the
covenant, or to communion. "Especially those of note," says he. My own
conscience is witness, and I trust a higher power still, that I have ever made
it my practice in affairs of this sacred importance, to treat all alike:
whether they be persons of note, or not; to make no destinction between high
and low, rich or poor.

There are several things in the remarkable postjeript to his letter, which
also merit observation. Mr C. can better give the reason tha^ I, why he
insinuates that "I had a mind to leave" my people: After it is notoriously
known, that I had publicly declared the contrary; that I had no desire, but to
spend my life with this people, if I could live in peace, and there was any
prospect of my being serviceable to their best interest: And that all reports
to the contrary, were groundless.

Another thing Mr. C. has implicitly charged me with is, breaking open a
letter, sent to him from my father. This has been industriously propagated and
aggravated by some persons. It Is necessary therefore the truth should be known.
The letter to Mr. C. was sent enclosed to me -- and unsealed -- with my
father's express desire that I would look it over, and see whether I thought it
might answer any good end to send it. If not, (as I knew the circumstances of
affairs here better than he did) he directed me to suppress or destroy it --
and left it wholly with me, to conduct as I though it most proper in the matter,
This is the whole truth of the affair; which I am ready to make appear to any
one that desires it, by my father's letter, which I now have by me. I erased
two short passages -- and should be as willing the world should know what they
were as not, were they in the least degree material to the present controversy
-- but they are not, as Mr. C. himself knows, who has since heard them.

In short, this Postscript, I apprehend, will appear, to every one who attends
to and compares it with what it refers to, a most peculiar one of its kind. Mr.
C. has, indeed by inverted commas given his readers to understand, that he
quotes the sentences from my letter. Whether his quotations are just, or
whether he has not perverted my meaning almost in every passage, the reader
will best judge, by only comparing it with my letter. He has, besure,
represented my letter, in a very frightful light. But I do not own the letter
in this dress. He has certainly stripped it of the garb that belonged to it,
and has dressed it up in one of his own manufacture; terrible enough, I
acknowledge; and then seems to have viewed and reviewed it, in this ugly hue,
till he had got quite out of all patience, and, as if unable to contain any
longer, he at length breaks forth in such expressions as these -- thundering
anathema -- soul-damning doctrines -- finished hypocrite -- lawyer like --
assuming the prerogative of God -- the rankest sepera^^ -- raw, unstudied --
young man, etc. But pray let us for a moment, get away from the noise of a
torrent, and calmly enquire, what it is that occasioned all this vehemence of
spirit, and expression? It (...) to have arisen, so far as I can find out, from
these two things, viz. My saying that I looked upon some things he had
advanced, to be of an arminian tendency -- and that I could not encourage the
instructions of those, that promoted such principles. These two things, it is
evident, are the chief, which he appears so exceedingly to resent; as if I had
herein been guilty of the highest crime that could possibly be committed
against a mortal. But I think a person must be of a very irritable disposition,
to conceive such poignan resentment at expressions like those above.

There are but two other things, which I shall particularly notice in this
letter. One is, his representing that I had "been obliged to retract some
opinions which I formely held." And the person I learned them of, he politely
tells me, was Bellamy. Without remarking upon the manner in which Mr. C. has
here and elsewhere treated that divine; I can inform him and the world if
necessary, 1. That I never espoused any principles, merely because they were
held by Dr Bellamy, or any other man. 2. That I have never, since I have been
in this place, retracted or seen cause to retract any sentiments in divinity,
which I had "formerly h^ld" -- as I have thought them, and ^ill think them
agreeable to the word of God. And 3. If I am convinced that any sentiment I
have espoused, is uns^riptural, I hope I shall always be willing to "retract
it," without being "obliged" to it; and shall look upon such a retractation,
not a reproach, as it seems here to have been intended, but as an honor to me.


The other thing is, the last paragraph in Mr. C.'s letter, which was wrote
upon the sabbath, April 12th. Upon which I observe, that it appears to savor,
not of a very christian spirit; and morover is a misrepresentation of the
matter: at least, such a representation, as will naturally give a stranger a
wrong idea. I, no doubt, did use those words of the Apostle, which he mentions;
but not in the manner, or with the design he suggests. And is it not very hard,
to have it flung at me, in the manner Mr. C. has done in his marginal note upon
it? "in a sever (says he) as his manner is when moved." So that if ever I feel
any impressive sense of divine things upon my own mind, I must take care not to
discover it, nor appear with any degree of earnestness in prayer or preaching,
least I should be reproached with being "in a sever as my manner is." How does
it look, for one who has been an old minister, (but now a hearer) to sit as a
captious critic under the ministry of a young man, carping at his expressions,
and finding fault, with no other grounds than he has mentioned above? How
discouraging must it be, to be always exposed to such cants as these -- that
"if he lived to the age of Methusaleh, he would not declare the whole counsel
of God," if he did not make more haste about it, than he had done -- That he
had never "preached fifteen twentieths of the heads of divinity" which a
minister ought to preach, etc. If these things are true, I am indeed very much
to blame, I acknowledge. But is it not a little strange, that no others of the
congregation should have found this out, and complained of it for years past?
Or if it was because Mr. C. had so much more knowledge and discerning than the
rest, that he discovered it, what can be the reason that he had never mentioned
it before? Why did he not, in a friendly manner, hint it to me, that I might
amend for the future; especially since we had "held a good correspondence"
before; and since this has been such "matter of grievance to him for years"
past? and was "no sudden ebullition of passion?" But if he thought it was owing
to my ignorance, and that I was not able to handle those points, why does he
expose my weakness, and publish it to the world? -- But, if I may be allowed to
dissent from Mr. C. I must say, that his assertion there, is not according to
the truth of fact. And that "it is in my power to prove it," not "by an
interleaved almanac," but from others of my hearers, who will be allowed to
have some understanding, as well as Mr. Cotton, and also by my own notes. So
that I think I have good right to appeal from his almanacks, to a more
impartial test: and the more so, because he has one or two texts set down (by
his own account) which I never did preach from. I have reason therefore, to
call in question the authenticity of his records, and to look upon his
"interleaved almanac" as apocriphal and not genuine.

Another remark he has, of much the same nature, in the margin of the next
page; where he repeats an assertion he had, in his former letter, viz. "That
his brethren all think as he does." If this be rightly and truly expressed, I
own, I am entirely ignorant of the minds of all the members of the church
respecting this debate; and can have no idea of the difference between a
negative and an affirmative.

Mr. Cotton, in the following page 50, exhibits to his readers further proofs
of his kindness and friendship to me, in a catalogue of charges he has drawn
up; at the close of which, he tells his readers, he "mentions these things not
to expose me, but to prevent the like for time to come." It seems it is a
preventive potion which he here intended to administer: I wish it is operation
may be salutary; though I must acknowledge, the ingredients seem to be somewhat
better -- I shall not trouble the reader by repeating the several articles of
charge, in this catalogue: But only observe, in general, that there is a
mixture of misrepresentation, suspicion and jealousy; things which are
surmised, without the least foundation: Particularly what he has said of my
praying at the church-meeting -- "sermon of triumph" -- psalms being sung at
him, etc. They are too low and even ridiculous to mention. I can with truth
declare, that during the whole of these debates, I have never once, either
prayed, sung or preached with any design to disgust Mr. C. or any one else --
but have always endeavored to avoid every thing that might be looked upon as
pointed, or intended to irritate. The psalms were sung in course. As to the
sermon, which he intimates was made in a way of triumph after the
church-meeting, etc. That sermon was made above a month before the
church-meeting had an existence; and therefore before I could possibly know (or
even suspected) what would be done at that meeting. I utterly deny the charge,
of it is being my "usual phrase to say "my friends and my enemies." -- What Mr.
C. says, likewise, in the postscript of his little letter, p. 51, I am certain
he has no grounds for, from his own knowledge. And if he had it by information,
is there not some danger, that his informer has had as great a share in the
"tristing discourse" as any one else? As to his letter being "sent back
opened," this is a very great mistake -- It might possibly be opened in his own
family, before he received it -- but it was never opened in mine; but
immediately returned to him unopened and unseen by any person in my family --
And I should probably never have been favored with the contents of it, the
challenge, etc. but as he has seen sit to publish it, with the other letters.
As to the manner and style of of it, I leave the reader to make his own remarks
on them -- and pass

To take some notice of his REMARKS on these letters -- p. 51. 52, etc. Mr.
Cotton intimates, that before these letters, "we held a good correspondence."
Of HIS friendly disposition toward me, the reader might be better able to
judge, perhaps, if I were (after his example) to publish a private letter,
which he sent me by way of chastisement, many years ago, for a part of my
conduct as a minister, which I never was faulted for, but by Mr. C. He has,
indeed, since that time, shown instances of kindness and friendship; which I
acknowledge with gratitude. And besure, I could scarcely have believed then,
that it were possible he could have said and done those things, which, since,
we have had but too sad occasion to observe, I cannot therefore, but have
reason to apprehend, from all that has appeared of late, that he has long had
some root of prejudice against me -- and that nothing was wanting but an
opportunity for it to manifest itself, as it has now done. I wish I may be
mistaken.

As to the provocation given by my letter; I can truly say, I never meant or
intended that abuse of him, which he complains of; or to "begin any quarrel"
with him; whatever his jealous mind may have suggested. Neither am I now at all
disposed to keep up a variance. I desire nothing but peace and reconciliation.
I should be sincerely glad to have Mr. C. return to us, with a kind,
charitable, christian spirit; and that we might, with the same spirit receive
him, and live and walk as brethren. I never purposely did any thing to drive
him away. And since his withdraw, I have endeavored a reconciliation, in the
presence of a number of the church -- the greater part of whom said, and still
say, that the terms I offered and proposals I made, were, in their opinion,
reasonable and sufficient, and agreeable to the gospel -- that they should
desire no more, had they been the offended; and yet Mr. C. refuses to be
reconciled and to return.

I think the account he has given of this matter p. 53, is far from being so
impartial and full, and it ought to be. The fact was this. At a meeting of a
number of the brethren at my house with him, in order to confer and endeavor
to heal this unhappy personal breach; after the affair was opened by Mr. C. I
told him, I was sorry for the unhappy difference that seemed to subsist between
us, and was willing to do any thing that was reasonable and scriptural, for an
accommodation; and would make this proposal -- viz. "Being sensible that it has
been a day of temptation and controversy among us, wherein we had both, no
doubt, said and done many things which are wrong, and which, at another time,
we should not have done -- Let us now mutually forgive each other, and bury all
that has been amise, covering each others faults and failings with a mantle' of
love and charity -- I am heartily willing to do it myself, and desire the same
of you; and hereafter let us love and live like brethren." This was what I
offered him -- and this he utterly refused; and let me know, that unless I
would go into particulars, and bring over sundry articles of grievance that he
had against me, he would not make up the matter. I told him I was not willing
to that, and refused to do it; and that the only objection I had to it was,
that it would tend only to exasperate, on both sides -- that raking open the
coals would serve but to e^crease the heat, instead of quenching the fire --
and that the only way, therefore, in the judgment of others, (both ministers
and brethren) as well as myself, would be mutually to ask and grant forgiveness
-- This I was free to do -- and thought it most reasonable that he should
comply with it; especially considering the injurious treatment, I thought, he
had given me so frequently before. He says, I thought it a condescension in me
to make this proposal. I acknowledge it -- and do now think so -- and am very
far from being alone, in my judgment, among those who have been most acquainted
with our affairs. But be it a condescension or no condescension, I will not
dispute that matter with him. I think it a reasonable and christian proposal;
and am willing still to comply with it. Mr. C. after this, persisted still to
refuse to consent to it; and pulled out of his pocket a paper, containing three
or four confessions for me to make; or articles of grievance, for which he
expected I make a distinct acknowledgment. I told him I did not think sit to
comply with his request -- and withal asked him if he thought HE was so
entirely innocent, as that he ought to make no concessions on his part? His
answer was in these words, "I shall not answer that question." And thus the
affair, in short, ended; and thus it remains.

There are innumerable other passages in Mr. Cotton's writings and conduct,
which manifest how little he thinks himself to blame through the whole affair
-- how quick to censure and condemn others and to justify himself; to aggravate
the faults of his brethren and to lessen and even annihilate his own. An
instance, among many others, of this, we may see in p. 52, 53. "Mr. Robbins may
thank himself IF I have been provoked to speak sometimes too harshly," If I
have. Nay, he brings it out, and says plainly p. 54. "I was not conscious I had
wronged him at all." And again, "I am not conscious I have exceeded christian
bounds in my treatment of Mr. R." Perhaps others may be better judges of that,
than Mr. C. or I. Be it as it may, it is certain, that most people among us
happen to differ much from his judgment in this matter.

But what a remarkable talent has he, on the other hand, at finding out crimes
in others and making mountains of molehills. In p. 70, under his 11th
observation, he charges me with "seeing with others eyes' -- never "examining
for myself" -- and so I am condemned as not being "a lover of truth;" only
because I had said, that some who have turned to the passages of scripture
referred to by the SYNOD, to prove the lawfulness of THIS PRACTICE, had said,
they could not see that they had proved it, or were to the purpose. Does this
imply, that I had never observed the same MYSELF? His observation or inference
is truly worthy a Logician, in this instance.

Yet this is a mere trifle, compared with his charge against me in the next
page, (marginal note) which is, that "I did in direct terms, in the face of the
church, give him the LIE." This is a high charge indeed: And obliges me in
vindication of myself, to say that, which I have been very loath to believe, and
would now be glad, (otherwise) to have been silent about: viz. That it is a
fact, that there has been much talk among us of late, of what he there refers
to. Many have been of the opinion, that Mr. C. (to mention none besides) has
had a design to get me away from this people, if he could. This opinion they
formed, I suppose, from the whole tenor of his conduct toward me of late. But
when he read his last piece at the church meeting, June 30th, (though the church
voted twice not to hear it) I must acknowledge, that by the matter and the
extraordinary manner in which it was delivered, I was, more than ever before,
satisfied in my own mind, that those reports were true; and that he would be
glad to procure a dissolution of my relation to this people. I grounded my
opinion upon that old, but true proverb, that actions speak louder than words.
And I did express this my opinion -- and for this he is pleased to say, I gave
him the LIE. I am persuaded, had any one been in my situation, and observed the
whole series of Mr. C.'s behavior toward me at those meetings, and since, he
would be at no great loss to conjecture what he would have, if it was in his
power. Possibly I may be mistaken; but I speak as things really appear to me --
and I believe to many others. However, I would speak it with thankfulness to
GOD, and also to my people, I have reason to believe (though most unworthy) that
I have as much evidence of the love and tender affection of my people in
general, as almost any minister whatever. -- I pray that I may continue, both
to deserve and enjoy it. And I am not without hopes, notwithstanding the late
troubles, that a gracious God will, in due time, cause all animosities and
divisions to cease among us; that peace may be restored, and that we may have
something to attend to, besides controversy, even the one thing needful -- that
that we may know the things which belong to our peace, before they are hid from
our eyes.

As to the methods proposed in the church, for an accommodation of the public
dispute, I had mentioned the following, viz. "That if the church would admit
those persons into full communion that appeared to be qualified to renew their
baptismal covenant, I should be willing to baptize their children, though perhaps
some of them could not see light to come immediately to the Lord's Supper."
This Mr. C. "rejected with contempt," as ridiculous; saying, that there would
"not be one person that should vote for it, but would be ashamed of it before a
twelvemonth." Had I an inclination to follow Mr. C.'s example, I might well
retort and say, he has " given ME the L -- e. if not several others, in the
face of the church," in saying "no church in the province practices any thing
like it." And again, -- "a report indeed we have, that one church in
Connecticut has adopted some such scheme, whether true or not we cannot tell."
p. 73. Whereas I had told him and the church, publicly, that some churches had
practiced in this method, both in this province and Connecticut. That I had my
information from indisputable authority: In the former, from the minister of a
church that are in the practice -- in the latter, from a member of our church,
of unspotted character, whose name I mentioned also, and whose futher, a
learned and worthy divine in Connecticut, has long been in the practice which I
proposed. And yet Mr. C. is pleased to say, in the face of these several
testimonies, "whether it is true or no, we cannot tell."
I knew indeed, there were some difficulties attending the method I proposed;
but I did it to avoid greater. My meaning was this -- "If scruples of
conscience call for the church's forbearance in this case, let us forbear with
them as members in covenant, not as half members. (For persons will look upon
them as half members, according to the present practice.) Let us bear with
their scruples, as we do with old communicants, who are in the dark. It
appeared to me, that this would be much more consistent, than the practice we
have been in.

On the other hand, Mr. C.'s proposal was, "that a neighboring minister come
and baptize the children of the persons in question -- and that the Deacons, or
a committee of the church propound them for owning the covenant." I told him,
this was not only an innovation, a plan, which I had never heard of in any
church before -- but, it appeared to me, would be instituting a kind of new
ecclesiastical jurisdiction: And that it would be attended with many
difficulties and inconveniences -- that I doubted whether any neighboring
minister would be willing to officiate in such circumstances. And if they
would, I questioned whether three persons, if a single one, in the congregation
would desire it -- that we had never heard any thing of this kind hinted, by
the persons concerned, or who were not of the church. -- I did not however,
treat his proposal, in the contemptuous manner he has suggested: nor tell the
brethren they "would be ashamed of it" should they adopt it.

I think the information Mr. C. gives, in the last page, "to those who live at
a distance," will hardly give a full idea of the manner in which "this dispute
terminated;" that it is a little to partial and defective. It seems to convey
an idea, that the church meeting was dissolved for the sake of peace, but not
to the satisfaction of the pastor -- that I remained "unsatisfied." It is well
known that I was not at all unsatisfied with the dissolution of the meeting;
but was very desirous of it -- that I had long though it, as well as above three
quarters of the church, that these church meetings rather hurt than promoted
the peace of both church and town: And that a dissolution, would, we had reason
to hope, put an end to the unhappy discords among us, at least for the present.
It is also as well known, that Mr. C. appeared greatly dissatisfied with the
church's proposal to dissolve the meeting and strove against it with great
vehemence. And that there never had been so much warmth and unchristian heat,
at all our meetings before, as at this time. (We have all of us reason to think
and speak of it with shame.) The occasion of it, it is evident, was, the
opposition that was made to dissolving the meeting; although the declared design
of it was, for the sake of peace. A paper had been, for this end, drawn up a
day or two before the last meeting, and signed by more than half the church --
not by constraint or persuasion, but willingly -- the purport of which was,
"considering the unhappy disputes that have subsisted in the church, and being
earnestly desirous to restore peace, we, for this end would propose and desire
that the church meeting which stands adjourned to the last of June, may then be
dissolved without entering into any further debates on the affair -- the church
to reassume the consideration thereof when they shall think proper. This paper,
being given into my hand at the opening of the meeting, and read, it was
opposed with the greatest earnestness, as mentioned above; Mr.C. insisting upon
reading further what he had wrote on the debate. On the other hand, the church
in general, not willing to hear any thing more; as we had seen but too sad
effects of Mr. C.'s Essays in former meetings -- and were therefore ^^irous the
matter might rest at present, and the meeting be dissolved in peace. However,
after some debate, the question was desired ^^^e put, and a vote called, --
Whether the church incline to hear any thing further? It passed in the
negative. After this, it being suspected there was some mistake in the vote, it
was called again, in the same words, and passed clearly in the negative again.
But so great were the complaints, and so vehement the opposition of Mr. C. and
two or three more, that the church, after this, did, in pure condescension to
the importunity of these brethren, reconsider their vote, and gave liberty for
Mr. C. to read his last essay. As Soon as he had finished, the question was
desired, once more to be put, whether the meeting should be dissolved? And it
passed in the affirmative, by a much greater majority than in either of the
former votes. And thus the affair now remains. And I cannot but think, that,
notwithstanding our difference in sentiments, and some past unhappy things
which have taken place among us, yet, if Mr. C. had not, "in his advanced state
of life," engaged in this public controversy -- and needlessly published to
the world, those Letters with the Essays -- (contrary I believe I may safely
say, to the minds of almost the whole church, and congregation too) our
difficulties would have soon subsided, and matters return to their former
peaceful state. But his publishing this book, as it had a natural tendency to
renew these things in peoples minds, to exasperate their spirits, and to blow
up the coals of contention; so it has been followed with some other unhappy
effects, which otherwise, would never have taken place.

What the issue of these things will be now; is known only by him who rules the
world in infinite wisdom and righteousness, and will govern and direct all
events for his own glory and the good of his church. But it is, and ought to be
matter of comfort to all that wish well to Zion, that while the church, like
the ark of old, is surrounded with waters, and many times tossed up and down by
storms and tempests, yet JESUS CHRIST sits at helm; and the Lord on high, is
mightier than the noise of many waters; and can say to them, Peace, be still!
-- For this, let the children of Zion pray; and at all times, be joyful in
their King.

I have now, but to request earnestly, the prayers of all that love the
interest and kingdom of Christ and the edification and peace of his members;
that God would, in his tender mercy, visit this vine, which we trust, his own
right hand has planted -- that he would give to more and more of the spirit
and temper of the gospel -- unite our hearts in brotherly kindness and charity,
and grant that we may all meet at last, in that holy world, where the church of
CHRIST are one in sentiment and affection.

THE END.

