The first BOOK of the American Chronicles of the Times. CHAP. I.
AND behold! when the tidings came to the great city that is afar off, the city
that is in the land of Britain, how the men of Boston, even the Bostonites, had
arose, a great multitude, and destroyed the TEA, the abominable merchandise of
the east, and cast it into the midst of the sea:

2. That the Lord the King waxed exceeding wroth, insomuch that the form of his
visage was changed, and his knees smote one against the other.

3. Then he assembled together the Princes, the Nobles, the Counselors, the
Judges, and all the Rulers of the people, even the great Sanhedrim, and when he
had told them what things were come to pass,

4. They smote their breasts and said, These men fear thee not, O King, neither
have they obeyed the voice of our Lord the King, nor worshipped the TEA CHEST,
which thou have set up, whose length was three cubits, and the breadth thereof
one cubit and an half.

5. Now therefore make a decree that their harbors be blocked up, and ports
shut, that their merchants may be broke, and their multitudes perish, that
there may be no more the voice of merchandise heard in the land, that their
ships that goes upon the waters, may be sunk in the depths thereof, and their
mariners dwindle away to naught, that their cods and their oil may stink, and
the whale, the great Leviathan, may be no more troubled, for that they have
rebelled against thee.

6. And it came to pass that the king hearkened unto the voice of these sons of
Belial.

7. Then arose Mordecai, the Benjamite, who was four score and five years old,
an aged man whom the Lord loved, a wise man, a soothsayer, an astrologer, in
whom was wisdom from above, and he said unto the King, I pray thee, O King, let
thy servant speak.

8. And the King commanded that he should speak.

9. Then Mordecai spoke aloud, in the presence of all the Princes, the Nobles,
the Counselors, the Judges, and the Rulers of the people, and said, O King,
live for ever.

10. Thy throne, O King, is encompassed about with lies, and thy servants, the
Bernardites and the Hutchinsonians, are full of deceit, for be it known unto
thee, O King, they hide the truth from thee, and wrongfully accuse the men of
Boston, for behold, these letters in mine hand witnesses sore against them; O
King, if thou art wise, thou will understand these things.

11. And there was present one of the King's Counselors, a Jacobite, a
vagabond, a Wedderburnite, and he used soul language, and said unto Mordecai,
Thou lie; and Mordecai answered and said unto him, God will smite thee, thou
whited wall, and Mordecai departed from amongst them.

12. And behold the Princes, the Nobles, the Counselors, the Judges, and all
the Rulers of the people, cried out vehemently against Mordecai, for they were
in fear because of Mordecai's wisdom.

13. And they besought the King that he would take from Mordecai his post, for
he was in high honor before that time.

14. So they prevailed on the King, and he took from Mordecai his post and all
that he had, and Mordecai was persecured yet more and more, but he bore it
patiently* for Job was his grandfather's great grandfather; moreover, he knew
the times must alter, and the King's eyes would be opened anon.

15. Now in the seventh month, in the fourteenth day of the month, the Lord the
King commanded Thomas, the captain of the Gageites, saying,

16. Choose thou the valiant men of Britain, by hundreds and by thousands, and
get ye together the ships, even the ships of war, the terror of the nations
round about, and make your way toward the coasts of the Americanites, the land
of the Bostonians, that lies on the other side of the sea westwards, and cut
off all that pisseth against the wall, and utterly destroy all their cities
with fire and with sword, for they have rebelled against me.

17. Howbeit, the men of Boston had intelligence thereof, for they kept their
spies abroad from the east to the west, and from the north to the south; and
when the tidings came of these things, they rent their clothes, and fasted, put
on sackcloth, and went softly.

18. And the Bostonites, the men of New England, spoke unto Jedediah, the
scribe, that he would bring the book of the law of their fathers, which the
Lord had commanded they should obey.

19. Then Jedediah, the priest, brought the book of the law before the
congregation, both of men and women that could understand it.

20. And he read therein in the street that was before the Watergate, and in
the Marketplace, and at the entry of the Fish-gate, and in the Old-South, from
the morning until the midday, and from the midday until the evening.

21. For Jedediah the priest had understanding of the times to know what the
Americanites ought to do, and what they ought not to do, and all his brethren
were at his commandment.

22. And the ears of all the people hearkened unto the book of the law, and
entered into a solemn league and covenant, that they would obey the book of the
law, and none other, both the priests and the Levites.

23. And behold when Thomas, the Gageite, was come into the land of the
Bostonites, he threatened them sore, and swore by the life of Pharaoh, insomuch
that some of the old women and children lifted up their voices, and wept
exceedingly with bitter lamentations.

24. And it came to pass that the New-Yorkites, the Philadelphites, the
Marylandites, the Virginites, the Carolinites, took pity on their brethren the
Bostonites, for there was like to be a famine in the land.

25. And they got ready their camels and their asses, their mules and their
oxen, and laded them with their meat, their fine wheaten flour, their rice,
their corn, their beeves and their sheep, and their figs and their raisins, and
their wine and their oil, and their tobacco abundantly, and six thousand
shekels of silver, and threescore talents of gold, and sent them by the hands
of the Levites, to their brethren, and there was joy in the land.

26. Now this same Thomas, a Heathen, put forth a mock proclamation for the
encouragement of piety.

27. Then Jedediah the priest, and Obadiah, and Ezekiel, and Jonathan the son
of Ebenezer, stood up and said, Men and brethren (the Lord knows our hearts,
and that we fear the Lord) ye have seen how this Heathen makes a mock of holy
things, and profaneth the GOD of our fathers, this man is like unto a Pharisee,
he prays with his windows open, and a two edged sword at our throats.
Moreover, he defiles the sabbath, in that he traineth his men on the
Lord's Day, and have ye not seen with your eyes how he stops the way side,
that the congregation may not pass, and how that he puts the yoke of cannon
upon the neck of the Bostonites, and the people marvelled and said, Fie upon
thee, Thomas! fie upon thee, Thomas! The Lord will avenge himself of such
abominations.

28. Now be of good comfort, let us send messengers into all the coasts of our
brethren the Americanites, peradventure they will commune with us, for we be
one people, and serve one God: If so be they hear us, the Lord is on our side;
but if they refuse to hearken unto us, they and we be then slaves to the
Gageites, and our substance and all that we have, taken from us, and we be
their hewers of wood and drawers of water.

29. And all the people shouted, and said with one voice, Send and commune with
our brethren.

30. Now it came to pass that their brethren listened unto them, and they sent
messengers backwards and forwards throughout the land, from the east unto the
west, and from the north unto the south, even unto the sea coast of the
Georgeites.

31. And they assembled themselves together, in a Congress in the great city of
Philadelphia, in the house of the Carpenters, the builders house, in the land
of Pennsylvania, on the seventh day of the ninth month, with their coaches,
their chariots, their camels, their horsemen and their servants, a great
multitude, and they communed together.

32. And behold while they thus communed, certain Torykites, false prophets,
and friends to the Gageites, said, Let us distract their counsels, and set at
naught their Congress, we will cause a lying spirit to go throughout their
land, that the great city of the Bostonites is burned to the ground, and the
inhabitants thereof are slain by the edge of the sword, peradventure they will
return home to inquire after their wives, their little ones, and their sheep
and their oxen, and we be then rewarded by our Lord the King.

33. And the rumor thereof spread abroad throughout all the land, and messengers
were sent day by day.

34. And moreover, that Thomas the Gageite, the Captain of the Heathen, came by
night and stole away their powder, and their implements of war, and to seize
their brethren and send them away captives to Babel, to be tried by the Heathen
laws, and peradventure hanged for supposed transgressions.

35. Then arose Jedediah the priest, and Aminadab, and Obadiah, and Jeremiah,
and lifted up their voices, and spoke aloud and said,

36. Fathers, brethren, and the children of our fathers, ye have heard of all
the evil that has been brought upon our city, the city of our forefathers, the
New-Canaan, the land of Promise, and behold this day it is desolate, and no man
dwells therein.

37. How does the city remain solitary that was full of people; she is as a
widow: She that was great amongst the nations, and princess among the
provinces, is about to be made tributary, and bow down to the TEA CHEST, the
God of the Heathen; tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of
Askalon.

38. Now therefore, if it seems good unto you, and that it proceeds of the
Lord our GOD, we will send to and fro unto our brethren that are in all the
land of the Americanites (for with them are Priests and Levites in the cities
and suburbs thereof) that they may assemble themselves unto us.

39. And all the congregation answered and said, Let us do so, for the thing
seems good in the eyes of all the people, for surely they will not be like
the Gibeonites of Old.

40. And they yet spoke unto them and said, Now, therefore, we pray ye arise!
every man of you from sixteen to sixty get up, be strong and valiant, gird thy
sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty, are ye not the men, and are ye not
the sons of your fathers, that subdued the Louisburgites?

41. And the young men gave a great shout and said, Yea, verily, we have heard
with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the noble deeds which
they did in your days, and in the Old times before us.

42. And Jedediah the priest, and Aminadab, and Obadiah, yet spoke once more to
the people and said, Moreover brethren, are ye not valiant men, and sprang from
the tribes of the Oliverians, be not afraid, nor dismayed, the Lord is on our
side, we fight the battles of the Lord, let us drive the heathen out of our
land, for they are but as grasshoppers unto us, and all the congregation gave a
mighty shout and said, lead us on; and Caleb and his brethren, ten men in
number, were sent as spies.

43. And they caused messengers to go throughout all the land, from Framingham
to Salem, and from Salem to Seabrook, and from Seabrook to Plymouth, and from
Plymouth to Nantucket, and from Nantucket to Marblehead, and from Marblehead
throughout Connecticut, and from Connecticut throughout all the cities, and along
the sea coasts, and the borders thereof, and the valiant men assembled
themselves, and marched to the relief of the men of Boston.

44. The Captains of hundreds, and the Captains of thousands, and all the
people from the least even to the greatest, came to fight the battles of the
Lord.

45. And the tribes of the valiant men from the mountains, and from the country
afar back, and as thou go down to the seacoast, and they pitched their
tents, which were of the skins of lions, and of bears, and of wolves, and of
foxes, and of he-goats, and encamped in the valley of Ephraim.

46. And these are the names of the tribes, and the number of them that were
sealed (that is, that had sworn by the solemn league and covenant) the least of
of whom could resist an hundred, and the greatest a thousand, valiant men of
war, and apt for battle, which could handle a spear and shield, and their faces
were like the faces of lions, and whose feet were like the roes in the
mountains in swiftness.

47. Of the tribe of Aminadab and Jedediah the priest, that were sealed, which
were reckoned by their geneologies, seventeen thousand and seven hundred and
ninety and two, whose staves were like unto white Oak saplins.

48. Of the tribe of Obadiah that were sealed, six thousand and four hundred
and seventy and two, and their sons, and their sons sons, that could handle the
the strong bow and javelin.

49. Of the tribe of Ezekiel that were sealed, four thousand and four hundred
and sixty and six, whose fists were as the hoofs of an elephant, and could beat
down the Colossus at Rhodes.

50. Of the tribe of Israel and Jonathan, the sons of Ebenezer, that were
sealed, ten thousand and six hundred and forty and nine that could sling a
stone to a hair's breadth.

51. Of the tribe of Nathan, and Eleazer, and Ruben and Hezekiah, and Caleb,
which were sealed, forty thousand and three hundred and fourscore and nineteen,
five heads of the household of their fathers, all chosen men, and men of valor
from their youth, exceeding Goliath of Gath in height.

52. Of the tribe of Peletiah and Zedekiah, which were sealed, five thousand
and six hundred fourscore and one, the least of whom were stronger than
Sampson, bold men, and as hard as a pine knot.

53. Of the tribe of Zechariah, the son of Joshua, which were sealed, twenty
thousand and three hundred thirty and one, men of high renown, which have done
mighty feats.

54. Now these are the names and the numbers of their tribes.

55. Now it came to pass that when the Gageites beheld them afar off on their
way, even as the sand on the sea shore in number, with their slings, and their
darts, and their cross bows, and their spears, and their javelins in their
hands, that they were astonished, and fear came upon them, and they said one to
another, Let us flee to our own country afar off, for these be not men, but
unconquerable Devils.

56. Howbeit, while the Gageites were about to flee, the spies returned and
spoke to the Bostonites, as they were on their way (for each man marched a step
with a gigantic stride of three cubits and a half, and a span) and said,
Behold, brethren, your city, the city of our forefathers, even the city of our
GOD, is safe, and your brethren, your wives, and your little ones, your cattle
and your sheep are all in health, for the heathen have not destroyed them.

57. So the rumor ceased, and the people gave a shout, a mighty shout, which
was heard even in the camp of the Heathen afar off, and they said, who dare to
spread this rumor, behold! are there not TAR and FEATHERS enough in our land
for these disturbers of our quiet.

58. And the men departed every man to his own home in peace, and the priests
returned and blessed the LORD.

59. Now the rest of the acts of the Gageites, and all that they did, first and
last, and all their abominations, behold will they not written in the book of
the Lamentations of the Elders and Select Men of Boston.

[To be Continued.]
Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlborough-Street.


