THE CAUSES OF THE PRESENT DISTRACTIONS IN AMERICA EXPLAINED: IN TWO LETTERS TO
A MERCHANT IN LONDON.

BY F --. B --.

Printed in the Year 1774.

The Causes of the present Distractions explained, in two Letters to a Merchant
in London.
LETTER I.
SIR,
AS the cause of the present ill-humour in America, and of the Resolutions
taken there to purchase less of our manufactures, does not seem to be generally
understood, it may afford some satisfaction to you, if I give them the
following short historical state of facts.

From the time that the colonies were first considered as capable of granting
aids to the Crown, down to the end of the last war; it is said that the
constant mode of obtaining those aids was by requisition made from the Crown
through its Governors to the several Assemblies, in circular letters from the
Secretary of State in his Majesty's name, setting forth the occasion, requiring
them to take the matter into consideration, and expressing a reliance on their
prudence, duty and affection to his Majesty's government, that they would grant
such sums, or raise such numbers of men, as were suitable to their respective
circumstances.

The colonies being accustomed to this method, have from time to time granted
money to the Crown, or raised troops for its service, in proportion to their
abilities, and, during all the last war, beyond their abilities, so that
considerable sums were returned them yearly by Parliament, as exceeding their
proportion.

Had this happy method been continued (a method which left the King's subjects
in those remote countries the pleasure of showing their zeal and loyalty, and
of imagining that they recommended themselves to their Sovereign by the
liberality of their voluntary grants) there is no doubt but all the money that
could reasonably be expected to be raised from them, in any manner, might have
been obtained from them, without the least heart-burning, offense, or breach of
the harmony of affections and interests that so long subsisted between the two
countries.

It has been thought wisdom in a government, exercising sovereignty over
different kinds of people, to have some regard to prevailing and established
opinions among the people to be governed, wherever such opinions might in their
effects promote or obstruct public measures. -- If they tend to obstruct public
service, they are to be changed before we act against them, and they can only
be changed by reason and persuasion. -- But if public service can be carried on
without thwarting those opinions, if they can be on the contrary made
subservient to it, they are not unnecessarily to be thwarted, how absurd soever
such popular opinions may be in their natures.

This had been the wisdom of our government, with respect to raising money in
the colonies. It was well known that the colonists universally were of opinion,
that no money could be levied from English subjects, but by their own consent,
given by themselves or their chosen representatives. That therefore, whatever
money was to be raised from the people in the colonies, must first be granted
by their assemblies, as the money raised in Britain is first to be granted by
the House of Commons. That this right of granting their own money was essential
to English liberty; and that if any man, or body of men, in which they had no
representative of their choosing, could tax them at pleasure, they could not be
said to have any property, any thing they could call their own. But as these
opinions did not hinder their granting money voluntarily and amply, whenever
the Crown, by its servants, came into their assemblies (as it does into its
Parliaments of Britain and Ireland) and demanded aids, therefore that method
was chosen, rather than the baneful one of arbitrary taxes.

I do not undertake here to support those opinions; they have been refuted by a
late act of Parliament, declaring its own power; which very Parliament,
however, showed wisely so much tender regard to those inveterate prejudices, as
to repeal a tax that had odiously militated against them. -- And these
prejudices are still so fixed and rooted in the Americans, that it is supposed
not a single man among them has been convinced of his error by that act of
parliament.

The Minister, therefore, who first projected to lay aside the accustomed
method of requisition, and to raise money on America by stamps, seems not to
have acted wisely in deviating from that method (which the colonists looked
upon as constitutional) and thwarting unnecessarily, the general fixed
prejudices of so great a number of the King's subjects. It was not, however,
for want of knowledge that what he was about to do would give them great
offense; he appears to have been very sensible of this, and apprehensive that
it might occasion some disorders, to prevent or suppress which he projected
another bill, that was brought in the same session with the stamp act, whereby
it was to be made lawful for military officers in the colonies to quarter their
soldiers in private houses. This seemed intended to awe the people into a
compliance with the other act. Great opposition, however, being raised here
against the bill, by the agents from the colonies, and the merchants trading
thither, the colonists declaring that, under such a power in the army, no one
could look on his house as his own, or think he had a home, when soldiers might
be thrust into it, and mixed with his family, at the pleasure of an officer,
that part of the bill was dropped; but there still remained a clause, when it
passed into a law, to oblige the several assemblies to provide quarters for the
soldiers, furnishing them with fire, beds, candles, small beer or rum, and
sundry other articles, at the expense of the several provinces. -- And this act
continued in force when the stamp act was repealed, though, if obligatory on
the assemblies, it equally militated against the American principle
abovementioned, that money is not to be raised on English subjects without
their consent.

The colonies nevertheless, being put into high good humor by the repeal of
the stamp act, chose to avoid a fresh dispute upon the other, it being
temporary, and soon to expire, never (as they hoped) to revive again; and in
the mean time they, by various ways, provided for the quartering of the troops,
either by acts of their own assemblies without taking notice of the acts of
Parliament, or by some variety or small diminution (as of salt and vinegar) in
the supplies required by the Act, that what they did might appear a voluntary
act of their own, and not done in obedience to an act of parliament, which they
thought contrary to right, and therefore void in itself.

It might have been well if the matter had thus passed without notice; but an
officious Governor having written home an angry and aggravating letter upon
this conduct in the assembly of his province, the outed projector of the
stamp act, and his adherents, then in the opposition, raised such a clamor
against America, as in rebellion, etc. and against those who had been for the
repeal of the stamp act, as having thereby been encouragers of this supposed
rebellion, that it was thought necessary to enforce the quartering act by
another act of Parliament, taking away from the province of New York, which had
been most explicit in its refusal, all the powers of legislation, till it
should have complied with that act: The news of which greatly alarmed the
people every where in America, as the language of such an act seemed to be Obey
implicitly laws made by the Parliament of Great Britain, to force money from
you without your consent, or you shall enjoy no rights or privileges at all.

At the same time the late Chancellor of the Exchequer, desirous of
ingratiating himself with the opposition, or driven to it by their clamours,
projected the levying more money from America, by new duties on various
articles of our own manufacture, as glass, paper, painters colors, etc.
appointing a new board of customs, and sending over a set of commissioners
(with large salaries) to be established at Boston, who were to have the care of
collecting these duties; and which were, by the act, expressly mentioned to be
intended for the payment of the salaries of Governors, Judges, and other
officers of the Crown in America, it being a pretty general opinion here, that
those officers ought not to depend on the people there for any part of their
support.

It is not my intention to combat this opinion; but perhaps it may be some
satisfaction to you to know what ideas the Americans have on the subject. They
say then, as to Governors, that they are not like Princes whose posterity have
an inheritance in the government of a nation, and therefore an interest in its
prosperity; they are generally strangers to the provinces they are sent to
govern; have no estate, natural connection, or relation there, to give them an
affection for the country; that they come only to make money as fast as they
can, are frequently men of vicious characters and broken fortunes, sent merely
to get them off the hands of a minister somewhere out of the way; as that they
intend staying in the country no longer than their government continues, and
purpose to leave no family behind them, they are apt to be regardless of the
good will of the people, and care not what is said or thought of them after
they are gone. Their situation gives them many opportunities of being
vexatious, and they are often so, notwithstanding their dependence on the
assemblies for all that part of their support that does not arise from fees
established by law, but would probably be much more so if they were to be fully
supported by money drawn from the people, without the consent or good will of
the people, which is the professed design of this act. That if by means of the
enforced duties, government is to be supported in America, without the
intervention of the assemblies, their assemblies will soon be looked upon as
useless, and a Governor will not call them, as having nothing to hope from
their meeting, and perhaps something to fear from their enquiries into, and
remonstrances against his mal-administration; that thus the people will be
deprived of their most essential rights; that its being, as at present, a
Governor's interest to cultivate the good will, by promoting the welfare of the
people he governs, can be attended with no prejudice to the Mother Country,
since all the laws he may be prevailed to give his assent to, are subject to a
revision here, and if reported against by the Board of Trade, as hurtful to the
interest of this country, may, and are immediately repealed by the Crown; nor
dare he pass any law contrary to his instructions, as he holds his office
during the pleasure of the Crown, and his Securities are liable for the
penalties of their bonds, if he contravenes those instructions.

This is what they say as to Governors.

As to Judges, they allege, that being appointed from hence by the Crown, and
holding their commissions, not during good behavior, as in Britain, but during
pleasure, all the weight of interest would be thrown into one of the scales
(which ought to be held even) if the salaries are also to be paid out of duties
forced from the people without their consent, and independent of their
Assemblies approbation or disapprobation of the Judges behavior; that where
the Crown will grant commissions to able and honest Judges during good
behavior, the Assemblies will settle permanent and ample salaries on them
during their commissions; but at present they have no other means of getting
rid of an ignorant, unjust Judge (and some of scandalous characters have, they
say, been sent them) but by starving him out.

I do not suppose these reasonings of the Americans will have much weight in
them. I do not produce them with an expectation of convincing you. I relate
them merely in pursuance of the task I have imposed on myself, to be an
impartial Historian of American facts and opinions.

LETTER II.
THE Colonists being greatly alarmed, as I observed in my last, by news of the
act for abolishing the legislature of New York, and the imposition of these new
duties, professedly for such disagreeable, and to them appearing dangerous
purposes; accompanied by a new set of Revenue officers, with large
appointments, which gave strong suspicion that more business of the same kind
was soon to be provided for them, that they might earn those salaries, began
seriously to consider their situation, and to revolve afresh in their minds,
grievances, which from their respect and love for this country, they had long
borne, and seemed almost willing to forget. They reflected how lightly the
interests of all America had been esteemed here, when the interest of a few
inhabitants of Great Britain happened to have the smallest competition with it.
That thus the whole American people were forbidden the advantage of a direct
importation of wine, oil, and fruit from Portugal, but must take them loaded
with all the expenses of a voyage of one thousand leagues round about, being to
be landed first in England, to be re-shipped for America: expenses amounting,
in war-time, at least to thirty per cent. more than otherwise they would have
been charged with, and all this, merely that a few Portugal merchants in London
might gain a commission on those goods passing through their hands. -- Portugal
Merchants, by the bye, who complain loudly of the smalest hardships laid on
their trade by foreigners, and yet even the last year, could oppose with all
their influence the giving ease to their fellow subjects under so heavy an
oppression -- That on a frivolous complaint of a few Virginia Merchants, nine
colonies were restrained from making paper-money, though become absolutely
necessary for their internal commerce, from the constant remittance of their
gold and silver to Britain. -- But not only the interest of a particular body
of merchants, the interest of any small body of British tradesmen or
artificers, has been found, they say, to outweigh that of all the King's
subjects in the colonies.

There cannot be a stronger natural right than that of a man's making the best
profit he can of the natural produce of his lands, provided he does not thereby
injure the State in general. Iron is to be found every where in America, and
beaver furs are the natural produce of that country. Hats and nails, and steel,
are wanted there as well as here. It is no importance to the common welfare of
the Empire, whether a subject gets his living by making hats on this or that
side of the water; yet the hatters of England have prevailed! so far as to
obtain an act in their own favor, restraining that manufacture in America, in
order to oblige the Americans to send their beaver to England, to be
manufactured, and purchase back the hats loaded with the charges of a double
transportation. In the same manner have a few Nail-makers, and still a smaller
number of Steel-makers (perhaps there are not half a dozen of these in England)
prevailed totally to forbid, by an act of Parliament, the erecting of
slitting-mills, and steel-furnaces in America, that the Americans may be
obliged to take nails for their buildings, and steel for their tools from these
artificers under the same disadvantages. Added to these, the Americans
remembered the act authorizing the most cruel insult that perhaps was ever
offered by one people to another, that of emptying our gaols into their
settlements (Scotland too, has within these few years, obtained the privilege
it had not before, of sending its rogues and villains to the plantations) an
insult aggravated by that barbarous, ill-placed sarcasm in a report of the
Board of Trade, when one of the provinces complained of the act. It is
necessary that it should be continued for the better peopling of your Majesty's
colonies. I say, reflecting on those things, the Americans said to one another
(their news papers are full of discourses) these people are not content with
making a monopoly of us, forbidding us to trade with any other country of
Europe, and compelling us to buy every thing of them, though in many articles
we could furnish ourselves 10, 20, and even 50 per cent. cheaper elsewhere; but
now they have as good as declared they have a right to tax us, ad libitum,
internally and externally; and that our constitution and liberties shall all be
taken away if we do not submit to that claim. They are not content with the
high prices at which they sell us their goods, but have now begun to enhance
those prices by new duties; and by the expensive apparatus of a new set of
officers, they appear to intend an augmentation and multiplication of those
burdens that shall still be more grievous to us. Our people have been
foolishly fond of their superfluous modes and manufactures, to their
impoverishing our country, carrying off all our cash, and loading us with debt;
they will not suffer us to restrain the luxury of our inhabitants as they do
that of their own, by laws; they can make laws to discourage or prohibit the
importation of French superfluities; but though those of England are as ruinous
to us as the French ones are to them; if we make a law of that kind, they
immediately repeal it. Thus they get all our money from us by trade, and every
profit we can any where make by our fishery, our produce, and our commerce,
centers finally with them! But this does not satisfy. It is time then to take
care of ourselves, by the best means in our power. Let us unite in solemn
resolutions and engagements with and to each other, that we will give these new
officers as little trouble as possible by not consuming the British
manufactures, on which they are to levy the duties. Let us agree to consume no
more of their expensive gew-gaws; let us live frugally; and let us
industriously manufacture what we can for ourselves; thus we shall be able
honorably to discharge the debts we already owe them, and after that, we may
be able to keep some money in our country, not only for the uses of our
internal commerce, but for the service of our gracious Sovereign, whenever he
shall have occasion for it, and think proper to require it of us in the old
constitutional manner. For notwithstanding the reproaches thrown out against us
in the public papers and pamphlets; notwithstanding we have been reviled in
their Senate as rebels and traitors, we are truly a loyal people. Scotland has
had its rebellions, and England its plots, against the present royal family;
but America is untainted with those crimes; there is in it scarce a man, there
is not a single native of our country who is not firmly attached to his King by
principle and by affection. But a new kind of loyalty seems to be required of
us, a loyalty to Parliament; a loyalty that is to extend, it seems, to a
surrender of all our properties, whenever a House of Commons, in which there is
not a single member of our choosing, shall think fit to grant them away without
our consent, and to a patient suffering the loss of our privileges as
Englishmen, if we cannot submit to make such surrender. We were separated too
far from Britain by the ocean, but we were united strongly to it by respect and
love, so that we could at any time freely have spent our lives and little
fortunes in its cause; but this unhappy new system of politics tends to
dissolve those bands of union, and to sever us forever. Woe to the man that
first adopted it! Both countries will long have cause to execrate his memory.

These are the wild ravings of the at present half distracted Americans. To be
sure no reasonable man in England can approve of such sentiments, and, as I
said before, I do not pretend to support or justify them; but I sincerely wish,
for the sake of the manufactures and commerce of Great Britain, and for the
sake of the strength a firm union with our growing colonies would give us, that
those people had never been thus needlessly driven out of their senses.

F. B.

FINIS.

