A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF NEW YORK, RELATIVE
TO THEIR OBTAINING THE JURISDICTION OF THAT LARGE DISTRICT OF LAND, TO THE
WESTWARD FROM CONNECTICUT RIVER, Which, antecedent thereto, had been patented
by his Majesty's Governor and Council of the Government of NEW HAMPSHIRE.

AND ALSO, Of the monopolizing Conduct of the Government of New York, in their
subsequently patenting Part of the same Land; and oppressing the Grantees and
Settlers under New Hampshire.

TOGETHER WITH Arguments demonstrating that the Property of those LANDS was
conveyed from the Crown to the New Hampshire Grantees, by Virtue of their
respective Charters.

WITH REMARKS on a Pamphlet entitled, "A State of the Right of the Colony of
New York," etc. and on the Narrative of the Proceedings subsequent to the royal
Adjudecation, concerning the Lands to the Westward of Connecticut River; lately
usurped by New Hampshire. Intended as an Appendix to the General Assembly's
State of the Right of the Colony of New York, (with Respect to it is Eastern
Boundary on Connecticut River, so far as concerns the late Encroachments under
the Government of New Hampshire) published at their Session, 1773.

By ETHAN ALLEN.

BENNINGTON, 23d September, 1774.

HARTFORD: Printed by E^^N, WATSON, near the Great Bridge.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
LIEUTENANT Governor Colden represented to his Majesty and Privy Council, that
it would be greatly to the Advantage of the Inhabitants of the District of Land
to the Westward of Connecticut River, which had been granted by the Government
of New Hampshire, to be under the Jurisdiction of the Province of New York, and
that Connecticut River was a good and certain Boundary line to divide the
respective Provinces; and furthermore, that Hudson's River was navigable a
great Way into the Country; and that the Situation of the New Hampshire Grants
was such as would naturally constitute that River the Center of Trade and
Commerce, for the Inhabitants of those Grants; by the Navigation of which they
could easily send Exports to the City of New York, and receive and return such
Articles as they needed: And that it would therefore be much more convenient
and happy for them to be under the Jurisdiction of New York, etc.

WITH Respect to the Southwest Part of the District of Land aforesaid it must
be confessed that Hudson's River must constitute the Center of Trade, etc. to
the Inhabitants thereof. But Three Qurters or more of that District of disputed
Lands, from the Contiguousness thereof to Lake Champlain, and remote Situation
from Hudson's River, equally constitute Lake Champlain, Montreal, etc. the
Center of Trade for its Inhabitants. -- Furthermore, it is no Way incompatable,
provided the Inhabitants of the Southwest Quarter of the District aforesaid
should Trade at New York, although they may be supposed to be under the
Jurisdiction of New Hampshire. The following Exhibitions, will undoubtedly
convince the impartial Reader that the said Inhabitants would be under vastly
greater Advantage, to trade at New York, or any where else, on Proviso they
should be re-annexed to the Government of New Hampshire; for then they would
peaceably enjoy the Right of soil of Lands they possess, which, under the
Jurisdiction of New York they cannot. A Number of Families that have spent
their Substance in purchasing Lands of the Government of New Hampshire, and in
removing from a great Distance to the Premises, and in making Improvements
thereon; provided they should be disinherited, would make a very indifferent
Figure trading at New York.

HIS Majesty, ever graciously disposed to promote the Interest and Good of his
Subjects, and viewing the Establishment of the jurisdictional Line between the
respective Governments, as not interfering with the private Property of his
Subjects, and in this View of the Case, perceiving a manifest Convenience, at
least for a Part of that District, to be annexed to the Province of New York;
and the Government of New Hampshire not being notified of Trial (which is
supposed to be owing to the Neglect of their Agent) by which Means his Majesty
and Council could have no Information but from the Representations from
New York; came to a Determination of the jurisdictional Line Exparte; which is
probably the Cause why it extended so far East as the west Banks of Connecticut
River. This Event proved exceeding unfortunate to the New Hampshire Settlers:
From which they may compute the Date of their Oppression from the Government of
New York; this put it in the Power of that crafty, desinging, and monopolizing
Government, to exercise that Usurpation toward the Inhabitants aforesaid,
exhibited in the following Sheets.

No sooner had New York obtained the Jurisdiction, than Governor Colden began
to Patent, to certain celebrated Attorneys and principal Gentleman in the
Province, the very Lands on which the New Hampshire Settlers dwelt; and it is a
more inexcusable and complicated Wickedness in Governor Colden; inasmuch as but
a little before he persuaded his graciously disposed Majesty into an Opinion
that it would be for the Advantage and Happiness of the Settlers aforesaid to
be under the Jurisdiction of New York. A complaint of the Conduct of the
Government of New York, relative to their laying Patent upon Patent, as
aforesaid, being laid before his Majesty, who with the Advice of his Privy
Council was graciously pleased to prohibit the Government of New York from
Patenting any of the said District of Land patented by the Governor of
New Hampshire as aforesaid, on Pain of his Majesty's highest Displeasure.
Notwithstanding, the same Lieutenant Governor Colden, Governor Dunmore, and
Governor Tryon, have, each and every of them, in their respective Turns in the
Administration, presumed to violate the said Royal Command, by Patenting to
certain of their own Favorites and Gentlemen of Influence, sundry valuable
Tracts of Land contained in, and belonging to the prohibited Premises; the most
of which Land being at the Time of patenting in actual Possession and Occupancy
by People claiming the same Lands by Virtue of prior Patents from the
Government of New Hampshire.

NEXTLY, in the Course of this Narrative it is necessary to take a
retrospective View to July Term, in the Year 1769, at which the Claimants under
New York, being Non-residents, brought Actions of Ejectment in the Supreme
Court against sundry of the Claimants under New Hampshire, who were in actual
Possession of the contested Premises: but part if not all of the Judges and
Attorneys being interested in the said subsequent Patents from the Government
of New York, and some of the principal Attorneys, Patentees of the identical
Patents then on Trial. And the Plaintiffs appearing in great Fashion and State,
which, together with their Fraternity of Land-monopolizers, made a briliant
Appearance. But the Defendants appearing in but ordinary Fashion, having been
greatly fatigued by hard Labor, wrought on the disputed Premises, made a very
disproportionable Figure at Court; and, in fine, Interest, Connection, and
Grandeur, easily turned the Case against the forlorn Defendants: The whole
District of Inhabitants were greatly alarmed at the Event that had begun to
take Place, were in great Consternation, each Individual reading his own
intolerable Destruction from that which had already began.

STILL there was more Actions of Ejectment commenced against sundry of the
Inhabitants, and the Sheriff of Albany County, by special Order from the
Governor, was raising the Militia of the County to dispossess the Defendants
aforesaid, of their Tenements. This was a most melancholy Scene -- Women
lamenting over their Children, and they crying; and Men pierced to the Heart
with the most pungent Grief and Affection for them, and bitter Indignation at
the approaching Tyranny of New York. And what renders the Reflection of the
Conflict more doleful, is the Consideration of the extreme Fatigue, Hunger, and
infinite Hardships the Inhabitants had undergone in the Settlement and
Cultivation of a Wilderness Country: It still adds a twinge to the Smart to
take a retrospect on the Interim; and view the Attorneys and wealthy Gentlemen
in the Province (and most of them in the City) of New York "which fared
sumptuously every Day" perusing the old obsolete and abdicated Charter from
King Charles to the Duke of York, and inspecting into the Cabots and Hudson's
exploring this Continent; and withal, inspecting closely, whether in ancient
Time some Dutchman had not Possession of some part of the abdicated Premises;
and by such round-about and salacious Pretenses of deducing a Title, planing
the Ruin of the Inhabitants aforesaid. -- But to return to the Sheriff and the
Posse of Albany County, who were in motion to dispossess the Inhabitants,
Defendants aforesaid, and deliver their Tenements to the Claimants under
New York. The Inhabitants being thus drove to the Extremity of either quiting
their Country and Possessions, or make forceable Opposition to the Sheriff and
Posse. In this State of Desperacy they put on Fortitude, and chose the latter
Expedient, and managed with that Economy that they defeated the Sheriff in
dispossessing them, without Bloodshed: Though it should be confessed that this
Event was but partly owing to the Fortitude of the Inhabitants; the greatest
Reason was this, the People of the Government in general (but particularly
those that compose the Posse of the said County of Albany) were fully persuaded
and conscious, that the Cause of the Inhabitants was just; and that the
New York Patentees was Oppressive and unjust: And therefore they would not
hazard their lives to defend them in such an Usurpation of the Rights of their
fellow Men.

THERE had before this time been several lesser Combinations of the People of
those Grants to defend their Persons and Properties from the Encroachments of
New York, which by them are called by the opprobrious Names of Riots, Mobs,
Rebellion, Felony, etc -- After the ineffectual Muster of the Posse, the
Land-Monopolizers in the Colony of New York, adopted different Measures to
accomplish their Designs; perceiving they could not raise a Militia, that would
Fight for the Title of their Subsequent Patents, and they being a cringing,
fawnig, deceitful Fraternity; not enured to the Horrors of War, or any thing
Heroic, durst not Fight for their own Claims: Their accustomed Way, to carry
Paints, being to deceive, cheat and over reach the Commonality of their
Species, under a Pretense of Law, Justice, good Government, and a great
pretended Zeal of Loyalty, etc. They were therefore obliged to follow their old
beaten Road of Politics, and by their Influence, caused to be indicted as
Rioters, every of the most bold, spirited and leading Men, who were active in
defending either their Country or themselves, against their most egregious and
intreiguing Wiles; hopeing to make such an Example of them thereby as to
frighten the Rest into their despotic Measures. -- The Inhabitants in general
viewing this to be their Policy, guarded against it, and were active in
defending themselves, their Friends and Neighbors so indicted, being fully
persuaded that the Fraternity of New York Patentees were the Fomenters and
Planers of those Indictments; and that they eventually, by such Stratagems,
designed to avail themselves of the Fee-simple of the Lands which they, the
aforesaid Inhabitants possessed. And as for the New York Patentees, and such
part of the Authority and People as they could Influence, they were active,
endeavoring by all and every Method to apprehend the Rioters (so called) and
punish them as Criminals: The Struggles that ensued between the Parties
relative to taking and defending Rioters, terminated in Wrath, Strife, and
Ill Will: The Consequences arising therefrom, (which are too prolix to be
inserted) are very ingeniously summed up in these Words, "Where Envying and
Strife is, there is Confusion and every Evil Work." Though it is common (and
almost without Exception) for both Parties to be more or less blameable in so
long and spirited a Controversy; yet in the Instances before us, it is beyond
Dispute certain, that the Yorkers act offensively, and the New Hampshire
Settlers defensively, which will more fully appear.

BUT to shorten this Narration, and yet make it intelligible, and exhibit to
View, that those Gentlemen interested in the Lands contained in the
New Hampshire Grants, by subsequent Patents from the Government of New York,
have extended their Influence into the General Assembly of the Government, and
sway that whole Legislative Body; the following Votes and Proceedings of that
Assembly are here transcribed; and also, the Votes and Proceedings of the
General Committee for the Inhabitants of the New Hampshire Grants in Answer
thereto: And likewise, the Acts passed by the Legislative Body aforesaid, the
9th of March Ultimo, and Remarks on the same; which here follow in their order,
as they were published in sundry public Newspapers in America.

FROM the New Hampshire Gazette, No. 914.
" At a General Meeting of the Committee for the several Townships on the West
Side of the Range of Green Mountains granted under the Great Seal of the
Province of New Hampshire, held at the House of Mr. Eliakim Wellers in
Manchester, on the 1st Day of March, A. D. 1774; and afterward, by
Adjournment, at the House of Capt. Jehiel Hawley, in Arlington, on the third
Wednesday of the same Month; at which several Times, and Places, the New York
Mercury No. 1163, was produced; which contains an Extract from the Votes and
Proceedings of the General Assembly of the Colony of New York, which is as
follows, viz.

"DIE SABATI, 10 Ho. A. D. 5th February, 1774.
"MR. Brush, (in behalf of Mr. Clinton, Chairman) from the Grand Committee,
reported, that he was directed by the said Committee, to make the following
Report to the House, viz. That the said Committee having taken into
Consideration, the Petition of Benjamin Hough, in behalf of himself, and many
of his Majesty's Subjects, inhabiting the County of Charlotte, and the
North-Eastern District of the County of Albany; complaining of many Acts of
Outrage, Cruelty, and Oppression, committed against their Persons and
Properties by the Bennington MOB, and the Dangers and Injuries to which they
are Daily exposed, and imploring that this House will take them under their
Protection, and secure them against future Violence; and the said Committee,
having also duly considered the several Proofs and Depositions presented in
support of the Truth of the said Petition, do therefore Resolve,

"1, THAT it appears to this Committee, that there at present prevails in part
of the County of Charlotte, and in the North-Eastern District of the County of
Albany, a dangerous and destructive Spirit of Riot and Licentiousness,
subversive of all Order and good Government; and that it is become an
intolerable Grievance, which requires immediate Redress. --

"2, RESOLVED, That it appears to this Committee, that many Acts of Outrage,
Cruelty, and Oppression have been there perpetrated by a Number of lawless
Persons, calling themselves the Bennington MOB, who have seized, insulted, and
terrified several Magistrates and other civil Officers, so that they dare not
exercise their respective Functions, risqued Prisoners for Debt, assumed to
themselves military Commands, and judicial Power, burned and demolished the
Houses and Property, and beat and abused the Persons of many of his Majesty's
Subjects, expelled them from their Possessions, and put a Period to the
Administration of Justice, and spread Terror and Destruction through that Part
of the Country which is exposed to their Oppression.

"3, RESOLVED, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the Complainants
before this House and others, who inhabit Part of that Colony, and from Respect
to Government, will not countenance or be concerned in the said riotous
Proceedings, are exposed from the Violence of the Rioters to eminent Danger,
both in Persons, and Properties, and that they stand in Need of immediate
Protection and Succor.

"4, RESOLVED, That it appears to this Committee, that Ethan Allen, Seth
Warner, Remember Baker, Robert Cochran, Peleg Sunderland, Silvanus Brown, James
Breakenridge, and John Smith, are principal Ringleaders of, and Actors in the
Riots and Disturbances aforesaid, and that it is therefore the Opinion of this
Committee, that an humble Address be presented to his Excellency, desiring that
He would be pleased to issue a Proclamation, offering a Reward of Fifty Pounds
for apprehending and securing any or either of the Persons above named, in his
Majesty's Goal in Albany; and commanding the Magistrates, and other Civil
Officers of the Counties of Albany and Charlotte, to be active and vigilent in
suppressing the said Riots, and preserving the Public Peace and good Order, as
well as for bringing to Justice the Perpetrators and Authors of said Riots.

"5, RESOLVED, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that a Bill be brought
in, more effectually to suppress the said riotous and disorderly Proceedings,
maintain the free Course of Justice, and for bringing the Offenders to condign
Punishment; which Report he read in his Place, and afterward delivered it in at
the Table, where the said Resolutions were severally read a Second Time,
Resolved that this House does agree with the Committee in their said
Resolutions.

"ORDERED, That a Bill be brought in, pursuant to the last Resolution, and that
Mr. Brush, and Col. Ten Broeck, prepare and bring in the same. Ordered, That
Capt. Delancey and Mr. Walton, wait on his Excellency the Governor with the
foregoing Address and Resolutions of the House."

Mr. Nathan Clark, Chairman of the Committee of the New Hampshire Settlers
aforesaid, ordered the Clerk to read the Resolves and Votes aforesaid, to the
general Committee, which was accordingly read sundry Times, and the following
Draught being presented in Answer thereto, to the Public Meeting; Seven
Persons were selected and chosen out of the said general Committee, to examine
the same, and report their Opinion thereon, which here follows.

"WHEN we consider the numberless Troubles, and almost insurmountable
Difficulties which our infant Settlements have been forced to struggle with,
since its first Beginning, which have been occasioned by an unequal and biassed
Administration of Law, ever since our unhappy Misfortune of being annexed to a
Government in which the Interest of the greater Part of the leading Gentlemen
thereof are in direct Opposition to our's. The tyrannical Measures they take to
enslave us, (we hope) will not fail to justify us in the following Arguments
and Resolves thereon; for we think it an intolerable Hardship, and Piece of
inhuman Cruelty, that we cannot be said to give sufficient Proof of our Loyalty
and Obedience to Government but at the Resignation of our whole Fortunes, in
the Purchase and Improvement of which, we have suffered an Infinity of
Hardships. Yet, at the same Time, impressed with a Sense of Gratitude, we
return our thankful Acknowledgment to these worthy Gentlemen, Governor Tryon,
and sundry of His Majesty's honorable Council, for the Province of New York,
for their signal Favors to us in some Time past; which has, in some Degree,
alleviated and supported us, under our heavy Troubles and Oppressions. But when
we consider that his Excellency is about to embark for Great Britain, and while
we view the Spirit of the General Assembly, in their Resolves; we cannot but
reflect with some Regret, on what may of Consequence prove the Result (without
an Alteration) of their present Opinion; but there are scarce any Circumstances
that entirely exclude Hope; therefore we are not yet in total Despair: For this
Moment we happily call to Mind, that the General Assembly of the same Province,
about two Years ago, did annex all that Part of the Bay Province, West of
Connecticut River, to that UNLIMITED County of Albany; but their avaricious
Grappling not being of a sufficient Strength for such an unreasonable Burden,
it failed, by which they lost their ideal Booty.

"THE candid Reader will doubtless observe, that in the Resolves of the
Assembly aforesaid, there is not a single Word mentioned in Regard to the Title
of the Land contested for, but that they level all their Spleen, and point all
their Malice at notorious Rioters, as they call them, and make a pretended Show
and Figure, as though they were great Sticklers for good Order and Government;
although at the same Time every Person of common Sense, who has had any
Acquaintance and Knowledge of the Controversy, absolutely knows, that our
goodly Land, with the Labor thereon, is the only subject Matter, and grand
Object of the whole Controversy; and give the New-Yorkers but that, and the
Matter would be accomplished to their eternal Satisfaction; and it is presumed
the Words Riotous, Disorderly, Licentious, etc. would not be printed again on
account of the New Hampshire Grantees and present Occupants, for the whole
Course of the succeeding Century.

"FOR the Truth of the Case is, the Executors of the Law, are most (if not all)
of them the pretended Claimants to the Lands whereon the New Hampshire Grantees
and Occupants dwell, and their Judgments on Writs of Ejectment, brought by the
New York Patentees, have not hitherto failed to correspond with their imaginary
Interests; but were they honest Men they would not undertake to be Judges in
their own Case, or in any other wherein the Resolution thereof would make a
President, for their own, especially in Title of Land wherein Judge and
Plaintiff are connected in one common Interest: such a Distribution of Law is
contrary to the Law of Reason and Nations. --

"Therefore our Case stands thus, if we submit to their Execution of Law, and
become obedient and submissive Subjects of their designing Government, we must
soon yield to be their Tenants and Slaves; and we cannot see Reason to conform
to any Law, or such Branches of it, as will apparently bring us and our
Posterity into Bondage, or manifestly deprive us of our Property; but inasmuch
as we boldly adhere to the Maintenance of our Property, which to us is very
precious, as it would be to the New-Yorkers, was it in their hands; we find it
is immediately recommended to the Governor of the Province by the General
Assembly, to issue his Proclamation, Offering therein large Sums of Money to
apprehend those notorious Rioters (as they are pleased to style them) but any
one who has had Opportunity to read the Stipulation and particular Articles of
the public Faith, pledged by the Government of New York to the New Hampshire
Grantees and Settlers, dated in July Anno Domini 1772, will immediately find a
sufficient Reason for the Governor's not signing such a Proclamation; for it
must indeed be shocking to common Sense when the Reader comes to observe what
notorious Complaints, and most horrid Accusations are set forth in the Resolves
of the General Assembly of New York, mentioned in the fore Part of this Paper,
against Thousands of hard laboring, industrious, honest Peasants, who are in
Truth loyal Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, for their Violations of Law
and Government; when at the same Time the following express Orders from his
Most Sacred Majesty, to that litigious Government of New York, will plainly
show that they do not make the least Hesitation, to rebel and act in direct
Opposition to the Authority of the Crown, when (as in the present Case) they
show a Disposition to take Advantage of the minor Part of those under their
Government; and throw them into Contention and Disorder; and thereby build
their Fortunes on the Ruin of the pretended Aggressors; and all under the
specious Pretense of good Order and Government which is in Fact what they
eventually aim at, as will appear by the following Order.

" At a Court at St. James's, the 24th Day of July, 1767.
PRESENT,

The KING's Most Excellent Majesty, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor,
Duke of Queensbury, Duke of Ancester, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Litchfield,
Earl of Bristol, Earl of Shelburne, Viscount Falmouth, Viscount Barrington,
Viscount Clarke, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans Stanley, Esquire
"THE Petition and Report thereon by the Lords of Trade and Plantation Affairs,
is too prolix to be inserted in this Paper, the royal Order is therefore only
transcribed which is as Follows.

"His Majesty taking the said Report into Consideration, was pleased, with the
Advice of his Privy Council, to approve thereof, and does hereby strictly
charge, require and command, that the Governor or Commander in Chief of his
Majesty's Province of New York, for the Time being, do not upon Pain of his
Majesty's highest Displeasure, presume to make any Grant whatsoever, of any
Part of the Lands described in the said Report, until his Majesty's further
Pleasure shall (...) concerning the same.

A true Copy, WILLIAM SHARP,
Attest GEO. BANYAR, Dep. Sec'ry.

"NOTWITHSTANDING this Prohibition, and one or two more of the same general
Import, and from the same Authority, the Government of New York have lapped
their Patents on the New Hampshire Charters, and in Consequence thereof demand
at Common Law, the Lands on which the New Hampshire Grantees and Occupants
dwell; and from hence has arisen the numerous Troubles and Disturbances,
between the Government of New York, and its discontented Subjects, the Settlers
under New Hampshire. This has also been the Source of all Licentiousness and
Confusion, Riotousness, etc. complained of by that Government, against the
Settlers aforesaid.

"AND whereas the true State of our Grants has been already laid before the
worthy Lords of the Board of Trade and Plantation, and they having considered,
and wisely deliberated upon its several Circumstances, did on the Third Day of
December, A. D. 1772, make their Report in Favor of the New Hampshire
Grantees, to his most Gracious Majesty, whose Royal Confirmation we daily
expect, and on the Credit and good Faith of this Report, many Hundreds of
industrious (and many of them wealthy) Families, have purchased and moved upon
the New Hampshire Grants, nothing doubting of that Title.

"We therefore humbly report to the said General Committee of the New Hampshire
Grants, as our Opinion, 1. That as we ever have, so for the future we will
remain loyal and dutiful Subjects, to our most rightful Sovereign GEORGE the
Third, and demean Ourselves agreeable to the good and wholesome Laws of the
Realm, and sight for the Honor and Dignity of his Majesty's Crown and
Government, at all Times when there may be a Call for it, viewing him as our
political Father, and relying on him to be protected in our Property.

"2, THAT as we purchased our Lands of One of his Majesty's Governors, and on
the good Faith of the Crown of Great Britain, we are determined to maintain
those Grants, against all Opposition, until his Majesty's Royal Pleasure shall
be known on the Premises.

"AND whereas we have never made any further Resistance to Government, than the
Law of Self-Preservation, which the Law of GOD and Nature enjoins on every
intelligent, wise and understanding Being; we therefore are fully of the
Opinion to resolve,

3, THAT such of the Magistrates, and governmental Authority of the Province of
New York, as have pursued, and have been accessory in the Scheme of indicting
our Friends and Neighbors as Rioters; and have by Intrigue and Stratagem, of
various Sorts, endeavored to take them, and punish them as Criminals; thereby
to dishearten and terrify the New Hampshire Settlers to that Degree, that they
may tamely be disinherited; have acted contrary to the Spirit and Design of the
good and righteous Laws of Great Britain, which, under a just Administration,
never fail to secure the Liberty and Property of the Subject; are thereby
guilty of great Inhumanity to its respective Subjects. We therefore resolve,
That as a Country, we will stand by, and defend our Friends and Neighbors, so
indicted, at the Expense of our Lives and Fortunes. And we would recommend it
to the General Assembly of the Province of New York, to wait the Determination
of his Majesty, relative to the Title of those Lands, and desist from taking us
as Rioters, to prevent the unhappy Consequences that may result from such an
Attempt.

"AND Fourthly, and lastly, Resolved, That for the future, every necessary
Preparation be made, and that our Inhabitants hold themselves in Readiness, at
a Minute's Warning, to aid and defend such Friends of our's, who, for their
Merit to the great and general Cause, are falsely denominated Rioters; but that
we will not act any Thing, more or less, but on the Defensive, and always
encourage due Execution of Law, in civil Cases, and also in criminal
Prosecutions, that are so indeed; and that we will assist, to the utmost of our
Power, the Officers appointed for that Purpose.

"THE foregoing Arguments, Narrations and Resolves, being laid before the
General Committee of the New-Hamshire Grants, and was read sundry Times, and
carefully examined. And after mature Deliberation, Mr. Clark, Chairman, put the
Votes to Trial, whether the foregoing was approved of, as an Answer to the
Resolves of the General Assembly of the Province of New York? And it was passed
in the Affirmative. And it was furthermore the Advice of this Committee, that
the foregoing be forthwith exhibited in the public Papers, to the Intent that
all Officers, Magistrates and Persons whatsoever may know that if they presume
to take the Rioters aforesaid, they do it on their Peril.

Certified per NATHAN CLARK, Chairman. JONAS FAY, Clerk.

Bennington, April 14, 1774.
The following LAW of the Colony of New York, was passed the 9th Day of March,
1774.
"An ACT for preventing tumultuous and riotous Assemblies in the Places therein
mentioned, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the Rioters.

" WHEREAS a Spirit of Riot and Licentiousness has of late prevailed in some
Parts of the Counties of Charlotte and Albany, and many Acts of Outrage and
Cruelty have been perpetrated by a Number of turbulent Men, who, assembling
from Time to Time in Arms, have seized, insulted and menaced several
Magistrates, and other Civil Officers, so that they dare not execute their
Functions -- rescued Prisoners for Debt -- assumed to themselves military
Commands, and judicial Powers -- burned and demolished the Houses and Property,
and beat and abused the Persons of many of His Majesty's Subjects -- expelled
others from their Possessions -- and finally, have put a Period to the
Administration of Justice within, and spread Terror and Destruction throughout
that Part of the Country which is exposed to their Oppression: Therefore, for
the preventing and suppressing such Riots and Tumults, and for the more speedy
and effectual punishing the Offenders therein,

"1. Be it Enacted, by His Excellency the Governor, the Council, and the
General Assembly, and it is hereby enacted, by the Authority of the same, That
if any Persons, to the Number of Three, or more, being unlawfully, riotously,
and tumultuously assembled, within either of the said Counties, to the
Disturbance of the public Peace, at any Time after the pasting of this Act, and
being required or commanded, by any One or more Justice or Justices of the
Peace, or by the High Sheriff, or his Under Sheriff, or by any One of the
Coroners of the County where such Assembly shall be, by Proclamation to be made
in the King's Name, in the Form herein after directed, to disperse themselves,
and peaceably to depart to their Habitations, or to their lawful Business,
shall, to the Number of Three, or more, notwithstanding such Proclamation made,
unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously remain or continue together to the
Number of Three, or more, after such command, or Request, made by Proclamation,
shall, for every such Offense, upon Conviction thereof, in due Form of Law,
either in the Supreme Count of Judicature of this Colony, or at the Courts of
Oyer and Terminer, and General Goal Delivery, or at the General Sessions of the
Peace, to be held respectively in and for the said Counties of Albany and
Charlotte, or either of them, suffer Twelve Months Imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize, and such further corporal Punishment, as the respective Courts
before which he, she, or they shall be convicted, shall judge fit, not
extending to Life or Limb; and before his or her Discharge, shall enter into
Recognizance with two sufficient Sureties, in such Sums as the said Court shall
respectively direct, to be of good Behavior, and keep the Peace toward his
Majesty, and all his Subjects, for the Term of Three Years, from such his, her,
or their Discharge out of Prison.

"2. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Order and
Form of the Proclamation which shall be made by the Authority of this Act,
shall be as hereafter follows, that is to say, The Justice, or other Person,
authorized by this Act to make the said Proclamation, shall, among the said
Rioters, or as near to them as he can safely come, with a loud Voice command,
or cause to be commanded, Silence to be kept, while Proclamation is making; and
shall then openly, with a loud Voice, make, or cause to be made, Proclamation
in these Words, or to the like Effect: Our Sovereign Lord the King, charge
and commands all Persons, being assembled, immediately to disperse
themselves, and peaceably to depart to their Habitations, or to their lawful
Business, upon the Pain contained in the Act made in the Fourteenth Year of the
Reign of King GEORGE the Third, to prevent tumultuous and riotous Assemblies.
And every such Justice and Justices of the Peace, Sheriff, Under Sheriff, or
Coroner, within the Limits of the respective Counties where they reside, are
hereby authorized, empowered, and required, on Notice or Knowledge of any such
unlawful, riotous and tumultuous Assembly, forthwith to repair to the Place
where such unlawful, riotous and tumultuous Assembly shall be, to the Number of
Three, or more, and there to make, or cause to be made, Proclamation in Manner
aforesaid.

"3. And be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
or Persons do, or shall, with Force and Arms, wilfully and knowingly oppose,
obstruct, or in any Manner wilfully and knowingly let, hinder or hurt and
Person or Persons, who shall begin to proclaim, or go to proclaim, according to
the Proclamation hereby directed to be made, whereby such Proclamation shall
not be made; that then every such opposing, letting, hindering, or hurting such
Person or Persons so being (...) going to make such Proclamation as aforesaid,
shall be adjudged Felony without Benefit of Clergy; and that the Offenders
therein, shall be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer Death, as in Cases of
Felony without Benefit of Clergy: And that also every such Person or Persons,
so being unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled to the Number of
Three, as aforesaid, or more, to whom Proclamation should, or ought to have
been made, if the same had not been hindered as aforesaid, shall, in Case they,
or any of them, to the Number of Three, or more, shall continue together, and
not forthwith disperse themselves, after such Let or Hindrance, having
Knowledge of such Let or Hindrance, shall likewise for every such Offense, upon
Conviction thereof, in Manner aforesaid, suffer the same Pains and Penalties as
are hereby inflicted on those who shall continue together to the Number of
Three, or more, after they shall be commanded to depart to their Habitations,
or lawful Business, by Proclamation as aforesaid.

"4. And be it Further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if such
Persons so unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled, or any Three or
more of them, after Proclamation made in Manner aforesaid, shall continue
together, and not forthwith disperse themselves, it shall and may be lawful to
and for every such Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Under Sheriff, Coroner, or
Constable, of any County or Township where such Assembly shall be; and to and
for such Person or Persons as shall be commanded to be assisting unto such
Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Under Sheriff, Coroner, or Constable, who are
hereby authorized and empowered to command all His Majesty's Subjects of Age
and Ability, to be aiding and assisting to them therein; to seize and
apprehend, and they are hereby required to seize and apprehend such Persons so
unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled together, after Proclamation
made as aforesaid, and forthwith to carry the Persons so apprehended, before
any one or more of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said Counties of
Charlotte, or Albany; in order to their being proceeded against for such their
Offenses, according to Law.

"AND that if the Persons so unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled,
or any of them, shall happen to be killed, maimed, or hurt in the dispersing,
seizing, or apprehending them, by reason of their resisting the Persons so
dispersing, seizing, or apprehending, or endeavoring to disperse, seize, or
apprehend them, that then every such Justice of the Peace, Sheriff,
Undersheriff, Coroner or Constable, and all and singular Persons aiding and
assisting to them, or any of them, shall be freed, discharged, and indemnified,
as well against the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as against all
and every other Person and Persons, of, for, or concerning the killing,
maiming, or hurting of any such Person or Persons, so unlawfully, riotously,
and tumultuously assembled, that shall happen to be so killed, maimed, or hurt
as aforesaid.

"5. And be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person
or Persons within the said Counties, or either of them, not being lawfully
authorized a Judge, Justice, or Magistrate, shall assume judicial Power, or
shall try, fine, sentence, or condemn any Person, who shall either be absent,
or shall unlawfully or forcibly be seized, taken, or brought before Him or Them
for Trial, or Punishment; or if any Person or Persons shall aid or assist in
such illegal Proceedings, or shall enforce, execute, or carry the same into
Effect; or if any Person or Persons shall unlawfully seize, detain, or confine,
or assault and beat any Magistrate, or civil Officer, for, or in the Respect of
any Act or Proceeding in the due exercise of his Function, or in order to
compel him to resign, renounce, or surcease his Commission or Authority, or to
terrify, hinder, or prevent him from performing and discharging the Duties
thereof; or if any Person, or Persons, either secretly, or openly, shall
unlawfully, wilfully, and malliciously burn or destroy the Grain, Corn, or Hay,
of any other Person, being in any Enclosure, or if any Persons unlawfully,
riotously, and tumultuously assembled together, to the Disturbance of the
public Peace, shall unlawfully, and with Force demolish, or pull down, or begin
to demolish or pull down any Dwelling House, Barn, Stable, Grist-Mill,
Saw-Mill, or Out-House, within either of the said Counties, that then, each of
the said Offenses, respectively, shall be adjudged Felony, without Benefit of
Clergy; and the Offenders therein, shall be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer
Death, as in cases of Felony without Benefit of Clergy.

"6. AND WHEREAS Complaint and Proofs have been made, as well before his
Excellency the Governor in Council, as before the General Assembly, That Ethan
Allen, some Time of Salisbury, in the Colony of Connecticut, but late of
Bennington, in the County of Albany, Yeoman; Seth Warner, late of Bennington in
the said County, Yeoman; Remember Baker, late of Arlington in the said County,
Yeoman; Robert Cochran, late of Ruporte, in the County of Charlotte, Yeoman;
Peleg Sunderland, and Silvanus Brown, late of Socialborough in the same County,
Yeomen; James Brackenridge, late of Wallumschack, in the County of Albany,
Yeoman; and John Smith, late of Socialborough, Yeoman; have been principal
Ringleaders of, and Actors in the Riots and Disturbances aforesaid; and the
General Assembly have thereupon addressed his Excellency the Governor, to issue
a Proclamation offering certain Rewards for apprehending and securing the said
Offenders, and for bringing them, and the other Perpetrators and Authors of the
Riots to Justice: And forasmuch as such disorderly Practices are highly
criminal, and destructive to the Peace and Settlement of the Country, and it is
indispensably necessary for Want of Process to Outlawry (which is not used in
this Colony) that special Provision be made for bringing such Offenders in
future to Trial and Punishment, without exposing the Colony to the Expense of
extraordinary Rewards and Bounties for apprehending such Offenders. --

" Be it therefore enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may
be lawful to and for his Excellency the Governor, or the Governor and Commander
in Chief, for the Time being, by and with the Advice of the Council, as often
as either of the above named Persons, or any other Person, shall be indicted in
either of the Counties aforesaid, for any Offense perpetrated after the passing
of this Act, made Capital by this or any other Law, or where any Person may
stand indicted for any of the Offenses above mentioned, not made Felony by this
Act, to make his Order in Council, thereby requiring and commanding such
Offender or Offenders to surrender themselves respectively, within the Space of
Seventy Days next, after the first Publication thereof, in the New York
Gazette, and weekly Mercury; to one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for
either of the said Counties respectively, who are hereby required thereupon to
commit him or them, without Bail or Mainprize, to the Goal of the City of
New York, or of the City and County of Albany, to the End that He or They may
be forthcoming to answer the Offense or Offenses, wherewith He or They shall
stand charged according to the ordinary Course of the Law; which Order the
Clerk of his Majesty's Council, or his Deputy, shall cause forthwith to be
printed and published, in eight successive Papers, of the New York Gazette, and
weekly Mercury; the two first of which to be forthwith transmitted to the
Sheriffs of the Counties of Albany and Charlotte; and the said Sheriffs
respectively, shall, within six Days after the Receipt thereof, cause the same
printed Orders to be affixed upon the Door of the Courthouse of the County of
Albany, and upon the Door of the Dwelling House of Patrick Smith, Esquire where the
Courts are now usually held for the said County of Charlotte, and upon the
Doors of two other Publick-Houses, in each of their respective Counties. And in
case the said Offenders shall not respectively surrender themselves, pursuant
to such Orders of his Excellency the Governor, or of the Governor and Commander
in Chief for the Time being, to be made in Council as aforesaid; He or They so
neglecting or refusing to surrender Himself, or Themselves as aforesaid, shall,
from the Day to be appointed for his or their Surrendery as aforesaid be
adjudged, deemed, and (if indicted for a capital Offense hereafter to be
perpetrated) to be convicted and attainted of Felony, and shall suffer Death,
as in Cases of Persons convicted and attainted of Felony by Verdict and
Judgment, without Benefit of Clergy; and that it shall and may be lawful to,
and for the Supreme Court of Judicature of this Colony, or the Courts of Oyer
and Terminer, or General Goal delivery, for the respective Counties aforesaid,
to award Execution against such Offender or Offenders, so indicted for a
capital Offense, perpetrated after the passing of this Act, in such Manner as
if He or They had been convicted or attainted in the said Supreme Courts of
Judicature, or before such Courts of Oyer and Terminer, or General Goal
Delivery respectively: And if any Offender, being indicted for a lesser
Offense, under the Degree of Felony, shall not surrender himself within the
Time fixed by such Order, and after such Notice as aforesaid, he shall thence
forth be deemed guilty of the Offense for which he may be charged by such
Indictment; and it shall be lawful for the Court wherein such Indictment is
found, to proceed to pronounce such Judgment against the Offender as might
lawfully be done if he was present in Court, and convicted in the ordinary
Course of the Law, of the Crime wherewith he shall so stand charged as
aforesaid. Provided always,

"7. And be it further enacted, by the same Authority aforesaid, That if any
Person so neglecting to surrender himself as aforesaid, within the said Seventy
Days, shall, at any Time after, surrender himself to the Sheriff of the Cities
of New York or Albany, or of the Counties of Duchess or West-Chester, (who are
to receive, and safely keep such Offenders) and being actually in Custody,
exhibited reasonable Proof, to the Satisfaction of the Judges of the Supreme
Court of this Colony, or either of them, that he was not within either of the
said Counties of Albany or Charlotte, or within either of the Counties of
Cumberland or Gloucester, at any Time after the Publication and Notices above
directed, and before such Surrender of himself as aforesaid; then such Judge
before whom such Proof is made, shall forthwith notify the same in Writing, to
the Sheriff to whom any Warrant of Execution for the Executing such Offender,
or any other Process for any lesser Punishment, has been, or may be issued;
and thenceforth such Prisoner or Offender shall not be liable to suffer Death,
or any other Punishment for not surrendering himself. -- Provided also, that
nothing in this Act contained, shall be construed to exempt any Offender, so
surrendering himself, after the Seventy Days, as aforesaid, from any Punishment
to which he may be liable for any other Crime than for not surrendering himself
within the Seventy Days, as aforesaid, nor to deprive any Person who shall so
surrender himself within the Seventy Days, from being bailed, in Cases where he
shall be bailable by Law; any Thing herein contained to the Contrary thereof,
in any Wise notwithstanding.

"8. And be it further enacted, by the same Authority aforesaid, That all and
every Person and Persons who shall, after the Expiration of the Time to be
appointed as aforesaid, for the Surrender of the respective Offenders herein
before named, harbor, receive, conceal, abet, or succor such Offender, or
Offenders, knowing him or them to have been required to surrender him or
themselves, by such Order or Orders as aforesaid, and not to have surrendered
pursuant thereto, shall upon Conviction thereof in due Form of Law, suffer the
same Pains and Penalties as are by this Act inflicted on those who shall
continue together to the Number of Three or more, after they shall be commanded
to depart to their Habitation, or lawful Business by Proclamation as aforesaid.

"9. AND WHEREAS the said County of Charlotte, has but lately been set off
from the said County of Albany, and there is yet no Goal or Courthouse erected
within the same; and a great Part of the said County being involved in a State
of Anarchy and Confusion by Reason of the violent Proceedings of the aforesaid
riotous and disorderly People, from whence it must at present be extremely
difficult if not impracticable, to bring Offenders to Justice within the said
County:

Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Treasons,
Felonies, Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses whatsoever, at any Time heretofore
committed or perpetrated, or hereafter to be committed or perpetrated within
the said County of Charlotte, shall and may be proceeded against and presented
by any Grand Jury for the County of Albany from Time to Time to be impanelled
and sworn at any Court or criminal Jurisdiction to be held in and for the said
County of Albany, who shall and may charge any of the said Offenses to have
been committed in any Part of the said County of Charlotte, and all Indictments
so found by them shall be adjudged to be good and valid, notwithstanding that
the Place of perpetrating any of the said Offenses be in the said Indictments
alleged to be out of the said County of Albany; and all such Offenses and
Offenders, which shall be presented or indicted as aforesaid, shall and may be
tried within the County of Albany, and by a Jury thereof, and there heard,
determined, and punished in the same Manner and Form as if such Treason,
Felony, Crime, Misdemeanor, or Offense, had arisen and been perpetrated within
the said County of Albany.

"10. Provided always, And be it further Enacted, That if at any Time hereafter
the Justices to be appointed for holding Courts of Oyer and Terminer, and
General Goal Delivery, for the said County of Charlotte, in Cases cognizable
before them; or the Justices of the General Session of the Peace for the said
County of Charlotte, in Cases cognizable before them, shall conceive that any
Prisoner or Offender may be safely brought to Justice within, and by a Jury of
the said County of Charlotte, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for
each of the said Courts respectively, to proceed against, and try such Prisoner
or Offender, having lawful Cognizance of his Cause within and by a Jury of the
said County of Charlotte, and him there to acquit or to Sentence, condemn, and
punish as the Law directs; any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

"11. AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act
shall be publicly read in every Court of General Sessions of the Peace, to be
held in each of the said Counties of Albany, and Charlotte, respectively.

"12. AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid; That this Act
shall remain and continue in full Force and Effect, from the passing thereof,
until the first Day of January, which will be in the Year of Our Lord, One
Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Seventy Six."

From the New Hampshire Gazette, No. 915. REMARKS, etc. on some late Laws,
passed in New York.
HIS Excellency Governor Tryon in Conformity to the Addresses of the General
Assembly of the Colony of New York, having on the 9th Day of March 1774, with
the Advice of his Council, issued his Proclamation, offering therein large Sums
of Money, for the Purpose of apprehending and imprisoning the following
Persons, viz. Ethan Alten, Seth Warner, Remember Baker, Robert Cochran, Peleg
Sunderland, Silvanus Brown, James Breakenridge, and John Smith.

AND whereas, his Excellency the Governor, by the same Proclamation, has
strictly enjoined and commanded all Magistrates, Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs, and other civil Officers of the Counties of Albany and Charlotte, to
be active and vigilant in apprehending, and imprisoning the Persons above
named; and we the aforesaid Persons, who have hereunto subscribed, being
conscious that our Cause is good and equitable, in the Sight of GOD, and all
unprejudiced and honest Men, are determined at all Events, to maintain, and
defend the same, 'till his Majesty's Pleasure shall be known, concerning the
Validity of the New Hampshire Grants. -- And we now proclaim to the Public, not
only for Ourselves, but for the New Hampshire Grantees, and Occupants in
general; that the Spring and moving Cause of our Opposition to the Government
of New York, was Self-Preservation, viz. Firstly, the Preservation and
maintaining of our Property: And Secondly, since that Government is so incensed
against us, therefore it stands us in Hand to defend our Lives; for it appears,
by a late Set of Laws passed by the Legislature thereof, that the Lives, and
Property of the New Hampshire Settlers are manifestly struck at; but, that the
Public may rightly understand the Essence of the Controversy, we now proclaim
to those Lawgivers, and to the World, that if the New York Patentees will
remove their Patents that have been subsequently lapped and laid on the
New Hampshire Charters, and quiet us in our Possessions, agreeable to his
Majesty's directions, and suspend those criminal Prosecutions against us, for
being Rioters (as we are unjustly denominated) then will our Settlers be
orderly and submissive Subjects to Government; but be it known to that despotic
Fraternity of Lawmakers, and Law-Breakers, that we will not be fooled or
frighted out of our Property; they have broke over his Majesty's express
Prohibitions, in patenting those Lands, and when they act in Conformity to the
regal Authority of Great Britain, it will be soon enough for us to obey them.
It is well known by all wise and sensible Persons in the neighboring
Governments, (that have animadverted on the Controversy) that their pretended
Zeal for good Order and Government, is fallacious, and that they aim at the
Lands and Labors of the Grantees and Settlers aforesaid: and that they subvert
the good and wholesome Laws of the Realm, to corroborate with, and bring about
their vile and mercenary Purposes.

AND, inasmuch as the Malignity of their Disposition toward us, has flamed to
an immeasurable and murtherous Degree, they have in their newfangled Laws,
calculated for the meridian of the New Hampshire Grants, passed the 9th of
March, 1774; so calculated them, as to correspond with the depravedness of
their Minds and Morals; in them Laws, they have exhibited their genuine
Pictures. The Emblems of their insatiable, avaricious, overbearing, inhuman,
barbarous, and blood-guiltiness of Disposition and Intention is therein
portraited in that transparent Image of themselves, which cannot fail to be a
Blot, and an infamous Reproach to them, to Posterity. -- We cannot suppose that
every of his Majesty's Council, or that all the Members of the General Assembly
were active in passing so bloody and unconstitutional a Set of Laws;
undoubtedly, some of them disapproved thereof; and it is altogether possible,
that many that were active in making the Law, were imposed upon by false
Representations, and acted under mistaken Views of doing Honor to Government;
but be this as it will, it appears that there was a Majority. And it has been
too much the Case with that Government, for a Number of designing Schemers, and
Land-Jockeys, to rule the same. Let us take a View of their former narrow and
circumscribed Boundaries, and how, by Legerdemain, Bribery and Deceptions of
one Sort or other, they have extended their Domain far and wide; they have
wrangled with, and encroached on all their neighboring Governments, and have
used all Manner of Deceit and Fraud to accomplish their Designs: Their Tenants
groan under their Usury and Oppression; and they have gained, as well as
merited the Disapprobation and Abhorrence of their Neighbors, and the innocent
Blood they have already shed, calls for Heaven's Vengeance on their guilty
Heads; and if they should come forth in arms against us, thousands of their
injured and dissatisfied Neighbors in the several Governments, will join with
us, to cut off, and extirpate such an execrable Race from the Face of the Earth!

THIS Piece is not supposed to contain a full Answer to the new constructed Set
of Laws aforesaid; for such a large TWO-YEAR OLD, has never before been seen
in America, it being of an enormous and monstrous Birth; nor is it supposed to
give the Legislators their full Characters: But so much, and a little more may
suffice for the present. To quote the Laws, and make Remarks thereon, would be
Matter sufficient for a Volume: However, we will yet make some few short
Observations.

1st, NEGATIVELY, it is not a Law for the Province of New York in general, but,

2d, POSITIVELY, it is a Law but for Part of the Counties of Charlotte, and
Albany; viz. Such Parts thereof, as are covered with the New Hampshire
CHARTERS, and it is well known those Grants compose but a minor Part of the
Inhabitants of the said Province; and we have no Representative in that
Assembly: The first Knowledge we had of said Laws, was the Completion of them;
which informed us, that if we assembled, Three or more of us together, to
oppose (that which they call legal) Authority, we shall be adjudged Felons, and
suffer the Pains of Death; and that same Fraternity of Plotters knew, as well
as we, and the generality of the People in the adjacent Colonies, that they
have for a Number of Years last past, endeavored to exercise such a Course of
what they call Law, that had they not been opposed by the People of these
Grants (called the MOB) in the executing the same, they would before this Time,
have been in Possession of that Territory, for which the Laws aforesaid are
calculated. Therefore the Case stands thus: If we oppose civil Officers, in
taking Possession of our Farms, we are, by these Laws, denominated Felons; or
if we defend our Neighbors, who have been indicted Rioters, only for defending
our Property; we are likewise adjudged Felons. In fine, every Opposition to
their monarchial Government is deemed Felony, and at the End of every such
Sentence there is the Word DEATH! And the same Laws further empower the
respective Judges, provided any Persons, to the Number of Three, or more, that
shall oppose any Magistrate, or other civil Officer, and be not taken, that
after a legal Warning of Seventy Days, if they do not come and yield themselves
up to certain Officers appointed for the Purpose of securing them; then it
shall be lawful for the Judges aforesaid, to award Execution of DEATH, the same
as though he or they had been convicted or attainted before a proper Court of
Judicature, etc. The candid Reader will doubtless observe, that the diabolical
Design of this Law, is to obtain Possession of the New Hampshire Grants, or to
make the People that defend them Outlaws, and so kill them whenever they can
catch them.

THOSE bloody Lawgivers know we are necessitated to oppose their Execution of
Law, where it points directly at our Property, or give up the same: But there
is one Thing is Matter of Consolation to us, viz. that printed Sentences of
Death will not kill us when we are at a Distance; and if the Executioners
approach us, they will be as likely to fall Victims to Death as we: And that
Person, or Country of Persons, are Cowards indeed, if they cannot as manfully
fight for their Liberty, Property and Life, as Villains can to deprive them
thereof.

THE New York Schemers accuse us with many Things, Part of which are true, and
Part not. -- With Respect to rescuing Prisoners for Debt, it is false. As to
assuming judicial Powers, we have not, except a well-regulated Combination of
the People to defend their just Rights, may be called so. As to forming
ourselves into Military Order, and assuming Military Commands, the New York
Possies, and Military Preparations, Oppressions, etc. obliged us to it.
Probably Mess. Duane, Kemp, and Banyer, of New York, will not discommend us for
so expedient a Preparation; more especially since the Decrees of the 9th of
March, are yet to be put in Execution: And we flatter ourselves, upon Occasion,
we can muster as good a Regiment of Mark's-men and Scalpers, as America can
afford; and we now give the Gentlemen abovenamed, together with Mr. Brush, and
Col. Ten Broeck, and, in fine, all the Land-Jobbers of New York, an Invitation
to come and view the Dexterity of our Regiment; and we cannot think of a better
Time for that Purpose, than when the Executioners come to kill some or all of
us, by Virtue of the Authority their Judges have lately received to award and
Sentence us to Death in our Absence. There is still one more notable Complaint
against us, viz. That we have insulted and menaced several Magistrates, and
other civil Officers, so that they dare not execute their respective Functions:
This is true, so far as it relates to the Magistrates. But the Public should be
informed, what the Functions of those Magistrates are: They are commissioned
for the sole Purpose of doing us all the Harm and Mischief they possibly can,
through their Administration and Influence; and that they might be subservient
to the wicked Designs of the New York Schemers. These are their Functions; and
the Public need no further Proof than the Consideration that they are the Tools
of those extravagant Lawmakers; and it must be owned, they acted with great
Judgment, in choosing the most infernal Instruments for their Purpose.

DRACO, the Athenian Lawgiver, caused a Number of Laws (in many Respects
analogous to those we have been speaking of) to be written in Blood. But our
modern Draco's determine to have their's verified in Blood. They well know we
shall more than Three, nay, more than Three Times Three Hundred, assemble
together, if Need be, to maintain our common Cause, till his Majesty determines
who shall be and remain the Owners of the Land in Contest. "Wilt not thou
possess that which Chemoth, thy God gives thee to possess?" So will we possess
that which the Lord our God (and King) gives us to possess.

AND lastly, we address ourselves to the People of the Counties of Albany and
Charlotte, which inhabit to the Westward of, and are situated contiguous to the
New Hampshire Grants.

GENTLEMEN, FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS, PROVIDENCE having allotted and fixed the
Bounds of our Habitations in the same Vicinity, which, together with the
Intercourse of Trade and Commerce, has formed an almost universal Acquaintance
and Tie of Friendship between us, and has laid such a Foundation of Knowledge,
that your People in general cannot but be sensible that the Title of our Land
is in Reality the Bone of Contention, and that as a People, we behave ourselves
orderly; and are industrious, and honestly disposed; and pay just Deference to
Order and good Government; and that we mean no more by that which is called the
MOB, but to defend our just Rights and Properties. We appeal to the Gentlemen
Merchants, to inform whether our People in general, do not exert themselves to
pay their just Debts; and whether ever they have been hindered by the Country's
MOB, in the Collection of their Dues. But as the Magistrates, Sheriffs,
Under-Sheriffs, Coroners, and Constables of the respective Counties that hold
their Posts of Honor and Profit under our bitter Enemies, we have a Jealousy,
that some of them may be induced (to recommend themselves to those on whom they
are dependant, and for the Wages of unrighteousness, offered by Proclamation)
to presume to apprehend some of us, or our Friends: We therefore advertise such
Officers, and all Persons whatsoever, that we are resolved to inflict immediate
Death on whomsoever may attempt the same: And provided any of us or our Party
shall be taken, and we have not Notice sufficient to relieve them, or whether
we relieve them or not, we are resolved to surround such Person or Persons,
whether at his or their own House or Houses, or any where that we can find him
or them, and shoot such Person or Persons dead. And further more, that we will
kill and destroy any Person or Persons whomsoever, that shall presume to be
accessory, aiding or assisting in taking any of us as aforesaid; for by these
Presents we give any such disposed Person or Persons to understand, that,
although they have a License by the Law aforesaid, to kill us; and an
"Indemnification" for such Murder from the same Authority; yet they have no
Indemnification for so doing, from the GREEN MOUNTAIN BOYS; for our Lives,
Liberties and Properties are as verily precious to us, as to any of the King's
Subjects; and we are as loyal to his Majesty or his Government, as any Subjects
in the Province: But if the Governmental Authority of New York will Judge in
their own Case, and act in Opposition to that of Great Britain, and insist upon
killing us to take possession of our "Vineyards" come on, we are ready for a
Game of Scalping with them; for our marshal Spirits glow with Bitter
Indignation, and consumate Fury to Blast their Infernal Projections.

"IT may be the Reader, not having seen the Law referred to in this Piece, and
not being thoroughly acquainted with the long and spirited Conflict that has
subsisted between the Claimants under New Hampshire and New York, nor of the
Progressive, Arbitrary and Monopolizing disposition of the Court Party of the
latter of those Provinces; may be apt to imagine that the Spirit of this
Writing is too severe, inasmuch as it Destines whoever presumes to take us as
Felons or Rioters, to immediate Death; but let the Wise consider the State of
the Cause.

1. PROVIDED we on our Part be taken, we have by them Laws the Sentence of
Death already pronounced against us, on Proviso more than Three of us assemble
together to maintain and defend our Property, till his Majesty determines the
Controversy. And,

2. MAY it be considered, that the Legislative Authority of the Province of
New York had no constitutional Right or Power to make such Laws, and
consequently that they are Null and Void, from the Nature and Energy of the
English Constitution; therefore as they merit no Place among the Laws of the
Realm of Great Britain, but are the arbitrary League and Combination of our
bitter and merciless Enemies, who, to obtain our Property, have inhumanly,
barbarously, and maliciously, under the specious and hypocritical Pretense of
legal Authority, and Veneration for Order and Government, have laid a Snare for
our Lives. Can the Public censure us for exerting Ourselves nervously to
preserve our Lives in so critical a Situation? For by the Laws of the Province,
into which we are unfortunately fallen, we cannot be protected in either
Property or Life, except we give up the Former to secure the Latter; so we are
resolved to maintain both, or to hazard or loose both.

FROM hence follows a necessary Inference, That inasmuch as our Property, nay
our Lives, cannot be protected (but manifestly struck at) by the highest
Authority in the Province to which we at present belong; therefore in the
Interim, while his Majesty is determining the Controversy, and till he shall
interpose his Royal Authory, and subject the Authority abovesaid to their Duty,
or re-annex the District of disputed Lands to the Province of New Hampshire, or
some Way in his great Wisdom and Fatherly Clemency, put the distressed Settlers
under New Hampshire, on an equal Footing with our Brother Subjects in his
Realm; we are under Necessity of resisting, even unto Blood, every Person who
may attempt to take us as Felons or Rioters as aforesaid; for in this Case it
is not resisting Law, but only opposing Force by Force; therefore inasmuch as
by the Oppressions aforesaid, the New Hampshire Settlers are reduced to the
disagreeable State of Anarchy and Confusion; in which State we hope for Wisdom,
Patience and Fortitude, till the happy Hour his Majesty shall graciously be
pleased to restore us to the Privileges of Englishmen.

Signed per ETHAN ALLEN, SETH WARNER, REMEMBER BAKER, ROBERT COCKRAN, PELEG
SUNDERLAND, JOHN SMITH, SILVANUS BROWN.

Bennington, April 16, 1774. N. B. WHEREAS Mr. James Breakenridge, has the
Honor to be enroled a Rioter with us, we can assure the Public that this
worthy Gentleman has never been concerned with us in any Mob whatsoever; but
that he has always relied on a good Providence, and the regal Authority of
Great Britain for the Confirmation of the New Hampshire Charter; exclusive of
all forcible Measures whatsoever.

"When Caesar reigned King at Rome,
St. Paul was sent to hear his Doom;
But Roman Laws in a criminal Case,
Must have the Accuser Face to Face;
Or Caesar gives a flat Denial. --
But here is a Law made now of late;
Which destines Men to awful Fate,
And Hangs and Damns without a Trial.
Which made me view all Nature through,
To find a Law where Men were ti'd,
By legal Act which does exact
Men's Lives before they are Tried.
Then down I took the sacred Book,
And turned the Pages over,
But could not find one of this kind,
By God or Man before.
T. R.



IN order to exhibit a more full Narrative of the real State of the Controversy
aforesaid, it is thought Necessary here to Insert sundry Letters from Governor
Tryon to the Inhabitants of Bennington and the adjacent Country, and their
Answers thereto, as they were published in sundry public Newspapers; which
will serve to open to View the antecedent State, and Progression of the
Controversy, as far back as the Year 1772, and Reflect Light on so important a
Cause.

From the CONNECTICUT COURANT, No. 394.
New York, 19th May, 1772. ON HIS MAJESTY'S SERVICE, To the Rev. Mr. Dewey, and
the Inhabitants of Bennington, and the adjacent Country, on the East Side of
Hudson's River.
GENTLEMEN, THE many violent and illegal Acts you have lately committed against
the Peace and good Order of this Province, of which I have had frequent Proofs
and Informations, at the same Time that they are not only a Reproach to
yourselves, but dangerous and injurous to your Families and Interests, cannot
fail of being highly offensive to your Sovereign. You may depend a Perseverance
in your Disobediance to, and Violations of the Laws of your Country must soon
draw forth against you the Exertions of the Powers of Government. However,
being sincerely disirous on my Part, to avoid compulsive Measures, while
lenient Methods may prove successful; I esteem it my Duty to invite you to lay
before this Government the Causes of your illegal Proceedings; and it is with
the Concurrence and Advice of his Majesty's Council that I send you this
Invitation, who, with (...) are disposed to examine into the Grounds of your
Behavior and Discontent with Deliberation and Candor, and as far as in us
lies, to give such Relief as the Nature of your Situation and Circumstances
will justify. That there may be no Obstruction to your laying before me in
Council, as soon as possible, a fair Representation of your Conduct, I do
hereby engage full Security and Protection to any Persons whom you shall choose
to send on this Business to New York, from the Time they leave their Homes to
the Time of their Return, except Robert Cockran, as also Allen, Baker, and
Sevil, mentioned in my Proclamation of the 9th of December last, and Seth
Warner, whose audacious Behavior to a Civil Magistrate, has subjected him to
the Penalties of the Laws of his Country. 'I am told Mr. William Dewey, a
Minister of the Gospel, James Breakenridge, and Mr. Fay, are Persons in whose
Judgment you have much Confidence; I should therefore think they would be your
proper Messengers on a Business in which you are so deeply concerned,
especially Mr. Dewey, who has been favorably represented here since my
Appointment to this Government. His Majesty's Secretary of State has signified
to me that the King has finally fixed Connecticut River to be the established
Jurisdiction between the Government of New York and New Hampshire.

"This Circumstance I mention that you may not be misled or deceived by a
Persuasion, that that Part of the Country you inhabit, will ever be annexed to
the Government of New Hampshire. I have this farther Motivefor mentioning the
King's final Decision, that by your receiving this Authority of your being in
the Government of New York, I am hopeful your future Conduct will justify me in
assuring his Majesty of your dutiful Obedience to his royal Determination. I
flatter myself you will cheerfully improve this final Offer of reconciling
yourselves to this Government. I am your Friend,

W. TRYON.

"A true Copy of his Excellency's Letter."
Bennington, 5th June, 1772. To his Excellency, WILLIAM TRYON, ESQUIRE, etc.
" May it Please your Excellency, WE his Majesty's liege and loyal Subjects of
the Province of New York, having received your particular Favor of the 19th
Day of May last, requesting the Inhabitants of Bennington, and the adjacent
Country on the East Side of Hudson's River, to lay before your Excellency and
Council, the Cause of our Discontent and Behavior, do now express our
Satisfaction in having this very Opportunity to acquaint your Excellency,

"FIRST, That we hold the Fee and Property of the Lands we are settled on, and
in Possession of, by Virtue of Grants from their Majesty's George the Second
and Third, etc. which Lands at the Time of thus being granted, was reputed to
be within the Jurisdiction of the Province of New Hampshire, until the Year
1764, when some of your Excellency's now Subjects had by some Measures obtained
his Majesty's Pleasure for Alteration of Jurisdiction-line between the
Provinces of New Hampshire and New York; since this, sundry Grants have been
made by those in the Administration of Government in the said Province of
New York, on the very Land before granted by their Majesty's to us, as though
the Fee of the Land and Property was altered with Jurisdiction, which we
suppose was not. The Measures taken to dispossess us of those Lands by repeated
Writs of Ejectments, Suits at Law, Rejectment of Proof from authentic Records,
refusing a suitable Time and Opportunity for Collection of Evidence to support
and vindicate our Cause, contrary, (as we suppose) to the usual Customs of the
Law of the Province, seem to be the Grounds of our Discontent, and that illegal
and unconstitutional Method of Proceeding in Indicting sundry persons who are
bound by the Law of Self and Family Preservation to maintain their Liberty and
Properties; the Usage of those intreaguers that would Monopolize our Interests
to themselves by such irregular Steps. --

"Their Methods of breaking by Violence, Houses for Possession, and to obtain
those whom they are pleased to denominate riotous, tumultuous and disorderly,
their firing on those People, and wounding innocent Women and Children, to
compass their Designs, may have occasioned some very disagreeable and unhappy
Disturbances among the Friends of Mr. Remember Baker, residing on the
New Hampshire Grants, which we suppose your Excellency has been pleased to
mention illegal. The foregoing is an exact Account of our hitherto Ideas of the
State of the present Case, and on this Footing we must closely adhere to the
maintaining our Property, with a due Submission to your Excellency's
Jurisdiction, and if we should, through Ignorance or Inadvertency, have
hitherto misunderstoood either your Excellency, or the Occasion of your
Excellency's Request, we beg the Favor to be undeceived. The Persons chosen to
present these Lines we hope may give your Excellency some further Satisfaction.

"WE flatter Ourselves from the Candor of your Excellency's favorable Letter,
that you will be friendly disposed toward us; and we most earnestly pray and
beseech your Excellency would assist to quiet us in our Possessions, till his
Majesty in his royal Wisdom shall be graciously pleased to settle the
Controversy. Should your Excellency Grant this our humble Request, our
Satisfaction would be inexpressible.

"THEREFORE, confidently trusting in your Excellency's Wisdom and Clemency, as
Members of your Province, as loyal and submissive Subjects to his Majesty, we
beg Leave to Subscribe ourselves

your Excellency's faithful, obedient, and very humble Servants.

A true Copy of the Answer to Excellency's Letter of the 19th of May last.
Bennington, 5th June, 1774. To His EXCELLENCY, WILLIAM TRYON, ESQUIRE, etc.
May it please your Excellency,
WE, His Majesty's loyal Subjects, whose Names are to this Piece affixed,
Inhabitants on that Tract of Land, your Excellency discribes by the Name of
Bennington, and the adjacent Country, etc. and who was by your Excellency's
Letter of the 19th of May last, prohibited the Privilege of going to New York,
and personally vindicate either ourselves or Country, before your Excellency,
and being put to the Extremity of informing your Excellency by Writing, the
Reason of our Discontent, and also of our Behavior, which we shall more
largely set forth, than is in the foregoing general Answer to your Excellency's
Letter; and also exhibit more Arguments deduced from Reason and the Nature of
Things, we hope your Excellency will be graciously pleased to view this our
Defense with that Tenderness and Candor a Gentleman in so elevated a Station
should do, and therefore beg Leave to observe, that as on the one Hand, no
Consideration whatever, shall induce us to remit in the least, of our Loyalty
and Gratitude to our most gracious Sovereign, nor of a reasonable Submission to
your Excellency; so on the other Hand, no tyrannical Exertions of the Powers of
Government, can deter us from asserting and vindicating our undoubted Rights
and Privileges as Englishmen. We expected an Answer from your Excellency, to
our humble Petition to you delivered soon after your Excellency's Accession to
the Administration of the Government, but for Reasons to us unknown, your
Excellency passed it by in Silence. However, we cheerfully embrace this
Opportunity of laying before your Excellency in Council the true State of our
Controversy, which we can no otherways do, but by absorbing our personal
Distinction into the Community, and general Cause, to which we have obtained
the Character of faithful. We assure your Excellency that we assent to your
Authority of Jurisdiction inasmuch as his Majesty's Proclamation assures us it
is his Will and Pleasure we be under the Jurisdiction of New York, and not only
now Assent to it, but have ever done the same, except in Instances where such
perverse Use has been made thereof, as would dispossess us of our Property and
Country, we are truly desirous, and petitioning his Majesty to re-annex us to
the Province of New Hampshire. But this is not the Ground of our Discontent, or
at least is far from being the principle Ground of it, though it was done ex
part, and we apprehend there were more or less wrong Representations made to
his Majesty, to obtain the Jurisdiction: However, it is the unreasonable and
unconstitutional Exercise of it that is the present Bone of Contention -- our
Properties are all at Stake; this we contend for, as the following known Facts
will demonstrate. A certain number of designing Men in New York (and elsewhere)
procured Patents under the Great Seal of that Province, and those Grantees
being non-residents, brought sundry Writs of Ejectment against the
New Hampshire Settlers on the same Land, covered by both Patents as aforesaid,
and obtained Judgment against them, and proceeded further and took out Writs of
Possession, and actually dispossessed several of them by Order of Law, of their
Houses and Farms, leaving them to suffer the Inclemency of the Weather,
bereaved of all the Necessaries of Life, their new Masters having monopolized
their earthly ALL, to themselves. These indigent Families having in the first
Place expended their several Fortunes, in bringing their Farms out of a
wilderness State, into that of fruitful Feilds, Gardens and Orchards; the whole
Country consisting of more than Fifteen Hundred Families, was greatly alarmed
at the Event which had already began to take Place, was in the greatest
Consternation, each Individual, from these Instances, reading their own
intolerable and universal Destruction. -- Still the Writs of Ejectment came
thicker and faster, and universal Slavery, Poverty and Horror, emblematically
appeared in every Countenance.

"THUS, things having come to this Pass, the Oppression was too great for human
Nature, under English Constitution, to grope under, for those unparrallelled
Instances struck an infinitely more terrible Idea, than that of the Exertion of
the Powers of Government.

"LAWS and Society-compacts, were made to protect and secure the Subjects in
their peaceable Possessions and Properties, and not to subvert them. No Person
or Community of Persons can be supposed to be under any particular Compact or
Law, except it pre-supposeth, that that Law will protect such Person or
Community of Persons in his or their Properties, for otherways the Subject
would by Law be bound to be accessory to his own Ruin and Destruction, which is
inconsistant with the Law of Self-preservation; but this Law being natural as
well as eternal, can never be abrogated by the Law of Men.

"WE would acquaint your Excellency, that since our Misfortune of being annexed
to the Province of New York, Law has been rather used as a Tool (than a Rule of
Equity) to cheat us out of the Country, we have made vastly valuable by Labor
and Expense of our Fortunes. -- We conclude these Things are yet unknown, or in
a great Measure so to your Excellency, as your Excellency's Commencement to the
Administration, has not been long, and a Set of artful, wicked Men, concealing
the Truth from your Excellency, purposing to make a Booty of us, characterizing
us, (speaking of our Inhabitants in general) as so many Rioters if not Rebels;
and we being a poor People at a great Distance from your Excellency's Place of
Residence, fatigued in settling a Wilderness Country, have little or no
Opportunity of acquainting your Excellency of our Greivances, except by one
short Petition delivered to your Excellency soon after your first taking
Adminisration -- and as our Cause is represented before his Majesty and
Council, we did not expect your Excellency to determine the Controversy, nor do
we yet expect it. We are sensible those Men that seek our Ruin, thereby to
enrich themselves, do by Stratagems of every Kind, represent us to your
Excellency as Breakers of the Peace, and Enemies to the Government; and under
this Pretense they hope to catch a Number of the boldest of our Inhabitants,
and punish them in the New York Inquisition, with that Severity that the
Residue may be frightened out of both Liberty and Property; for otherways they
would soon be indicted Rioters, and thus under Color of punishing Rioters, and
a Zeal of Loyalty and Veneration for good Government, rob the Inhabitants of
their Country. If we do not oppose the Sheriff and his Possy, he takes
immediate Possession of our Houses and Farms, if we do, we are immediately
indicted Rioters; and when others oppose Officers in taking such their Friends
so indicted, they are also indicted and so on, there being no End of Indictment
against us so long as we Act the bold and manly Part, and stand by our Liberty.
--

"This is a short Sketch of the disingenuous Cunning of Messieurs Duane, and
Kemp, and their Associates; and it comes to this at last, that we must tamely
be dispossessed, or oppose Officers in taking Possession, and as a next
necessary Step, oppose taking of Rioters so called, or run away like so many
Cowards, and quit our Country to a Number of cringing, polite Gentlemen who
have ideally possessed themselves of it already.

"As to sundry Men who have eloped lately from our Grants, and sled to New York
for Protection, Self-preservation necessitated us to treat some of them
roughly; and others, viz. Ebenezer Cowle, and Jonathan Wheat, of Shaftsbury,
fled to New York, on Account of their own Guilt, not being hurt or threatened.
Would Time permit we could give a rational Account for most, or all of our late
Conduct toward these Men. The general Reason is this, namely, they were a Set
of Men that loved themselves, and not their Country, they busied themselves in
planning and assisting to take Rioters so called. In fine, they were the
Emissaries of that mercenary Core of Yorkers, and did more in Oppressing the
People, than their preposterous Benefactors.

"The Assault made upon Mr. Baker at Day break, of the Night of the 22d of
March last, by a Number of Ruffians under the Command of the infamous John
Munro, Esquire was a notorious Riot, and gave Energy and Motion, to the subsequent
Acts, your Excellency denominates illegal. This Munro and his bloody Party, by
cuting, wounding and maiming, Mr. Baker, his Wife and Children, in such an
inhuman and Savage Manner, was no less than proclaiming himself in a most
public Manner to be a malicious and bloody Enemy, not only to Mr. Baker, but
also to all those Men on our Grants, who manfully adhere to maintaining Liberty
and Property, and inasmuch as the murtherous Villian is alive, he has no Cause
of Complaint -- for after his Assault upon Mr. Baker, he made another Assault
upon Mr. Seth Warner, but not having so strong a Party of Ruffians with him as
in his other Expedition, it was not attended with the like Consequences, for
Mr. Warner, struck his Head with a dull Cutlass, and levelled him to the
Ground, but the Blow proved not Mortal, and after this, for his Satisfaction
for the Wound, threatened the Lives of a Number of the New Hampshire Settlers.
-- Your Excellency will undoubtedly consider as our Opponents have had the
Manufactory of the Civil Laws so much under their Power, that this merciless
Man could not be brought to Justice, nor could others among us be safe any
other Way, but by using him in his own Play, he set the Example, and enraged
the People to mimick him from that natural Principle of justice in every Man's
own Breast.

"As to the Perfidious and treacherous Bliss Willoggby, he always pretended to
be a Friend of the said Baker's, and Baker had ever been truly a Friend of his
-- this Hypocrite, two Days before Baker was taken, made a frivilous Excuse of
Business, went to said Baker's House, viewed the Strength of it, perceived
Baker was somewhat careless and secure, and made Report to the said Munro. In
fine, Willoggby was the Planner and Instigator of that savage Cruelty exercised
to said Baker, which was perpetrated and brought into Action by the detestible
said Munro. But to desist, as to the History of our late transaction, whether
they be all Right or not, we on our Part have a few Arguments and
Considerations more to lay before your Excellency, as to the Cause of our
Discontent, as well as to the Cause of our late Actions your Excellency
denominates illegal.

"The Alteration of Jurisdiction in 1764 could not effect private Property:
Surely his Majesty by this Alteration, did not purpose to take away the
personal Property of a large Number of his loyal Subjects, and transfer it to
other Subjects; the English Constitution will by no Means admit of this, for
the transferring or alienation of Property is a sacred Prerogative of the true
Owner. -- Kings and Governors cannot intermeddle therewith. Furthermore Your
Excellency and Council must needs be acquainted that we have a Petition lying
before his Majesty and Council, for Redress of our Grievances. That is an
impartial Board; pray why may it not be determined there? For the very
indentical Matters in Dispute, are now and for several Years past, have been
lying before that Court, except the Accusations of Riotousness, Disorderly,
etc. which is improved as a Handle to subvert Property, and that only.

"FURTHERMORE, in the Time of Sir Henry Moor's Administration, his Majesty was
pleased to lay the Government of New York, under absoluto Prohibition not to
grant or patent any of the Lands antecedently granted under the Great Seal of
the Province of New Hampshire, and Furthermore forbid the Government to disturb
or molest the Settlers. This rightly understood, amounts to a Supercedies over
the Authority of Common Law, and absolutely controuls the Cognizance thereof.
As to the particular Matters in the Prohibition set forth, or Matters lying
before his Majesty by Petition, the Import of the Prohibition must needs be
thus, Namely, that his Majesty, by it informs the Government of New York that
he has taken the Controversy to him made known by Petition, under his Royal
Consideration, and that, after due Information and Evidence of the State of the
Case, determines to settle the Controversy; consequently forbids the Government
taking Cognizance thereof; and Common Sense teaches us that under such
Prohibition, if a Judgment at Common Law be supposed to be valid, it would
invalidate the Authority of the Crown, and subvert and overthrow the Authority
of the Kingdom, as it would render the Prohibitions of the Crown perfectly
impertinent. Therefore Common Law, in the Case before us, is not clothed with
Cognizance of this Case, much less with Authority to dispossess us;
consequently every Party of Men that have with Officers or otherwise, come into
these Parts to dispossess us, came in open Defiance and direct Opposition to
his Majesty's Orders and Authority: And though they style us Rioters, for
opposing them, and seek to catch and punish us as such, yet in Reality,
themselves are the Rioters, the tumultuous, disorderly, stimulating Faction,
or, in fine, the Land-robbers; and every violent Act they have done to compass
their Designs, though ever so much under Pretense of Law, is in Reality a
Violation of Law, and an Insult on the Constitution, and Authority of the
Crown, as well as to many of us in Person, who have been great Sufferance by
such inhuman Exertions of pretended legality of Law. -- Right, and Wrong, are
eternally the same to all Periods of Time, Places and Nations, and coloring a
Crime with a specious Pretense of Law, only adds to the Criminality of it; for
it subverts the very Design of Law, prostituting it to the vilest Purposes. Can
any Man, in the Exercise of Reason make himself believe that a Number of
Attorneys and other Gentlemen, with all their Tackle of Ornaments, and
Compliments, and French Finesse, together with their boasted Legality of Law,
that these Gentlemen have just Right to the Lands Labors and Fortunes of the
New Hampshire Settlers? Certainly they cannot. Yet this is the Object in View
by that mercenary Fraternity.

"WE do not suppose, may it please your Excellency, we are making Opposition to
a Government, as such; it is nothing more than a Party, chiefly carried on by a
Number of Gentlemen Attorneys (if it be not an Abuse to Gentlemen of Merit to
call them so) who manifest a surprising and interprizing Thirst of Avarice
after our Country, but for a Collection of such Intreaguers, to plan Matters of
Influence of a Party, so as eventually to become Judges in their own Case, and
thereby cheat us out of our Country, appears to us so audaciously unreasonable
and tyrannical that we view it with the utmost Detestation and Indignation, and
our Breasts glow with a martial Fury to defend our Persons and Fortunes from
the Ravages of those that would Destroy us; but not against your Excellency's
Person or Government.

"WE are fully persuaded your Excellency's Ears have been much abused by subtle
and designing Men, for we are informed from credible Authority, your Excellency
has lately made Application to your Assembly to raise an armed Force to subdue
us, but that the Motion was negatived: We apprehend your Excellency views us as
opposing your Excellency's Jurisdiction, and that the violent Acts, by us done,
was in Rebellion to his Majesty's Authority, or your Excellency had never
proposed the subduing of us; We are morally Certain we can convince your
Excellency, that it is not so; but that on the other Hand Messieurs Duane,
Kemp, and their Associates are the Aggressors.

"WE have chosen two Men from among us, viz. Capt. Stephen Fay, and Mr. Jonas
Fay, to treat with your Excellency in Person, who we hope will Answer such
Queries, and give your Excellency the Satisfaction you hope for.

"We view your Excellency as our Governor and political Father, and hope and
expect, from the Sincerity and Candor of your Excellency's Letter, you will be
friendly and favorably disposed toward us, when your Excellency by these
Lines perceive the Grounds of our Discontent: For we are Conscious that our
Cause is good, and that it was Oppression which has been the Ground of our
Discontent, and that Self-preservation has hitherto urged us to the Measures
lately taken. And we now earnestly entreat your Excellency's Aid and Assistance
to quiet us in our Possessions and Properties, till his Majesty in his royal
Wisdom Settle the Controversy: If your Excellency should do this, there would
be an End of Riots, so called, and our Tongues unable to express our Gratitude
to your Excellency for such Protection.

"THEREFORE, relying on your Excellency's great Wisdom and Goodness, as Members
of your Government, his Majesty's loyal and liege Subjects, we subscribe
Ourselves

your Excellency's ever faithful and humble Servants, ETHAN ALLEN, SETH WARNER,
REMEMBER BAKER, ROBERT COCHRAN.


An Encomium on his Excellency Governor Tryon, and his Majesty's Honorable
Council of the Province of New York.
Copied from the CONNECTICUT COURANT.
WHEREAS the Inhabitants of the Lands West of Connecticut River, who purchased
their Lands of his Majesty's Government of New Hampshire, who on the Faith of
Government, and full Reliance on the Veracity of Charters under the Great Seal
of that Province, have settled, cultivated, and made great Improvements
thereon; which Tract of Land, in the Year Seventeen Hundred and Sixty-Four, his
Majesty was pleased to annex, the Province of New York. And whereas, subsequent
thereto, a Number of mercenary and litigious Gentlemen of the Province (and
principally of the City) of New York, procured Patents under the Great Seal of
that Province, and covered sundry Townships the same identical Land,
antecedently granted under the Great Seal of the Province of New Hampshire. And
whereas many vexatious Lawsuits, and clandestine and oppressive crown
Prosecutions, have been craftily, subtly, and with a Design to overawe,
abuse, terrify, and impoverish the said Inhabitants, has been militated,
devised and prosecuted against them, by the Influence of the Gentlemen
aforesaid, purposing by such base and oppressive Measures of Policy, to defraud
and wrong the said Inhabitants, out of the Possession and Property of their
Country. And in order to clude and defeat such their disingenuous and vicious
Policy, the said Inhabitants mutually agreed to oppose New York Officers, in
their Attempts to take Rioters, so characterized, and take every other
requisite, lawful and effectual Method to defend their Property.

"And Matters having come to this, that Hostility, Revenge and Hatred, had
began to put on their bloody, murtherous, and vengful Emblems -- In which
propitious Hour, his Excellency WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire Governor of the Province of
New York, sent the said Inhabitants a kind, lenient and generous Letter, which
breathed forth rather the Affections of a Father, than a hard-hearted Judge;
requesting the said Inhabitants to exhibit to him in Council, the Grounds of
their Discontent and Uneasiness, and the Cause of their violent and illegal
Proceedings; assuring them, that they should be heard with Candor in the
Premises, and have such Relief as the Nature and Circumstances of their Case
should justify.

"UPON which the Town of Bennington, and the adjacent Towns, by their
Committees, met at Bennington, and sent a written Answer to his Excellency's
Letter, informing him of the State of the Controversy, and withal of the Ground
of their Uneasiness and Discontent, and the Cause of their Proceedings; and
also made Choice of Captain Stephen Fay, and Doctor Jonas Fay, of Bennington,
to go to New York, and deliver the written Answer to his Excellency, and
further inform him as to the State of Facts, and negotiate the Matter of our
Petition; (though not with Power to complete a Settlement on our Part.) His
Excellency received the Agents with Expressions of Kindness -- laid the State
of Grievances before His Majesty's honorable Council, who after mature
Consideration, determined in the following Words: "The Committee are desirous
your Excellency should afford the Inhabitants of those Townships, all the
Relief in your Power, by suspending, till his Majesty's Pleasure shall be
known, all Prosecutions in behalf of the Crown, on Account of the Crimes with
which they stand charged, by Depositions before us, and to recommend it to the
Owners of the contested Lands under Grants from this Province, to put a Stop,
during the same Period, to all civil Suits concerning the Lands in Question."

AFTER our Agents received Copies of the Minutes of Council, and also a Letter
from his Excellency, purporting his Approbation and Compliance therewith, they
retired to Bennington with great Joy -- warned a Meeting of that Town and the
adjacent Country, which was held on the 15th of July Ultimo; and before a large
Auditory of People, the Copy of the Minutes of Council was read, and also his
Excellency's Letter of Compliance to the same, which defused universal Joy
through the Country of the New Hampshire Grants, and the People were at Strife
in doing the most exalted Honor to Governor Tryon. And having at Bennington a
Cannon, it was discharged sundry Times in Honor to his Excellency and his
Majesty's honorable Council, and after the Report of the Cannon, each several
Time, the whole Audience gave a Huzza! in Acclamation, Good Will, Gratitude and
vocal Honor to Governor TRYON, and Capt. Warner's Company of GREEN
MOUNTAIN-BOYS under Arms, fired three Vollies of small Arms, in Concert and Aid
of the Glory.

"HIS Majesty's Health, also a Health to his Excellency, and his Majesty's
honorable Council was drank, with full flowing Bowls, and Confusion to all the
New York Land-jobbers, hoping Peace, Liberty and Plenty may abound.

Dated August 22d, 1772.
From the CONNECTICUT COURANT.
His Excellency Governor TRYON'S Letter to the Inhabitants of Bennington, etc.
Albany, 11th August, 1772. GENTLEMEN,
"AT the same Time I express to you my Satisfaction by the Opportunity of Mr.
Fay, on the grateful Manner in which you received and accepted the lenient
Measures prescribed by this Government, for your peaceable Conduct until his
Majesty's Pleasure should be known, respecting the disputed Claim to Lands
within this Government. I cannot conceal from you my high Displeasure at the
Breach of Faith and Honor, made by a Body of your People, in dispossessing
several Settlers on Otter Creek, and its Neighborhood, of their Possessions,
during the very Time the Commissioners you appointed to attend on me at
New York, were waiting the Determination of Government on your Petition, that
you might remain unmolested in your Possessions, until the King's Pleasure be
obtained. Such disingenuous and dishonorable Proceedings, I view with great
Concern, considering them as daring Insults to Government, a Violation of
public Faith, and the Conditions granted to you on Petition. To prevent
therefore the fatal Consequence that must follow so manifest a Breach of public
Confidence, I am to require your Assistance, in putting forthwith those
Families who have been thus dispossessed, into Re-possession of their Lands and
Tenements, in the same Manner in which they were at the Time Mr. Fay and his
Son, waited on me at New York. Such a Conduct on your Part, will not fail of
recommending your Situation to his Majesty, and insure a continuance of my
friendly Intentions toward you.

WM. TRYNN.

To the Inhabitants of Bennington, and the adjacent Country.
Bennington, August 25th, 1772. To His EXCELLENCY. WILLIAM TRYON, ESQUIRE, etc.
" May it please your Excellency,
WE his Majesty's liege and loyal Subjects, Inhabitants of Bennington, and the
adjacent Country, have received your Excellency's Letter, of the 11th of August
Instant, by which we are informed of your Excellency's high Displeasure toward
us, by Reason of a Body of our People's dispossessing several Settlers on
Otter-Creek, and its Neighborhood, of their Possessions, during the very Time
our Messengers attended on your Excellency at New York, and were waiting the
Determination of Government, on our Petition, that we might remain unmolested
in our Possessions, till the King's Pleasure could be obtained. Your Excellency
further informs us, that you Look on our late Proceedings with great Concern,
viewing them as daring Insults to Government, a Violation of public Faith, and
the Conditions granted to our Petition. We would with proper Submission, give
your Excellency and Council, a short Narrative of Facts, with a few Reflections
and Reasons thereon. And,

"FIRST, we would observe, That our Messengers your Excellency styles
Commissioners, was not authorized to establish, and complete Articles of public
Faith for their Constituents. The Business assigned them, was to deliver the
written Petition, and inform your Excellency and Council of the Facts of the
Controversy subsisting, and further negociate and forward the Matter of our
Petition, and return to us the Determination of Government, reserving to
Ourselves the Power of assenting to, or dissenting therefrom, though true it is,
when the Articles of amicable Settlement, or Order of Government was read at a
public Meeting held at Bennington, on the 15th Day of July Ultimo, the said
Order and Proposals were universally complied with by those present: From which
Time we reasonably Compute the Date of public Faith, and sacred Bond of
Friendship, but in the Interim, the Conditions of Faith was forming, and before
a Ratification thereof, Mr. Kockburn, a noted Surveyor, unknown (as we suppose)
to your Excellency, and Council, who, by the Contrivance, Aid and Employ of
certain monopolizing Adversaries of our's, took a Tour to the northerly Parts
of the New Hampshire Grants, to survey, and make Locations on our Land. Such
Locating we view as a manifest Plan, and Intention of invading our Property --
the same as intrenching round the City, portraits a Siege thereof.

OUR People having Notice of Mr. Kockburn's Intrusion on our Borders, rallied a
small Party, and pursued, and overtook him and his Party, and in their Pursuit,
passed the Towns of Panton and New Haven, near the Mouth of Otter Creek;
dispossessed Col. Reed of a Saw-Mill in said Panton, which by Force, and
without Color, or even Pretense of Recourse to Law, he had taken from the
original Owners and Builders, more than three Years before, and did at that
same Time extend his Force, Terrors and Threats into the Town of New Haven;
who, by the vicious and haughty Aid of Mr. Benzell, the famed Engineer, with a
Number of Assistants, under their Command, so terrified the Inhabitants (which
were about twelve in Number) that they left their Possessions and Farms to the
Conquerers, and escaped with the Skin of their Teeth, although they had
expended large Sums of Money in cutting Roads to, and settling in that new
Country, as well as fatigued and labored hard in cultivating their Farms: Col.
Reed at the same Time, and with the same Force, did take Possession of one
Hundred and Thirty Saw-Logs, and fourteen Thousand Feet of Pine Boards, which
Boards were made in the same Mill, and all lying thereby, all which he
converted to his own Use. Not long after, the original Proprietors of the said
Mill, did re-enter, and take Possession thereof, but was a second Time attacked
by Col. Reed's Stewart, with a Number of armed Men, under his (supposed).
Instructions, and by their superior Force and Threats, obliged to quit the
Premises again -- all which Tenements, said Reed occupied and enjoyed until
dispossessed, as your Excellency's Letter complains of.

BUT to return to Kockburn again. Cur Party having taken him as aforesaid,
brought him to the Town of Castleton, near South Bay, where being first
informed of your Excellency's Clemency as well as that of the honorable
Council, in granting the Prayer of our Petition; and in Conformity to the
Articles of Settlement agreed on, dismissed him on honorable Terms.

THIS is a short Narrative of Facts, for the Proof of which, sufficient
Affidavits can be educed,

WE are apprehensive your Excellency has been hitherto unacquainted with these
Facts, and have therefore exhibited them in this Letter; although it appears
strange to us, according as your Excellency's own Letter states the Matter,
that we should be suspected or taxed with violation of public Faith, and that
our disingenuous and dishonorable Violation thereof, has nullified and made
void the late amicable Settlement; for at the same Time your Excellency charges
us with breach of Faith, and Settlement, the very Preliminaries of this Faith
was not known on our Part, and consequently could not have been complied with,
the very Stipulation and Faith spoken of, did not then exist, for it must be
the Meeting of the Minds of the contracting Parties, which constitutes such
Faith and Agreement, and of Course cannot be broken before its existence.

MR. Kockburn's locating our Lands in the mean Time the Preliminaries of Public
Faith were forming, was at least as much a Breach of that Faith, as what we are
charged with. Nay, according to our Conception of the Matter, more so; as he
made the first Movement toward the Invasion of our Property.

SOON after, our Messengers returned from New York, and read the Minutes of
Council, and your Excellency's Letter of Compliance therewith, to a large
Auditory convened at Bennington for that purpose, composed of the Inhabitants
of that Place, the adjacent Country, and sundry respectable Gentlemen from the
neighboring Provinces; your Excellency's gracious, wise, and benevolent
Proposals for settling Unity and Concord, in our Part of the Province, were by
those present, unanimously applauded, and conceded to; and all possible public
Testimonies of Honor and Respect, paid to your Excellency and Council, by
sundry Discharges of Cannon and small Arms; your Excellency's Health, long
Life, and Prosperity, as well as that of the honorable Council's, was the
Toast; your Name commanded Reverence and Esteem, and your Excellency's Person
in particular, became precious in our Eyes.

AND, we do humbly assure your Excellency we have no Disposition of Alienation
of Affections, toward you, or knowingly break any Article of Public Faith.

THERE are two Propositions, which are the Objects of our Attention.

"FIRSTLY; The Protection and maintaining our Property.

AND, SECONDLY; to use the greatest Care and Prudence, not to break the
Articles of Public Faith, or insult Governmental Authority.

THESE two Propositions, we mean strictly and religiously to adhere to. And for
the more explicit Knowledge of the Preliminaries and Conditions of Public
Faith and Trust, we would inform your Excellency and Council, that our
Acceptance of those Conditions on the Part of New York, is, that they make no
further settlements or Locations on our Lands, granted under the Great Seal of
the Province of New Hampshire, until his Majesty's Pleasure be obtained, as to
the validity of the Grants; although this was not so fully expressed, yet we
suppose it was implied in the Abstract of the Minutes of Council; if it was
not, we pray, your Excellency and Council would undeceive us in that
Particular, for if we are deceived in this, then, on this Hypothesis, your
Excellency and Council's lenient and friendly Disposition toward Us, will not
for the future, (by us) be viewed as such; for such Locations and Settlements
on our Lands, would be incompatible with Friendship, and a manifest
Infringement on our Property, which has all along been the Bone of Contention.

THE last part of your Excellency's Letter to Us, contains a Requirement of our
immediate Assistance in repossessing Col. Reed's Tenants of said Tenements. As
to this Particular, had your Excellency have known by what Means Col. Reed
obtained Possession of them Lands and Tenements, undoubtedly your Excellency
would not have required our Assistance in repossessing him; or have viewed with
Concern, our dispossessing him, as a daring Insult to Government: For the Case
rightly understood, it appears, that his Conduct was a daring Insult to
Government, and continued Violation for more than three Years, of the Laws,
Restrictions, Regulations, and Economy, both of God, and Man; a notorious
Breach of the Tenth Command of the Decalogue, which says, "Thou shall not
covet, etc." He coveting, did take the Saw-Mill-Logs, Boards, and also, the
Lands, Labors, Possessions, Farms, Tenements, etc. etc. from the rightful
Owners, Proprietors, and first Occupants thereof, without a process at Law, as
aforesaid, to their Exclusion from the Premises more than three Years, all
which Time He has been enriching Himself, by the improvement of their Estates;
and, should we repossess him of the Premises again, We should become
Copartners with Him, in his Wickedness. Such an Act we could not reconcile to
our own Consciences; it being a parently immoral, and most flagrantly Cruel and
Unjust.

WHEN your Excellency and Council views these Facts, and Arguments, we humbly
conceive we shall not be required to repossess Colonel Reed of the Premises:
Nor do we expect your Excellency and Council will adjudge us to be Violators of
the late Articles of Public Faith: All which with due Submission, we refer to
your Excellency and Council.

AND, we do now, with due Reverence, ask the Favor of a few Lines, which may
certify to us, the Determination of Government, relative to the Particulars
litigated in this Paper, and remain your ever faithful and most obedient humble
Servants.

AT a General Meeting held at Manchester, on the 27th Day of August 1772, by
the Committee of the Towns of Bennington, Sunderland, Manchester, Dosseth,
Ruport, Pollet, Wells, Poultney, Castleton, Pitsford and Rutland; the foregoing
Answer to his Excellency's Letter of the 11th Instant, was read to the said
Committees, and the Vote was called by Mr. Nathan Clark Chairman, whether the
said Answer be approved of, by the said Committees? and it was voted in the
Affirmative.

Test. ETHAN ALLEN, Clerk for said Committees.

ARGUMENTS, Demonstrating that the Property of the District of LAND aforesaid,
was conveyed from the CROWN, to the NEW HAMPSHIRE GRANTEES, by Virtue of their
respective CHARTERS.
SECTION I.
AS the Claimants under New Hampshire rely on their Charters from that
Government as the predicate and ground of their Title to the Property of the
Land in Contest; so, on the other Hand, the Claimants under New York, predicate
and ground their Title to the same Land on the Validity of their Patents from
New York: This brings the Point in Issue between the respective Claimants to
this single Question, namely, Which of the said Governments conveyed the Fee of
the Land in Contest? For it is self-evident both could not. And upon exploring
the Controversy, and animadverting on the Merits of the different Claims, be it
which it will that may be allowed to stand the Test, and adjudged Valid, it
will of Necessity invalidate the other. In the Discussion of this Subject, and
searching into the Merit of the respective Claims, it is necessary to inspect
into the Validity of the Grant from King CHARLES to the Duke of York, from
which Foundation only, the Government of New York deduce their Right of
patenting the Lands in contest; yet the Matter of Fact is, that neither the
Government of New York as such, or any Individual therein, has ever had any
Conveyance of any Land from the Duke of York, nor does any Landlord or Person
whatever, in the Government hold the Fee or Property of their Land, by Virtue
of any Conveyance from the Duke of York; but they hold the Fee of their Lands
on a very different Footing, viz. by Conveyance from the Crown; yet, if it be
conceded to, that King CHARLES gave to his Brother James Duke of York, the Fee
of the Lands West of Connecticut River, to the Head of Delaware Bay; and
allowing the Fee to be still vested in him, his Heirs or Assigns, upon this
Hypothesis no Person in the Province of New York has the Fee or Property of
the Land they possess, the Fee remaining the Property of the Duke of York, his
Heirs or Assigns. And further, upon the same Principle, those identical Patents
under the Seal of New York, which were laid on the New Hampshire Grants, are in
their own Nature, equally null and void, with all other Conveyances of Land in
the said Province which have been given by the Crown, the Fee thereof being
vested in the Duke of York, etc. So that the Grantees under New York and
New Hampshire, are both, upon this Stating of the Case, equally destitute of
the Fee of the Land contested for: But, upon this Stating, the Grantees under
New Hampshire, have the Argument of Settlement, and Ocoupation, and Possession,
on their Side; which is abundantly sufficient to give the Priority, and
Preference of Title to them, so that neither the Government of New York or
their Patentees, gain any Thing by building their Title on the said Grant to
the Duke of York -- for if there be any Thing in it, it defeats their own Title
as well as that of New Hampshire, proving too much for their Purpose, or
nothing at all: But, if the Lands contained in the Duke of York's Grant
reverted back to the Crown, then the Duke of York's Patent became extinct,
null, and absolutely void, and is as though it never had been; whether the said
Reversion happened in Consequence of the said Duke's abdicating the Throne --
turning Papist, or by any formal Surrendery, or by any Means whatever, provided
the Fee became revested in the Crown, then the said Charter became extinct, as
aforesaid: so that whether the Fee of the Land in Dispute still remains in the
said Duke of York, his Heirs or Assigns, or reverted, or was surrendered to the
Crown, none of all this will in the least justify the Government of New York or
its Patentees, in founding their Pretensions of Title to the Lands aforesaid,
by Virtue of the aforesaid Grant from King Charles to the Duke of York. For,
take the Argument one Way, and it overturns both the Title of New York and
New Hampshire also, leaving the latter in Occupation and Possession of the
disputed Premises, and that only, being entirely destitute of the Fee; and the
New York Claimants destitute of the least Color of Title whatsoever. But, take
the Argument the other Way, viz. Provided the Fee of the Lands aforesaid
reverted and been revested in the Crown, then the said Lands at the Time of
first granting were crown Lands the same as though the Duke of York had never
existed: But the Truth of the matter undoubtedly is this, the under Proprietors
all except William Penn, who had the several Countries parcelled out to them by
the Duke of York, which was contained in his Grant; surrendered their Charters
to the Crown, whereby New York and New Jersey, became royal Governments: This
then being the State of the Case, the Lands in Dispute became Crown Lands, and
the Governor of New Hampshire, as well as New York Crown Officers, or King's
Agents, and it is of no Consequence to the King which of his Governors, grants
his Land, if so be they be granted to, and settled by loyal and industrious
Subjects, thereby adding to the Revenue of the Crown and enlarging and
strengthening the Kingdom: This being presupposed, and admit for supposition
only, that the Governor New Hampshire exceeded his proper Limits in crown
Lands, must the Grantees who have settled those Lands, paid one of the crown
Officers for granting the same, and expended their ALL, in settling and
cultivating his Majesty's Wilderness Land, and who are truly loyal Subjects, be
turned off the said Land by Thousands, and reduced to starving Poverty,
together with their numerous Families, because one of the crown Officers either
ignorantly or designedly imposed upon the People by granting Crown Lands over
his Bounds? This would be extreme wrong, the more so as it cannot be supposed
that the Subjects are capable Judges of the Jurisdiction of Governments and
consequently there should be the greatest care taken to guard the Subject from
injury in all Cases of this Nature, the Truth of which will more fully appear
by the following Considerations, viz. That notwithstanding the supposed Error
in granting the said Lands, yet the great End of the Crown in granting of it is
completely answered, and provided the Subjects i. e. the Settlers are quieted
in the Fee and Possession of the said Lands, they will not be injured, so that
upon this Hypothesis, neither King nor Subject would sustain Damage: Indeed no
Person in the Realm could have just Cause of Complaint. True, the respective
Governors of New York may insinuate, that upon this state of the Case, the
Governor of New Hampshire has cheated them out of their Fees for granting the
said Land -- though it is evident, if Crown Officers are faithful to the King
and Subjects, they could take no more Money for granting Crown Lands, than a
reasonable Compensation for their Trouble, and the other Governor's being
supposed to grant the Lands, saves the said Governor of New York the trouble;
so that the Argument is brought to this single Point only at last, that upon
Supposition the Governor of New Hampshire exceeded his proper Limits in
granting those Lands, yet neither King nor Subjects are injured, (provided the
Claimants under New Hampshire hold the Fee of the said Land as above) except
the Governors of New York, and if they be supposed to be honest Men, the
Trouble of granting the Land would be equal to their Fees had they granted it;
so that they have not been injured a Whit more in this Case, than they may be
supposed to have injured the Subjects by taking exorbitant Fees for granting
the same Lands; which to them is no Injury at all, but a providential Check to
the Exercise of their Avarice. So that the respective Governors of New York,
in an equitable Sense, are no Loosers in this Affair; or at most the Privileges
would be so very inconsiderable as to make it mere trifling to mention it,
especially when set in Competition with the shocking and universal Destruction
that would overspread a large Country of his Majesty's good Subjects, provided
they be dispossessed of the Lands aforesaid. This seems to be the genuine
Sequel of the Argument, even upon the Yorker's own Stating it.

SECTION, II.
IT is not conceeded to on the Part of the Claimants under New Hampshire, that
the Governor did in Fact exceed his proper Limits in granting those Lands, the
contrary will abundatly appear from the following Considerations, viz. Before
and at the Time the said Governor of New Hampshire granted those Lands they
were reputed to be within his Jurisdiction, this was the Opinion of both
Learned and Unlearned, the Wise as well as Simple, thus it was universally
planed in all ancient and modern Maps down to the Year 1764, when, by royal
Determination, the Jurisdiction of New York, was extended over this disputed
District of Land: But the general Opinion before this royal Adjudication was
that the Province of New York extended its Jurisdiction but Twenty Miles to the
Eastward from Hudson's River, so general was this Opinion that the best Maps of
the two respective Provinces, and the History of New Hampshire adopted it as
settled; it is of very great weight in the Question to show how univesal this
Maxim was, and that the unprejudiced and accurate Geographer Mr. Mitchel, in
his Map composed so late as the Year 1755, which with great Propriety and
Certainty ascertains the same Limits, this Map has the more Authority as it was
according to the Certificate of Mr. Pownal, Secretary to the Board of Trade,
and was undertaken with the Approbation and at the Request of the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantation, and is chiefly composed from Draughts,
Charts, and actual Serveys of different Parts of His Majesty's Colonies and
Plantations in America, great Part of which have been since taken by their
Lordships Orders and transmitted to the Office of the Governors of said
Colonies: This Twenty Mile Line was so far from being deemed unfavourable to
New York, that we find the Commissioners from that Province so late as the Year
1767, made an Offer to those of the Massachusetts Bay to let a Line at Twenty
Miles distance East of Hudson's River be the Division between their respective
Provinces, which the latter Commissioners would not then agree to it, being
Thought by them too much in Favor of New York, so little it seems did New York
Commissioners conceive their Claim as far as Connecticut River could be
supported.

THOUGH it is true in the Year 1771 the Province of New York by a public Act
of their General Assembly, did annex all that Part of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, to the Westward from Connecticut River, to their County of
Albany; and it is likewise true that in the Year 1773 the Governor's of the
respective Provinces met at Hartsord in Connecticut and came to a mutual
Agreement to settle that Line at Twenty Miles distance Eastward from Hudson's
River, which was the Hypothesis of that Settlement, which has since been
ratified by His Majesty.

THE Report of the Lords Commissioners for Plantation Affairs in 1753, States
the following Facts, from which is necessarily inferred that New Hampshire
extended its Jurisdiction to the Westward of Connecticut River. -- "There are,
says their Lordships, about 60,000 Acres of Land situate on the West side of
Connecticut River, which was purchased by private Persons from Connecticut, to
whom the Land had been laid out, by the Government of the Massachusetts Bay as
an equivalent for two or three Townships which the Latter purchased from the
Former, this Tract of Land by the determination of the Boundary Line between
the Provinces of New Hampshire and the Massachusetts Bay in 1739 is become a
Part of New Hampshire." -- Thus we have their Lordships Sentiments that the
Jurisdiction of New Hampshire extended over Part of the very Lands in Contest,
Westward of Connecticut River, as long ago as the Year 1739, at which Time
New York never dreamed of extending their Claim to Connecticut River. -- There
is another glaring and indisputable evidence of the former Western extent of
New Hampshire, viz. Relative to Fort Dummer which was Built by the Bay Province
in 1724, and garrisoned at their Expense a great Number of Years; but upon its
being excluded from their Jurisdiction by the Settlement of the jurisdictional
Line, between them and New Hampshire in 1739, the Bay Province represented to
the Government at Home, that the said District of Land and Fort Dummer, having
been determined to be the Property of New Hampshire, they were no longer
obliged to Garrison and maintain it, and praying, That as it was necessary to
the Defense of the Country, that New Hampshire might be directed to support it.
In Consequence of which, an Order passed the King and Council in 1744, that the
Governor and Commander in Chief of New Hampshire, should forthwith move the
Assembly, in His Majesty's Name, to make a proper Provision for that Service;
and at the same Time informing them that in Case they refused to comply with so
reasonable and necessary a Proposal, his Majesty would find himself under a
Necessity of restoring that Fort, with a proper District of Land contiguous
thereto, to the Province of the Massachusett's-Bay, who cannot with Justice be
required to maintain a Fort no longer within their Boundary. In consequence of
this, New Hampshire did maintain this Fort, and paid a Demand of Arrears for
its Maintenance, to the Massachusett's-Bay. In the mean Time New York was
never a Competitor for the Burden, willing as she is to enjoy the Advantage of
granting and engrossing the said Lands.

THIS being the Case, the Government of New Hampshire by the Royal Decree, was
obliged to maintain Fort Dummer, and it being on the West Side of Connecticnt
River, and on this very identical District of Land now in Dispute, can that
Government be justly charged with granting Lands in the Province of New York,
when but a little before his Majesty in Council had adjudged the same Lands to
be in the said Government of New Hampshire and ordered them to defend it, as by
maintaining Fort Dummer, etc. Surely at that Time New Hampshire, did extend its
Jurisdiction Westward of Connecticut River; otherwise the King had ordered the
Government of New York to have maintained Fort Dummer. Nothing can be more
flagrantly evident, than, that the Government of New Hampshire had a Right to
Grant Crown Lands where the Crown compelled them to Defend. From Hence it
appears, that the Government of New Hampshire had a legal Right to grant the
Lands now in Dispute, and that, that Government and his Majesty's good
Subjects, the Grantees of, and Settlers on the said Lands, acted upon honest
and honorable Principles, in granting purchasing, and settling the same, and
on the other Hand, it appears, that the Government of New York in re-granting
the same Land, acted quite the reverse; and the more unpardonably so, as they
granted great Part of it, in open Defiance to His Majesty's Authority
manifested unto them by his express Prohibition, dated the 24th Day of July
1767.

FROM what has been already elucidated it appears, that the Line of
Jurisdiction between the respective Provinces was not exactly ascertained till
the 20th of July 1764; but nevertheless that the Administration of
Great Britain had adjudged in 1739 and confirmed in 1755, that the Government
of New Hampshire extended Westward of Connecticut River, and that this was the
general Sense of the Nation (till ascertained as aforesaid) is real Matter of
Fact. -- True no Determination of His Majesty or Reports of the Lords of Trade
had before particularized how far the Government of New Hampshire should extend
West of Connecticut River: but such Determinations of their's mightily
strengthened the common Opinion, nay, fully confirmed it, that that Government
extended Westward to a twenty Miles Distance, East from Hudson's River;
intersecting a parrallel Line with the Colony of Connecticut, and the Province
of the Massachusett's Bay, between them and said Province of New York. This was
the Opinion both of King and Subjects at the Time the Government of
New Hampshire granted those Lands; and Americans could not conceive of any
intermediate Boundary in one Place more than another, between Connecticut River
and the twenty-mile Limit aforesaid; nor had they any Apprehension that the
Government of New Hampshire would extend to the Westward of that Limit. This
parrallel Line took universal and deep Impression on the Minds of Geographers,
and was the Understanding of the British Empire, and was thus portrayed in all
former Maps. -- The Certainty of this general Opinion may be further
illustrated from the Consideration that none of the British Subjects applied to
the Government of New York for Grants of those Lands, till after the Alteration
of Jurisdiction in 1764, except it be, as is pretended by the New York
Scriblers, that their Government extended Patents from within the said twenty
mile Line across the same, and on some Part of the Premises in Dispute, many
Years before the Government of New Hampshire granted those Lands -- which will
be hereafter considered: But, would further add, it is Matter of Dispute
whether the Administration at Home would recognize those Patents granted by the
Government of New York, on the Premises aforesaid; though antecedent to those
granted by New Hampshire, inasmuch as the Royal Adjudication in 1764, could not
antecedently empower the Government of New York to grant them Lands, which by
Royal Adjudication of the Line of Jurisdiction between New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, fell within the Government of New Hampshire in 1739, as
aforesaid. However, for Argument only, we will suppose the Governments of
New Hampshire and New York had each of them equal Authority to grant those
Lands -- then on this Stating the Case, prior granting would of Consequence be
Priority of Title. The first Conveyance, upon this Hypothesis, being good and
valid both in Law and Equity, must necessarily defeat any subsequent Grant from
the Crown or its Representatives, being as authentic, to all Intents and
Purposes, as any Conveyance of the Fee of Land from the Crown can possibly be.
-- Thus it appears upon this most favorable Concession to those on the Part of
New York, that the Argument preponderates in Favor of the Claimants under
New Hampshire, as their Grants are prior to those of New York, (except in the
Instances of the old Patents, yet to be considered.)

FURTHERMORE, it appears by the express Words of the New Hampshire Grants, that
the Grantees were not only entitled to the Fee of the Lands therein discribed,
but also to all the Enfranchisements, and each and every of the Privileges and
Immunities that by Law his Majesty's Subjects in the Province of New Hampshire
enjoy; so that at the same Time that the Grantees were vested with the Fee of
the Land, they were enfranchised with, and entitled to, all the Privileges and
Immunities contained in their Charters; as the holding of Fairs, choosing Town
Officers, and making and mending their own Roads, etc. It is therefore humbly
conceived, that provided it should be the future Pleasure of his Majesty, to
continue the said Lands in the Jurisdiction of New York, (which by the Settlers
aforesaid is hoped will not be the Case) that the Claimants and Settlers under
the said Grants, will nevertheless have his Majesty's gracious Approbation to
enjoy without Let or Molestation, the Privileges of Incorporation therein
contained; the Grantees having ever considered those Privileges as inseperably
connected with the Grant of the Fee-Simple.

SECTION III.
FROM the Facts and Reasons that have been advanced in the foregoing Sections,
it manifestly appears, that the Title of the Claimants under New Hampshire to
the Lands in Question is indefeasible; yet still there are sundry
Considerations that may serve more abundantly to confirm and establish this
Title beyond Hesitation. As,

FIRSTLY, The far greatest Part of the Extent of Jurisdiction of the Province
of New York, and great Part of New Hampshire, depended entirely on his
Majesty's Pleasure, being wholly in the Arbitration of the Crown, to be either
curtailed or extended. The real Grant on which the original Circumference of
the Government of New Hampshire was founded, extended but Sixty Miles from the
Sea into the Country, to the Westward, terminating about Twenty Miles East of
Connecticut River. This Government was afterward enlarged by his Majesty's
Commission to Benning Wentworth, Esquire Governor of that Province, directing it to
extend to the Westward until it should meet with his Majesty's other
Governments. Which Clause of Western Extention, in the said Commission, as well
as the Royal Adjudication of the boundary Line between this Government and the
Massachusetts Bay in 1739, and Report of the Lords of Trade in 1755, and many
Arguments mentioned in this and the foregoing Sections, all, on the Part of
New Hampshire, amount to sufficient Evidence, that their Government extended so
far West as to intersect the parrallel Line of the Colony of Connecticut and
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, as argued above. And with respect to the
Province of New York, it is original Northen Circumference terminated South of
the City of Albany, and afterward, as Plantations were extended Northerly,
either on Patents procured immediately from the Crown, or Government, or mere
Settlements on Extra-provincial Lands, Commissions from the King, to the
respective Governors were enlarged, as in the Example following, viz. A. M.
Esquire. Captain General, Governor and Commander in Chief in and over the Province
of New York, (then follows the Enlargement,) and the Territories depending
thereon in America. -- These Territories are that Extension of Jurisdiction
beyond their first circumscribed Limits, terminating South of Albany, called
the Province. This territorial Extension of Jurisdiction is altogether in the
Arbitration of the Crown to curtail or extend as before represented. This being
the Case, the respective Governors can no other Way be Judges of the Extent of
their Jurisdiction, but by Directions given them in their Commissions, together
with his Majesty's express Proclamations, and public Determinations relative
thereto, as in the Instance of the Royal Adjudication in 1764; a Publication of
which, by his Majesty's Order, gave his Subjects to understand, that it was his
Pleasure that the Territorial Jurisdiction of New York, should extend to the
West Banks of Connecticut River, which includes the disputed Premises within
that Government; before this it was impossible for the Subjects to know it; if
they could have understood it without his Majesty's Proclamation certifying the
same, such Proclamation would have been needless and impertinent. The Truth of
the Matter is, his Majesty in 1739, determined New Hampshire Government should
cover the present disputed Premises; he altered his Determination in 1764,
whereby New York extended it is Territories over the same Land. And the King has
an undoubted Right to alter and regulate the Jurisdiction of Royal Governments
as may seem to Him mete; and for the New-Yorkers to pretend to amuse People of
common Sense, pretending that it is the ancient and indisputable Right of the
Colony of New York to extend to the West Banks of Connecticut River, as it is
eastern Boundary, is the very Height of Folly: It was in the Nature of Things
absolutely impossible his Majesty himself should have known that to have been
the Case the Moment before he determined it, and equally inconsistent that the
Subjects should know it before his Majesty proclaimed it.

FURTHERMORE, it appears by the Representation which was laid before his
Majesty by Lieutenant Governor Colden, as an Inducement to prefix the West
Banks of Connecticut River, the eastern Boundary of the Province of New York --
That they were Arguments of Convenience, holding up to View that it would be
greatly to the Advantage of the Inhabitants on the New Hampshire Grants, to be
under the Jurisdiction of New York; which Arguments are incompatible with the
Idea of antecedent Right of Jurisdiction. Likewise, from hence we may see the
Inconsistency of that Government or it is Patentees, in founding their Right in
Fee to All or any Part of the Lands in Contest, by Virtue of the said Royal
Adjudication of the Boundary Line on the West Banks of Connecticut River;
inasmuch as it cannot operate to their Advantage antecedent to the Date of that
Adjudication, and afterward cannot be considered any Thing more than a mere
Line of Jurisdiction between the respective Governments.

IT should be furthermore considered, that neither Governments were vested with
the Fee of those Lands; their Case in this Respect, is quite the Reverse to
that of Proprietary Governments, who have a Right to appropriate the Soil. In
Royal Governments, it is true, the Governors have a delegated Authority from
his Majesty to grant Crown Lands; and in such Governments it is a Prerogative
of the Crown to alter the Limits of Jurisdiction; His Majesty has a Right to
re-annex the disputed Premises to his Province of New Hampshire, (in which it
formerly was, and on the Faith of which the Claimants under that Government
purchased and settled the same Lands) or incorporate it into a new Government,
or continue it under the present Jurisdiction, as his Royal Wisdom may discern
to be best for the governed: But, upon such Alterations of Jurisdiction,
private Property is never changed or subverted. For, if the Property of the
Subject be in the Arbitration of the Crown, and liable to the same Vicissitudes
and Changes with Jurisdiction, this would destroy the very Nature of Property,
and would render a King absolute, and despotic, which is perfectly inconsistent
with the Constitution of the Kingdom. -- Therefore, to convey or alienate
Property, is the sacred Prerogative of the rightful OWNER. -- Kings and
Governors (in the Kingdom of Great Britain) cannot intermeddle therewith. There
is indeed as much Difference between the Change of Jurisdiction, and
transfering of the Property of the Subject, as there is between Light and
Darkness; although since the said Royal Adjudication in 1764, the New-Yorkers
have endeavored to blend them together to answer sinister and lucrative
Purposes. -- They were sensible, undoubtedly, that such the aforesaid Arguments
were conclusive against their monopolizing the Fee-simple of said Lands; and as
it is very common for People, who are upon a Design of engrossing the Property
of their Neighbor, to set up some specious Pretense of Right to vindicate
themselves from the Imputation of Dishonor and Reproach; so in the present
Case, the New-Yorkers endeavor to draw the Curtain of the Duke of York over
their Knavery, and under the feigned Character of Heirs to that apostate Duke,
claim the Lands aforesaid, and fancy themselves the Owners of Towns, (Fields)
and Houses that they builded not.

Some REMARKS on a Pamphlet entitled, "A State of the Right of the Colony of
New York," etc.
HAVING finished the general Narrative of the Controversy subsisting between
the Claimants, under New Hampshire and New York, to Lands to the Westward of
Connecticut River; which were firstly granted by the Former, and which, by the
Determination of the Boundary-Line, between the respective Provinces in 1764,
fell within the Jurisdiction of the Latter. And, having given the Reader to
understand the Oppressions which the Government of New York have exercised
toward the Grantees and Settlers under New Hampshire, which could not have
been so effectually done any other Way, as by transcribing the Letters from
Governor Tryon to the Inhabitants of Bennington, and the adjacent Country, and
their Answers to him, on the State of the aforesaid Controversy; which were
published in the public News Papers, directly after they were wrote. And having
also finished three Sections of Arguments, which demonstrate that the Fee of
those Lands was conveyed from the Crown to the New Hampshire Grantees, by
Virtue of their respective Charters; the last Thing proposed, is to make some
Remarks on a Pamphlet entitled, A State of the Right of the Colony of New York,
etc. and on the Narrative of the Proceedings subsequent to the Royal
Adjudication concerning the Lands to the Westward of Connecticut River; lately
usurped by New Hampshire. -- Intended as an Appendix to the General Assembly's
State of the Right of the Colony of New York, (with Respect to its eastern
Boundary on Connecticut River, so far as concerns their late Encroachments
under the Government of New Hampshire,) published at their Session, 1773.

SECTION IV.
ALTHOUGH the Arguments contained in the foregoing Sections are full and
conclusive, relative to the Nullity and Nothingness of the Duke of York's
Grant, at least, such Part thereof as concerns the present Dispute; and that
neither the Government of New York or its Patentees gain any Manner of Title to
the Land in Contest, by predicating it on the Validity of that Grant, yet the
General Assembly of the said Province in their State of the Rights, etc.
venture the Stress of their whole Cause thereon, and deduce all their Arguments
of Title to those disputed Premises therefrom: It is therefore partly out of
Compliment to so learned a Body of Doctors, as well as more fully to
invalidate, and apparently demonstrate, to every capable Judge, the utter
Insufficiency and Defect of Title to those Lands, by Conveyance from the
Government of New York, that the Grant of the Duke of York is here brought
under Consideration: And in Order thereto, it is Necessary that the second
Grant be here inserted, which is transcribed from the New York Pamphlet
Verbatim.

EXTRACT of King CHARLES the Second's Grant of the Province of New York, to his
Brother JAMES, Duke of York.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Know Ye, that We, for diverse Good Causes and Considerations, have, of our
especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, given and granted, and by
these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto our
dearest Brother, James, Duke of York, his Heirs and Assigns, all that Part of
the Main Land of New England, beginning at a certain Place, called or known by
the Name of St. Croix, next adjoining to New Scotland, in America; and from
thence extending along the Sea Coast, unto a certain Place called Petuaguine or
Pemaquid, and so up the River thereof to the furtherest Head of the same, as it
tends Northwards; and extending from the River of Kinebeque, and so upwards,
by the shortest Course of the River Canada Northwards: And all that Island or
Islands, commonly called by the several Name or Names of Matowacks or
Long Island, situate, and being toward the West of Cape Cod; and the Narrow
Highgansetts, abutting upon the Main Land; between the two Rivers there, called
or known by the several Names of Connecticut and Hudson's River, together also
with the said River called Hudson's, and all the Lands from the West Side of
Connecticut River, to the East Side of Delaware Bay: and also, all those
several Islands, called or known by the Names of Martin's Vineyard, and
Nantuckes, otherways Nantucket; together with all, etc.

Dated the Twenty Ninth Day of June, in the Twenty Sixth Year of the Reign of
King Charles the Second.
It appears from the Sequel of the Representations, Narratives and Arguments
contained in the New York Pamphlet, that the Government of New York do not
pretend to any Conveyance of the Fee of the Lands in Contest from the Duke of
York. But their Grand Hypothesis is, that the Jurisdiction of their Government
from the first Establishment, was predicated on, and bounded by the descriptive
Limits of the said Grant; and consequently, that the disputed Premises was
never in the Government of New Hampshire; and, that that Government never was
vested with Authority to grant those Lands, and also consequently, that the
Grants by them made, are in their own Nature void. This is the Sum of the
New York Arguments relative to their Title to those Lands. Here,

FIRST, it is necessary the descriptive Limits of the above rehearsed Charter
be brought under Consideration; which includes the Countries of St. Croix,
adjoining New Scotland, Pemaquid, the River Kenebeque, and the Islands known by
the Names of Martin's Vineyard, Nantucket, etc. All these Countries lying far
East of Connecticut River, and within the actual Jurisdiction of the Provinces
of the Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, etc. and at present, not contended for
on the Part of New York. Their General Assembly, in the State of the Right.
etc. had done well to have informed the Public; whether their "ancient and
indisputable Right" of Jurisdiction extended to every Part of the discriptive
Limits of the Grants aforesaid, and if not, to which Part it was circumscribed;
and when done, and by what Authority; whether their Governors Commissions, at
any Time, particularized and determined to what Part of the Limits of the said
Duke's Grant their Jurisdiction should extend, more than another, or to the
whole; or, whether any Royal Edict or Proclamation, had ever thus given them
such predicated Limits of Jurisdiction: this is absolutely necessary for them
to do, in Support of their Title to the Lands in Question. And furthermore, it
is requisite for them to demonstrate that those Lands were actually contained
in such their former Limits of Jurisdiction: but, if the Government of New York
from Royal Determination, cannot extend Jurisdiction to any one Part of the
descriptive Limits of the Grant aforesaid, more than to another; then, on this
Hypothesis, their Jurisdiction includes the whole Limits contained in the
Grant, or none at all; that it includes the Whole, will not be pretended, and
that any Part, as predicated on them Limits, cannot be made to appear: But on
the contrary, it appears His Majesty and Council had no Reference to any Part
of the Limits of this Grant, in determining the Boundaries of the Jurisdiction
of New York in 1764, as may appear from the Royal Order itself, an Extract of
which is as follows: His Majesty with the Advice of his Privy Council, does
Order and Declare, That the West Banks of the River Connecticut, from where it
enters the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, as far North, as the Forty-fifth
Degree of Northern Latitude, to be the Boundary between the said two Provinces
-- that Parrallel of Latitude is also established it is North Boundary, etc. The
Source of Connecticut River is supposed to be something to the Northward of
Latitude Forty-Five, and comes much from the North-East, a considerable
Distance after it passes that Latitude; but it is notorious, that the Source of
Hudson's River is far South of it; so that by comparing the descriptive Limits
of the Duke of York's Grant, with those expressed in the Royal Order, they will
be found to be materially different. The Limit of that Part of the Duke's
Grant, which respects the present Arguments, is in the Words following:
Together also with the said River called Hudson's River, and all the Lands from
the West Side of Connecticut River to the East Side of Delaware Bay; which
Limit in any possible Construction of it, can include but Part of the disputed
Premises, (which said Premises extend and are bounded on the Forty-fifth Degree
of North Latitude,) as will more fully appear in a further Discussion of that
Line. But,

FIRST, it is manifest that the King and Privy Council, in determining the
Extent of the Jurisdiction of the Province of New York, did not proceed upon
the Idea of that Government's having any antecedent Right of Jurisdiction to
those Lands. Had that been the Case, the Royal Order had been predicated on the
Boundary Lines of the Duke's Grant aforesaid, and could not have comprehended
any more Land than from the West Side of Connecticut River to the East Side of
Delaware Bay; and these Bounds are so loose, vague, and indeterminate, that it
is altogether impossible to found a Line of Jurisdiction thereon, as will more
abundantly appear by the following Observations on the discriptive Limits
thereof, which may be seen at Large in the fore Part of this Section.
Therefore, such Part only, as is necessary for the Consideration of the
indeterminate Bounds, before spoken of, is here quoted; which, after describing
the Situation of Long Island, and that it abuts upon the Main Land between the
two Rivers there called or known by the several Names of Connecticut and
Hudson's River, begins the Description under Consideration, together with the
said River called Hudson's River. Observe, that as the Description of this
River is not immediately connected with any foregoing or following Discriptions
in said Grant; nothing more can possibly be included in it, but a Description
of the River only, exclusive of one Foot of Land on either Side. The second
Description and all the Land from the West Side of Connecticut River to the
East Side of Delaware Bay. The best Mathematician on Earth cannot ascertain
these Limits, except upon arbitrary Principles, as there can be no prefixed
Place on Connecticut River where to erect the first Bounds; and as to any
particular Place on the East Side of Delaware Bay, where to erect a Second, is
altogether undetermined in this Description: But, inasmuch as it includes all
the Land from the West Side of Connecticut River, etc. there is a little better
Foundation to establish the first Bounds than the Second. It seems in order to
include All as aforesaid, it would be necessary to extend either to the Head of
the River, or to the most Northerly Extention of the whole Stream, to make the
first Bounds; and provided this imaginary Bounds should extend North of the
Forty-fifth Degree of Northern Latitude, it would so far exceed the Settlement
of the Line in 1764. Be this as it will, the most Northerly Part of the River,
which would most likely be the Head, would be the most favorable on the Part
of New York, for to establish a first Bounds, and from thence to extend a
strait Line to some Place on the East Side of Delaware Bay; this is something
of a natural Construction, on the indeterminate descriptive Limits aforesaid,
without exploring Connecticut River, which in this Case is necessary. And,
First, in tracing said River to its Source, it is found toward it is Extremity,
to come much out of the North-East. This being the Case, a strait Line from
it is Head to Delaware Bay, would cross said River and include a large Tract of
Land on the East Side, and perhaps cross the River sundry Times; the
Consequences may be drawn thus, that where the Line may be supposed to cross
the last Time, ought to be the first real North Boundary, of the ancient and
indisputable Limit of Jurisdiction of New York. For, if the Bounds at the Head
of the River before spoken of, be so established, it would include considerable
Land on the East Side of the River, within the old Boundary of New York, which
is contrary to any Idea to be gained from the discriptive Limit aforesaid, viz.
and all the Land from the West Side of Connecticut River, etc. Still it may be
queried whether there may not be another proposed first Boundary better
purporting with the Description of And all the Land from the West Side of
Connecticut River to the East Side of Delaware Bay, between the Head of the
River, and the Place where the imaginary Line was supposed to pass? To this it
may be answered, that a Place between these two, so far up the River as in
tracing a strait Line from thence, to Delaware Bay, would not cross the River,
may better agree with the above Description: Still, from none of these imagined
Lines, from the different imagined Bounds, or from any other projected,
possible, first Bounds, can such a strait Line be ascertained, till the Place
for the South-Western Boundary on the "East Side of Delaware Bay" be
established? And the Vagueness of the discriptive Limit is so great, that it
cannot be determined whether that Bounds shall be at the Northern Extremity of
the East Side of Delaware Bay, or at the Southern, where it communicates with
the main Ocean, or at any other intermediate Place between these two: so, that
from the uncertainty of the second Bounds, it is impossible to establish the
first, so as exactly to include "all the Land from the West Side of the said
River to the East Side of said Bay," and no more. And,

THUS it is demonstrated from the Vagueness, Uncertainty and Obsoleteness of
the discriptive Limits of the Grant to the Duke of York, before quoted at
large; that it is in the Nature of Things absolutely impossible to ascertain
it. From hence follows a Second necessary inference, viz. That it is equally
impossible and contradictory, that governmental Jurisdiction should be
predicated thereon; for an ideal uncertain Jurisdiction, in its own Nature
incapable to be determined, is in reality none at all. And from hence follows a
Third Inference which determines the Sequel of the Argument, on the Subject of
Property, concerning the Lands in Question, to be in Favor of the Claimants
under New Hampshire: For, it is in the last Place, equally contradictory and
impossible, as in the Case of the Absurdity of ascertaining the Limits of the
pretended "ancient" Jurisdiction of New York, predicating it on vague and
undeterminate Boundaries, that, that Government should predicate their Right to
the Fee of Lands, by them thus unascertainable; for as Uncertainty, and natural
Impossibility of a Jurisdiction's being rendered determinate makes it in
Reality to be none at all; so the Idea of Property, predicated thereon is
equally impertinent. -- True it is, by the royal Determination in 1764, the
East Line of New York extended to the West Banks of Connecticut River. Which
may be Foundation for Conjecture, that, that Limit might have Reference to a
Description in the Duke's Grant aforesaid, "and all the Lands from the West
Side of Connecticut River," etc. Yet when the Representation made by Lieut.
Governor Colden, to his Majesty in Council, as mentioned in this Pamphlet,
under the Head of the Narrative, etc. comes to be considered it will reflect
Light on this Point. The Arguments made Use of in the said Representation were
those of Convenience and Advantage to the Settlers on those Lands to be in the
Government of New York: And, that the West Banks of Connecticut River was a
good and certain Boundary," etc. These were undoubtedly the preponderating
Motives of determining the West Banks of Connecticut River to be the East
Boundary of New York, and such Arguments are utterly inconsistant with the
Notion of an "Ancient indisputable Right" of Jurisdiction.

THERE is still another Consideration which may be of Moment in the Observation
of this, so Trumpt-up, "ANCIENT RIGHT OF JURISDICTION" of the Province of
New York, to the Lands in Contest: If it be admitted a Line should be drawn
from the most northerly Part of Connecticut River to the most northern
Extremity of Delaware-Bay; still, it is by no means probable such Line would
include more than one half (if so much) of the Lands in Dispute so far as may
be judged from the Latitude and Longitude of the respective Objects: For
considering the Course of Connecticut River, which is nearly from North to
South, except toward its Extremity; and the Sea coast, from the River's Mouth,
together with Delaware Bay, forming also an indened Line, to the South of West;
the Land included in these Limits, by a Line drawn from Connecticut River to
Delaware Bay as aforesaid, would (excepting the small Promontory formed by the
Mouth of the Bay and the Ocean) lie in the Figure of an obtuse angled Triangle;
and the Course of the said Line from the River to the Bay, according to occular
Survey, would be from the Northeast a Southwesterly Direction: Which very badly
comports with the present North and Westerly Exercise of Jurisdiction of the
Government of New York, at Crownpoint, Detroit, etc. -- It may here well be
observed, the Settlers under New Hampshire seem to be in a critical Situation;
every arbitrary Measure under the present Administration of the Government of
New York, is excercised against them; and provided they flee to the Eastward to
procure Inheritances, there they are fore-closed, the discriptive Limits of the
said ancient Jurisdiction covers them (to wit) the Countries of St. Croix,
Pemaquid, Kenebeque, Nantucket, Martin's Vineyard, etc. -- Yet there is another
large unknown Country to the West and Northwest, which has been but partly
explored; and provided, these People, instead of fleeing to the Eastward,
should turn their Course, to those Countries; there, it is indisputable but
that, New York would encircle them with another odd Description of Domain
contained in their Governor's Commissions, i. e. A. B. Captain General Governor
and Commander in Chief in and over the Province of New York, next follows the
Description hinted and the Territories depending thereon, in America.

FROM the foregoing Discriptions of the Government of New York, it appears they
lay Claim to so extensive a Domain three different Ways, or have three
different Modes or Modifications in comprehending and engrossing their
progressive Limits. As,

1stly. THE Province of New York, which falls short of, and terminates
considerably South of the City of Albany.

2dly. "THE Territories depending thereon in America." These Territories
comprehending such Plantations, on extra-provincial Land, as are and have been
carried on adjoining to the Province till its Territories, are at present
extended to Detroit and the Neighborhood thereof, etc.

3dly. The Limits of the Duke of York's Grant, and inasmuch as the Grantees and
Settlers on the Lands in Dispute, hold their Title under New Hampshire, and
that Government had for several Years exercised their Jurisdiction over those
Lands, even till 1764. -- Therefore, in this Case the Government of New York
could not extend their Territorial Sort of Jurisdiction over the Premises; for
such Sort of Jurisdiction might be challenged on the Part of New Hampshire (if
it should be admited at that Time, said Premises was extra-provincial Lands)
and that with far the most Propriety. Inasmuch as that Government had granted
the Land and began Settlements thereon. Add to this the following Clause in
Governor Wentworth's Commission, which they viewed to be of great Weight in
this Case, which, after discribing the former Limits of New Hampshire, and from
thence extending West till it meets with his Majesty's other Governments. Add
to this also, the Reasons held forth in the Chain of Arguments, contained in
the three first Sections; all which were too potent for the New York
territorial Sort of Dominion to frustrate. At that Juncture, Therefore, the
Lawyers, Land-jobbers, Politicians, etc. planed out the aforesaid third Modes
of Jurisdiction predicating it on the discriptive Limits of the Grant to the
Duke of York. And on this new modled Plan breathed an air of ANCIENT AND
INDISPUTABLE RIGHT of Jurisdiction, and consequently to the Fee of the Lands in
Contest.

THE first Intimation that ever saluted the Ears of the Public, asserting it
to be the ancient Right of the Colony of New York, to extend to Connecticut
River as its eastern Boundary, was discoverd from a Proclamation, given under
the Hand of William Tryon, Esquire Governor of the Province of New York, etc. and
dated the 11th Day of December, 1771. His Proclamation begins after the
following Manner. Whereas it is the ancient and incontestible Right of this
Colony to extend to Connecticut River, as its Eastern Boundary.

THIS was drawing a positive Conclusion from fictitious, and till that Time,
unheard of Premises: and rather influenced People, in the several Governments,
to purchase and settle under New Hampshire, than diswade them therefrom, for
common Fame, and common Sense were a Barrier against the Belief of this
New York Doctrine, which from the Time of the royal Adjudication in 1764, was
by the Proclamation aforesaid, antidated to "Ancient." That this Doctrine till
then, was incontested, is thought to be true; for it had but peept to public
Consideration, and has ever since been contested.

SHOULD this, their new Hypothesis be admitted; yet, as has been before
observed, these Limits could include but Part of said Lands, according to the
best Judgment that can be formed without an actual, and accurate Survey of the
discriptive Limits of said Grant; which if the New-Yorkers can do and fairly
Demonstrate, to any able Mathematicians, and competant and impartial Judges,
that they have rightly ascertaned those Limits, it is engaged on the Part of
the Claimants under New Hampshire that they shall yield up, to the Land-jobbers
of New York, their Lands and Labors: an Object which undoubtedly would be
grateful and pleasing to them; and which they have many Years been in Pursuit
of, and have hitherto had the Mortification to be baffled. It is verily
Incumbant on the Government of New York, in order to found Tittle to those Land
on this new Scheme,

FIRSTLY, to ascertain the Limits of their imaginary Bounds: This, the
Claimants under New Hampshire, will expect completed, or hear no more of those
"ANCIENT AND INCONTESTIBLE" Boundaries of New York.

SECTION, V.
THE General Assembly of the Colony of New York, in their State of the Right of
that Colony, etc. Page 3d. wave the Right of the English by first Discovery, as
being foreign to their Purpose, and that the Dutch Possessions are only
material to be supported; and Claim no further Right by Pay of the Dutch, but
priority of Possession. Yet in the same Page inform, when the first War between
England and Holland became inevitable, King Charles the Second, by Letters
Patent dated the 12th Day of March 1663-4, granted to his Brother the Duke of
York the Tracts of Country, which comprehend New York. To render this Gift
effectual, before the War was proclaimed, a Fleet and Land Forces were sent out
to remove the Dutch and put the Duke in Possession. -- The Circumstancies that
attended the making this Grant, and sending the Armament to render it
effectual, are a sufficient Reason to Determine that the Government at Home, at
that Time, viewed the Dutch Settlement as an Intrusion, and Possession (which
is all they rely on) gained by trespass, in legal Construction, is no
Possession at all. That the English had prior Right to all the Countries from
Forty to Forty-eight Degrees of North Latitude, by Virtue not only of Discovery
by Sebastian Cabot and others, but by being in actual Possession of several
Parts of the Premises, is Matters too well known to be disputed.

WHETHER there was real Seisin in the Crown, or not, or the Time of granting
these Countries, is not truly in Question; since every Grant so made is
incontestibly valid against the King, his Heirs and Successors; and the Colony
of New York being entirely Dependant on the Crown of Great Britain for their
Title; Priority of Charter is therefore necessary to be determined.

THE Grant of King James the First to the Council of Plymouth bearing Date at
Westminster, the 13th Day of November, in the Eighteenth Year or his Reign:
comprehends all the Lands, Islands, etc. from forty to forty-eight Degrees of
North Latitude, through the Main Land from Sea to Sea. On the 19th Day of March
1628, the Council of Plymouth under their common Seal, did grant to Sir Henry
Roswell, Sir John Young, and Others, their Heirs and Associates for ever, all
that Part of America, lying between the Great River there, commonly called
Monomack, alias Merimack and Charles River, within the Space of three Miles to
the Northward of the same River, called Monomack, alias Merimack, or to the
Northward of any or every Part thereof, and in Length and Longitude of and
within all the Breadth aforesaid, throughout the Main Lands there, from the
Atlantic or Western Sea or Ocean on the East Part, to the South Sea on the West
Part.

THIS Deed of Sale at the Suit of the Grantees, with a Charter of
Incorporation, was granted and confirmed by King CHARLES the First, the 4th Day
of March 1629, wherein the Limits are exactly the same with those in the
Plymouth Conveyance; and the Proviso of CHARLES, that the actual Settlement of
the Subjects of other Christian States to determine the Extent, the same as was
the Proviso in JAMES'S Grant to the Plymouth Company.

THIS same Charter of Incorporation was adjudged void in the High Court of
Chancery of England in 1684; from which the Assembly of New York in their
State, etc. Page 5th, take Occasion to say the Title of that Colony now solely
depends on their new Charter of 1691. Nevertheless, the Right of Soil to All
and every Part of the Deed of Sale aforesaid, remained indefeasible; for, only
animadvert back to the Plymouth Conveyance, and observe, that the Right in Fee,
was by them conveyed to the Grantees; and trace it to King CHARLES'S Charter of
Incorporation, which only vested the Grantees with Powers of Government. Though
it is true, this Charter contains all the Formality necessary in the Conveyance
of the Fee; yet is, so far as respects the Fee, is no more than a Duplicate of
what was before granted, which neither adds nor deminisheth; and it is easy to
see, that the Court of Chancery could not vacate or make Void, at most, any
Thing more than those incorporate Privileges; and likewise as easily
discernable that nothing more was attempted. Thus the Colony of the
Massachusetts still hold their Right in Fee, by Conveyance from King JAMES to
the Council of Plymouth, who were their Grantors.

IN the next Place it may be observed, that in 1691 the Privileges of
Incorporation were restored; though our Authors, in their State, etc. endeavor
to curtail the Colony of the Massachusetts, by construing their last Charter to
extend no further West than the East Limit of the Colony of Connecticut. Their
Words are these, "These Words (as far as) being in the Case of the Grant of the
Crown on the Suit of the Party, in legal Construction, carry the Massachusetts
Bay Colony no farther Westward than till it meets the Colony of Connecticut,
and not to Connecticut River, and much less to the Westward of it." Be these
bold Assertions as they will, and provided it be here admitted, for Argument
sake, that the Powers of Jurisdiction of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay
be ever so much curtailed, yet one Proposition we can verily be assured of,
viz. That it is not in the Power of King or Chancery to curtail or deprive them
of their Property.

IT is to be further observed, that however our Authors may Criticize upon the
gramatical or legal Construction of selected Words or Phrases; yet, a little
Attention to the following real Facts, will clearly point out the Inconsistency
of such Sophisms.

FIRSTLY, Connecticut Charter, granted by King CHARLES the Second, the 23d Day
of April 1662, was bounded and extended in Length, by and with the
Massachusetts first Charter, granted by King CHARLES the First, the 4th Day of
March 1629, which incontestibly extended agreeable with the aforesaid
discriptive Limits of the Deed of Sale from the Council of Plymouth, to Sir
Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, etc. and extended through the Main Land in
Longitude to the South Sea on the West Part.

THIS Charter, as above, being nullified in the High Court of Chancery of
England in 1684, and restored again in 1691, wherein the West Extent of Limit
is predicated by that of Connecticut, and this West Limit of Connecticut being
predicated by the old Charter of the Massachusetts Bay, and expressly extending
in Longitude to the South Sea on the West Part, exactly extends the present
Charter of the Massachusetts Bay, with it is Powers of Jurisdiction to All, and
every Part of the Limits of the old nulled Charter. This is the natural and
legal Sense of the present Charter of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay,
predicated on undeniable Facts,

IN the next Place it is necessary to consider the Charter of Connecticut, which
our Authors inform should not extend West of Connecticut River, in the Words
following: This being a Crown Grant on the Suit and Petition of the Grantees,
is to be taken most beneficially for the King. The discriptive Words, and the
Intention of the Grant, will in legal Construction be satisfied by giving the
Colony the same Length as the Massachusetts Bay; and it is plain, both from the
Recital and the saving Clause in the Plymouth Patent, on which the
Massachusett's Title was founded, that the Latter could not in any Sense,
extend to the Westward of Connecticut River. As this their Assertion is founded
on the Hypothesis of Connecticut Charter's being predicated on that of the
Massachusett's, and therefore the Arguments before exhibited on that Head, are
equally Conclusive for the establishing the Western Extent of Connecticut,
nothing more is necessary for that Purpose, but a Recital of the discriptive
Words of their Charter, granted subsequent to their Purchase from the Council
of Plymouth by King CHARLES the Second, the 23d Day of April, 1662, Bounded on
the East by Narraganset River, commonly called Narraganset Bay, where the said
River falls into the Sea; and on the North by the Line of the Massachusetts
Plantation; and on the South by the Sea, and in Longitude as the Line of the
Massachusetts Colony, running from East to West: That is to say, from the said
Narraganset Bay on the East, to the South Sea on the West Part. Thus it appears
not only by the Demonstrations aforesaid, but from the express Words of the
discriptive Limits of the Charter itself, which cannot admit of a double
Meaning, (curious as our Authors be in the Art of playing with Words, they have
not attempted to obviate their literal Meaning,) that it is the unquestionable
Right of the Colony of Connecticut to extend it is Western Boundary to the South
Sea on the "West Part;" and in this that Colony agree, who are now challenging
their Right in Fee to those Limits, and actually making Plantation, as at
Susquebannah, etc.

BY this Time, undoubtedly Queries will arise in the Mind of the Reader, What
will become of the Grant to the Duke of York, if the Massachusett's and
Connecticut Colonies extend "to the South Sea on the West Part?" The following
Intelligence from our Authors will introduce an Answer to this Query; who,
after discribing said Grant further inform, in Page 3d of the State, etc. That
a Fleet and Land Forces were sent to remove the Dutch, and put the Duke in
Possession. Accordingly, on the 27th Day of August 1664, the Dutch Governor
Stuyvesant, surrendered by Capitulation, all the Countries the Dutch then
possessed, to King CHARLES the Second; when among other Terms it was
stipulated, that all the People shall remain free Denizens, and shall enjoy
their Lands, Houses, and Goods, where^^ ^^er they are within this Country, and
dispose of them as they please. Thus, by Conquest, the King became revested
with his Right to the Lands conquered: for, as the King had antecedently
disposed of all the Estate the Crown was possessed of in these Countries, to
the Colonies of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Bay; therefore, his Right now
could not extend any further than the actual Conquest, which, in legal
Construction, must be satisfied with, and can extend no further than the actual
Possessions described in the forementioned Capitulation. A further Information
is in Page 4th, To remove any Doubt of the Validity of the Dukes Title, either
from the Want of Seisin in the Crown when it originated, or on Account of the
intermediate Conquest by the Dutch, it was confirmed to his Royal Highness by
further Letters Patent, dated the 29th Day of June, 1674. That there was Want
of Seisin in the Crown at the Time of first Granting, is incontestible; for, as
above said, the King by antecedent Grants had divested the Crown of it is Right,
and by this Conquest became revested: So that from this, Occasion will be taken
to say, that in Fact the Province of New York was originally sounded on
Conquest, and the Limits of it, as before mentioned, circumscribed by the Dutch
Possessions pointed out in the Terms of Capitulation. However ^^^^^ourable this
Conclusion may be thought, on the Part of New York, yet, as the Crown had prior
to either of the Duke's Grants, disposed of its Right to the Massachusetts and
Connecticut Colonies -- if it was not thus founded on Conquest, it has no
Foundation at all; and it is having any Place for Existence, is but an
"Intrusion on the Rights" of those other Colonies. Furthermore, it is
Mysterious and Contradictory, admitting that that Government was thus founded,
to suppose the Duke could be Lord Proprietor; inasmuch as by the Conditions of
Capitulation, the Fee then acquired to the Crown, passed to the Dutch
Inhabitants, who then became English Subjects.

THE Reader is in the next Place invited to a more particular Consideration of
the aforesaid disputed Premises, which are bounded South on the North Line of
the Massachusetts Bay, and West by a Line about twenty Miles East of Hudson's
River, extending North ten Degrees, East till it comes almost opposite to
Ticondaroga; thence West till it strikes on Lake Champlain, thence on the East
Banks of said Lake to the Forty fifth Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the
North by the said Latitude, and East on the West Banks of Connecticut River. On
this Tract of Country it is not pretended there ever was any ancient Dutch
Possessions, nor any under Title from New York, except on the West Part of the
Township of Pownal, situate at the South-West Corner of this Tract; and some
Possessions in the Township of New Haven, on Otter Creek, which Colonel Reed
gained and maintained by Force, about three Years, and which by Force he was
obliged to surrender to the first Settlers, who were Claimants under
New Hampshire.

THOUGH this Tract of Land was contained in the original Grant to the Council
of Plymouth, yet, as they never made any Conveyance of it, therefore it
reverted to the Crown on the Surrender of that Grant, the 7th Day of June,
1635. From which it may be objected, on the Part of New York, that the above
Conciseness in the Circumscription of the Boundaries of their Colony is too
great; for, that the Grant to the Duke must hold good where the Crown, at the
Time of granting, was vested with a Right to the Lands granted. In Answer, it
has been argued in the preceding Section, that it is very uncertain whether
the Limits of the Duke of York's Grant included this Tract of Land, or if any,
how great a Part; and that the Limits of said Grant could not be ascertained --
and that governmental Jurisdiction, and Property could not be predicated on
such obsolete and uncertain Bounds. It was also demonstrated in the first
Section, and will be further observed in this, that the Duke of York's Grant
reverted to the Crown, and that the Landholders in the Government of New York
hold under the Crown -- and that, if it did not revert to the Crown, the Fee is
still in the Duke, his Heirs or Assigns, and no Landholders in the Government
are vested with the Fee of the Lands they possess, etc This Argument and
Couclusion is founded on the New York Hypothesis, exclusive of the herein
mentioned Article in the Dutch Capitulation.
. It would be too tedious as well as needless to recite the Arguments that have
been offered in the three first Sections, which is humbly conceived are
abundantly sussicient to Answer the aforesaid Objection, and fairly demonstrate
Priority of Title to be in Favor of New Hampshire; to which the courteous
Reader is referred for a Consideration.

As has been before observed, the Design of the Duke of York's Grant was to
include the Dutch Possessions, or in other Words, that it never was valid any
further than to such Possession, which by Conquest, reverted to the Crown, and
no farther than these Limits, to interfere with the Charter Colonies of the
Massachusetts and Connecticut. And as a Twenty Miles Line to the Eastward from
Hudson's River would include the most Eastern Extent of the forementioned
Possessions, the Reason why such a Line was agreed to as the Boundary between
the Colonies of Connecticut and New York: But, as these Possessions to the
Northward of Connecticut, fell far short of this Twenty Mile Line, or were so
inconsiderable and uncertain as not to come within the Capitulation Reserve,
therefore, the Massachusetts Colony contended with New York for a further
Western Extent than Twenty Miles East from Hudson's River; but the restless
Government of New York, ever uneasy within it is own Boundaries, presumed
unrelenting, to intrude on, and contesting for the just Rights of the
Massachusetts, by extending their Patents far to the Eastward of Twenty Miles
from Hudson's River; in Consequence of which the greatest Disturbances have
arisen between the Inhabitants of the respective Colonies, and sundry of the
Conflicts so severe, that human Blood spilt in the Contests redened the Hands
of the Intruders; but finally a boundary Line was agreed to by the respective
Governments in 1773, at a Twenty Miles Distance from Hudson's River, which has
since been ratified by his Majesty.

IN the State of the Right, etc. Page 4th, is the most extraordinary Account of
Alienation of Property that is to be found in the Annals of History. The Duke
continued Proprietor and chief Governor of this Province till he ascended the
Throne, when his Right merged in the Royal Authority, on his Abdication it
passed to King William, his Successor, as Lord Proprietor and Royal Sovereign.
That upon the Duke's accession to the Throne his Right of Government merged in
the Royal Authority will not be denied; But, that his Right in Fee,
consequently passed to King William as his Successor, wants greater Proof than
a bare Assertion; our Authors should have explained this Matter; it is taken for
granted they will not pretend that King William was Heir at Law to the Duke's
Estate, and they mention no Conveyance from the Duke to the King, but say the
"Duke's Right merged in the Royal Authority;" to suppose it is possible that
Right should pass to King William, as Lord Proprietor, is so great an Absurdity
that it wants a Name.

IN the same Page they further inform, That in the Duke of York's Commissions
to his several Lieutenant Governors, Major Edmond Andross on the first Day of
July 1674, and Col. Thomas Dongan on the 30th Day of September 1682, among
other Discriptions of the Boundaries of this Province, are expressly
comprehended all the Land from the West Side of Connecticut River to the East
Side of Delaware Bay. Note, those Commissions were from the Duke before he
ascended the Throne; undoubtedly in his Commissions to his Lieutenant
Governors, he had referrence to the Limits of his Grant, to determine their
Boundaries: But after his Abdication, and the Accession of King Willaim and
Queen Mary, we find a Commission from their Majesty's to Henry Slaughter, to be
materially different. King William and Queen Mary, by their Commission, dated
the Fourth Day of January, in the First Year of their Reign, appointed Henry
Slaughter to be Governor of the Province of New York, and the Territories
depending thereon in America. The same Assembly (styled our Authors) further
inform, that in all subsequent Acts and Commissions this Colony is described by
the same Words, the Province of New York, and the Territories depending thereon
in America. "No Arguments need be used to prove, for it is self evident their
Majesty's had some different Idea of the Province of New York, than what had
been before described by the Duke's Commissions to his Lieutenant Governors,
and a little attention to the original State of that Government, will explain
that Difference. Our Authors further inform, Page 17, The Ransselaer Family are
not indebted to the Government of New York for their Estate, they continue to
enjoy it by an Act of Justice and not of Favor; it was originally a Dutch
Colony of it self, granted to their Ancestors by the Dutch West India Company,
who held it as a Part of New Netherlands, under the States General. On the
Surrender in 1664, their Rights were secured to them in common with the rest of
the Inhabitants, by the before mentioned Article of Capitulation granted on the
Surrender of the Country, by Col. Nichols, the Commander in Chief under the
Crown, and Lieut. Governor under the Duke: the Faith of Government was pledged
for their Security, and their Estates were confirmed under the Seal of this
Colony in the Year 1685, not by mere Act of the Provincial Governor and
Council, but by an express Order of King James the Second. They further inform
Page 5th, so long ago as the Year 1685, King James the Second, by Letters
Patent under that Seal granted to the Ransselaer Family the Manor
Renselaerwick, extending from Hudson's River both on the East and West Sides
Twenty-four Miles. This Manor includes the City of Albany, and extends near
Twenty Miles to the Southward of it; South of which terminates the Province of
New York, expressed in their Governor's Commissions, so that this Manor is
included in their second Description of Domain, viz. the Territories depending
thereon, and exclusive of this Clause in the Commissions, antecedent to the
forementioned Determination in 1764, the Governors of New York could not
exercise Jurisdiction even in the Manor of Renselaerwyck, and much less to the
Northward of it, as Settlements which lay Contiguous to those Limits seemed
necessarily to fall under the Jurisdiction of that Government. Thus their
territorial Sort of Dominion has been extended without any Prescription or
Limitation, agreeable to the Observation of their celebrated Judge Smith, who,
speaking of that Government, said it might well be accounted unlimitted.

IT may be further offered in Objection, on the Part of New York, That allowing
the foregoing Arguments relative to the Territories, and that Renselaerwyck
was, before the Era of the aforesaid Determination, in Fact annexed to the
Government by the territorial Clause in the Governor's Commissions; yet,
nevertheless the Duke's Grant must be valid to the Northward of that Manor, to
all the Lands it originally covered. This cannot operate in Favor of New York,
for, in Addition to what has been before argued to this Purpose, the Reader is
desired to observe, that King James. the Second, who was this same Duke of
York, abdicated the Throne in 1688, and his Estate reverted to the Crown of
England, and this Grant became vested in the Crown, the same as though the Duke
or his Grant had never had an Existance. -- Nor have any of their Governor's
Commissions, from Henry Slaughter, the first Governor appointed by King William
and Queen Mary, down to this present Era, ever been predicated on, or had the
least Reference to the Limits of that Grant.

SECTION VI.
THE Government of New York make the greatest Outcry against her Sister
Colonies, taxing them with Intrusion, Violence and Encroachment; and, at the
same Time, are flagrantly more guilty of the same avaricious, unjust, and
hostile Wickedness than all the rest of English America: Their capricious
Land-Jobbers have a surprising Faculty in carrying their Points; at the same
Time, they are encroaching upon their Neighbors, provided they meet with
Opposition, they will cry out in the most exagerating Exclamations, Violence,
Riot, Treason, etc. and at the same Time, not hesitate to trample upon his
Majesty's Authority, (the Particulars of which may be seen in the preceding
Narrative) They are great Advocates for Law, Order, and good Government; these
are their Horns of Iron, and with them do they push the Poor and Needy, when
they get them into their Net. Their Way is as the Way of a Serpent upon a Rock,
and it is difficult to trace their Footsteps: They complain of the lawless,
factious, and riotous Conduct of the Settlers under New Hampshire; yet know,
that they themselves are the moving Cause of all the Disturbances they complain
of: It is incredible to suppose a Collection of Farmers exposed to the
perpetual Fatigues, and laborious Toils of cultivating a Wilderness Country,
should under a just Administration of Law, become "a Confederacy of
Insurgents:" Was it only, that natural Presumption being so much in Favor of
those Inhabitants, it is humbly conceived, that all wise and unprejudiced
Persons will, at least suspend their Judgments concerning them, 'till the
New-Yorkers can clearly evince, that these People are in reality, without
Cause, tumultuous, disorderly, etc. And, inasmuch as the Facts of this
Controversy is so fully set forth in the preceding Narrative of this Treatise,
the Reader is thereto refered for a clearer Exhibition.

OUR Authors, in Order to maintain their Claim to the Lands in Contest, and if
possible, to include it within One of the descriptive Limits of the Grant to
the Duke of York, tell us many strange Things about the Colonies of Connecticut
and the Massachusetts: That Connecticut. "in legal Construction" should not
have extended to the Westward of Connecticut River, and that their Settlements
West of that River were an Intrusion on the Right of the Colony of New York;
yet, nevertheless for Peace sake, and rather than contest with "a powerful
Neighbor," they settled with that Colony at twenty Miles distance from
Hudson's River.

THEY further inform, that the Massachusetts Claim stands by no Means in so
respectable a Light as that of Connecticut, and in legal Construction, should
extend no further Westward than 'till it meets the Colony of Connecticut, and
not to Connecticut River, and much less to the Westward of it. Our Authors
being Men of great Learning and Sagacity; soon extended their ancient Right of
Jurisdiction over such Part of the Massachusetts Colony as lay to the Westward
from Connecticut River, and this their Scheme in stopping the Western Extension
of that Colony where it meets Connecticut, may be reckoned as one among the
greatest of their political Achievements. "And it is worthy a Remark," that
had the Massachusetts Colony extended West to the South Sea, it could not have
met Connecticut, but must have extended parallel with it, in the same Direction.

To give this pleasing Scheme some Kind of Color, they argue the Nullity of
the Massachusetts first Charter, and introduce the Duke of York's Grant as the
oldest Title, Page 5th, The Massachusetts Charter was vacated, and the Title of
that Colony now solely depends on their Charter of 1691.

YET they allow, that that Colony obtained the Right of Soil from the Council
of Plymouth, and that the Charter of King Charles dated the 4th Day of March
1628-9, This is the Charter spoken of as vacated, which was done as has been
before largely treated of, in 1684.
vested them with Powers of Government, (it is needless to animadvert on these
strange Accounts) however, after they have charmed their Imaginations with the
fruitless Idea of extending their ancient Right to all that Part of the Bay
Province West of Connecticut River, they complain bitterly of the Encroachments
of the Massachusetts, Page 8th. Under Circumstances so favorable to the Rights
of this Colony, we have great Reason to complain of the unwarrantable
Encroachments under the Authority of the Government of the Massachusetts Bay,
by which a valuable Tract extending from Connecticut River, within Twenty Miles
of Hudson's River, has been wrested from us.

THEIR Conduct seems the more inexcusable, as they must have known that such
Encroachments were not only disrespectful to his Majesty's Authority, and big
with great Mischiefs and Disorders, but were highly injurious to private
Property, great Part of these Lands having anciently been granted to his
Majesty's Subjects under the great Seal of this Colony.

THEN they proceed to recite their old Grants, which they tell us cover the
Country the whole Breadth of the Massachusett's Claim: The Manor of
Renselaerwyck, granted in 1685, and extending 24 Miles each Side, from Hudson's
River; and Westonhook, in 1705, which extends about 30 Miles from Hudson's
River; and Hoosick, in 1685, which extends about 30 Miles from the River. It
seems to have been a political, and universal Principle with the Government of
New York, to begin their Patents within the Twenty Mile Line, and extend them
Eastward of it, that by this Means they might have Opportunity to encroach on,
and jockey their neighboring Colonies, more or less, out of their Lands, as
subsequent Policy, Intrigue and Power, would render practicable.

THAT Government, thus extended their Patent into Connecticut, One in
particular, into the Township of Salisbury; and it has ever been their Practice
to wrangle till they find by Experience, that neither by Sophistry, Law, or
Hostility, they can maintain their exorbitant Claims, and then capitulate on as
good Terms as they can; and conclude with branding their Competitors with
Dishonesty, Encroachment and many hard Names, and don't scruple to impeach
their Governmental Authority, (as in the Case just recited of the
Massachusetts Bay) with being Disrespectful to his Majesty's Authority, and
guilty of great Mischiefs and Disorders; although the Authority of their own
Government, by their unjust, avaricious Encroachments on the Massachusetts even
to Connecticut River, laid the Foundation of those Disorders, and they might
have added Bloodshed; yet their Assembly have the Impudence to Palm it all
upon the Authority of the Massachusetts.

THE Claimants under New Hampshire are so happy as to be almost exempted from
any New York Claims, by Patents from that Government prior to their's; the
aforesaid Hoosick and Wallumscock Patents being the only ones of this Nature,
the former includes about one Qaurter of the Township of Pownal, on which Part
were about four Settlers, when it was granted by New Hampshire. This Township
is bounded Southerly by the North Line of the Massachusetts Bay, and extends
West as far as the Connecticut and Massachusetts Colonies; the latter, i. e.
Wallumscock Patent, was granted under the common Seal of the Province of
New York, the 15th Day of June, 1739. This Patent is said to interfere with the
Township of Bennington, and it is Matter of Dispute, whether in it is first
Location, it included more than about 30 or 40 Acres within that Town, though it
seems the Patent by it is discriptive Limits, extends further into the Town, and
the Patentees produce a Map corresponding with those Limits: However, an
Indian, aged Fifty-Nine, who was Pilot to the Party that located this Grant,
informs of a certain Monument they then erected, where they broke a Bottle,
etc. for their Eastern Bounds. "And it is worthy a Remark," that this Indian
happens to be exactly of the same Age with Ebenezer Cole, one of our Author's
principal Deponants. This Monument is well known by the Bennington People, and
is on the Western Edge of the Town; and there has never been a Discovery of any
Lines of the Survey of that Location to the Eastward of this Monument. The many
Circumstances of this Nature, amount to almost a Certainty, that the Patentees
never made any actual Location further interfering with Bennington, than as
aforesaid; notwithstanding, as they have planned their patent, it includes
about one Eighth Part of the Town; which Lands are exceeding good in Nature,
and are settled wholly under the New Hampshire Title, by industrious Farmers,
who form a Wilderness State, have cultivated and brought the most of it under
good improvements, with many valuable Houses, Barns and Orchards; some of them
annually mowing at least 80 Tons of Hay, and raise other Produce of the Country
in Proportion. Not the least Improvements or Possessions were ever made in that
Town, except by these Inhabitants; neither had they the least Knowledge of a
Pretense of any New York Patents extending there till several Years after they
had settled the Land. As has been before observed, there was about four
Settlers on that Part of Hoosick Patent, included in the Township of Pownal,
when it was granted; and if the Author has a right Information, there has not
been any more Settlements made under the New York Title since, though there
has sundry Families settled on the Premises, included as aforesaid, under the
New-Hamshire Title.

As the State and Circumstances of such Part of the Townships aforesaid, as are
included in the old Patents, are materially different, in many Respects, from
the Circumstances of the New Hampshire Grants in general; it will therefore be
necessary that this Matter have a particular Consideration; and that none of
the aforesaid Arguments be considered in this Case but what are truly
applicable: and in this Review of the Case, it will be admitted, that the old
Wallumscock Patent includes such Part of Bennington, as the Plan the Patentees
exhibit does contain.

IT is taken for granted that the Royal Determination of the boundary Line in
1764 could not extend the Government of New York antecedent to the Date of that
Order, which was a Manifestation of Royal Power, and which was the sole Cause
of that Extention; therefore, at the Time the Government of New York granted
the forementioned old Patents, they could have no greater Authority for so
doing than what they were then in Fact possessed of: It remains therefore to be
considered, whether the Patents from the Government of New York are valid or
not, so far as they interfere with the Townships of Bennington and Pownal. And
Firstly, it has been proved that the Province of New York as discribed in their
Governor's Commissions, does not extend so far North as the City of Albany;
therefore, the Northern Tracts of Country which these Patents of Hoosick and
Wallumscock cover, must be considered as belonging to their second Sort of
Domain, (to wit) the Territories. It has also been shown, that these
Territories are not circumscribed to any particular Limits, but that they were
originally meant to include some ancient Grants that were Independent of the
Province and adjoining Settlements, on Extra-provincial Lands: probably that
Government may have Authority to grant Land to the West and North-West, where
it is indisputably unappropriated, and where the Claim of none other Government
could interfere: But it will be insisted upon, on the Part of the New Hampshire
Settlers, which are included in the aforesaid old Patents, that the Government
of New York had no Right to extend any of their Patents to the Eastward of a
Line equivalent to that which constitutes the Bounds between New York and the
Colonies of Connecticut and the Massachusetts: This Limit was ever thought by
the People in general of the Colony of New York, as well as those of the
adjacent Colonies, to be the Eastern Boundary of New York, until the Era of
the late Determination, which extended it to the River Connecticut: and
laboring Men that support the World of Mankind, are obliged to form their
Judgments of the Jurisdiction of Government's by the common received Opinions
of Mankind they are conversant with; and even admitting they make an erroneous
Judgment, yet, in the present Case, as the Lands were of but little Value,
exclusive of their Toil and Cultivation; and as the Farmers in Reality uphold
the State, it is therefore not only incumbent on the Laws, but on the Policy of
the State to defend them in Cases of this Nature -- it must be admitted that
where the Limits of Governments are clearly ascertained and notoriously known,
that a Farmer trespassing in this Manner on another's Property, must bear the
Loss: But, provided a Country of People be generally under a Deception as to
Matters of Jurisdiction, and purchase Land and make great Improvements, and all
on a mistaken Footing, Men in such Circumstances should be considered in the
most favorable Light. For, as not only Individuals, but the Country about them
were in the same Manner deceived, and therefore, at the Time of purchasing and
Settlement, they were utterly destitute of the Means of Knowledge; yet,
however, it is not conceded to, that those Farmers on whose Account the present
Arguments are exhibited, are under a Deception about this Matter; for of all
Sorts of governmental Jurisdiction, the New York Territorial was the weakest,
loosest and most vague; it was rather occasional and political, than positive,
and in it is own Nature almost or quite incapable of being extended faster than
Settlements were actually carried on, or at most the Lands exposed to this
territorial Jurisdiction, should not be patented faster than his Majesty's
Subjects are disposed forthwith to settle. The Necessity of granting so fast
may be pleaded on Account of Order -- the Policy of Government may demand it;
otherwise an occasional Jurisdiction would be altogether unable to abilitate
the Government to make Conveyance of the Right in Fee; although it is
indisputable that such a Jurisdiction in Matters of mere Government, is to all
Intents and Purposes, equal to positive Jurisdiction; but with Respect to
having a Power to convey the Fee of Lands, is Matter of Doubt: But thus much
with Propriety may be inferred, that a Title so weak and impotent should not
claim Superiority over the least Conception of Title whatever; a mere
Possession is of itself abundantly sufficient to maintain the Right in the
Possessor, and on a judicious Trial at common Law, (could such an One be had)
would be judged Paramount to it.

There is another Consideration that must totally extinguish and obliterate all
possible remaining Idea of Right, that the Patentees of Wallumscock may be
supposed to have to the said Tract of Land included in the Limits of the
Township of Bennington. Only advert to the Date of that Patent, which is on the
15th Day of June, 1739, and compare it with the Time of the Commencement of the
Settlement of Bennington, which was in the Spring of the Year 1760, and there
will be found to be 21 Years, from the Date of this Patent, to the beginning of
the Settlement under New Hampshire; -- in all this Time there was not the least
Settlement or Possession made in the Premises; although the express Condition
of the Patent was, that it should be settled in three Years from the Time of
granting. Possibly in all that Time the Patentees might have got some Dutch
Tenants on some Western Part of the Patent, which, with the Government of
New York, may be denominated a Fulfillment of the Condition of Settlement; many
large Tracts having been patented, some since, and others longer ago than that
Wallumscock, which are yet mostly a howling Wilderness. This Practice of the
Government of New York, in extending their Patents to the Eastward of a Twenty
Mile Line from Hudson's River, has ever been considered as a disingenious and
designing Policy in that Government; thereby to lay a Foundation for intruding
on the Rights of their neighboring Colonies; and has been attended with many
disagreeable Consequences, as has been before observed. And as that Government
have given up their exorbitant Claims where they interfered with the Right of
the Massachusetts, it would undoubtedly be their wisest Way to do the same with
Respect to such Claims as interfere with the Right granted under the great Seal
of the Province of New Hampshire; and instead of treating the People that have
settled those Lands under that Title, as Rioters and Felons; to exercise that
Justice and Humanity toward them, which becomes Governors, to the governed.

IT remains still, that there be a summary View exhibited, relative to the Rule
of Right which should take Place with Respect to the Settlers under each
Government, that are settled on such Part of the forementioned Patents as are
included in the Townships of Bennington and Pownal. And although Superiority of
Title is in Favor of those under New Hampshire; nevertheless, as the Line of
Jurisdiction, in those Times of granting and Settlement, was not expressly
ascertained or known. -- Under these Circumstances, it would not only be bad
State Policy, but great Inhumanity and Injustice to the Subject; for either the
Government of New York or New Hampshire to dispossess them, let them have
settled under the Title of either; for Titles liable to so much Dispute and
Uncertainty as both must be confessed to be (though One may have much the
Preference of the Other) are not sufficient to oust the Possessor, inasmuch as
both challenge a legal Right; therefore, either Title, sealed and confirmed
with the Sweat and Toil of the Farmer is abundantly paramount to the Other.

OUR Authors, in their Appendix, Page 19th, mis-represent the Plea of the
Bennington People, in saying, To reason on their own Principles, if Equity
confirmed the Claims of Others under New Hampshire, on Account of Priority of
interfering Grants, it would have afforded a fatal Plea against the People of
Bennington; because they ought then themselves to have yielded up all the Lands
which are covered by more ancient Patents. The People of Bennington, or rather
the Claimants under New Hampshire, have ever insisted, that at the Time the
Government of New Hampshire, granted those Lands, they had good Right so to do;
but that New York had not. This Matter is illustrated and proved by many
Arguments, and real Facts, in this Treatise, particularly in the 2d and 3d
Sections, to which the Reader is referred. It Is true, provided the Bennington
People had no further Considerations in the Matter of Title, but the Priority
of interfering Grants -- according to this Method of arguing, they ought to
yield up such Part of that Town as interferes with Wallumscock Patent; but the
Consideration of Settlement is undoubtedly, with the many other Matters,
material to be considered, as argued aforesaid.

SECTION VII.
HAVING gone through with the Remarks on the New York Pamphlet, so far as
immediately respects the Title of those Lands which has been the Principal
Cause of the Publication of this Treatise -- shall nextly proceed to detect
some notorious and dishonorable Mis-representations contained in the Pamphlet
aforesaid, particularly in the Appendix. In this brief Review, it would be too
tedious, as well as needless, to trace the Authors through all their disguised
and fictitious Representations, and intricate Windings. Shall therefore pass on
with noteing such of their Exhibitions as are the most cruelly fallacious;
among which the Story of the Extention of the Township of Bennington, merely by
a Vote of the Inhabitants, at a Town Meeting, to the Westward from where it was
intended to be granted, and within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River, is the
most flagrantly opprobrious. The Story may be seen recorded in the 4th Page of
their Appendix. The Grantees of the Township of Bennington, discovered that the
Situation of the Tract according to the Intention of the Grant, would be both
inconvenient and unprofitable, as it included a large Proportion of Mountain;
and they therefore, by no better Authority than a Vote of their Town Meeting,
presumed to extend it to the Westward, within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River.

As this Representation in All and every Part is entirely groundless, and no
Pretense of Proof to support it, but is the mere calumnious Aspersion of those
who have an implacable Hatred to the Bennington People, a ositive Denial of the
Facts alleged, would be a sufficient Refutation of those Facts. Nevertheless,
as the Assembly of New York have made a principal Engine of this infamous Story
of their own Creation, to destroy the good Character of the People aforesaid,
by representing them to the Government at Home as the vilest of Insurgents and
Outlaws -- and inasmuch as the Facts alleged are capable of Dis-proof by
mathematical Certainty, and sundry Demonstrations of this Sort having been
actually made, (though not with a View of disproving this Calumny, as it had
not then been published,) by Admensurations of the Distance from Hudson's
River, to the Westerly Line of Bennington, all of which agree that it is at
least Twenty Miles. Mr. Samuel Robinson for once made an actual Mensuration of
that Distance, and found it to be Twenty Miles and Thirty-five Chains; his
Affidavit and Mr. Ebenezer Wood's, together with an attested Copy of the Survey
of that Town by Mr. Matthew Clesson, the Surveyor, is thought Expedient to
transcribe in it is following Order, which will abundantly serve to exculpate
the People of Bennington from that Odium wherewith they have been branded. The
Author is furthermore especially directed by the Inhabitants of that Town, to
request the Government of New York to vindicate what their Assembly have before
alleged, by another accurate Mensuration of the Distance from Hudson's River,
to the Westerly Line of Bennington; and further notify that Assembly, that as
omnipotent as they may conceive themselves to be, they must nevertheless recede
from the Calumny wherewith they have abused the Inhabitants of that Town, and
do public Penance for the same, or continue under the Resentment of those
Inhabitans: Which take an additional Affront at the ill Usage, inasmuch as our
Opponents tell us Page 3d, it is to be transmitted for the Information of the
Government at Home; and further inform that it was to guard against the
Impositions which from the Want of Candor, they were apprehensive the said
Settlers, who spared no Art of Act of Violence, would by their Agents deceive
the Government at Home, and therefore they had undertaken to transmit a
Narrative of those Settler's Proceedings, for the Information of that
Government. It seems the said Assembly fully resolved that the Settlers and
Agents from the Want of Candor, would endeavor artfully to deceive, etc. and
that themselves were as fully resolved to over match them in a Game of that
Sort, being greater Practitioners than Peasants: But artful as they are, they
made a fatal Mistake in advancing for Matter of Fact that which in its own
Nature is incapable of Proof, and what has been disproved by Evidence of a
mathematical Nature, and capable of further Dis-proof by actual Mensuration. It
is no Ways mavelous that those Gentlemen which govern in that Assembly have
an Antipathy against the Inhabitants of Bennington, who have had a great Share
in defeating them in obtaining Possession of the Country of the New Hampshire
Grants: It seems they are no insensible of their Merit, for, say they, it is to
this Township erected by a Charter in itself void, and so greatly abused, that
we are to ascribe all the Opposition which has since been given to the
Jurisdiction of New York. It is evident that these Gentemen have an evil Eye
upon Bennington Inhabitants; for, when they mention the Opposition to their
Jurisdiction, they take Care to repeat the aforesaid groundless Aspersion, by
adding these Words, erected by a Charter in itself void, and so greatly abused.
They still proceed upon this their favorite Topic, and draw particular
Inferrences from it to their advantage, for by changing the Situation of
Bennington, it is made to comprehend a large Part of Wallumscock, which was
granted under the Seal of this Province so early as the Year 1739. This their
scandalous Assertion is twice repeated in Page 8th. One of the Passages is as
follows: Mr. Ingersoll, one of the most eminent Counsel in Connecticut, and Mr.
Selvester of Albany, were concerned for the Defendants. When these Gentlemen
found Breakenridge's Farm to be within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River, and
greatly to the Westward of what the Government of New Hampshire had admitted to
be the Jurisdiction of New York -- they told him that it was impossible to set
up any Principle for his Defense. Accordingly, when his Case was brought to
Trial, he refused to confess the Lease, Entry and Ousture, agreeable to the
Rule, and the Plaintiff being Nonsuited, obtained Judgment in the succeeding
July Term, against the casual Ejector.

THIS is far from being the true State of the Case. Sundry Causes which had
been tried, were determined against the Claimants under New Hampshire, and Mr.
Breakenridge perceived it was expending Money to no Purpose, to maintain a Suit
at Law against the New York Patentees, as they had such a Combination of
Interest with the Judges, Part of which were interested in the New York
subsequent Patents, which interfered with the Grants under New Hampshire,
though not in those on Trial. This, with many other Things too tedious to
particularize, was the Cause why Mr. Breakenridge would not defend the
aforesaid Suit in Trial; but there as not a Word said, (as he informs me)
between him and his said Attorneys, about his Farm's being within Seventeen
Miles of Hudson's River; nor is it likely never such a Thing was mentioned in
Albany County; the contrary being so well known. Undoubtedly, this was wrote
"for the Information of Government at Home," thinking the Fallacy would not
there be detected, it being at so great a Distance.

OUR Authors, P. 10th, after giving a Narrative of a riotous and tumultuous
Outrage, committed by the Inhabitants of Bennington, for which Proclamation had
issued from the Earl of Dunmore, against the principal Authors of the
Disturbance "which could not be brought to Justice," then they introduce a
particular Charge against Mr. Breakenridge, which is entirely destitute of
Foundation, viz. That he was One of the principal Rioters. To this they join
the former Calumny of the Westward Extention of Bennington, by a Vote of their
Town Meeting; and add to both these, the groundless Story of Mr. Breakenridge's
Council's Inability to set up any Principle in his Defense, by Reason of his
being seated within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River. All these Fictions
blended together, make considerable of a Figure, in their own Words, James
Breakenridge and Isaiab Carpenter, were Two of the most inexcusable of all the
Offenders: the first had seated himself within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's
River, where he knew it was impossible, on their own Principles, that he could
be protected by the New Hampshire Claim, he had declined a fair Trial, and
suffered Judgment by Default. With Respect to Mr. Breakenridge's being active
in any Expeditions (the New-Yorkers denominate Riots, Mobs, Felony, etc.) it is
well known through the Country of the New Hampshire Grants, he has not. In the
18th and 19th Pages of the Appendix, they repeat their former Aspersion against
the Inhabitants of Bennington in the most virulent and emphatical Language --
And what is still more shameful, they contend, they arm, they sight, for Lands,
as a Part of Bennington, which lies within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River,
and which the Government of New Hampshire never claimed, but admitted to be
beyond their Jurisdiction.

AS THERE can be no Doubt but these Gentlemen really wish these things to be
true, and having so frequently repeated them as being so, it is conjectured
they by this Time begin to believe them, or at least think others may; but that
the impartial Reader may have the real Truth of the Matter, the following
Evidence is exhibited.

"A Plan of a Township of Six Miles square (i.e. Bennington) lying in his
Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, laid by Matthew Clesson, Surveyor, Abraham
Bass, John Hooker, Ezekiel Foster, and Samuel Calhoon, Chainmen, in Pursuance
of an Order from his Excellency, Benning Wentworth, Esquire Governor of said
Province, to Col. William Williams, lying Six Miles North of the Province Line
that was run by Mr. Richard Hazzen, between said Government, and the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, and Twenty Miles East of Hudson's River, viz.
Beginning at a crooked Hemlock Tree, marked W. W. Six Miles due North, or at a
right Angle from said Province Line, said Angle commencing at a White Oak Tree
in said Line, marked M. O. I. T. which Tree is Twenty-four Miles East from
Hudson's River, allowing one Chain in Thirty for Swag, (which Allowance is made
through the whole following Survey) and from said Hemlock Tree West, ten
Degrees, North four Miles, to a Stake and Stones; and from said Stake and
Stones North ten Degrees, East six Miles, to a Stake and Stones; from thence
East ten Degrees, South six Miles, to a Stake and Stones; and from thence South
ten Degrees, West six Miles, to a Stake and Stones; from thence West ten
Degrees, North two Miles, to the Hemlock first mentioned, which Survey was made
November, 1749,

(A Copy.) Per MATTHEW CLESSON, Surveyor."

HAMPSHIRE, ss. October 30th, 1749.
Matthew Clesson, Surveyor, John Tailor, Ezekiel Foster, and William Williams,
Chain-men, on November 3d, 1749, John Hooker, Abraham Bass and Samuel Calhoon,
Chain-men, were all sworn to the faithful Performance of the respective
Services aforesaid, and for the above Survey.

Quorum, TIMOTHY DWIGHT, Justice Peace. (A Copy.)

THE Deposition of Samuel Robinson, who, being of lawful Age, says, He being a
Surveyor, has laid out in Lots, a great Part of Bennington, and is confident
that the West Line of said Town is the Line that Matthew Clisson run before the
Town was granted (upon which said Grant was made,) and as I have run all the
Lands East, adjoining said Line, and some on the West Side, I never knew of any
other Line that was called, or known, or supposed to be the West Line of
Bennington; but according to that Line, the Proprietors have settled, not
making any Improvements in the least Degree to the West of said Line.

AND the Deponent further says, That his Excellency, Benning Wentworth, late
Governor of New Hampshire, gave a Warrant to Samuel Robinson and George
Gardner, Esq'rs, and John Davoow, to get the Line run and measured out, from
Hudson's River; which committee employed the Deponent as a Surveyor, with
Timothy Abbot and John Drott, as Chainmen, who were under the Inspection of
said Committee, and under Oath, measured out from said River Twenty Miles,
according to the aforesaid Governor's Warrant; and then turning a right Angle
North, ten Degrees East, which they did, and found the West Line of Bennington
to be East of the Line your Deponent run, Thirty-five Chains; and so the
Proprietors of said Town concluded the aforesaid Clesson Line to be right, and
have conducted accordingly.

And further, your Deponent says, John R. Blaker, Esquire of the City of Albany,
got some Chainmen soon after your Deponent had run the Line, and measured out,
and told your Deponent that Bennington West Line, was more than Twenty Miles
from Hudson's River: And Archebald Campbell, of Albany, Deputy-Surveyor, told
your Deponent, that he had measured out, and found it to be above Twenty Miles.
And further says not.

SAMUEL ROBINSON.
Sworn before me, in Hoosick, the 29th March, 17^^ JOHN MALCOMB, Justice.

THE Deposition of Ebenezer Wood, who being of lawful Age, says: He being
chosen a Select Man for the Town of Bennington, and sent to Perambulate the
West Line of said Town, which accordingly I did, which Line John R Blecker, Esquire
of the City of Albany, told your Deponent was more than Twenty Miles from
Hudson's River, which was the Line that Matthew Clesson run; and your Deponent
never see or heard of any other Line but that, for Bennington West Line.
Further says not.

EBENEZER WOOD.
Sworn before me in Hoosick, the 29th Day of March, 1774. JOHN MALCOMB, Justice.

IT may now be requisite to give the Reader to understand, that although no
Part of the Township of Bennington interferes with a Twenty Mile Line from
Hudson's River; yet, it is probable some other of the Westerly Tear of
Townships may in some Places, and in Others not approach it by a considerable
Distance, which may be easily understood by the Windings of the River.

THE New Hampshire Grants are bounded West on a Line commencing at the
Massachusetts North-West old Corner, extending North ten Degrees, East till it
reaches almost opposite to Ticondaroga, then extending West to the Lake. It is
beyond Dispute, considering the Course and Windings of Hudson's River, that
there is as much or more Land included in the old supposed Government of
New-(...) by this Division, as would be by extending a Twenty Mile Line exactly
parrallel with the River; it is also to be observed, that where those Grants,
as above, extend West from this Line to meet the Lake, Hudson's River is at
least Forty Miles to the Westward. -- Therefore, upon this Hypothesis, it may
well be concluded, that, although some Towns may interfere with a Twenty Mile
Line from the River, yet the Proprietors have nevertheless equal Right to those
Lands with them whose Townships do not interfere with that Line. Undoubtedly,
against the Colonies of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Bay, this was the
Case; that in some Instances New York lost Land by the Windings of the River,
in others it gained it so as to make it about equivalent to a Breadth Twenty
Miles East from the River; had the Line commenced at that Distance from the
River, and extended Equidistant to it, which would be a Line Difficult to
ascertain, and perpetuate.

THE Representations our Authors have exhibited in the Thirteenth Page of their
Narrative, relative to Cochran, Allen and Baker's dispossessing some People
settled on a Tract granted to Mr. Farret, a reduced Lieutenant, which is in the
Western Part of the Township of Rupourt, and demolishing several Buildings,
etc. are nearer the Truth, than most of their Accounts; yet, as the real State
of the Facts are materially different, in many Respects, and as Evidence of
these Matters is procured, for Brevity's sake shall pass over with inserting it.

THE Depositions of Jesse Graves, Daniel Scott, and Enoch Eastman -- is,
THAT some Time in the Month of October 1771, We was in Company together in the
Westerly Part of Rupourt, a Township of the New Hampshire Grants, and we
perceived there was a Controversy between the New Hampshire Settlers of that
Township, and sundry Persons that had newly come to that Place, with Axes and
Saws, and other Farmery Instruments, to begin a new Settlement near the West
Line of said Town, and within the Limits of the same, under subsequent Patents,
under the Grant of the Province of New York, which laped on the Township
aforesaid: And sundry of the New Hampshire Settlers of that Town were gathered
together to the Number of about Nine, including Ethan Allen, and Remember
Baker, which was not Inhabitants of said Town; this Number of Persons went to
warn off Two Men, whose Names were Todd, that was then at work on a Lot of Land
laid out to Robert Cochran in said Rupourt, and on the same Piece, where said
Cochran had partly cleared before, and had in his Possession: and we the
Deponents went with the Party, having a Curiosity to see the Event, for we were
informed that the Two Encroachers, viz. the Todds, had bid a Challenge against
the New Hampshire Settlers, and that they were provided with Arms, and had
threatened the Life of the said Cochran, and claimed the same Land by a
subsequent Patent from the Governor of New York: So the Party came to where the
Two Persons above named were at work, clearing Land, and warned them, to
forthwith go off from the Premises, and they did accordingly. And we found it
true that the Two Encroachers was well furnished with Firearms, and so was the
Party of Nine Men that went to dispossess them; expecting there would be near
or quite as many to oppose them, but there was no Pretense of using Firearms
on either Side. After this, the Party of Nine Men went a little further, where
another Person had began to build a Log-House on a Lot of Land belonging to a
New Hampshire Grantee in said Town; the Logs were laid, and the Rafters fixed
thereon for the Roof; the Person's Name that was building the same, was
Hutchinson, the Party aforesaid warned him off the Land; accordingly he
departed the Town, but tarried to see the Logs he had collected together,
pulled down, and laid in Four Heaps by the Party, and burned with Fire. After
this, the Party advanced a little further, where one Reid had began a small
Improvement on a Piece of Land in the Town of Pollite, his Claim being also
under New York, on a subsequent Grant, where was a poor Shelter, four Crotches
being drove into the Ground, and a Pole laid thereon, and Boughs added to the
heap in Lieu of a Roof: This shiftless Fabric was also consumed by Fire by the
same Party; and we the Deponents, were Eyewitnesses of the Fact before
related; and directly after this, the Party dispersed: But there was no Family
dispossessed in the whole Affair, nor was there any that had moved on the
Premises under Title from New York. And further the Deponents say not. Taken
and sworn before me, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in and for the
County of Charlotte, and Province of New York, this 11th of March, 1774.

EBENEZER CLARK.

HAVING procured with much Difficulty some Evidence relative to a spirited
Controversy that has for many Years subsisted between Col Reid, of the City of
New York, and certain Claimants under New Hampshire, about a Township of Land
called New Haven, adjoining to the first Falls on Otter-Croek, a little to the
Northward of Crown-Point; a State of the same Controversy, from the
Commencement of it down to the Year 1772, was conveyed to Governor Tryon, a
Copy of which has been transcribed in the Narrative, at the Beginning of this
Treatise. The present Evidence will serve to support the main Facts there
alleged, as well as inform with Respect to some later Transaction of the same
Controversy, which by Turns has subsisted to this Period. More Evidence would
have been produced, not only relative to this Affair; but sundry others, had it
not been, that the Justices at Crown-Point, refused to take any Affidavits in
Behalf of the New Hampshire Settler's, except those hereafter inserted,
although they have been often thereto requested.

The Deposition of James Henderson and David Bridea, is as follows:
THAT, on or about the 19th Day of June, 1773. we arrived from Scotland at
New York -- soon after our Arrival, we met with Col. Reid, in New York, who
invited us to settle under him in the County of Charlette, on Lands which he
said he owned in that County. We being Strangers to the Country, and not
knowing there was any Dispute or Controversy about Land in America, thought
best to accept of his Offer; and accordingly agreed to go with him, on the
following Terms, viz. That we should have a Lease of our Land forever, with the
first seven Years free from Rent, and after that, Six Pence per Acre yearly,
and to deliver to him at his Mill or Mills, the Tenth Part of our Grain yearly,
and not to cut any Timber, save what the clearing our Lands required. On the
aforesaid Agreement we set out from New York, with said Reid, and when we
arrived at Fort Miller, we heard those Lands that we agreed for, were in
Dispute; on which we went to said Reid, and acquainted him, that if his Lands
were in Dispute, we rather chose to turn back, than to go any further; but he
affirmed to us, that his Land was not in Dispute, and that he would put us in
peaceable Possession, and protect us there. On this Encouragement we went
forward as far as Fort George, where we heard the News of the Dispute again
confirmed to us; on which some of our Company would have turned back, but Col.
Reid refused to let them go, assuring us that the Lands was not in any Contest,
and that he would compel us to go forward. After this we went to Crown-Point,
where we understood that the Land to which we were going, was granted to the
Settlers that were on it by the Governor of New Hampshire, and that they would
not give up their Title, it being antecedent to New York Patents. After hearing
that we should have Trouble, we absolutely refused to go any further, telling
Col. Reid that we did not come to America to fight for any Man's Title, nor to
take away any Man's Property, and desired we might go back to New York; but he
refused, alleging that we should fulfill our Agreement, and, that there was a
Parcel of Yankies, or New England Men, settled all over America, without any
Right or Title to their Lands, and he would put us in Possession, and defend us
there. After this, he brought us to the Mouth of Otter Creek, and then he
ordered every Man to load his Gun; but I, viz. James Henderson, refused to load
mine. Next Morning, at the Falls of said Creek, he asked me where my Firelock
was? I replied, it was in the Battoe. Ay! Damn you! said he, you dare not load
your Firelock -- you will make a bad Soldier. After this we went to New Haven,
a Town above the Falls, where we found large Improvements made, and the
New-Hampshire's actually in Possession with their Families, which Families said
Reid turned out, and put us, with the Rest of our Company, in their Place --
then he said, there was no further Danger, and went back and left us to keep
Possession of those Houses and Improvements. Soon after this, came a large
Number of armed Men which styled themselves the Green-Mountain-Boys, and they
demanded of us if we were Reid's Settlers? We replied that we were. Then they
informed us that their Business was to dispossess us, alleging that those
Lands were antecedently granted to them by the Government of New Hampshire, and
that they would keep Possession of them 'till his Majesty's Pleasure was
further known, Then they ordered our Goods and Effects to be taken out of the
Houses, that none of them should be hurt, which was done; and then they
demolished and burned the Houses, which were made with large Logs, but nothing
of our Household Goods were burned. Next Day they pulled down a Grist Mill of
said Reid's, and there was a small Stack of Hay burned; which they said
accidentally took Fire; and that if they could find out that any of their Men
put Fire to it, they should pay for the Hay; for, they said, they did not
approve that any of the Effects of the Earth should be destroyed. Their Horses
likewise destroyed some of the Wheat and Corn, but they did not otherways abuse
our Persons, Effects or Families; neither did they exclaim against governmental
Authority, but constantly affirmed that they would maintain their Property, and
defend it from the Incursion of Col. Ried, or any other Claims from New York,
until his Majesty's Pleasure should be further known. And further we the
Deponents say not.

Sworn before me at Crown-Point, 17th March, 1774. THOMAS SPARHAM, Justice
Peace.

THE Deponent, Joseph Pangbun, jun. says, That in the Month of August, 1766 or
7, Col. Reid accompanied by Adolphus Benzel, and several Others, did come to
Otter Creek, to the Dwelling Place of him, the said Joseph Pangbun, where the
said Deponent had lately built a Saw-Mill, and forcibly did dispossess the said
Deponent, and by Force did put the said Col. Reid in Possession of the said
Saw-Mill, together with a large Quantity of Logs and sawed Boards, which he the
said Col. Reid did convert to his own Use, to the utter Undoing of the
Deponent, and that he the said Deponent, was kept out of his Possession six
Years, or upwards, when he recovered his Possession, but was in a short Time by
the said Col. Reid, again dispossessed, and reduced to the last Extremity. That
the said Deponent had a legal Right to the Saw-Mill and Land; they were his own
Proper Estate, as granted and given, by Charter to a certain Number of
Proprietors, by his Majesty's Governor, his Excellency, Benning Wentworth, then
Governor of his Majesty's Province of New Hampshire.

WHEREAS I the said Deponent, have made Application to all his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace at Crown-Point, and could not obtain an Affidavit of the
above Circumstances, I the said Deponent do, in Presents of the subscribing
Witnesses, aver the above to be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth. So help me God.

JOSEPH PANGBUN, jun.
Phineas Spalding, John McAlpine, William Patterson.


SECTION VIII.
OUR Authors in the Twenty Seventh and finishing Page of their Narrative,
discover great Invention and Subtilty, who after giving an Account of the
unfortunate Circumstances of the Town of Hinsdale which has, say they, been
taken up by a Royal Mandamus. This Township had first been granted by the
Government of the Massachusetts Bay, and upon the Settlement of the
Boundary-Line between the Massachusetts and New Hampshire in 1739, it fell
within the latter, and by them granted, and fully ratified to the Inhabitants
and Proprietors, who in Addition to their Title, had also the Indian Right.
This Township, by the Determination of the Boundary Line between New York and
New Hampshire, fell within the Jurisdiction of the former, and was by them
granted to Col. Howard, after it had been settled about Seventy Years. The
Assembly of New York in Order to screen their Government from the Imputation of
the Blame justly due to so reprehensible a Conduct, endeavor to palm it on the
Government at Home, see Page Sixth, with Respect to Hinsdale, a Township in the
South East Corner of Cumberland County: Even this is not to be ascribed to our
Government, it proceeded from a much greater, and the highest Authority: A
Mandamus was produced from the Crown, on the Report of the Board of Trade, and
by the Advice of the Privy Council, which vested the Grantee with a Right of
Election, an Act decisive in itself, and superceding the Agency of the Governor
and Council here, and the usual Forms. A very Extraordinary Representation! The
Nature of a Royal Mandamus is diametrically opposite to this Interpretation:
The Right of Election in the Grantees, is restricted entirely to Crown Lands
which are unapropriated; in such Lands, the Grantee has a Right of Election,
and common Sense may teach, that neither a Mandamus or any other Crown Grant
can subvert the Property which the Subject holds under the Crown by Prior
Grants; and, though there be ever so many Alterations in the Jurisdiction,
sundry of which have perplexed the Town of Hinsdale, yet this should have no
Effect on the Property of the Subjects. -- These Grantees are likewise withheld
from interfereing on the Right of the Indian Subjects. -- Yet, it seems Col.
Howard had the Vanity to locate his Mandamus on the old Plantation of Hinsdale,
which was firstly appropriated by a Purchase from the Indians, secondly, by a
Grant from the Government of the Massachusetts Bay, and thirdly, by the
Government of New Hampshire, and fourthly, by an uninterupted Possession and
Occupancy about Seventy Years.

THE Subterfuge the Gentlemen make Use of, to rid their Government from
Dishonor, in making this last Grant of Hinsdale, is very extraordinary; it
seems not well calculated to be transmitted for the Information of the
Government at Home! who are undoubtedly competent Judges of their own
Mandamus's, and no Doubt will easily discern their Last Error to be worse than
the First. Such preposterous granting of Lands, is Criminally injurious to the
Subject, as it never fails to embarrass the different Claimants with many
concomitant Difficulties. Yet, still to cast the Blame due to their Government,
on the King's Mandamus, is more daringly injurious to the highest Authority in
the Nation.

LASTLY, the manner of Redress prescribed for the Sufferers, viz. the old
Proprietors of Hinsdale, is the most shocking Piece of Contrivance, Page 27,
Hinsdale, a small Township which has lately been taken up by Virtue of a Royal
Mandamus, is alone unfortunate -- but even here the Possessors may be relieved,
by a suitable Compensation, equal to the Value of their Improvements in Crown
Lands, free from the Expense of Fees. These Gentlemen in their great Clemency
have also conceded that the New Hampshire Settlers in general may be thus
considered, On the same Terms, may be assigned to each of those who are seated
on the Soil, actually appropriated to others by the Government of New York, and
the Possessions of which cannot for that Reason be confirmed; such a Proportion
of Crown Lands, as the Governor and Council shall judge to be adequate to their
respective Improvements.

THEN they proceed to describe the Tract, A Fertile and extensive Country, in
the northern Part of the County of Charlotte, and between Connecticut River and
Lake Champlain, still remains unpatented by either Government; and might be
planted and cultivated by these People: -- What a surprising Condescension
this! the Posterity of the Original Proprietors of Hinsdale, especially, to be
allowed the Privilege to pull up Sakes, quit their Farms and Possessions,
Houses, Orchards, etc. and join Company with the New Hampshire Settlers in
general, and trudge off to the North-East Part of the Wilderness of Charlotte,
and there commence another Settlement, leaving their pleasant Habitations,
Fields, Tenements, and Country, in Exchange for a howling Wilderness; a pretty
Exchange! -- and this to gratify a number of New York Cormorants. But, let us
stop a little and consider -- whether it would not be more Righteous to change
the Scene, and so the New York Patentees remove their Patents, that interfere
with the New Hampshire Grants, and lay them in the Wilderness of Charlotte, as
neither Government have appropriated it.

A sufficient Reason to be offered in favor of the latter of these Projects,
is, that the Settlers under New Hampshire, are in Deed, and in Truth the right
and lawful Owners and Proprietors of the Lands they possess, as, it is
apprehended, has been fully demonstrated in the preceding Sections. Although
these Gentlemen have, in the Course of their Narration, flung out very
extraordinary Hints of rewarding his Majesty's Soldiery, by the Distribution of
those Lands, yet, they may here again be reminded, (which may further serve as
the above Reason) that his Majesty's Proclamation directed the Soldiery to make
their Pitches on unappropriated and vacant Lands; this therefore, they must do,
at the Hazard of losing their Grants, or repitching. For those Lands which
being antecedently granted by the Crown, by the Agency of the Governor and
Council of New Hampshire, must forever exclude the Soldiery from pitching
thereon; and put it entirely out of the Power of the Government of New York, or
the Crown, to grant them to a Second Person. And when it is considered, that
the New York Land-Jobbers have, long since purchased great Part of the Soldiery
Rights, and that for a mere Trifle, and laid them out of themselves, at their
own Risque; their Arguments on that Subject, cannot contribute greatly to the
Removal of the New Hampshire Settlers, to the exterior Part of Charlotte.

OUR Authors have given a tedious History of the Suits at Law, which have been
commenced, by the New York Patentees, against the Claimants, and Occupants
under New Hampshire, and have exhibited many specious Appearances of Fairness,
Equity, and Impartiality in their Trials. However, the Reader must observe,
that in every of those, so boasted of, candid Trials, the Defendants, by the
Result, were to be dispossessed of their Farms. They then continue to tell of
the entire Satisfaction of the Vanquished, (together with such or the
New Hampshire Claimants at attended the Courts) relative to the Validity of the
New York Title. -- Soon after this, they give a surprising Account of Riots and
Outrages, committed by these Settlers, and mention Allen by Name, (who they
say, but a little before was so fully persuaded of the Validity of the New York
Title) as one of their Leaders. This Narrative is in itself incredible, it
cannot be supposed, that Men who were convinced, they had had an impartial
Trial at Law, and of the Insufficiency of their own Title, and the Authenticity
of that of their Opponents, would rally to arm, in Defiance of legal Authority,
and in Defense of their own invalid Title; especially, after they had publicly
declared their own Sentiments concerning that Matter.

THIS Assembly seem profusely lavish in the Praise of their own Government,
concerning the Generosity, Forbearance and Humanity, etc. they have exercised
toward the New Hampshire Settlers; and that nothing of that Sort may here pass
unnoticed, but that every Act, by them done, worthy of such Appellations, may
be duly acknowledged; it will be freely confessed that Governor Tryon, and the
Majority of his Majesty's Council, conducted with Honor and Humanity toward
them; while his Excellency was in the Administration, except in passing some
very extraordinary Laws on the 9th of March, 1774, which may be seen in the
fore Part of this Treatise, under the Head of the Narrative: But those Settlers
must have that Charity for his Excellency, as to conclude he, would not have
put his Sanction to those Laws, had he not known the said Settlers called the
Green Mountain-Boys to be very expert with Firearms and likewise very good
Woodsers; and consequently, that the New York Land-jobbers could not put these
Laws in Execution. To view this Matter in any other Light, they would be
obliged to distrust the Fidelity of their worthy Friend Governor Tryon. But to
return to the Subject of Generosity. The Assembly of New York are unwise to
make so great a Bustle about this Matter, inasmuch as they have spoiled the
Joke themselves, by their so infamous a Proposal of Accommodation, which as has
been before observed, is, that the New Hampshire Settlers remove to the
Wilderness of Charlotte, in Order to gratify a certain Fraternity with the
Country they have with much Toil and Expense subdued: We have a very beautiful
Representation of this New York Beneficence by a wise Author, the tender
Mercies of the Wicked are Cruelty. -- Now follows another Quotation from our
Authors, which is no less than a barefaced Insult on those Inhabitants, and one
of the boldest of Misrepresentations. If the New Hampshire Claimants imagined
that they were aggrieved by the Decisions of our Judges, the Means of Redress
were in their own Power; and they ought to have sued their Writs of Error, and
in the legal and ordinary Mode, to have referred their Cause to the final
Sentence of his Majesty: But to expect a Remedy incompatible with the
Administration of Justice, and the Rights of the Subject, either bespeak the
greatest Ignorance, or Presumption.

COULD they once get this established, that there should be no Access to his
Majesty, or Trial, but in this "ordinary Mode," it would no doubt, be to their
entire Satisfaction; Trials in that Government would then easily become
decisive; for in no Case, wherein the Demand of the Plaintiff is below the Sum
of Five Hundred Pounds, a Writ of Error in Favor of the Defendant can issue.
And the New York Attorneys who compiled the New York Statings, and are also
Patentees under that Government, well knew that every Action brought against
the New Hampshire Claimants has been designedly laid below that Sum. Yet they
were possessed of that extreme Boldness to aver in express Terms, that, if the
New Hampshire Claimants imagined, that they were aggrieved, by the Decisions of
their Judges, their Means of Redress were in their own Power. i. e. by Way of a
Writ of Error.

THERE is nothing exhibited in this New York Pamphlet which more sensibly
deserves Resentment than their Pretensions of Indulgencies, Favors, etc.
conferred on these Claimants by that Government -- To the Honor of the
Government of New York, it may justly be asserted, that the New Hampshire
Claimants have received every Mark of Favor and Indulgence which the
Circumstances permitted. Such Hypocrisy debases Human Nature, is the Pest of
Society, partakes of Falsehood and Treachery; and what renders it peculiarly
vile, is, that it usurps the Seat of Virtue, and destroys Faith in Communities,
and is the Source of cruel Jealousy. Had the Government of New York been truly
friendly to those Settlers, it had been returned again; and mutual Good Will
supplied the Place of Hatred an Strife. But, alas! so long as the Fee of the
Country of the New Hampshire Grants is the Object in View, by the Government of
New York, how it is possible for Peace and good Order to take Place, cannot well
be conceived. Well would it be for that Government, and infinitely better for
the Settlers under New Hampshire, were they annexed to some other Government;
but they say, No. Quere, Why? The Answer is easy. They would then loose Sight
of the aforesaid desirable Object: Otherwise, surely they would be glad to part
with such rebellious Subjects as they represent them to be. For the Truth no
Doubt is, that they are in Hopes some better Fortune may in future, attend
them. And that they can take and execute some of the leading Men among these
Inhabitants; and so frighten and impose on the Rest; and finally, by this
Means, avail themselves of their Estates and Property. This is all they can
desire in continuing this Country under their Jurisdiction. That they have in
Reality a View to this, will further appear, by some memorable Sentences
recorded in the 25th Page of their Appendix. "We may," say they, readily
conceive, that Breakenridge, and his Party, have abundant Reason to wish for an
Alteration of Jurisdiction. The public Crimes, and private Wrongs which they
have perpetrated, must make them look forward to the Hour of Tranquillity, with
the most anxious Apprehensions. The injured may then demand Satisfaction for
all their Sufferings. -- An Atonement must then be made to the Country, for the
Violation of it is Laws. Here the New Hampshire Settlers may read their intended
Doom, in Consequence of the Ability of the Government of New York. And one
Reason why this Government have not already destroyed the Inhabitants of the
New Hampshire Grants, with Fire and Sword, is their Want of Ability; and this
Inability, in great Part, consists in this, that the common People in the
Government, are universally of Opinion that the Inhabitants have a good Right
to those Lands, and should not be molested in the peaceable Enjoyment of them;
and consequently will not assist their Civil Officers, in taking Possession of
their Tenements, or them as Rioters. That they are no further turbulent than
what is necessary to defend their Persons and Properties, from the Cruelty and
Monopoly of their Rulers. This is the Ground of all the Lenity, Forbearance and
Indulgence of that Government toward those Inhabitants; and it is hoped, if
these excessive Favors should be passed over without their Thanks, they may
yet be excused for the Neglect.

FURTHERMORE, those Gentlemen, after having thus soon out their in sulcible
Complaints, crown the Whole in Page 25th. That they, i. e. the New Hampshire
Settlers, may in Nothing (...) of Character, they have appointed James
Breakenridge, (whom we have so often mentioned) a Fugitive from Justice, and
who has rendered himself so obnoxious as to become the immediate Subject of a
Proelamation -- as one of their Agents. What a monstrous Crime is here! -- Has
Mr. Breakenridge rendered himself obnoxious to Punishment in the Government of
New York? O strange! Such a pacific Government too! -- But what has he done? He
has never, (notwithstanding all their Insinuations) been active in any Riots
(as they term them) occasioned by this Controversy; but is become the Subject
of a Proclamation -- yet still, what Evil has he done? As those Gentlemen have
not obliged the Public with an Information, the Author can supply their Defect.
This Gentleman was one of the first Settlers on the New Hampshire Grants; and
has had a great Share in the political Economy of that Country, is a Man of
Probity and Stedfastness in Principle, and blessed with strong Power of
Ponderation, and has gained, as well as merited the Esteem of these Settlers.
He was by them chosen as Agent to represent their distressed Cause to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Dartmouth, President of the Board of Trade; and also, to
implore his Majesty to interpose his Royal Authority, and relieve his oppressed
Subjects. -- He approached his Lordship, with a Representation of the Conduct
of the Government of New York, toward his Constituents, and solicited his
Lordship's Aid and Assistance, in Behalf of the Sufferers. He was received with
Expressions of Kindness, and when he had laid the Facts of the Cause before his
Lordship, and substituted an Agent at London, and put the Cause in Readiness
for a final Trial, before his Majesty in Privy Council, returned to America;
having done all Things to the great Satisfaction of his Employers. -- Since his
Return from Great Britain, he has made his Abode at his own House in
Bennington, (which is not within Seventeen Miles of Hudson's River,) although
"a Fugitive from Justice," -- making further Preparations for the decisive
Trial depending before his Majesty, and comforting the Inhabitants, with the
Hopes of his most gracious Deliverance. These are the Things which have so
exasperated the Government of New York, against this good and worthy Man.

AS THE Design of this Section was, in a concise Manner, to point out some of
the most notorious Extravagancies of the Government of New York, the Subject
cannot with Propriety be passed over, without taking a short Review of the
forementioned Laws of that Colony, which are the most apparent Portraiture of
their horrid Malevolence and Caprice. Passing these Laws, which are evidently
calculated with a Design of extirpating the Inhabitants, by them Laws alluded
to, from their goodly Land, nay, from the Face of the Earth; is no less than
lavishly foaming out their own Shame; Laws that ought, and are contemned and
disregarded by every Lover of Virtue. Laws and Society-Compacts were originally
designed to protect the Subjects in their Property. Loyalty and Subordination
to such Government, is essentially necessary, for the Good of Society, and all
good and liege Subjects will support such Laws and Legislators. But, as in the
present Instance, when Laws, in their original Design and Administration, are
degenerated from the good Ends for which Laws and Government were instituted,
terminating in the Ruin and Destruction of the Society it should secure and
protect; from the same Principles, viz. Self-preservation, the Subjects are
obliged to resist, and depose such Government. And, inasmuch as those Laws,
together with some Remarks on them, are to be seen in the Narrative Part of
this Performance, shall therefore conclude, with leaving the Reader, from his
own Meditations, to pass such Sentence concerning this Matter as may appear
reasonable.

SECTION IX.
IT may be of some Moment, toward the Close of this Treatise, to exhibit a
Number of special Motives which induced those Inhabitants to prosecute
Settlements on the controverted Premises. As,

FIRST, On the good Faith of his Majesty's Grants, by the Agency of the
Government of New Hampshire, the Validity of which has been sufficiently
argued. And,

SECONDLY, by Engagement from a Proclamation by his late Excellency Benning
Wentworth, which, for the more public Information, is here inserted.

By His EXCELLENCY, BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire Captain General, Governor and
Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, in New England,
etc.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his Honor, CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, and Commander
in Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, bath lately issued a
Proclamation, of a very extraordinary Nature, setting forth, that King CHARLES
the Second, on the 12th Day of March, 1663-4, and the 29th June, 1674, did, by
his several Letters Patent, of those Dates, grant in Fee to his Brother, the
Duke of York, among other Things, all the Land from the West Side of
Connecticut River to the East Side of Delaware Bay; and therein also set forth,
and describes the Bounds of New Hampshire; in which Description there is a very
material Mistake; besides, there is omitted the Fact, on which the Description
of New Hampshire depended, viz. His Majesty's Determination of the North and
Western Boundaries of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in 1739. And
nothing can be more evident, than that New Hampshire may legally extend her
Western Boundary as far as the Massachusetts Claim reaches, and she claims no
more; but New York pretend to claim even to the Banks of Connecticut River,
although she never laid out and settled one Town in that Part of his Majesty's
Lands, since she existed as a Government.

When New York Government extends her Eastern Boundary, to the Banks of
Connecticut River, between New York and the Colony of Connecticut; and to the
Banks of said River, between New York and the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, it would have been full early for New York to declare that
the Government of New Hampshire was fully apprised of the Right of New York,
under the before recited Letters Patent to the Duke of York. In Virtue of the
final Determination of the Boundary Lines settled by his late Majesty, between
this Government and the Massachusetts Bay, all the Lands capable of
Settlements, have been erected into Townships, agreeable to his Majesty's
Commands, and a considerable Revenue is daily arising to the Crown, unless
interrupted and impaired by his Honor's Proclamation, which New Hampshire will
not be answerable for.

At present, the Boundaries of New York, to the Northward, are unknown, and as
soon as it shall be his Majesty's Pleasure to determine them, New Hampshire
will pay ready and cheerful Obedience thereunto, not doubting but that all
Grants made by New Hampshire, that are fulfilled by the Grantees, will be
confirmed to them, if it should be his Majesty's Pleasure to alter the
Jurisdiction.

For political Reasons, the Claim to Jurisdiction by New York, might have been
deferred, as well as the strict Injunction on the Civil Power, to exercise
Jurisdiction in their respective Functions, as far as the Eastern Banks of
Connecticut River.

The said Proclamation carrying an Air of Government in it, may possibly affect
and retard the Settlement of his Majesty's Lands, granted by this Government:
For preventing an Injury to the Crown, of this Kind, and to remove all Doubts
that may arise to Persons holding the King's Grants, they may be assured, that
the Patent to the Duke of York is obsolete, and cannot convey any certain
Boundary to New York, that can be claimed as a Boundary, as plainly appears by
the several Boundary Lines of the Jersies on the West, and the Colony of
Connecticut on the East, which are set forth in the Proclamation, as Part only
of the Land included in the said Patent to the Duke of York.

To the End therefore, that the Grantees now settled and settling on those
Lands, under his late and present Majesty's Charters, may not be intimidated,
or any Way hindered or obstructed in the Improvement of the Lands so granted,
as well as to ascertain the Right, and maintain the Jurisdiction of His
Majesty's Government of New Hampshire, as far Westward as to include the Grants
made:

I HAVE thought fit, by and with the Advice of of His Majesty's Council, to
issue this Proclamation, hereby encouraging the several Grantees, claiming
under this Government, to be industrious in clearing and cultivating their
Lands, agreeable to their respective Grants.

AND I do hereby require and command all Civil Officers, within this Province,
of what Quality soever, as well those that are not, as those that are
Inhabitants on the said Lands, to continue and be diligent in exercising
Jurisdiction in their respective Offices, as far Westward as Grants of Land
have been made by this Government; and to deal with any Person or Persons, that
may presume to interrupt the Inhabitants or Settlers on said Lands, as to Law
and Justice does appertain, the pretended Right of Jurisdiction mentioned in
the aforesaid Proclamation notwithstanding.

Given at the Council Chamger in Portsmouth, the 13th Day of March, 1764, and
in the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign. B. WENTWORTH.
By His Excellency's Command, with Advice of Council, T. ATKINSON, jun.
Secretary.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
A THIRD and weighty Inducement to the Settlement of those Lands, was argued
from his Majesty's express Order, prohibiting the Government of New York from
Granting any of those Lands in Dispute, which is as follows.

At a Court at St. James's, the Twenty Fourth Day of July, 1767.
PRESENT,

The King's most excellent Majesty. Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor,
Duke of Queensborough, Duke of Ancaster, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Litchfield,
Earl of Bristol, Earl of Shelborne, Viscount Falmouth, Viscount Barrington,
Viscount Clarke, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans Stanley, Esquire
"His Majesty taking the said Report" i. e. a Report of the Board of Trade, --
into Consideration, was pleased with the Advice of his Privy Council, to
approve thereof, and does hereby strictly charge, require and command, that the
Governor or Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, for the
Time being, do not, upon Pain of his Majesty's highest Displeasure, presume to
make any Grant whatsoever, of any Part of the Lands described in the said
Report, until his Majesty's further Pleasure shall be known concerning the same.

WILLIAM SHARP.
A true Copy, Attest GEO. BANYAR, Dep. Secr.

A FOURTH, and last special Motive for the carrying on, and extending those
Settlements, was from a Report of the Lords of Trade, as follows,

EXTRACT from a Report of the Lords of Trade, to the Committee of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, for Plantation Affairs, dated December 3d, 1772.
UPON the fullest Examination into all the Circumstances which at present
constitute the State of that District between the Rivers Hudson, and
Connecticut; out of which, the greatest Disorders and Confusion have arisen: It
seems to us, that the principal Objects of Attention in the Consideration of
any Measures that can be suggested for restoring public Tranquillity, and
quieting Possessions, are,

FIRST, Those Townships, which having been originally settled and established
under Grants from the Government of the Massachusetts Bay, fell within this
District, by the Determination of the Northern Boundary of that Province, in
the Year 1740.

SECONDLY, Those Grants of Land, made within this District, by the Government
of New York, previous to the establishment of the Townships laid out by the
Governor of New Hampshire, after the Conclusion of the Peace; and which Land
now lies within the Limits of some One or Other of those Townships.

THIRDLY, Those Townships, which having been originally laid out by the
Governor of New Hampshire, either continue in the same State, or have been
confirmed by Grants from New York, and also, those which have since originated
under Grants from the Latter of those Colonies.

WITH Regard to those Townships which fall under the First of the
abovementioned Descriptions; when we consider their Nature and Origin, and the
numberless Difficulties to which the original Proprietors of them must have
been subjected in the Settlement of Lands exposed to the Incursions of the
Savages, and to every Distress which the Neighborhood of the French in Time of
War could bring upon them; and, when we add to these Considerations, the great
Reason there is to believe that the Grants were made upon the Ground of
Military Services against the Enemy; we do not hesitate to Submit to your
Lordships our Opinion, that the present Proprietors of these Townships, ought,
both in Justice and Equity, to be quieted in their Possessions: And, that all
Grants whatsoever, made by the Government of New York, of any Lands within the
Limits of those Townships, whether the Degree of Improvement under the original
Grant had been more or less; are, in every Light which they can be viewed,
oppressive and unjust: But as we are sensible that such subsequent Grants made
by the Government of New York, however unwarrantable, cannot be set aside by
any Authority from his Majesty, in Case the Grantees shall insist on their
Title; we submit to your Lordships, whether it might not be expedient, in Order
to quiet the the original Proprietors in their Possessions, to propose that all
such Persons who may Claim Possession of Lands within the Limits of such
Townships under New York Grants, should upon Condition of their quiting such
Claim, receive a Grant under the Seal of New York upon the like Terms, and free
of all Expenses, of an equal Number of Acres in so me other Part of the
District lying between the Rivers Hudson and Connecticut; and in Case where any
actual Settlement or Improvement has been made by such Claimants, that they
should in such Case, receive Fifty Acres of waste Land for every Three Acres,
they may have improved.

WITH Regard to those Grants made by the Government of New York, which fall
within the Second Description, and upon which any actual Improvement has been
made; they do appear to us to deserve the same Consideration; and that the
Proprietors thereof ought not to be disturbed in their Possessions, whether
that Improvement be to a greater or lesser Extent: But we beg Leave to observe
to your Lordships, that in both these Cases no Consideration ought to be had to
any Claim, where it shall appear that no regular Possession has ever been
taken, and no actual Settlement ever been made.

WITH Regard to those Townships which fall within the last mentioned
Description, we submit to your Lordships our Opinion, That provided such
Townships do not include Lands within the Limits of some antecedent Grant, upon
which actual Improvement has at any Time been made, it would be advisable they
should be confirmed as Townships, according to the Limits expressed in the
Grants thereof; and that all Persons having Possession of any Shares in the
said Townships, either as original Grantees, or by Purchase or Conveyance, and
upon which Shares any actual Improvement or Settlement has been made, ought not
in Justice to have been, or to be in Future, disturbed in the Possession of
such Shares; nor ought they to be bound to any other Conditions, whether of
Quit-rent or otherwise, than what is contained in the Grant.

THESE Inducements are indisputably Authoritative, and need no Commentation:
Yet notwithstanding the Priority and Preferance of the New Hampshire Title to
that of New York, and the so many corroberating and concomitant Inducements to
the Claimants under the former, to settle and cultivate those Lands; yet the
Assembly of New York, in sundry Parts of their State of the Right, etc. and
more particularly through the Appendix, treat those Inhabitants, merely on
Account of such Settlement, with the most extreme Injury; who, instead of
arguing, only declaim against them, and go on in a Gradation of Consequences
drawn from false Premises, till they have dragged them from their true
Character of honest Men, to that of Usurpers, Rioters, and Felons. Although the
Quotations from our Authors have already been lengthy, yet that a Precedent of
their Injustice may not here be wanted, the following, from the third Page of
their Appendix is inserted.

But though the same Principles have been explained, and enforced in several
Acts and Proclamations of Government, as well as on repeated Trials in our
Courts of Judicatory, they have left no suitable Impression on the contentious
Claimants under New Hampshire. On the Contrary, in Contempt of the Dictates of
Justice, the Decisions of Law, and the civil Authority, have their
Encroachments, which were few in Number at the Time of the royal Determination,
been increased and extended in a tenfold Proportion; and that in general by
Men, who cannot plead that they were deceived or ignorant of the Nature or
Merit of their Claim, which it appears, were too notorious to have escaped
their Observation, but who in spite of every Warning and Remonstrance to deter
them, which human Prudence could devise, engaged as Volunteers on the Side of
New Hampshire, and wilfully plunged themselves into the Controversy. To
extenuate their own Indiscretion and Misconduct, Calumny and Misrepresentation
are their only Resource; and accordingly without the least Reason, they charge
the Government of New York with Partiality, and every Land-holder under it,
upon whom they have trespassed, with Injustice and Oppression; asserting, that
because they have sanctified their Claim by a wrongful Possession, they ought
peacebly to enjoy the Fruits of their Usurpation. To fortify their Pretentions
they have spared no Art or Act of Violence, however Criminal; and after all, as
if they were really injured, and the Objects of Regard, they do not hesitate to
carry their Complaints to the Throne, and by special Agents to solicit some
extraordinary Act of Favor, by which their Offenses may be passed over with
Impunity, and their Encroachments perpetuated in Prejudice to those who enjoy a
clear Title from the Crown, under the Great Seal of New York.

As this clamorous Quotation is already mostly answered, shall only remark, as
to those Settlers extending their Encroachments in a ten-fold Proportion, since
the Royal Determination. It has been fully evinced that this Determination
respected Jurisdiction only, and the before recited Royal Order and Report of
the Board of Trade, were accounted sufficient to exclude all manner of Doubts
in the Minds of the New Hampshire Claimants of the Validity of their Title.
They truly cannot plead that they were deceived or ignorant of the Nature or
Merit of their Claim. This Matter was elucidated by the highest Wisdom and
Authority in the Nation; they rejoice in the Clemency of their Sovereign, and
in the Wisdom and impartial Justice of the Honorable Board of Trade, exhibited
as aforesaid, upon which Encouragement those Claimants have greatly extended
Settlements on those Lands, in a more special Manner on Onion River, and Lake
Champlain, between the Township of Panton, which a-buts on the Lake opposite
Crown-Point, and the said River, and North of it almost to the Forty-fith
Degree of North Latitude, and preparations are vigorously making to extend
these Settlements to the very Bounds of the Province of Quebec. It is seldom
any new Country Settles with such Rapidity, notwithstanding the Oppositions
they meet with from the Government of New York: The Expense of clearing Roads,
building Mills, Moving to and settling in that Wilderness Country only for Two
Years last past, would amount to no very inconsiderable Sum. And those Settlers
from the foregoing Reasons, do not in the least hesitate, but that they in so
fulfilling the Conditions of their Charters, have and are acting agreeable to
his Majesty's Will and Pleasure; and that those Labors will not only be for
their own Emolument, but for the Enlargement of the British Empire, and
Addition of the Crown Revenue.

THE Assembly of New York have been very particular in their History of the
Tumults and Riots made by those Settlers, in Opposition to that Government,
(many of which Facts must be confessed to be true) though they have carefully
omitted their manyfold Provocations, yet, with all their Particularity have
given but a very imperfect Idea of those Transactions. I shall here, therefore,
waving particulars, give a general Review of the Economy of those Settlers in
their Oppositions to that Government. For defending their Properties, they were
indicted Rioters, the next Thing was to defend Rioters; then they had two
Objects as the Subjects of their Protection, viz. their Persons, as well as
Property: They were at First greatly intimidated at the empty Appearance of
Law, that their Opponents were so conversant with, sometimes despairing of
maintaining their Possessions; yet upon Extremity, rather than quit their
Substance to the insatiable Ravishers, would rally and frustrate their Designs:
Thus, when the Sheriff of the County of Albany with his Posse came to
dispossess some of them, they most generally, boldly took up Arms, and
appointed Leaders. Matters having come to this, not long after, the Inhabitants
assembled and appointed Committees of Safety in the several Towns throughout
their Settlement; this general Committee have the conducting of the Public
Affairs of the Country for its Security, 'till his Majesty settles the
Controversy. They have erected several Companies, which by the Votes of the
Soldiers are furnished with Officers, these Companies form a Regiment which are
known by the significant Character of GREEN-MOUNTAIN BOYS, who are generally in
the Prime of Life, well versed in the Use of Firearms, and of robust
Constitutions; probably no American Regiment in an interior Defense could excel
them, or that would willingly contribute more to the Support of the Crown of
Great Britain; for it is observable, that such Subjects that will not fight for
their Property, will never fight for their King: And, the general Instructions
from the Committee, ever have been, not to act in any thing against the
Government of New York, but on the Defensive.

IT is in the Nature of Things impossible to pass a right Judgment on the
Conduct of the New Hampshire Settlers, without taking into View the Treatment
of the Government of New York toward them. All Cases must be determined upon
the peculiar Circumstances attending; no Act can scarcely be conceived of
which, under certain attending Circumstances might not be lawful. It will be
readily admitted on the Part of those Settlers, that, provided the Government
of New York, and its Patentees have a clear and incontestible Right to those
Lands; and that they are Intruders, and by Force and Violence have maintained
such Encroachments, then, they are truly guilty, in manner as the Assembly of
New York have alleged: But on the Contrary, if those Settlers have a legal and
incontestible Right to those Lands, that they prosecute Settlement on the good
Faith of that Title, and the sundry Approbations of both their Title and
Settlement from the British Administration, then, they are not guilty in Manner
as those Gentlemen have declared; and the impartial Public, instead of viewing
them as Usurpers, Rioters and Felons, will justify them in their Conduct, and
esteem them as good Members of Society, liege Subjects to the Crown of
Great Britain, and good Soldiers for defending their Persons and Properties.

THUS, is humbly submitted the State of the Controversy, which has for many
Years subsisted between the Government of New York and the Settlers under
New Hampshire; by impartial Justice must every Act stand or fall; if those
Settlers are in the wrong, they are criminally so, but if not, then the
Allegations of their Opponents will be adjudged as futile and cruel.

INTRODUCTION, TO THE APPENDIX.
WHEREAS the French Government of Canada have made sundry Grants of some of the
most valuable Part of those Lands in Dispute, between the Government of
New York and the Claimants under New Hampshire on the Easterly Side of Lake
Champlain, and even to the Southward of Crown-Point. And whereas the General
Assembly of the Colony of New York, in their State of the Rights of that
Colony, so far as concerns the French Grants aforesaid, have very ingeniously
confuted the French Claim to those Lands; shall therefore subjoin it as an
Appendix to this Treatise, in as much as the same Arguments equally Support the
New Hampshire Claim against that of the French, as they do that of New York. --
There were several Reasons which induced the Author to make Use of this
Appendix.

Firstly, Because he is not acqainted with many of the Historical Facts, on
which the Arguments therein Contained are founded. And,

Secondly, From the Consideration that he cannot Argue so well. And a Third and
special Reason is,

Because be is credibly informed that the Gentlemen Land-schemers of New York
have altered their Plan of Operation, and have at an inconsiderable Price,
purchased the greatest Part of the French Claim to coroborate their own
subsequent Patents, and by that Means to avail themselves of an antecedent
Claim to that of New Hampshire; and that their present Scheme is to be silent
at the Court at Great Britain, with Respect to their Claim under New York, and
carry on the Dispute in the Name of the French Barons, hopeing by this
Stratagem to procure to themselves the Fee of those Lands which the French
Grants cover; and frustrate and Dispossess the Claimants and Settlers under
New Hampshire, which are seated on the Lands the French Grants include, to the
Number of about Three Hundred Families, and on which there is not a single
Settler under either the French or New York Claim. And inasmuch, as the Chain
of Arguments predicated on undeniable Facts, and exhibited in the following
Appendix, of which this is an Introduction, are abundantly sufficient to
invalidate the French Claim, the Author therefore takes a peculiar Pleasure in
turning the Artillery of the Assembly of New York against themselves, in full
Confidence that, that Assembly cannot, by Reason and Argument, gainsay what
they have thus exhibited with the Help of any French Cunning whatsoever. And
provided the Assembly of New York had published the following Appendix, with a
friendly Design toward the New Hampshire Settlers; that Assembly would have
merited their grateful Acknowledgements; but though their Design at that Time
was to defeat the French Claim to establish their New York Patents,
nevertheless it seems a good Providence has made Use of the learned Abilities
and evil Intensions of the Gentlemen of that Assembly, which those Settlers
dreaded as their greatest temporary Evil to be conducive to their greatest
temporary Good.

Although the Arguments contained in the Appendix, to be hereafter inserted, are
full and complete against the French Claim, they are nevereheless somewhat
incumbered with mere imaginary Notions, relative to the prodigious and ancient
Northern Extention of the Colony of New York, even to the River St. Lawrence.
They indeed ascertain and vindicate the Right of the Crown of England to those
Lands, and then on ficticious Principles assume the Right of that Colony to be
co-extensive with that of the Crown. Now the Reader will with a little
Attention, discern that Arguments relative to the French claim, do not at all
depend on the aforementioned Extention of the Right of the colony of New York,
or of any of his Majesty's colonies: Merely the Right of the crown to that
Extention of Territory is abundantly sufficient to nullify and make void the
French claim. Undoubtedly those Lands granted by the French Government of
Canada, adjoining to Lake Champlain were crown Lands when usurped and granted
by the French, and continued so to be till it was granted by his Majesty's
English Government of New Hampshire. But of this enough has been already
animadverted. The Dispute between New York and New Hampshire is committed to
the Public consideration. What remains in this Introduction to the Appendix is
only to point out to the Reader that such Part of the Arguments, or rather
Representations, therein contained as assume a colony Right to those Lands, are
foreign to the Point in Issue, in the Dispute of the French claim; the same may
be said, provided the Government of New Hampshire assume a particular colony
Right of their's to the same Premises. Such Arguments may truly affect the
colonies of New York and New Hampshire, but by no Means affect the Issue in
Dispute relative to the French claim, inasmuch as the Right of the Crown of
England to those Lands Precludes the French claim entirely. Therefore such
colony Arguments as may be found interspersed in the following Appendix are
only Digressions from the Point in Issue, but cannot any Way affect the
Arguments which center in that single Point. Those Digressions are also
virtually answered in the foregoing Discourse.

APPENDIX, Transcribed from the Assembly of New-York's State, etc. Verbatim.
A STATE Of the Rights of the Colony of New York, so far as concerns the Grants
formerly made by the French Government of Canada, of Lands on Lake Champlain,
and at and to the Southward of Crown-Point.
THE Whole intermediate Coast between Martha's Vineyard and the first
Settlements in Virginia, remained entirely unknown 'till Hudson's Discovery in
1609, when it began to be minutely explored, and the Bays, Rivers, Islands, and
Creeks, distinguished by Name.

Hudson's River was again visited in 1610, and the following Years, by Dutch
Ships, with a Grant under the States General for an exclusive Trade; and the
Coloy which they denominated Nieuw Nederlant, advanced with such Rapidity, that
in 1612 they had a Town and Fort in New-Amsterdam, now New York; and in 1615,
another Town and Fort at Aurania, now Albany 160 Miles up Hudson's River.

IN 1623, they erected Fort Good Hope, on Connecticut River, and upwards of
Thirty-five Miles from its Mouth. Near to this ancient Fortress the Town of
Hartford has since been built under Connecticut, but it is indisputable that
the Dutch actually enjoyed the exclusive Possession, Trade, and Advantage of
the whole River, long before it had been approached by any English Subject; and
that they claimed and considered all the Country to the Westward of Connecticut
River, and as far Northward as the River St. Lawrence, as Part of their Colony
of Nieuw Nederlandt See Ogilvy's America, published in 1671, and the Map at
Page 168, Sect. Nieuw Nederlant; where this Country is called Nova Belgica, and
Nieuw Nederlant; and the River itself is called Rio St. Lawrence, DE GROUTE
RIVIER VAN NIEUW NEDERLANT. See also Blaev's America, Vol. xi. published at
Amsterdam in 1662, and his Map inscribed Nova Belgica, et Anglia Nova.


.

IN 1663-4, King Charles the Second, granted to his Brother James, Duke of
York, the District of Country comprehending New York and New Jersey, which were
Territories possessed by the Dutch.

IN that Year the Dutch were subdued by an Armament from England. By the
Articles of Capitulation, the Rights and Estates of all the Inhabitants were
secured to them.

IN 1673, the Country was again surrendered to a Dutch Fleet, but in 1674, by
Treaty between the two Nations, the Dutch ceded all their Claim to this
Country, to the Crown of England.

IN the same Year King Charles the Second, to remove all Doubts which might
have arisen concerning the Validity of his first Grant to the Duke, on Account
of the intermediate Conquest by the Dutch, confirmed the same Territories to
his Royal Highness by a new Grant. There can be no Dispute but that by the
Words of the Duke's Grant, the Province of New York was to have an Eastern
Extent to Connecticut River. That River takes it is Rise to the Northward of the
45th Degree of North Latitude, and consequently beyond the Boundary lately
established between New York and Quebet, by his Majesty's Royal Proclamation of
the 7th Day of October 1763.

ON this Principle we have always claimed, under the Royal Grant, as the just
and ancient Right of this Province, All the Country which lies to the South of
West Line drawn from the Head of Connecticut River; except so far as it
interferes with the Colony of Connecticut, with which a Settlement was made in
1683, by Commissaries of both Provinces, under mutual Acts of Legislature, and
which was confirmed by King William.

BUT we have a further Title to the Country as far Northward as the South Side
of the River St. Lawrence.

THE Dutch on their first Establishment here, made a Treaty of Peace and
Alliance with the Five Nations, called by the French the Iroquois. These
warlike Tribes were the Conquerors and Masters of a great Part of
North America, holding all the Natives in Subjection, from the River St.
Lawrence down to Georgia.

WHEN the English became possessed of New York, they also made an Alliance with
the Five Nations, who afterward, in the most express Terms, subjected
themselves to the Crown of England, under the Government of New York; and
however wild and untractable, were always treated as Subjects by this
Government.

THE Country as far Northward as the River St. Lawrence, and Westward without
any known Limits, was their undoubted Property That the Country as far North as
the River St. Lawrence, belonged to the Iroquois, or Five Nations, is proved by
all the ancient Maps and Histories. In the Map inscribed Nova Belgica, et
Anglia Nova, published in xi Vol. Geographiae Blavianae, in 1662, Lake
Champlain is called Lacus Irocoiensis, and the Country on the East Side of the
Lake is called Irocoisia. In Johannes Van Keulen's Atlas, published at
Amsterdam in 1720, the River St. Lawrence is called Rio des Iroquois ou de St.
Lawrence, and the Country on the South of that River and West of Lake
Champlain, Iroquois, and the Lake itself Lac Champlain on mere de Iroquois.

Ogilvy in his America, says one of the great Lakes is called the Lake of
Iroquois, which together with a River of the same Name (Sorrel by the French)
falls into the River of Canada. He adds, that the French having, in early
Times, sided with the Algonquins, against the Iroquois, have been so bated by
them ever since, that none of them durst ever appear again in any Part of the
Lake. Ogilby 166.

The Five Nations formerly lived near the Place where Montreal now stands. In
1672 the French Governor Monsieur De Frontenac, persuaded them to allow him to
build a Fort on the North Side of Cadaracqui Lake, under Pretense of a Store
for Marthandize. Colden's History Five Nations, Page 21, 24.


; this Government has consequently considered it as Part of the Province of
New York. -- The Lands on the West Side of Connecticut River by a double Title,
-- the Grant to the Duke of York, which expressly includes it, and the Right
acquired by the Subjection of the native Proprietors.

THE Crown, by a Participation in numberless Acts of Government, has justified
our Right and Jurisdiction over these Countries. And it is remarkable that no
single Commission, Instruction, or Act, either of our own or from Home, 'till
the late Proclamation, had the least Tendency to alter or infringe such
Jurisdiction; but it solely rested on the Basis we have mentioned.

THAT the Crown considered the Five Nations, and their Country, to be under
it is Subjection, That the Five Nations became Subjects of England, and put
themselves under it is Protection, appears from many of their Treaties. -- Vide
Colden's History, Page 53, 54, 62, 80, 139.
and that the French could have no Claim to either, is manifest from the
fifteenth Article of the Treaty of Utrecht, The Treaty of Utrecht 11th April,
1713.
confirmed by that of Aix-La-Chapelle; stipulating that the Subjects of France,
Inhabitants of Canada, and elsewhere, shall not disturb or molest in any Manner
whatever, the Five Indian Nations, which are subject to Great Britain, nor its
other American Allies. And that it was well understood both by the Crowns of
Great Britain and France, that the English Right and Claim did extend as far
Northward as the South Part of the River St. Lawrence, including the Lakes
which discharge themselves into that River, clearly appears from the several
Proposals and Conferences of the Ambassador from the Court of Versailles, with
the British Ministry in 1756, on the Subject of a Suspension of Hostilities,
and a Convention for the amicable Termination of the Differences between the
two Crowns; at the Close of which France demanded, as a previous Condition,
that his Britannick Majesty should desist from three Points, which made a
principal Part of the Subject in Dispute; the first of which was The South Part
of the River St. Lawrence, and the Lakes that discharge themselves into that
River. Vide Entic's History of the late War, Page 228. War was not proclaimed
by England 'till the 18th of May, 1756.
The Refutation and Rejection of this extraordinary Claim, occasioned the
sudden Departure of the French Ambassador, and the Declaration of War, which
followed soon after.

THIS Government has given the most solid and authentic Proofs both of
Possession and ^^risdiction, which the Subject could admit of, and nothing but
the dangerous Neighborhood of Canada, and their Intrigues with the Savages,
(which often deluged this Frontier Part of the Province in Blood) has prevented
it is actual Cultivation and Improvement.

So long ago as 1696, a Grant passed the Great Seal of this Province to Godfrey
Dellius, for a Tract of Country extending from the North Bounds of Saraghtoga,
(which lies on Hudson's River thirty four Miles North of the City of Albany) to
the Rock Rosian, a Station indisputable, and which is well known to lie on Lake
Champlain upwards of twenty Miles to the North of Crown-Point; and extending
twelve Miles East from Hudson's River, and the same Distance East from the
Wood-Creek, and the Waters to the Northward. Nor ought it be unobserved, that
such was the Value and Importance of this Tract of Country, even at that early
Day, that the Legislature conceived the Grant of it to be too great a Favor to
one Subject, and passed a Law in the Year 1699, repealing it as extravagant.
Laws of New York, 1 Vol. Page 35.


FORMERLY, and before the Year 1731, we had a Trading-House at Crown-Point,
where our Traders occasionally resided; for it was not 'till that Year that the
Canadians, in profound Peace, invaded this frontier Part of the Province, and
erected Fort St. Frederick at Crown-Point, which has been the Occasion of an
almost uninterrupted Series of Contention and Bloodshed. As it secured them the
absolute Command of the Lakes, and facilitated their In-roads not only into
this but the neighboring Colonies of the Massachusett's-Bay and New Hampshire,
nothing could be more alarming; and no sooner was it communicated than our
House of Assembly, in order to obtain Relief, and the King's Directions,
addressed the Commander in Chief to represent to his Majesty or his Ministers,
these Encroachments, and the fatal Consequences they must be attended with.
Journal of the General Assembly of New York Vol. 1, Page 632. -- Also Minutes
of the Privy Council of New York, in 1731.


A COMPLAINT was accordingly transmitted to Sir Robert Walpole, but it made so
little Impression on that Minister, that our Government was left without the
least Direction from their Superiors; and conceiving an attempt to oppose or
dislodge the French (which probably must have drawn upon them the whole Power
of Canada) to be too hazardous an Undertaking, without the Authority or
Assistance of the Crown, this important Pass was left in the Hands of our
Enemies.

BUT though we were at that Time unable to do ourselves Justice, it was not only
the Opinion of this, but of all the neighboring Colonies, that the Erection of
the Fort at Crown-Point was a dangerous Encroachment; and that the common
Interest demanded that proper Measures should be adopted to secure the Colonies
against the Mischiefs to which it exposed them.

ACCORDINGLY in 1755, and before the Declaration of War, this Colony, in
Conjunction with the Massachusett's-Bay and Connecticut, formed a Plan for
erecting one or more Forts on his Majesty's Lands at or nigh Crown-Point, and
the Troops were raised accordingly, Journal of the General Assembly of
New York, 2 Vol. Page 440.
but War being soon proclaimed, our Operations became more extensive.

IN short, on the Principle that it was unquestionably a Part of the British
Dominions within this Colony, the Government both at home and here, have ever
considered the Occupancy of Crown Point by the French, as a persidious and
dangerous Encroachment, which in Effect was one of the principal Causes of both
of the last Wars. These Remarks justify an Inference of the utmost Moment in
the present Controversy, to wit, That as it was an ancient Right of this
Colony, coeval with it is first Plantation by English Subjects, to extend even
further Northward than the Latitude of 45 Degrees, to which it is now
restricted, his Majesty's Proclamation, instead of enlarging our Limits, (as
has been understood by some, who have not considered the Subject, and pretended
by others whose Interest it is to misrepresent) does in Fact considerably
abridge it, operating as a Confirmation of our original Title up to the Line it
establishes; and as an Extinction of Jurisdiction beyond it ( to wit) over the
Lands between that Latitude and the Head of Connecticut River, or more properly
the River St. Lawrence, our old Boundary.

IT is true that since the Year 1731, the French by maintaining Forts and
strong Garrisons at Crown-Point, Tieonderoga, etc. have deprived us of the
Enjoyment of the Country to the Northward of Albany; nor was it possible to
extend our Plantations, perpetually exposed to the Ravages of a most cruel
Enemy, 'till on the Approach of Sir Jeffery Amherst, with the English Army in
1759, the French abandoned both their Forts and their Settlements. -- These
last were very few in Number, and all of them in the Neighborhood of Crown
Point and Tieonderoga; which having been intended by the French as Places of
Arms, to annoy and distress this Colony the more effectually, no Cultivation
had taken place but for the mere Convenience of their Garrisons. Sir Jeffery
Amherst apprehensive of the bad Consequences of Canadian Settlements on the
Banks of Lake Champlain, prohibited them, nor have they to this Moment been
re-established.

THE Capitulation granted by the English General to the Inhabitants of Canada,
on the Conquest in 1760, stipulates, That the French, in the whole Extent of
the colony of Canada, shall preserve the entire Possession and Property of
their Goods, noble and ignoble, moveable and immovable; and shall have Liberty
to keep, let, and sell them, as well to French as to the English.

BY the first Article of the definitive Treaty of Peace between Great Britain,
France, and Spain, in 1763, His most Christion Majesty cedes and guaranties to
Great Britain, Canada and all its Dependencies. His Britannick Majesty, on his
Side, agrees, That the French Inhabitants of Canada may retire with all Safety
and Freedom, where^^^ they shall think proper, and may sell their Estates,
provided it be to the Subjects of his Baitannick Majesty, etc. The Term limited
for this Emigration shall be fixed to the Space of eighteen Months, to be
computed from the Day of the Exchange of the Ratification of the present Treaty.

NOTHING seems more obvious than that the Security given to the Canadians, both
by the Capitulation and the Treaty, was confined to the Limits of the Colony of
Canada; nor any Thing more absurd, than to suppose it should extend to a Part
of the Country which the French had perfidiously usurped, and which they had
only within the Compass of a few Years granted to the Canadians, to further
their Encroachments.

THE Government of New York therefore, independent of his Majesty's late
Establishment of our Boundary with Quebec, could not but consider all the
Country on both Sides of Lake Champlain, as unquestionably within it is just and
ancient Limits and Jurisdiction.

THAT the Canadian Grants can never be justified by a mere Encroachment, nor
derive Stability or Confirmation either from the Capitulation or the Treaty,
was not only the Opinion here, but also of his Majesty and his Ministers.

IN Pursuance of the Proclamation of the 7th Day of October, 1763, Sir Henry
Moore, and Col. Carleton, the Governors of the two Provinces, in the Month of
September 1767, fixed the Place of the Latitude of 45 Degrees, by actual
Observation, near the North End of the Lake. On the 12th Day of August 1768,
his Majesty was pleased to declare his Approbation in Privy Council, and to
direct in favor of his new Canadian Subjects, That nothing in the Order of
that Date contained, should affect the Property of such as had Possessions
under proper Titles in Lands on the South Side of the Line, the Dominion of
which was not disputed on the Part of the crown of Great Britain; and that the
said Determination should not operate wholly to deprive them of such
concessions on the South Side of the said Line whereon they had made actual
Settlements and Improvements, although the said Line might have been disputed by
the crown of Great Britain, but proportioned to their Improvements at the Rate
of fifty Acres for every three that were improved; provided that Grants should
be sue out under the Seal of New York, subject to the usual Quit-Rents, and
that a Grant to one Person should not exceed 20,000 Acres.

LORD Hillsborough, in a Letter to Sir Henry Moore our late Governor, on this
Subject, of the 25th of February 1768, expresses himself as follows. Your
Letter to Lord Shelbourne, No. 5, which relates to the claim of his Majesty's
American Subjects, to Lands on that Part of Lake-Champlain which is now a Part
of the Colony of New York, has been referred to the Lords of Trade, and their
Lordships having made a Report to his Majesty thereupon, it is his Majesty's
Resolution, upon the fullest Consideration, not to allow any Claims made upon
the Ground of ancient Grants from the Government of Canada, is Lands which were
never acknowledged to belong of Right to the Crown of France.

" His Majesty has a most tender Regard to the Rights of his new Subjects, and
is desirous of giving every proper Testimony of his Attention to their Interest
and Welfare, and therefore it is his Majesty's Pleasure, that they should not
be disturbed in the peaceable Possession of any Tracts so circumstanced, WHICH
THEY HAVE ACTUALLY SETTLED AND IMPROVED; provided they consent to establish
their Titles under the Seal of the Province of New York, upon the usual
Conditions of Quit-Rents and Improvements."

CONFORMABLE to these Sentiments, a Royal Mandamus, directed to the Governor of
New York, actually issued upon the Report of the Board of Trade, and by the
Advice of the Privy Council, on the 11th Day of January 1769, requiring him to
lay out for, and grant to Charles De Fredenburgh, Esquire in one contiguous Tract,
30,000 Acres of Land; which is expressly described in the said Royal Order or
Mandamus, to lie on the West Side of Lake-Champlain; beginning from a certain
Point opposite to the Island Valceur, including Sarenac River, on both the
Banks, as far as the Highwaterfall, the Land, Beech and Creek; and including
also, the whole Point of Cumberland Bay, commonly Squinanton or Cumberland Head.

THIS Tract is likewise laid down on the Map, and actually includes a great
Part of two of the Seigniories which are the Object of this Dispute. See Map
No. 1


THE Title of this Province, in Right of the Crown, to all the Country to the
Southward of the River St. Lawrence, ('till his Majesty's Proclamation, and
since that Act, to the Southward of the 45th Degree of Latitude) being thus
clearly established, it cannot be wondered at that after the Peace was
restored, our Government proceeded to the Grant and Settlement of the Lands to
the Southward of this last Boundary, without the least Scruple.

His Majesty having been pleased by his Royal Proclamation of the 7th Day of
October 1763, to assign to the reduced Officers and disbanded Soldiers, who had
served him so gloriously in America, each a Quantity of Land for their more
comfortable Subsistence, and as a Reward for their Service; and having left to
them the Right of Election, out of any Part of the different Colonies which
remained vested in the Crown, they in general applied to this Government for
Patents, locating their several Lots along the East and West Sides of Lake
Champlain, on the Wood Creek, and at and to the Southward of Crown Point.

THERE were several Reasons which induced them to fix, and the Government to
grant, in this Part of the Country.

IT had been the Scene of War, and they were well acquainted with it. They
seemed to have a peculiar Right to be provided for, out of the immediate Fruits
of their Victories; and above all, the rest of the Province which remained
unappropriated, belonged to the Native Occupants, and could not be patented
without a previous Purchase from them: A Condition with which most of the
Officers, and all the Soldiers, were unable to comply. Under these
Circumstances they were chiefly gratified by Grants of the Lands first
mentioned, and the Country adjoining to the Southward and Eastward, after being
put to great Trouble and Expense in the Discovery and actual Survey of their
respective Allotments. Many Grants have also been made to the Inhabitants of
the Colony in the same District, which, as far as they concern this
Controversy, are laid down in the annexed Map. See Map No. 1


THE Canadian Grants cover a great Part of the Country along both Sides of Lake
Champlain, not only to Crown Point but several Miles to the Southward. They
include the Whole, or chief Part of ancient Grant to Dellius; which has since
been parcelled out among the Military. They are numerous, large in Extent, but
unattended (except in very few Instances) with the least Improvement or
Possession.

THEY all originated at, and since the Time of the French Encroachments at
Crown-Point in 1731, and several of them are so late as the Years 1757, and
1758: A Period when we were actually at War with France, concerning these very
Lands!

THE Number and Extent of these Grants, and how destructive it must prove to
the Rights of the King's Military Subjects, as well as to others, to give them
the least Countenance, will be seen by a View of the annexed Map and the Notes
which accompany it. Map No. 1.


ON this Subject we are furnished with two Petitions, the one presented to his
Majesty by several Persons whose names do not appear in the Copy; the other to
the Lords of Trade, by Monsieur De Lolbinier.

THE Merits of these Petitions are founded, 1st. On an Assertion that the Lands
in question lie within the ancient Bounds of Canada as peaceably possessed for
many Years by the French, and have only been added to the Colony of New York by
the King's Proclamation. 2d. On the Article of the Capitulation and Treaty of
Peace before taken notice of 3d. On the actual Improvements and Possession of
the Petitioners or their Grantors. 4th. On their having, in many Cases, paid
the Governor of Quebec, the Quint or fifth Part of the original Purchase Money
of their respective Seigniories, and done Faith and Homage, and having been put
in full Seisen in the King's Name. 5th. On the Hardship of their having been
turned out of Possession, by Titles granted under New York, and being further
threatened with the same Distress.

We have anticipated the three first of these Assertions. 1st. Crown-Point, nor
any of the Lands Southward of the River St. Lawrence, were ever a Part of
Canada, but rightfully belonged to the King of Great Britain, as within his
Province of New York, and as the Country of the Five Nations his Subjects; nor
were they ever in the peaceable Possession of the French. They were invaded in
Time of profound Peace, with an armed Power. they were held by the same
unjustifiable Means. They were the Source of perpetual Contention and Bloodshed
between the Provinces of Canada and New York. They were a chief Occasion of two
bloody Wars between the Nations. Can this be called a Title or a peaceable
Possession? 2d. We have shown that neither the Articles of Capitulation, nor
the Treaty, can serve the Purpose of the Claimants. The Capitulation can only
apply to what the French had a Right to, and not to what they had unjustifiably
seized; and as to the Clause of the Treaty, it only gives leave to the French
Subjects to sell their Estates in Canada, but does not confirm or concern
disputable, and much less tortious and fraudulent Grants, founded in Breach of
Faith; nor can it create a Right which had no prior Existence. Besides, this is
a Point which the Crown has already solemnly determined, and it is presumed
there can be little danger of the Change of a Resolution grounded on the
clearest Dictates of Reason and Justice. 3d. As to the third Particular, actual
Possessions and Improvements by the Canadian Claimants and their Grantors, it
is denied that any such (worthy of Consideration) have ever been made.

Crown-Point was a Place of Arms, and so was Tieonderoga. These important
Passes the French forfeited to facilitate their Hostilities against New York,
and not for the Sake of Cultivation; accordingly on the Conquest of the
Country, few French Improvements were found, and those within a narrow Compass
about the Forts, and for the Convenience of their Garrisons. With these
inconsiderable Exceptions, the Country was a desolate Wilderness all along on
both Sides of the Lake. 4th. As to the Payment of the Quint or fifth of the
original Purchase Money of their respective Seigniories, and their having been
put into full Seisen in the King's Name; the Canadian Claimants have pointed
out no Instances. We may however, venture to affirm that this Assertion, if it
relates to the Lands on the South Part of Lake-Champlain, cannot be supported;
nor, with respect to the rest, is it to be presumed that a Governor or any
Crown Officer of Quebec, would interfere with the Lands or Affairs of the
Colony of New York. If such Acts have been performed, in any single Instance,
we suppose it concerned Lands near the North End of the Lake, and was only
calculated to give some Color and Countenance to a Claim so groundless: Be it
as it may, this Government (which only could rightfully interpose) has had no
Agency in any such Acts, and they must therefore be considered as of no
Validity. 5th. The fifth Suggestion, -- the Hardship of their having been
turned out of Possession by Titles granted under New York, and being further
threatened with the same Distress, -- is also without Foundation. No French
Claimant has been evicted, nor has a single Suit of any kind been prosecuted
against them. Indeed there could be no Room for it, for as we before observed,
since they abandoned their Forts and Settlements, in 1759, there has been no
Attempt to re-establish them. Some transient People from that Colony, have been
employed on the Lakes in the Lumber Trade, (either with Leave of the New York
Proprietors, or as mere Trespassers) but we have no Proof of a single
Improvement or Possession, since the War, under a Canadian Grant.

BESIDES all these Objections, it is worth a Remark, that the Petitioners ask
what is improper in itself, and, as we humbly conceive, out of the Power of the
Crown to Grant.

1st. THEY aim at enjoying their Seigniories according to their original
Tenures, which depend on the Laws and Customs of France. It is difficult to
comprehend how these Tenures can prevail in this Colony, where such Laws and
Usages are unknown, and where all Estates are held under the Crown upon
Quit-Rents, in free and Common Socage as the Manor of East-Greenwich, in the
County of Kent, is held in England.

IF the Tenure aimed at by the Petitioners, was free from this Objection, it
would be a great Sacrifice of the Rights of the Crown, which derives a very
valuable Revenue from the Quit-Rent of 2 s. 6 d. Sterling, upon every Hundred
Acres of Land granted in this Colony.

BUT, 2dly. It is presumed that no present Act, or Order of the Crown, can have
any legal Influence on the Grants in Question. They must stand or fall by the
Rules of Law.

IF the Limits of the French Colony of Canada, originally extended as far
Southward as is now insisted, and if the Articles of the Capitulation and
Treaty, operate as a Confirmation of the Canadian Grants, then these Claimants
have a good Title at Law: This Question, in a Course of Litigation, will come
judically before the King in Privy Council, on an Appeal from the Judgments of
the Courts of our Province, if either Party should be dissatisfied. The
Petitioners need not be apprehensive of Partiality, because as a Decision here
(upon the Point of Title) is not final, no Injustice can be done but what the
Crown will eventually redress. To take up and determine the Matter extra
judically, and without hearing the New York Grantees, would not only be
premature but inconclusive, for we suppose a mere exparte Order of the Crown
cannot determine the Title. The Royal Interposition would be very consistent if
the Lands had remained unpatented; but here the Crown in every View has parted
with it is Right. -- If the Canadian Principle is just, to them, by the
Capitulation and Treaty; -- If it is insupportable, then to the New York
Grantees under the Great Seal of this Province.

But admitting that the Order of the Crown would be decisive, -- that this is
an extraordinary Case, which ought not to move or depend upon the nice
Principles of Law, -- and that the Rules of Equity and Policy ought alone to be
consulted. This Issue, we conceive, must be equally favorable to the Military
Grantees, under New York.

1st. WITH respect to the Merits of the different Claimants, the French
Subjects received their Grants from their Prince, for their Services in an
unjust Encroachment upon the British Crown; and in Violation of our original
Rights, and of the Treaty of Utrecht. The Military, who hold under New York,
received their Titles by virtue of his Majesty's Proclamation, and as a
Recompense for their Valor, in defense of his just and ancient Dominions. To
reward the Aggressors at the Expense of the King's faithful Subjects, seems
inconsistent with every Idea of Justice. But it is conceived the Honor of the
Crown is engaged to support the Millitary Grants under New York.

FOR, 2dly. It would bespeak a Language very different from the Proclamation,
and prove, instead of a Reward, a severe Punishment to People who have deserved
so much, if his Majesty, after a Settlement of the Limits between the two
Colonies, -- after so fully signifying that it was his Royal Intention to give
no Confirmation to these Canadian Claims, -- after all the Trouble and Expense
they have been put to in obtaining their Surveys, and maintaining their Grants,
and settling and cultivating their Lands, -- should now by any Order, question
or impeach their Validity; and which must involve them in the utmost Perplexity
and Distress.

3dly. To confirm Claims, derived under the Authority of France, to the
Southward of the River St. Lawrence, would hold up to the World a strange
Picture of the Justice and Equity of the British Court. After engaging in two
bloody Wars, and particularly the last in Resentment of such flagrant
Encroachments, should it now be admitted that Canada extended as it is Advocates
allege, what would be the Inference? Must it not necessarily follow, that the
Occupancy of the Lakes, Crown Point, Tieonderoga, etc. was no Invasion or Act
of Hostility, but the Exertion of a rightful Sovereignty? And consequently,
that we were the Aggressors in those Wars, and not the French; for nothing less
could be implied in the Confirmations solicited.

4thly. Lake Champlain and Lake George, open a most important Communication,
and may be justly called a Key to the Northern British Colonies However humbled
in the Course of a War, which has crowned Great Britain with unexampled
Success, it is natural to think the French of Canada will long look with an
affectionate Eye toward their former Prince. The Canadian Barons in
particular, lose a flattering Weight and Distinction; while under the Dominion
of the English, they are sunk into mere Commons. Their Language, their Laws,
and their Manners, but above all, their Religion, must for an Age to come,
forbid a cordial Attachment to our Government. They may not be without Hopes
that the Fortune of War, between two powerful and rival Nations, may one Day
give France such an Ascendency as to reduce us to the Necessity of restoring
Canada.

FROM this View, it must be very impolitic to suffer the French, although now our
Fellow Subjects, to settle on those Lakes, since it will give them the fullest
Opportunity of assisting their Countrymen in invading and distressing this and
the neighboring Colonies, and establishing a Footing, on the first Rupture, in
the Heart of our Country. On the other Hand, if the fertile Lands surrounding
the Lakes, were peopled with the King's natural born Subjects, this Danger,
which ought not needlessly to be despised, would be avoided; it is ill
Consequences be prevented, and the Canadians themselves, even if they should be
inclined to revolt, would be over awed into Subjection.

BUT this is not all. -- If ever Canada should be the Subject of a Cession to
France, what were her ancient Bounds must become a necessary Question? Her
original Grants to the Canadians, supported by the Confirmation of the King of
Great Britain, would be considered as irresistible Evidence of ancient Right;
and thus not only Lake Champlain but Lake George, which are both interspersed
with these Grants, would fall again into the Hands of France. The Possibility
of an Altercation of this Nature, will be wholly removed by considering the
Claims of the Canadians to the Lands on those Lakes, as unworthy of Attention.

UPON the Whole, viewing this Subject in every Light, upon the Principles of
original Right, -- Treaty and Cession, -- Law and Justice, -- Equity and
Policy, it is conceived that the Military and other Grants under the Seal of
this Province, ought not to be impeached; and that the Canadian Claims,
extravagant in themselves, and destitute of all Foundation, ought to be
rejected.

By Order of the General Assembly, JOHN CRUGER, Speaker.

ERRATA.
PAGE 4, Line 1. for and read in. P. 21. L. 14. for on r. in. P. 63. L. 28. for
of v. by. P. 82. L. 16. add the Word of and in the next Line the Word granting.
P. 99. L. 4. for second r. said. P. 100. L. 9. add the Word River. P. 102. L.
6. add the Words it includes at the beginning of the Line. P. 111. L. 18. add
the word then. P. 112. L. 17. for pay r. Pay. P. 147 and 148 for Malcomb r.
Macomb.


