WE the Subscribers, inhabitants of the town of (...) having taken into our
serious consideration the precarious state of the liberties of North America,
and more (...) present distressed condition of this insulted province,
embarrassed as it is by several acts of the British Parliament, tending to the
entire subversion of our natural and charter rights; among which is the act for
blocking up the harbor of Boston: and being fully sensible of our
indispensable duty to lay hold on every means in our power to preserve and
recover the much injured constitution of our country; and conscious at the same
time of no alternative between the horrors of slavery or the carnage and
desolation of a civil war, but a suspension of all commercial intercourse with
the island of Great Britain: Do, in the presence of God, solemnly and in good
faith, covenant and engage with each other, 1st, That from henceforth we will
suspend all commercial intercourse with the said island of Great Britain, until
the said act for blocking up the said harbor be repealed, and a full
restoration of our charter rights be obtained. And,

2dly, That there may be the less temptation to others to continue in the said,
now dangerous commerce, we do in like manner solemnly covenant (...) not buy,
purchase or consume or suffer any person by, for or under us to purchase or
consume, in any manner whatever, any goods, wares or merchandise which shall
arrive in America from Great Britain aforesaid, from and after the last day of
August next ensuing. And in order as much as in us lies to prevent our being
interrupted and defeated in this only peaceable measure, entered into for the
recovery and preservation of our rights, we agree to break off all trade,
commerce and dealings whatever with all persons, who perfering their own
private interest to the salvation of their now perishing country, shall still
continue to import goods from Great Britain, or shall purchase of those who do
import.

3dly, That such persons may not have it in their power to impose upon us by
any pretense whatever, we further agree to purchase no article of merchandise
from them, or any of them, who shall not have signed this, or a similar
covenant, or will not produce an oath, certified by a magistrate to be by them
taken to the following purpose* viz. I (...) of (...) in the county of (...)
(...) and propose for sale, have not, to the best of my knowledge, been
imported from Great Britain, into any port of America since the last day of
August, one thousand seven hundred and seventy four, and that I will not,
contrary to the spirit of an agreement entering into through this province
import or purchase of any person so importing any goods as aforesaid, until the
port or harbor of Boston, shall be opened, and we are fully restored to the
free use of our constitutional and charter rights. And,

Lastly, we agree, that after this, or a similar covenant has been offered to
any person and they refuse to sign it, or produce the oath, abovesaid, we will
consider them as contumacious importers, and withdraw all commercial connexions
with them, so far as not to purchase of them, any article whatever, and publish
their names to the world.

Witness our hands, June, (...) 1774

