Mr. Bean's CENTURY-SERMON.

A SERMON Delivered at WRENTHAM, OCTOBER 26, 1773, On completing the first
CENTURY since the Town was incorporated. BY JOSEPH BEAN, A. M. Pastor of the
first CHURCH in said Town. Printed at the earnest Desire of the Hearers for the
Preservation of ancient Things to future Posterity. Together with some Marginal
Notes.

I have considered the Days of old, the Years of ancient Times. PSALM. lxxvii.
5. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlboro'-Street. MDCCLXXIV.

A CENTURY-SERMON.
1 CHRONICLES. IV. 22. -- And these are Ancient Things.
AS this is the last day of the first Century, and compleats one hundred years
since Wrentham was granted to be a township, I have been importuned by some to
deliver a discourse on so observable a period.

I did at first decline it for several reasons; the principal of which is, my
being but very slenderly furnished with matter for a work of this nature, by
reason of my being unacquainted, either by private records, or particular
traditional accounts, with the special circumstances of the original and
progress of this town.

From this is easily seen what a disadvantage I am under to preach on the
present occasion. And though at the solicitation of some of you, I make the
attempt; yet I fear, I must unavoidably fail your expectations: there being no
more than a few brief hints I can possibly give you, relative to this
settlement.

However, though we may not pretend so to trace the special circumstances of
the original and progress of this town, as from these alone to collect suitable
and sufficient matter for your religious and pious entertainment; yet we may
from these, in connection with some of the ancient things of this country.

And indeed it may not be improper; but both pertinent and profitable, on the
present occasion, to reflect on those things which laid the foundation of our
present establishment, and from whence have arisen this and all other towns and
churches through the land.

It has been the practice of God's people in all ages to commemorate the
ancient things God has done for them, and to improve them to religious
purposes.

That this was practiced by the pious and godly among the Jews is evident from
the book of psalms, and diverse other parts of sacred writ, and particularly
from the words of my text -- "These are ancient things."

And though we may not so clearly see, at this distance of time, what religious
purposes the recollecting and mentioning those ancient things, referred to in
my text, might serve; yet we may be certain of this, that it was some how
serviceable and is so still to the church of God, -- for "all scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, -- for instruction
in righteousness." 2 Timothy 3. 16.


So then without taking any special notice of those ancient things to which my
text refers, I shall make use of the words to lead your tho'ts and meditations
-- to the original, or first settlement of this country, -- its rise and
progress -- and particularly of this town.

First, I shall lead your thoughts back to the original or first settlement of
this country, and say something of the rise and occasion of it.

Now in order to know the occasion of our forefathers coming into this part of
the world, -- or the reason of their removing from the land of their nativity
to settle on these American shores; let it be observed, -- That at the
beginning of the reign of the popish Queen Mary in England, many of those who
were sincerely engaged in the reformation and in casting off all the
superstitions of Rome, being much alarmed at the furious storm of persecution
which they apprehended coming on, fled abroad for safety. And, having
opportunity there to observe the worship and discipline of foreign churches,
many of them thought that these churches had carried the reformation to a
greater degree of perfection, than had been done in England.

Hence, upon their return home, at the happy accession of the protestant Queen
Elizabeth to the crown, they became very zealous for a more perfect reformation
in the church of England, agreeable to what they had seen in the protestant
churches abroad. This is the party who were at first distinguished by the name
of Puritans, afterward by that of Nonconformists or Disciplinarians, and now
usually of Presbyterians or Dissenters.

These good and conscientious people, though far from being pleased with many
things that were practiced, and required of them, which appeared to them
unscriptural and rather the commandments of men than the appointments of God;
yet many of them thought it prudence for the present to continue in the
communion of the established church, and wait for better days: hoping for a
further reformation, and that their discipline and worship might in time be
brought nearer to the purity and simplicity of the Gospel.

But after long and fruitless waiting, finding all attempts unsuccessful for
obtaining that reformation they so earnestly desired and prayed for, and being
very hardly treated in those unhappy times because they could not submit to all
things imposed on them, they were many of them hereby drove to a more open
separation from the things that were by law established. And not being suffered
peaceably to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences in
their native country, they sought it abroad. Some removed into other parts*
Europe, and found that comfort in foreign churches which was denied them at
home. Others sought a refuge from the storm in some quiet recess of America,
"Here," as one says, "they hoped still to enjoy the freedoms and privileges of
English government and to enlarge the British dominions: Here they hoped to be
the blessed instruments of spreading the gospel of Christ among the natives:
here they hoped to prosecute the design of a spiritual reformation and entail
pure religion, with liberty of conscience, as the goodliest heritage, unto
their children in succeeding generations."

Upon such excellent views as these our pious Ancestors transplanted
themselves, families and estates into these remote regions of the earth. Late
in the year 1620, arrived to America those good people who laid the foundation
of the most ancient Church and Colony of Plymouth.

Sometime in June 1629 arrived at Salem, The Indian name was Naumkeak, but now
called Salem from that in Psalm 72. 2.
that most ancient town of the Massachusetts, the original settlers of that
part of the country.

In the summer of 1630 came over those who first imbodied into church order at
Charlestown; but the greater part of these, not very well liking their
situation, removed over to the other side of Charles-river and settled the town
of Boston.

These first settlers were few in number -- our Fathers were then in a
wilderness-condition; seeing nothing round them but uncultivated wilds and
savage creatures; distant a thousand leagues from their native country;
enduring various hardships, wants and straits.

But this pious people thought nothing too much to be done and suffered, for
the procuring those happy gospel privileges and religious liberties, which too
many among us at this day make but little account of. And with great labor and
fatigue, and no small expense to themselves (though none to the crown) was it
that they subdued and settled this land.

Thus we have seen the occasion and beginning of the settlement of this country
by the English. -- And these are ancient things.

We are in the next place to give some brief account of the growth and progress
of it.

Now this country flourished under the smiles of heaven so remarkably, that it
is thought scarce any history in the world affords a parallel. It has been
remarked by those who have undertaken to give us an account of the rise and
progress of this country by the English, that several repeated attempts for the
settlement of an English plantation in the bay of Massachusetts, upon worldly
views, proved abortive; though undertaken by gentlemen of considerable powers
and estates, and attended with many servants. But it pleased God wonderfully to
bless and distinguish those who came here upon a religious account, and crown
their noble enterprise with glorious success. It was that God, who led the
tribes of Israel through the sea and the wilderness, and whom the seas and the
winds obey, that conducted our Fathers over the wide and hazardous Atlantic
ocean -- that prepared a sanctuary for them in this obscure corner of the
earth, and gave them the land of the heathen for an inheritance. We have heard
with our ears; our fathers have told us these ancient things, -- how God did
drive out the heathen and plant them. They got not the land in possession by
their own sword, nor did their own arm save them, but his right hand, his holy
arm, and the light of his countenance, because he had a favor unto them. God's
presence with our Fathers was their shield, their strength, and defense, and
the source of all their prosperity, temporal and spiritual, -- of their
external and moral tranquillity and happiness. Through the influence of the
Spirit of grace, they had not only the form but the power of religion among
them: they were in general pious toward God and righteous toward men: And
"godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is and of that which is to come." 1. Tim. 4. 8.
And "righteousness exalts a nation," Prove. 14. 34.
God blessed and increased them greatly. For the above historical accounts,
etc. I have been obliged to the Rev. Mr. Prince's chronology and the Rev.
Thomas Foxcroft's historical and practical observations on the rise and
primitive state of New England; but chiefly to the latter: How free an use I
have made of them may be seen by perusing them.


And hence arose in so short a time so many settlements and plantations. The
people broke forth on the right hand and on the left and dispersed themselves
on all sides. The wilderness and solitary places became inhabited and the
deserts blossomed as the rose. Towns were multiplied and where there were
hideous woods, fields soon appeared white unto harvest.

And this leads us, as was proposed, to look back to the original plantation
and settlement of this town and the churches in it; -- to observe some of the
steps of Divine Providence in our rise, growth, and establishment as at this
day. I have been careful to obtain as succinct and just an account of these
ancient things as I could, though not altogether such an one as I should have
been glad to have done. However, what I have collected is as follows:

This township was originally contained within the limits of Dedham. We are
told in the Rev. Mr. Dexter's century-sermon -- "that the town of Dedham was
the 16th or 18th settlement from the first beginning of the country -- and that
the first inhabitants of that town came from several parts of England; few of
them known to one another before they came over." And they are said to have
been a serious, godly people: and I suppose removed from England into these
parts upon the same religious principles that others before them had done.

From this place and people originated all, or most of the first settlers of
this town.

This place, as was said before, being contained within the limits of Dedham,
sundry of the inhabitants of that town, after they had been up to take a view,
obtained grants of land here. Several who had obtained such grants began soon
to make improvements upon them: and at length they with others removed their
families and settled here. The first English inhabitant in this place,
according to our church records, was one Mr Shears.


In a few years after this plantation was begun, the proprietors applied to the
town of Dedham to set them off; which they did March 27th, 1661. About twelve
years after this, viz. October 15th, 1673, they petitioned the General Court to
be e^ected into a township by the name of Wrentham; which name, as I have been
informed, was desired because some of them came from a town of that name in old
England. And it appears from the ancient records of this town that their
petition was granted and they made a township the very same day they applied to
the Court for it: -- and that their desire was gratified as to the name. This
was done about 53 years after the arrival of the first Fathers of this country,
and ONE HUNDRED YEARS from this day.

There were 16 families here when the township was granted.

That the first settlers of this place were in general a religious sort of
people, and that the truth and ways of God -- mutual assistance and brotherly
love were things regarded by them, some what appears from their petition to
Court to be a township: but more especially from the covenant of association
which they entered into, in their infant state: and upon the signing of which,
as I suppose, they admitted others to incorporate with them.

Accordingly, before ever they were erected into a township (though so few in
number) they were careful to have the word of God regularly preached to them,
and procured Mr. Samuel Man, Mr. Samuel Man, I am told, was born in Cambridge,
and was graduated at Harvard College in the year 1665.
a young candidate, for this purpose: not being willing to live like the
heathen though they dwelt in the wilderness. This worthy and pious Gentleman
continued to dispense the word of God to them till March 30th, 1676; when the
inhabitants were obliged to draw off by reason of an Indian war. This was
Phillip's war, an Indian Sachem or King at Mount-Hope, now Bristol.
This was a little more than two years and an half after they had been made a
township.

Through the preventing goodness of God and their seasonable withdraw, no lives
were cut off by the heathen. However, the enemy came upon the town after they
were gone, and burnt all their dwellings except two, What saved these two
dwellings from the flames was their being infected with the smallpox, of which
the Indians by some means or other had gotten information.
if my information has been good. We can none of us think but this must be very
distressing to those new beginners, although the bitter cup was sweetened with
the consideration that no life was lost.

After the Indian war was over, or at least the heat of it abated, I find a
number (I suppose the greater part) engaging themselves to return by a written
instrument with their names affixed thereunto. This may be seen in the ancient
records of this town. The names of the signers or subscribers are these, viz.

Eleazar Metcalf, Robert Ware, William Mackneh, Daniel Haws, John Alldis,
Eleazar Gay, Daniel Wight, Samuel Fisher, John Pain, Benjamin Rocket, Samuel
Man, John Ware, Nathaniel Ware, Cornelius Fisher, Michael Willson, James
Mosman, Joseph Kingsbury, Samuel Shears.

And because it seems to indicate something of their pious and good temper of
mind, I shall take the liberty of transcribing a few words, viz. -- "We the
subscribers -- having formerly had our residence in Wrentham, but by those sad
and solemn dispensations of God's providence were removed: yet desiring that a
work for the honor of God and the good and comfort of ourselves and ours might
be again engaged in, and promoted at that place: therefore our purpose is to
return thither, God willing," etc.

So great was their veneration for Mr. Man, and so acceptable had been his
labors among them, that it was their earnest desire he should return with them.
Accordingly they chose and sent a committee to treat with him about it. Mr.
Man, as I have been informed, was then preaching at Milton, and already had a
call to settle in the work of the ministry there, or Milton people were about
to give him one. But so great was his affection for the people of Wrentham, and
so desirous was he of that plantation's going on, that he complied with their
request. Accordingly, he and diverse of the inhabitants returned to Wrentham
again,. Aug. 21st, 1680, four years and some months after they drew off on
account of the Indian war.

In the year 1681, the inhabitants of this Town agreed to erect an house for
the public worship of God, before the year 1684. And probably between these
dates the first meeting house was built.

Mr. Man continued dispensing the word to them, though not ordained over them,
till the year 1692; in which year, on the 13th day of April, a Church was
gathered here; consisting of ten members (including Mr. Man) who imbodied in
church fellowship by solemn covenant. And Mr. Man was ordained over the church
and congregation the same day. He preached his own ordination-sermon, from 1
Cor. IV. 2.


Whether it were the difficulties they had to conflict with in their infancy,
or what was the reason that it was so long after their incorporation, before a
church was gathered and Mr. Man ordained, I am not able to say: but it was more
than eighteen years.

In the year 1719, on May 22d, our church-records say, "that the Rev. Samuel
Man gave up the ghost, in the 72d year of his age." And by a private record put
into my hands by one of the parish, -- he died in the 49th year of his faithful
ministry; so it is expressed. But this must be understood as including all the
time he preached in this place before his ordination: for from that to his
death was but about twentyseven years.

By what I have heard of him he was a man of good erudition and an accomplished
preacher, pious and faithful. One of the first men, if not the first, in this
Province, and who was esteemed a good judge of the powers and abilities of men,
said of Mr. Man that "he was not only a very good, but a very great and learned
man."
He lived greatly beloved of his people and died greatly lamented by them. But
christian charity obliges us to think that their loss was infinitely his gain.
He left a numerous Posterity, and many of his descendants are now among us.


After the death of Mr. Man the church and congregation here were destitute of
a pastor about seven months; when this breach was made up in the happy
settlement of the Rev. Henry Messinger, who was ordained to the pastoral office
December 5th, 1719.

About two years after his ordination, in the year 1721, the second house for
the public worship of God was built in this place, larger and more commodious
than the former. Hither, to this second erected house did all the tribes of the
Lord, or in other words all the people in the town repair to worship, 'till
August 29th, 1737: when by the good hand of God upon them they were so
multiplied, prospered and succeeded, that they became two bands; for the people
of the west part of the town, at their request, were then set off into a
distinct parish by themselves. The brethren being dismissed from this church
here, were formed into a new church-body there, February 16th, 1738. And the
Rev. Elias Haven was unanimously called to settle in the work of the sacred
ministry among them on the 23d of March following: and was solemnly ordained
over them on the 8th day of November, the same year.

Mr. Messinger continued in this first parish, greatly laboring in word and
doctrine, till it pleased the Sovereign Lord of life and death to put a period
to his life and work nearly together. He was confined but a few days, and I
think preached the sabbath, or the sabbath but one before his death.
And when he was dismissed from his faithful labors here below, we trust he
was received to his glorious reward above; and that no inconsiderable number of
his flock and others will be his joy and crown in the day of Christ's appearing.

He departed this life March 30th, 1750, in the 55th year of his age, and 32d
year of his faithful ministry. He was a gentleman of unblemished reputation,
and highly esteemed for his piety and virtue. He had the character of a plain,
faithful, affectionate, and profitable preacher. And though he was but of a
slender, feeble constitution, yet he was abundant in labors among the people
of his charge, and spared no pains for promoting the interest of the Redeemer
and the good of souls. It is no wonder then, that when all the congregation saw
he was dead they mourned for him, as Israel did for Aaron.


After his decease, the church and congregation here were destitute near nine
months, which brings down the time to the present settlement. The present
pastor was ordained December 5th, 1750.


The Rev. Elias Haven, pastor of the west parish, was taken off from his
ministerial labors by bodily weakness, contracting a consumptive habit, for
several years, and was able to preach but very little during that time, I think
Mr. Haven preached but very seldom for five or six years or more before his
death. -- And I would record it to the honor of that people, that they procured
preaching most of that time at their own charge, or with but very little
expense to their pastor, and allowed him the whole, or most of his annual
stipend, till he removed to that world where we trust he is now reaping better
than those carnal things.
to the no small affliction of his parishioners who were thereby deprived of
his excellent sermons and other performances, which they were very passionately
fond of.

After ineffectual endeavors for the recovery of his health by change of air,
use of medicine, and an exact regimen, he fell a prey to that disorder, and
departed this life August 10th, 1754, in the 41st year of his age and 16th of
his ministry. He was esteemed a gentleman of good powers and abilities, happily
gifted and well furnished and qualified, for the work of the gospel ministry --
A man of undissembled piety and virtue, and truly faithful in the trust
committed to him by the great Head of the Church. During his long continued
weakness he appeared to be far from an impatient spirit and temper, and very
much resigned to the all-disposing will of his heavenly Father. When the
important hour of his departure drew near, he appeared calm and serene --
Neither from his countenance, nor from any word or action, could be discovered
the least perturbation or trouble of mind, -- they rather indicated a divine
tranquillity and composure of soul. The king of terrors being thus disarmed of
his sting, he seemed to welcome his approach, and to view him as a kind
messenger of peace, sent from Him who is the Lord of death to set his soul at
liberty from a world of sin, cares, and sorrows, to go to a world of holiness
and everlasting rest.

Accordingly he cheerfully resigned up his spirit into the gracious arms of his
Redeemer, big with the hopes and expectations of entering into his Master's
joy. -- Nor have I ever found any that were disposed to think that these were
but the hopes of a self-deceived hypocrite, -- but all rather though it them to be
well founded, and that while he was lamented on earth, He in his better part
was triumphing in the regions of bliss. The author was personally acquainted
with Mr. Haven, -- had intimate converse with him, and was with him not long
before his death; therefore had opportunity to observe something of the flame
and temper of his mind during his long weakness and at the closing scene.


I have said the more of these two gentlemen last mentioned that have been in
the ministry among you, viz. Messi'rs Messinger and Haven, because many of you
here present can testify to the truth of what I have declared about them. Ye
yourselves can witness not only to the purity of their doctrine, but how holily
and unblameably they walked before you in love. Their memory I know is still
dear to you, even to this day, -- Nor will some of you easily forget that they
were your spiritual Fathers in Christ, and helpers of your faith and joy. Both
of these gentlemen left widows and issue, and each has a son in the ministry,
-- The Rev. James Messinger pastor of the first church at Ashford in
Connecticut: And the Rev. Thomas Haven pastor of the second church at Reading
in this province.

Mr. Messinger's widow sometime after his decease married Deacon Jonathan
Simson of Boston, and after the decease of her last husband returned to
Wrentham, and now remains a widow among us in an advanced age. Mr. Messinger
also left several daughters, four of which were married to ministers: -- of
these, three are now living. Mr. Haven's widow not long after followed her
deceased partner.




After Mr. Haven's decease the west parish was vacant about six years, when the
breach was made up in the happy settlement of the Rev. Caleb Barnum, who was
ordained to the pastoral office June 4th, 1760. He carried on the work of the
Lord there, -- faithfully performing the work of the ministry, 'till unhappy
difficulties arising and increasing among them so broke the harmony between him
and a number of his parishioners, that he thought it his duty to ask a
dismission from his pastoral relation to them. And (though with reluctance as
to many if not as to the most of them) they yielded to his request and he was
honorably dismissed March 6th, 1768. The Rev. Mr. Barnum, soon after his
dismission from his pastoral relation in the west parish, settled in the town
of Taunton, and we trust is a blessing to that people -- and hope they will
long rejoice in his light and labors.


After the dismission of Mr. Barnum that parish was destitute about five years;
when to their great joy we trust the vacancy was supplied with their present
worthy pastor, the Rev. Nathaniel Emmons; who was ordained April 21st, 1773.

I might add, that besides those in the ministry, this town and the churches in
it have been favored with many serious, godly, and useful persons who have
their names and memories yet alive among us. But not to dwell upon these things.

How greatly has God increased you! It has been observed to you that when this
township was granted there were but 16 families in it: and it is computed that
there are now at least 460 families, and 2600 souls. And it is thought that
this first precinct contains more persons than were in the whole town when the
west parish was set off, about 36 years ago. Some among us are of the mind that
there is a greater number of souls in the second parish than there was in the
whole town when that parish was set off.


I need not tell you that this is the third house, in which we are now
worshipping, that has been built for God in this part of the town: nor yet that
it is a much more elegant structure than either of the former. This third
meeting house was finished in the year 1766, and is a very comely, decent
house: but some gentlemen are disposed to think that there is one thing wanting
in what is called the Belfry, which might give a greater propriety to that
name, and be not only ornamental, but very convenient on many occasions.


As to the births that have been in this town from its first settlement I have
collected about 3371. The first English person born in this town was Mehetibel
Shears, daughter of Samuel Shears.


As to the admissions into church fellowship and baptisms I cannot be exact by
reason of the ancient church records being destroyed when the Rev. Mr. Man's
house was providentially consumed by fire. From what I have been able to
collect, there have been baptized 1457 children, Let it be observed that it
has never been the practice of the churches in Wrentham to baptize any
children but those whose parents, one or both, are in full communion.
and 106 adults: -- and admitted into church fellowship 331. These are
exclusive of the baptisms and admissions that have been in the other part of
the town since they were set off to be a parish by themselves. Since the above
I have received from their pastor the following account of the admissions and
baptisms of the west church.

24 Members at first imbodied into a church state. 53 Received from other
churches. 186 Received here. Which makes in the whole admitted since Mr.
Haven's ordination, 263 Including the 24 first formed into a church. 681
Baptized since Mr. Haven's ordination, including a few adults.



Of deaths since the first settlement of this town I have found upon record
766. The first person that was buried in the town burying place was an Infant,
the son of Mr. John Ware, February 10th, 1673.


But I would have it remembered, that I cannot be any more exact as to the
number of the births and deaths, than was pretended in exhibiting the list of
baptisms and admissions into the church: because many have neglected to get
them recorded. It is probable there have been many more births and deaths than
I have given an account of.

These are the principal ancient things relative to this settlement that I have
been able to collect, and that may with any tolerable degree of propriety be
delivered in a discourse, the professed design of which is to serve your
spiritual interests.

Let us now endeavor to improve the ancient things we have been reflecting upon
to the purposes of religion and devotion. With such a view as this it was, that
God's people of old so often called to mind and reflected on the ancient things
God had done for his church many years, and centuries of years, after those
wonders were performed, -- as their remarkable deliverance from the Egyptian
bondage -- the miraculous dividing of the red sea for the ransomed tribes to
pass through -- their miraculous preservation in the wilderness forty years,
when God fed them with manna and gave them of the corn of heaven, till their
introduction and settlement in the land of Canaan, which prepared the way for
their future establishment and prosperity. God's people commemorated these and
such like ancient works of Divine Providence with a view to God's glory and
their own spiritual advantage. And I hope these are the ends we propose to
ourselves in assembling this day and on the present occasion at the house of
God, and reflecting on those ancient things that have been hinted in this
discourse. And indeed, if our hearts be rightly disposed, we may improve them
in general to our spiritual advantage and benefit. -- Let us then in the fear
of God endeavor to do it. And here,

1. Let what has been said of the ancient things of this town and country serve
to humble us, by considering the meanness of our beginning as to externals, yet
the glory thereof as to spirituals, which spiritual glory is now very much
lost, as is thought, in the increase of our temporal comforts. Have we not
great reason to humble ourselves under the decay of vital piety? -- How is the
gold become dim and the most fine gold changed! Where is the primitive faith,
zeal, and purity of our Fathers! What will it avail us that we have, (or rather
once had) a great name for religion, and have been spoken of as a people among
whom sobriety, righteousness, and godliness have flourished above many others,
if those dignifying excellencies have taken wing! If our present character
falls short of our ancient one, and we have degenerated from the virtues of our
Ancestors, we have greater cause for shame than for glorying in what we have
been. How many among us in this place and through the land have corrupted their
ways and forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers! And how are we stained with
the most odious vices, such as uncleanness, drunkenness, theft, violence,
malice, strife, profaneness, and others! As to profane language, though the
histories of this country will inform us, that in its first and purest times
there was scarce a profane oath heard in the land, yet now how common, how very
common is cursing and swearing among us! and this not only in our seaport
towns, where it was once very much confined, but in our inland towns, and
parishes, and, this vice like a contagious distemper, spreads through the
provinces; so that even children in age are heard to take the tremendous name
of God in vain, and to speak the horrid and shocking dialect or language of
hell. Awful degeneracy this!

It is granted that there are many sincerely pious and godly persons in this
land, and we hope a considerable number in this town, who in despite of all
temptations and evil examples hold fast their righteousness -- maintaining a
life of devotion toward God, and justice toward men -- shining thereby as
lights in the world in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation. This I say
we acknowledge to the glory of God, and bless Him for it. But then if we compare
ourselves in general with the first Fathers of this land (though we are far
from pretending that they were perfect) how vastly short do we come of their
bright example! Does it not appear that we want their ardent love to God, his
truths and ways -- their peaceable, healing, loving, friendly, benevolent
spirit?

I am disposed to think that some of the aged in Wrentham, and who are present
in this assembly, can remember when there was more peace, love, and friendship
in this town than there is at this day -- when the inhabitants appeared to
regard and treat one another more like brethren -- and contentious lawsuits
were seldom known among them.

But to return. Do we not very much want their humility and self-denial --
their generous contempt of this world -- their strong faith and affecting views
of the world to come! How many defects are there in the manner of our conduct
-- in the seriousness of our deportment -- in our christian prudence,
faithfulness, and diligence! Now all this should serve to humble us.

2. Let our reflections on the ancient things of this town and country excite
us to give God the glory of his wonderful works in the days of our Fathers. It
is certain God did great things and mavelous for them in their first
plantation and settlement in this country, when it was a land not sown, and
possessed by cruel savages. Our Fathers saw the hand and work of God and were
glad, and they gave glory to Him. They spoke often one to another of these
things to the praise of God and their mutual edification and comfort. And it
becomes us the posterity of those good people who bore the heat and burden of
the day, to speak of them to the glory of God as well as they. God was pleased
to visit the natives of this land with a terrible sickness (of what nature or
kind we are not able to say) which cut off multitudes of them; and with wasting
wars among themselves, in which many perished before the arrival of the English
into these parts, whereby room was made for them. And it pleased God in a very
extraordinary manner to introduce and settle this small number of people on
this strange and distant shore -- to preserve and establish them, by a series
of kind and powerful providence, in the midst of a great variety of
distressing difficulties and dangers -- and enable them to do what may now
appear surprising to us, considering their circumstances, in their infant state
and settlements. It is but reasonable therefore that we should give to God the
glory of it. -- These works belong to the history of Divine Providence, which
God would have known and read of all men; and justly expects that we should
praise him for them.

3. Let our reflections on those ancient things that have been mentioned, serve
to make us patient and resigned to the will of God, under all our straits and
difficulties. The uncommon sufferings and hardships our Progenitors endured, in
their wearisome pilgrimage in this wilderness, in their going into the woods to
make new settlements, should not only endear their memory to us, as we reap the
fruits of their labors, but alleviate the pressure of our own troubles and
prevent all murmurs and complaints. What are our straits and wants to what some
of them had to encounter with! They were in perils by robbers, in perils by
their own country men, in perils by the heathen, in perils* in the wilderness,
in perils in the sea -- in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. It may be of
service to us, my hearers, to think sometimes of these things, especially when
our commons seem short, and we think our fare course and hard, and begin to be
impatient and uneasy. It might be of use to check such an ill temper at its
first rising, to consider the straits and difficulties of our Fathers, who
sometimes had not a morsel of bread, but were obliged to dig up certain roots
for their sustenance: and when they could procure these, and a few shellfish,
Ground-Nuts and Clams,
they were contented and cheerful, giving God thanks. And indeed we have reason
to think that the first settlers of this town were far from affluent
circumstances. When they came up here, it was not with any hopes to enter into
other men's labors and build on foundations already laid. No, they came
expecting neither houses prepared for their reception, nor gardens, fields, or
orchards for their entertainment; -- but a wilderness, where they expected to
get their bread not only with the sweat of their brows, but even with the peril
of their lives on account of the heathen. I have been told they were obliged
sometimes to carry their firearms into the field when they went to works and
to the house of God when they went to worship.
We are not to imagine that they had the comforts of life in such plenty as we
have. They were obliged to rub very hard, as we say, to support themselves and
families and procure what they left to you their children. So then if at any
time you are disposed to murmur at your lot, and repine because you are not in
so plentiful circumstances as some others -- remember your Ancestors.

4. Let our reflections on those ancient, memorable things God has done for
our Fathers, serve to encourage our faith and hope in God, who is still the
same powerful and gracious Being as ever, and ready to appear for all those who
truly seek him.

Our Fathers were many times brought into pressing difficulties -- sometimes
thick and dark clouds rolled over them -- the aspect of things appeared black
and gloomy, but they trusted in God, and he soon dissipated the threatening
appearances. In their affliction He was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them. There was a time something similar to the present, when
our Fathers were threatened, more than threatened, to be deprived of their
civil liberties and privileges: but they called upon God in their trouble and
He delivered them. And he is the same God still, for he changes not -- as
powerful, as good, and as kind as ever. Let us then seek and serve the God of
our Fathers and trust in his mercy, and we may hope that he will appear for us
as he did for them, and still secure to us our invaluable privileges.

5. Let our reflections on the ancient things that have been mentioned remind
us of the great errand of our Ancestors into this wilderness -- the spiritual
and noble ends of that great undertaking which brought them over to America,
and induced the first Fathers of this place to attempt to settle it. It was the
advancement of the glory of God and their own spiritual interest* in the
unmolested enjoyment of the pure ordinances and worship of God, that brought
our Ancestors into this quarter of the world. And you may remember it was
observed that the first settlers of this town professed that they had religion
in their view, and that their desire to do a work for the honor of God was one
principal thing that induced them to remove here and plant this place. Now, we
should pursue their glorious design and build on their foundation.

6. Let our reflections upon the piety and virtue of the ancient settlers of
this country and town excite in us a care of imitating their pious examples. We
should be excited to this by a sense of peculiar obligations lying on us, as we
are the descendants of such pious Ancestors, whose names will be a reproach to
us if we do not also inherit their virtues: and we shall deserve such an
upbraiding expostulation as that in Jer. 2. 21. "Yet I had planted thee a noble
vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange vine unto me?" Many were the prayers our godly Predecessors put up
for us -- solemn the charges, and very amiable the examples they have left us:
all which will rise up in judgment against us if we forsake the God of our
Fathers.

But to apply what has been said more particularly to ourselves the inhabitants
of this town.

Your Fathers, where are they? They are gone, long ago gone to their long home.
But, through the kind indulgence of heaven and the tender mercies of our God, the
children of his servants continue, and their seed is established before him: so
that instead of the fathers are the children. And notwithstanding this town, as
well as other places, has been under a variety of dispensations, and God has
visited you several times with moral sicknesses, whereby many, both old and
young, have been taken from among you -- and some very useful persons in town
and church, and the mourners have gone about the streets; yet God has bestowed
innumerable kindnesses upon us; and of late we have not had any times of great
mortality among us.

We see how God has increased us. Can we then ever justify our conduct if we
cast Him off? Shall we not be guilty of the greatest ingratitude if we thus
requite our own and our fathers God? Instead of doing this, let us follow our
Fathers wherein they followed Christ. And whatever appears to have been
commendable and praiseworthy in their characters, when held up to view, let us
endeavor to copy and imitate.

They, we have heard, had such a taste and relish for the word of God preached,
that they would not content themselves without having it publicly and regularly
dispensed unto them, even when there were no more than sixteen families, and
probably not so many. Mr. Man preached with them a considerable time, if I
mistake not one or two years or more, before they were erected into a township:
and there being no more than sixteen families when they were incorporated, it
makes it greatly probable that there were not so many when Mr. Man came first
to preach among them.
And now, allowing that some who lived in Dedham and had rights of land here
bore part of the charge that they were at in providing preaching among them,
yet the weight of the expense must have been heavy, there being so few to bear
it. However, by all I can collect from the town records, they bore it
cheerfully, and chose rather to pinch their bodies than starve their souls --
and to put themselves to some temporal inconveniences than not to have the word
of salvation preached unto them.

Let us then after their example highly esteem, give diligent attendance upon,
and make conscientious improvement of all the means of grace.

They were careful to set up religion in their families, and offered up their
morning and evening-sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving to God, with reading
the holy scriptures. May we, all of us, follow them in this. And let there not
be one prayerless family among us, nor one house wherein the written word of
God is not daily read.

Like them may we instruct our children and servants in the things of God and
Christ, and in the duties of religion; -- and set pious examples before them.

And oh! that God would pour out his Spirit upon his servants and his blessing
upon our offspring! -- and by his Spirit and power turn the hearts, both of
parents and children, unto the Lord God of our Fathers, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared of the Lord!

I would address the young people and children of this town in the solemn
language of David in his dying charge to his son. "And thou Solomon my son,
know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a
willing mind -- if thou seek him he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for-ever." 1 Chronicles. 28. 9
You are, young people and children, particularly concerned in what has been
delivered. It is agreeable to the will of God that we should acquaint you with
these ancient things: Not indeed to amuse you with ancient stories, but for
your spiritual profit and advantage.

Thus we find God commanding his people Israel to transmit the knowledge of
what He had done for them, down to all their generations -- that "one
generation might praise his works to another, and declare his mighty acts --
that the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be
born: who should arise and declare them to their children: that they might set
their hope in God, and not forget the works of God; but keep his commandments."
Psalm 145. 4. and 78. 6, 7.


For these purposes and ends we declare to you the ancient things God has done
for your Fathers in their day. And as they, in the first settlement of this
town, had a view to you their descendants, -- had a care that extended to the
latest posterity, -- and sought a godly seed: may you be concerned that you be
such a seed in reality! -- such every way as they wished and prayed for! And
let us your immediate parents have the comfort and joy of seeing you our
children walking in the truth; -- and have this to refresh our spirits before
we quit these mortal abodes, that we shall leave those behind us, who will keep
the ways of the Lord and not wickedly depart from our God.

To the aged of this town let me say; as your venerable years entitle you to
that respect and reverence from the rising generation, which was paid to your
Fathers by the younger sort in their day; so if you would be in favor with God
and honored by the youth, you must, like your Ancestors, be "sober, grave,
temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience." And be shining examples of
piety and virtue.

And as the first inhabitants of this town, by what I can collect from records
and traditional accounts, studied union among themselves -- lived in harmony,
and like the builders of Jerusalem, strengthened one another hands for the
good work they came here upon: let us imitate them in this, and all of us
"follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may
edify another." May the God of peace unite us all in the bonds of truth,
holiness and love! May He give us one heart and one way that we may fear him
for ever; for the good of ourselves and our children after us!

In a word, let us begin our second Century with new and better frames,
tempers, and resolutions than we have ever had, and make it our constant and
zealous endeavor, to express a grateful sense of divine favors in the virtues
and praises of a life devoted to God. This let us do as a chosen generation, a
peculiar people showing forth the praises of him who has called us out of
darkness into the mavelous light and liberty of the gospel -- commanding our
children, and households to keep the way of the Lord, that the Lord may
abundantly bless us in all our generations.

To conclude, May every one of us in this Assembly be formed by the Spirit of
holiness for the service of God here, while we remain in the body; and for the
full and complete enjoyment of him in the world of spirits! And when that great
and mighty Angel, spoken of in the book of the Revelation, shall proclaim that
time shall be no longer, -- strike off the wheels of nature, and bid centuries
and generations cease to roll; may our souls be reunited to our raised bodies
gloriously formed, and we, in body and soul, pass into a state of undecaying
felicity; where neither days, nor years, nor centuries of years, but eternity
will be the measure of the duration of our happiness! Where, among other
delightful exercises, we shall (very probably) with exalted strains of rapture
and devotion, trace the history of Divine Providence, and call to mind the
ancient things of the works of God for his church and people through all the
generations of time -- everlastingly celebrate the praises of him who is the
Ancient of days for these his wonderful works to the children of men -- and
admire the surprising displays of the wisdom, power, and goodness of the
Godhead in them all!

AMEN.

