A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE RISE, PROGRESS, SERVICES and SUFFERINGS, OF NEW ENGLAND,
ESPECIALLY THE PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. Humbly submitted to the
CONSIDERATION of both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.

[Lately published in ENGLAND.]

NORWICH: PRINTED BY ROBERTSONS AND TRUMBULL. M,DCC,LXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT, BY THE ENGLISH EDITOR.
IT is far from being the Design of this Pamphlet to calumniate private
Characters, or to inflame the Passion of the Reader, by any bitter, personal
Invectives. The Author intends nothing more, than to lay before the Public a
fair and impartial State of Facts; and submits the Propriety of the Conclusions
drawn from those Facts, to the cool Determination of every unbiassed
Understanding. The Editor most heartily concurs with the Author, in wishing
that a due Attention to the several Considerations herein suggested, may serve
to convince the unprejudiced, that the Opposition of the Colonies to certain
Measures, did not owe its Rise to any Disaffection to the Mother Country, or
Disloyalty to their Sovereign -- that it may also prevent the undue Influence
of Misrepresentation -- and prove, in some Degree, the happy Occasion of
tempering the Decisions of the British Parliament, with an equitable Respect to
the Claims of past Services; and a candid Regard to the Jealousies and
Resentments, natural to a People who are descended from British Ancestors, who
have struggled so hard, fought so gloriously, and bled so freely, to procure
and defend their civil and religious Liberties. That so the Honor of his
Majesty's Crown may be most effectually secured, his Name endeared to his
American Subjects, and the Union, mutual Affection, and Prosperity of
Great Britain, and the Colonies, be happily restored, and established upon the
most honorable Basis.

A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE RISE, PROGRESS, SERVICES AND SUFFERINGS, OF NEW ENGLAND.
AMERICA, New England in particular, was first settled by a pious People from
England, who were not allowed to worship their Maker according to his
Institutions, in their native Country, without the Mixture of human Inventions.
Animated therefore by the best of Principles, they were spirited to attempt a
Settlement at a Distance from Britain, that so they might enjoy a Worship
purely Scriptural, and leave the same to their Posterity. They accordingly
provided all Things necessary for their Removal, at their own Expense, and
sailed for an unknown Country. Their first Arrival was at Cape-Cod, which is
situated in the Massachusetts Bay; and they sat down at a Place they call
New-Plymouth, utterly unknown, and in the advance of Winter. Wherever they
turned their Eyes, the utmost Distress surrounded them: Fatigued with their
boisterous Voyage, disappointed of their expected Country, Virginia; without
any Prospect of human Succor, without the Help or Favor of England, without a
Patent, without a Promise of their religious Liberties, without convenient
Shelter from the Weather, and their Hardships almost beyond the Power of
Language to describe. Clambs, Oysters, and Lobsters were their daily Food;
their Clothing soon became Rags and Skins of Beasts; their Prospects on the
Sea were extensive, but afforded no Relief; on the Land their Views were
limited to a few Rods, by a Wilderness altogether in the Dress of uncultivated
Nature. Their only Neighbors, the most savage, cruel and Bloodthirsty of all
the human Race, over numbered them a Thousand to One, and were united to
destroy them while few and weak. These are a Few of the numberless Sufferings
which attended their first Setlements; so that, in less than five Months after
their Arrival, above half the Company died; yet the Survivors bore all their
Misfortunes with a christian Fortitude and Patience, as extraordinary as their
Trials. "Brown Bread and the Gospel is good Fare," they used to say to one
another, for their mutual Encouragment to Patience and Endurance. Thus they
were carried on, and soon began to increase in Numbers; so that when the French
at Port Royal, in Nova Scotia, disturbed them, they raised an Army in 1690,
under Sir WILLIAM PHIPPS, and took that Fort, and therewith the whole Country
of Acadia, which was afterward ceded to the French, at the Treaty of Ryswick.

The same Year the New-Englanders raised three Thousand Men, to make an Attempt
upon Canada, but failed of Success; after having sustained the Loss of a
Thousand Lives, and the Expense of fifteen Thousand Pounds.

About eighteen Years after they made another Attempt against Port Royal, but
had not the former Success.

Near the same Time, Queen ANNE signified her royal Intention to reduce Canada;
and making the same known to the New-Englanders, they acceded to every Measure
with great Alacrity; but the Parliament did not proceed on the Design.

The next Year, New England raised an Army, and took Port Royal, with the
Assistance of only five Hundred British Troops; since which Time the
Massachusetts Province, by the Vigilance of their late Governor SHIRLEY, in
sending Provincial Troops to their timely Assistance, has saved that Fort two
or three Times from falling into the Enemy's Hand; and it is owing to their Aid
that it is now in the Hands of the English; together with the whole Country of
Nova Scotia.

Soon after, they raised more than their Quota, in the unfortunate Expedition
against Canada, under General HILL; and sustained a great Loss of Men, together
with an heavy Expense.

In 1703, Jamaica being threatened with an Invasion, applied to
Massachusetts Bay for Help; the Inhabitants of that Province raised two
Companies, and sent them under the Command of Colonel WALTON and Captain
LARAMORE; which timely aid arrived safe to the Island, but very few of them
ever returned to their own Country.

In 17740, they raised many Hundred Men, and made an Attempt upon the Island of
Cuba; but failing of Success, most of those Men were unhappily buried on that
Island.

In 1745, the New England Provinces set on foot an Expedition against
Cape-Breton, under General PEPPEREL; and raised three Thousand five Hundred
Men, who were embarked on board a sufficient Number of Transports, with
Provisions, Artillery, and every Necessary for a Campaign, guarded by a Number
of armed Ships. In this important Business they were successful. Great Britain
knew nothing of this Attempt, neither did any other Colony afford any
Assistance; nor was there any, except from Admiral WARREN, who came from the
West Indies with four Ships of War, and joined the Fleet before Louisbourg,
when the Conquest was half completed; so that he did not fire a Gun at any of
the strong Fortresses of the Enemy; and the City of Louisbourg, together with
the Islands of Cape-Breton, and St. John's surrendered to the New England
Forces. And although the Land and Sea Forces went forth as equal Adventurers
(according to a previous Agreement at Boston) yet when a great Treasure, viz. a
French Ship from the South-Seas, two French Ships from the East Indies, and
several other Ships of immense Value (which put into Louisbourg to recruit in
their way Home) fell into our Hands by Means of this Capture; the Admiral
ordered them to England for Condemnation, and the Property was all divided
among the King's Ships, and not one Farthing of it was ever enjoyed by the
New England Troops; except a small Sum which Capt. FLETCHER received after near
as much expended in his Application to obtain it. Thus, by Means of this
Undertaking of New England, double, if not treble the Cash was brought into
England, that ever England paid for this important Piece of Service; and the
Conquest itself was very soon after given up to the French, to buy a Peace for
the Dutch. New England was indeed paid the Expense of this Expedition by the
Crown; but at such a low Rate, that many were ruined in their Fortunes. The
Benefit of all these Conquests accrued to this Nation, and New England was
obliged to set down where it began, with this Difference only, that they lost
nineteen Hundred of their best Men.

In 1746, Great Britain set on foot an Expedition against Canada. New England
was desired to raise its Quota of Men, and a great Expense was incurred for
that Purpose; but Westerly (some say, F -- h) Winds blew so hard, and so long,
on the British Ports, that the Fleet destined for that Service did not get out
of the Harbors, and this Expedition came to nothing. Here it may be mentioned,
that near the same Time, the Duke D'Anville, with about 20 Sail of French Ships
of the Line, was suffered to approach the Coast of New England, undisturbed;
though he came to revenge the taking of Cape-Breton, and the Reduction of
Louisbourg by the New-Englanders. Divine Providence was pleased to interfere;
the Fleet was scattered, and only a few Ships returned to France, having done
New England no Damage, except putting them to a considerable Expense in
watching their Motions, and preparing to give them a proper Reception; and
making Captures of a Number of the Fishing Vessels.

During the last War, New England at every call, raised its Quota of Men, and
joined the British Troops. The Numbers raised, and the Cheerfulness with which
they were raised, will hardly find Credit in the Annals of History. And
although at the Beginning of the War, through a Mistake in Measures, the Nation
met with great Discouragement, and was almost ready to fall a Prey into the
Enemy's Hand; yet no sooner was that great Minister (yet living) advanced to
the Helm of national Affairs, and the best and most faithful Officers appointed
to command the Troops, but it set New England in Triumph. Every Measure
proposed, was adopted; and, as one Instance, the Massachusetts Province raised
seven Thousand Men to serve in one Campaign, and paid and clothed them;
besides three Thousand more which were, at the same Time, in pay on their own
more immediate Service. All these together amounted to a Fourth Part, of all
the Men in the whole Province, capable of bearing Arms. In this spirited Manner
they proceeded, until the War was finished; which swept away a large Proportion
of their fighting Men, and involved the Province in a Debt, which will not be
paid in fifty Years.

It may now be enquired, how New England behaved under all the Sufferings and
Services beforementioned? Did they despair? No. War was almost their continual
Employment, when the Mother Country was at Peace, us well as when it was at
War. From their first Arrival to the End of the last War, scarce a Village was
settled, but what was broken up once, or oftener by the Savages. Men, Women, and
Children, whole Families, Villages and Towns, were murdered, scalpt, and
captivated, and their whole Substance committed to the Flames. It may be said
with Truth, that most of the inland Towns were once or twice, soaked with the
Blood of their Inhabitants. Did they Murmur at being thus oppressed, while
wholly neglected by the Nation? No. Did they grow disaffected to the national
Interest? The contrary to all this was manifest. They loved and revered the
Nation to a Degree of Excess and Enthusiasm. New Glory to the Crown, new
Acquisitions of Territory, Happiness, and Wealth to England, were ever as much
a Source of Joy to New England, as to the Nation itself: And every Misfortune
that befell the Parent Country, as deeply affected the New England Colonies.
However strange this may seem, it is an undoubted Truth. If the Nation
prospered, they fought with reiterated Vigor, and bore Hardships with Patience
and Fortitude; nay, such was their Sincerity, and the Strength of their
Affections and Regard for the Mother Country, that the News of any dark Cloud
gathering over England, would most visibly sink their Spirits and distill in
Tears. On such Occasions, the adverse Aspect of Affairs was the melancholy
Topic of their Consultations at the General Court; and whether any thing could
be done by them to prevent the approaching Danger, became the principal Object
of their Attention. If you went into their Churches, they would be often found
Praying, Fasting, and Weeping, that the impending Evil might be averted; and
the fame was observable in private Families.

Thus they went on, from Year to Year, and from Age to Age, with an invincible
Attachment to a Country, to which, besides Love, they owed nothing but a dear
bought Charter, and the Birth of a few of their Forefathers.

It may now be considered* of what Advantage New England is to the Mother
Country, more especially above the West India Islands, considering the Charge
the Nation, has been put to, to secure and defend them separately. At first
Glance, the Difference is nearly, as Something is to Nothing; at least, till
the Commencement of the last War. What numerous Fleets and Armies have, at all
Times, been employed in the West India Islands, both in Peace and War? Who can
tell the Millions Sterling, those Islands have cost the Nation, to secure,
protect, and defend them? Even in a Time of general Peace, an Expedition must
be set on foot, to suppress a few Caribbs (of late) St. Vincent's; the very
Thought of which creates a Blush. New England has, for all that Time, been
entirely left to its own Fate. In common there was not so much Sea Force, as
would amount to an armed Longboat, provided at the Cost of the Crown; not a
single Officer, or private Man in Pay of the Crown (till since the last Peace)
though the War was ever so hot, and Danger ever so threatening. God alone
appeared to be the Guardian of New England, and carried the Inhabitants through
the many Difficulties which attended their Struggle, under the Auspices of his
gracious Providence -- a Struggle, which has raised, as it were, an Empire to
the British Crown, and a vast Fund of Wealth and Glory to the Nation. -- Rivers
of Blood were laid in the Foundation, at the sole Expense of the Inhabitants of
New England.

Great Numbers of New England Men are trained up to the Sea, in Fishing
Vessels, and on other Voyages; so that it is a good Nursery for the Royal Navy.
The Refuse of their Fish, together with all Kinds of Provisions, Horses and
Lumber, they carry to the West Indies, without which the Islanders could not
make Sugar, etc. so cheap as they now do. And should New England stop the Trade
to the Islands, a Plantation there would hardly be worth Acceptance, if the
Islanders must be supplied with Provisions from Europe.

The best Sort of Fish is sent to Spain, Portugal, and the Straits; the neat
Proceeds of which are remitted to England in Cash. Oil, Bone, Masts for the
Royal Navy, Timber of all Kinds (which is now sent home in Rafts) Ships of
every Kind, Pot-Ash, Furrs, etc. etc. (many of which England was obliged to
other Nations for, before New England was knows) are the immediate Exports to
Great Britain. In return for all, they receive the Manufactories of England,
and thereby give Bread to Thousands of British Subjects. Thus all their Labor
centers in England, excepting their daily Food.

It is manifest, that some of the most northern Colonies (especially
Massachusetts Bay) while the national Debt has been contracting, have been at
almost an infinite Expense of Blood and Treasure, to defend themselves; and in
a Number of Instances, to carry their Arms into the Enemies Country, by which
his Majesty's Service has been greatly promoted for a Century past, until the
Commencement of the last War. With a very little Help from Connecticut and
New Hampshire Colonies only, they have been the grand Barrier of many of his
Majesty's other Colonies on the Continent; at least so much, that it may be
affirmed, had they not exerted themselves, more than all the other Colonies
together, with the Nation's Assistance, the laying Duties on the Colonies had
been a needless Business seventy Years ago, LOUIS the 14th of France, who first
projected the Conquest of America, might have accomplished his Designs, if
Massachusetts Bay had not effectually covered the whole Country. New York and
New Hampshire (both of them Royal Governments) were by their Situation somewhat
exposed. As to the former, their Trade and Intercourse with the French, and
Indians, gave them great Advantage, in turning the Heat of the War from their
own Doors, to those of Massachusetts Bay. Respecting the latter, near a Fourth
part of Massachusetts Province, was added to New Hampshire, and after this
Addition of Territory, which was so much exposed to the Enemy, and which
New Hampshire was unable to defend; the Province of Massachusetts Bay, at a
very great Expense, defended it for them; New Hampshire has not yet paid one
Farthing of the Expense, although Application was made to England for that
Purpose, and Restitution was promised, or else that the Territory should be
returned; neither of which Promises has ever been performed.

Let us now inquire, whether New England has not a just Right to expect some
peculiar Advantages, as the Fruit of their Sufferings, Services, etc.

First, have they not Reason to expect, and an unquestionable Right to claim, a
national Confidence in their future Attachment to the British Interest? This is
a Question of great Importance; because if they had good Reason and clear Right
to expect this Opinion from the English, then every oppressive Measure is
unjust, arbitrary and cruel. And if it be considered, how unnatural any
Oppression of our fellow Subjects must be, who have given such unparallelled
Evidence, of their Adherence to the national Good; and how likely to introduce
Distraction, and beget Distrust and Disaffection, surely, common Prudence will
direct a British Minister to avoid or Repeal such impolitic Ruinous, and
oppressive Measures.

Again, have they not both Reason and Right to expect some peculiar Advantages,
particularly such, as were not balanced, much less over-balanced, by any
pecuniary Advantages? Does not the Loss of fourteen or fifteen Thousand Men
(which they sustained during the last War) besides a very heavy Debt yet
remaining, after twelve Years Taxes, to the Amount of at least four Shillings
in the Pound, deserve some Compensation, at least such as will place them on an
equitable Adjustment with the other American Provinces.

Again, have they not good Reason to expect, as all their Labor centers in
England, that it should excuse them from being taxed, to pay the national Debt?
especially while they Support a Government of their own. And that all Taxes
should be laid consistently with British Liberty, and be void of all
Partiality, no just Man can possibly deny. Ought not the English Nation to rest
satisfied, and content, with the same Kind of Services from them, as from his
Majesty's other Subjects? This is certain, they have done as much for the
national Glory, and have exulted in it. Why then, should they not share in the
same Immunities? At least be exempted from the same Oppressions? And why submit
to Taxes, unless by their own Representatives?

Let us now inquire, into the Necessity of taking or imposing Duties, on the
Colonies; or whether there was any Authority for such a Step, while their
Charters continued in Force? The Question shall not be, about the Necessity the
Nation was under, of Assistance from the Colonies. No doubt, it stands in need
of Help from them; but such Help should be in Proportion to the Ability of the
respective Colonies, and to the Expenses the Nation has been put to, in
protecting, securing, and defending them severally. But the true Inquiry seems
to be, what was the Necessity of raising this Money by Authority of Parliament.

To say that this Measure, so extremely alarming, to the Colonies, was
necessary, in order to obtain their Help, is very strange. The Reason is, that
the Colonies were never asked, if they would raise a Sum themselves, on a
Requisition from England. This Method was taken in Time of War, in raising Men;
and when it is considered, how cheerfully they complied with every Request,
although heavy, and burdensome to the last Degree, and, with what an entire
Confidence in his Majesty's Wisdom, this was done; it must needs creat some
Wonder, that this Method for raising Money, to discharge the national Debt,
never was proposed to them. There was the greatest Probability from long
Experience, as well as from the good Disposition the Colonies then manifested,
that it would have been complied with, and the Money paid into the Exchequer,
without Half the Distress on the People; and with Three Parts in Four of more
clear Revenue to the Crown, than by the present Duty, or Tax in the Way since
adopted. There would have been no Infringement on Charter Rights, no
Disaffection from the Parent Country; and no Regret, that they had fought and
bled for Chains, would have been heard among the Inhabitants. Supposing this
Method had failed, the Steps which have been taken, might have had some seeming
Appearance of Necessity.

It may now be enquired, whether the Crown has received any Benefit from these
Duties or not?

Here then let it be considered, what vast Sums of Money are first paid to the
Officers, and others who receive their Saleries out of this Revenue (and the
unlimited Power the Board of Commissioners have, of increasing the Number of
Officers under them) which are so many, that there were but about Eighty-five
Pounds paid into the Exchequer, the last Year. Farther what Numbers of Men of
War, and Swarms of armed Vessels, and armed Boats, and how many Regiments of
British Troops are also emyloyed, under Pretense of of protecting the Officers
of this Revenue, whose Pay comes from another Quarter? This must necessarily
leave a large Balance against the Nation.

Did not the People of New England undergo such Hardships and Sufferings as
have been stated, in the first Settlement of the Country? Did they not make a
Conquest of Nova Scotia, once and again? Did they not always exert themselves
for the national Interest, by complying with every Requisition for that
Purpose? Have they not behaved themselves dutifully, and ever loyally to the
Crown of England? And have their Services and Sufferings been attended with the
Expense of so much Blood and Treasure, that they have even raised an Empire to
the Crown of Great Britain, and are they allowed to have and maintain a
Government of themselves, by a Charter under the Crown of England, and all this
at the sole Expense of the Inhabitants? If so, then every Measure already
taken, or which may be about to be taken by the Parent Country, that is
grievous to them, is but an unkind Return; it is not treating them as every
Father is wont to treat his Children, and if such Treatment should be
continued, it will, perhaps, end in the utter Ruin of the whole Family.

If the foregoing Representation of New England be true, (as all unprejudiced
Men, who have Knowledge of the History, will witness,) the following Remarks
may be made.

First. Can it be for the Interest of the Nation, to continue the Duties on the
Colonies, when the Expense of collecting them, is double, if not treble, the
Amount of the whole Duties collected?

Secondly. Can it be for the Inetrest of the Nation, to lose the Affections of
four or five Millions of brave, loyal and loving Subjects, always inured to
manly Freedom, who have never thought it too much to venture their Lives and
Fortunes, and every Thing dear and valuable to them, if by any Means they could
add to the Glory, Wealth and Oppulence of the Nation? This they have done, at
all Times, where there was the least Probability of Success.

Finally, Can it be for the Interest of the Nation, to keep up an armed Force
in New England, especially in Time of Peace? How vauge is the Pretense, for
thus affronting, and even murdering some of the Inhabitants, corrupting their
Morals by Debauchery, Drunkenness, Profaneness, etc.! Sins but little known
among them, until Troops were quartered upon them. Surely such a Torrent of
Evils, as has rushed in upon them by Means of the Measures taken by the Mother
Country, is a far greater Punishment, than all the Hardships and Difficulties
they endured, from their first Settlement, to the End of the last War. In all
those Hardships and Sufferings, there was no general Complaint or Murmurings.
But how far this is from being the Case at present, is manifest to the World;
and there is no Doubt, but they would rather have continued, to have fought
Canada to the Knees in Blood, with their Charter Rights in full Possession,
than to be freed even from so dreadful a Calamity, and have the Evils
beforementioned heaped upon them. Let me add, that all Men of Sobriety, who
have the national Interest at Heart, tremble to think, what the End of these
Proceedings will be.

Upon the whole, notwithstanding the hard Treatment the Colonies have met with
of late Years, viz. In having Duties or Taxes imposed upon them, by the British
Parliament, quartering Troops in the capital Town, wresting Castle-William A
Fortress built on an Island, three Miles from Boston, commanding all Ships that
enter the Harbor; it has upwards of 100 large Cannon, a Number of Mortars, and
every Necessary suitable for a Fortification.
out of the Hands of Massachusetts Bay, which built, furnished and maintained
it, at their sole Expense; without either paying the Province for the Fort and
its Artillery, or so much as promising that the Crown of England would pay for
it; besides the numerous other dreadful Evils which have attended these
Measures. -- Nothwithstanding these Things the Colonies do not wholly despair,
but continue to be loyal and loving Subjects to his present Majesty, hoping
that the Influence of Individuals will be of short Continuance. They never have
doubted, that if the Nation should seriously and dispassionately once attend to
the Services which the Colonies have done it, of what Importance they must ever
be to its Interests, and that all their past Services have been effected in the
Enjoyment of their civil and religions Rights and Privileges, the Nation would
grant them the full Possession thereof for the Time to come. In this Hope,
under God, they have hitherto persevered; nay, so well grounded do they suppose
this Hope to be, that however strange it may seem, though the Measures which
have so much aggrieved them, were adopted by the representative Body of the
Empire, they do not yet give it up; although it is like hoping against Hope.

FINIS.

