TO THE CITIZENS of New York, On the present critical Situation of Affairs.
WERE I neither a Philadelphian, a New-Yorker, a Bostonian, nor even a native
of this continent, as a friend to the rights of mankind, I should interest
myself in the fate of America. America must at present be considered as the
principal, or indeed the only remaining seat of liberty -- In Corsica, Sweden,
Poland she has been borne down by the direct hand of violence; and in our
parent country, she is sapp'd by corruption to so dangerous a degree, that she
totters from the foundation, and unless propp'd by the virtue and spirit of her
colonies, she must inevitably fall to the ground. A regular plan has been
formed by the present court, for the introduction of arbitrary power; -- this
is no declamation, and did the size of this paper admit of it, I could prove
the truth of the assertion by numberless instances: The privileges, and indeed
natural rights of the subject, have been invaded in every part of the empire,
one while by open force, another by cabal and the arts of corruption -- Even
the islands of Minorca, Jersey, Guernsey, have not been protected by their
insignificance, from the scourge of tyranny. -- Great Britain and Ireland have
been drained almost to the last farthing, not for any national purposes, but to
increase the influence of the crown, in creating new placemen, pensioners, and
of course enemies to the public welfare, and liberty.

General warrants, violation of the rights of election, the disfranchisement of
the proprietors of the East India stock, murders committed, murderers pardoned,
encouraged, rewarded, and the other overtacts (of treason, I may say) which the
ministry have been guilty of against law, magna charta, and the English
constitution, are so notorious, that it is almost impertinent to mention them;
but there are other indications, or rather evidences of the temper and views of
the court, which ought not to be passed over in silence and which must convince
the subjects that they are to expect nothing but from their own virtue and
firmness, --

Every writer in support of boundless prerogative, every jacobite historian,
(the Humes, Guthries and Smollet's) has been caressed, placed or pensioned.
Attacks have been made under the auspices of the court, not only on the
revolution, and the principal promoters of the revolution, but a scheme has
been laid, and to the utmost of their power carried into execution, to
proscribe virtue herself, by subverting the reputation of her brightest models
-- They argue thus, if we can spread the persuasion, that public virtue never
did exist in a human breast that patriotism has been in all ages only a mask
for designing men; we shall gain the following point, we shall render mankind
totally indifferent who are in office, who are not; whether a Pit or a Bute --
what maxims we rule by, what maxims we repudiate, whether we profess those of
an Alfred, or a Stuart, will be a matter of indifference to the public, if we
can once convince them, that their interests ever have been, and ever will be
equally out of the question. -- When we have thus destroyed all political
confidence, we have reason to flatter ourselves that the people will not be
such fools as to think of opposition, or resistance, but without giving
themselves any unnecessary trouble, submit to the yoke we are preparing for
them. To accomplish these pious purposes, some fit instrument was to be sought
and found, some man of a sufficiently corrupt heart, to qualify him for the
task. This instrument was found in a certain Sir John Dalrymple, (who in the
administration of Lord Rockingham had been turned out of an important office,
which he held in Scotland, for manifest corrupt practices -- He was detached
into France, and recommended by Lord Mansfield, and another very great
personage, to the famous Duke D'Aiguillon; he, who had trampled on the few
remaining laws of France, and exterminated their virtuous Parliaments. -- the
Duke D'Aiguillon, with the candor (as this Dalrymple tells us) inseparable
from every minister of a great King catches the idea of our court, (and as
might be expected from so natural an ally) patronizes the project, and consigns
to their agent, the key of the depote des affairs etrangeres. Office of
records of foreign affairs.
-- Here he sets himself to work, to rummage, to garble, to defalcate, to
forge, -- for without straining inferences, it is almost certain that he did
forge -- at length he triumphantly sallies forth, with the testimonies, as he
hopes to persuade us, of the nonexistence of human virtue, with proofs that
her brighest patterns were knaves and hypocrites. It would be easy (though here
might be thought tedious) to overturn the whole foundation, (...) defeat the
intended effects of this abominable production; -- but I cannot help remarking,
that were the proofs of Sydney and Russel's being traitors irrefregable, he who
should produce them, would be held in abhorrence by every friend to humanity.

It is necessary that some models of human virtue should be held up to our
imitation: He who would remove from our sight these few models which history
has left to us, would check every noble ardour of the soul, as it would then
appear madness to attempt attaining what is incompatible with our nature It may
now perhaps be asked what can be the intention (in an address to the citizens
of New York) of so long a preamble on the conduct and spirit of the court, in
matters which do not particularly relate to America. I will explain to you my
intention; it is to convince you, that when a spirit so hostile to general
liberty prevails, in those who have the power at home, you have only to hope
for redress of grievances from the united virtue and firmness of the colonies;
that the idea of proceeding by petition and remonstrance, is the most
ridiculous idea that ever entered into weak heads. Can you seriously think your
petitions would have any effect at this instant, when the confidence and
temerity of the ministry are mounted to so much higher a pitch than we have
hitherto seen them? Can you seriously think that your petitions would operate
more strongly on so firmly a fixed minister, backed by a vast majority in
parliament, than the petitions of the city of London, and the principal
counties of England, with the first men of property and character, and a
considerable number of the members at their head did on a minister less firmly
seated; a minister, not only less firmly seated, but perhaps a much less bold
and determined foe to liberty, than the present. -- It is no calumny, it is no
exaggeration to say, that Lord North is a determined foe to liberty. -- He is
so by inheritance; descended from one of the most forward and active
instruments of tyranny under Charles the second; every speech, every action of
his life demonstrates him to be the genuine offspring -- On the brave Corsicans
he never bestowed a gentler Epithet than rebels and traitors. -- The mention of
American liberties, the supposition that they had any liberties, always threw
him into a frenzy of rage, -- foaming at the mouth, and with eyes starting from
their sockets, He has denounced, or rather vomitted forth eternal war against
you and your posterity. -- He has had the arrogance, the madness to declare, in
the open senate, that he never would receive, never hear any petitions from
America, until he had her at his feet.

When it is considered that this avowed foe, and persecutor of America; this
furious fanatic in despotism, is now become the omnipotent minister, I must
repeat, that the idea of redressing grievances by petition and remonstrance, is
the most contemptible idea, that ever entered into weak heads. It is indeed so
very contemptible, that we cannot suppose those who adopt it are in earnest; --
it is impossible not to suspect them of sinister designs -- They must mean,
under the cloak of coolness and moderation, to check the vigor, so absolutely
requisite at this juncture, and to prevent the only possible means of redress;
they must mean to recommend themselves to the future favor of your oppressors.
-- They perhaps already devour in their minds, contracts, salaries, and
pensions, for which, (if the ministry succeed) funds will be immediately
established out of the fruits of your honest labor and industry. -- They must
be conscious that all the force and troops they can employ, will not effect
their purposes, unless the corruption of your own members powerfully
co-operates -- Upon the whole, considering the critical situation of affairs,
the impending ruin over our heads, I cannot help being a good deal surprised
and somewhat shocked, at the conduct of this city -- Is this a time to amuse
yourselves with narrow local politics and disputes? Is this a time, when the
dearest interests of yourselves, of posterity, and of mankind are at stake,
(for the cause of liberty is the cause of mankind)? Is this a time I say, to
indulge your little prejudices, jealousies, and personal piques? For shame
citizens, discard all such disgraceful sentiments; assume a more noble
character; save yourselves from the infamy which threatens you; let not the
common ruin be laid to your charge. For my own part, I neither pretend to
approve nor to condemn the measure which the committee has lately thought
proper to censure -- But this I will pretend to say that the publishing the
censure, may have most pernicious consequences; it may, by propagating the
opinion of divisions starting up in this ^^^ding capital, repress the ardour of
your own counties, of the other colonies, discourage your friends at home, and
give fresh vigor to your enemies; and (the haste with which the publishing
this censure was pressed, with the professed intention of transmitting it by
the packet) gives. I must confess, a very suspicious air to its authors -- the
design could not be good. It has already furnished matter of triumph to (...)
of liberty. One man in particular (he is indeed an official man, not a native
of this country, and remarkable for his alacrity in political wickedness) sings
te deum, I am told, in all companies on this occasion, considering the victory
as insured to his idol despotism -- There are now some farther consequences to
be apprehended from the present conduct of this city, which perhaps have not
occurred to you, and which therefore I shall beg leave to offer to your
consideration -- Is it not to be apprehended that the Bostonians, when they
turn their eyes and address their prayers to you, as a leading people of
America, for succor in their distress; and when instead of the vigor and
noble spirit they had reason to expect from your former exertions, they see
nothing but backwardness, frivolous delays, and (as to them it will appear)
total dearth of spirit; is it not to be apprehended, that having no prospect of
relief, they may grow desperate? And that their despair, in conjunction with
the corruption of individuals among themselves, (for you may be assured that
General Gage has unlimited credit on the treasury for the purposes of
corruption) may drive them into the wished for fatal concession; the general
seal of American bondage -- The admission of the right of taxing you without
your own consent? Is it not to be expected, that the instant they have divested
themselves of the character of freemen and taken up that of slaves, they will
become the favorite colony of the court? That it will then be discovered, that
they have been misrepresented? That they had indeed for some time been deluded
by a few factious demagogues, but that in fact, they were a loyal, dutiful and
affectionate people? -- This will be the language affected by the General, and
this will the ministry ostentatiously affect to believe. -- When they have thus
commuted the character of freemen for that of slaves, will they not act the
part natural to slaves? Be the ready instruments for reducing others to the
same situation with themselves? And when a people so potent in numbers and
other respects as New England, is thrown into the scale of the military I am at
a loss to know what means on this continent can be devised for resistance.

For my own part, O citizens of New York, supposing myself a Bostonian, and
that my country were reduced to the wretched situation I have described,
through your dilatoriness, disaffection, or want of virtue, I am afraid there
is no measure (be it ever so tyrannical) my Lords and masters could dictate
against you, which I should not from resentment, find a pleasure in putting
into execution. -- For instance should they think proper to revive in this
particular province, the odious stamp act, (and such is the wantonness and
insolence of tyranny, that they would probably choose it, in preference to any
other mode of oppression, as a trophy of their victory) I should, I am afraid,
with alacrity lend my hand to enforce it. -- I am sensible that in hazarding
these sentiments, I may give to many, a disadvantageous picture of my own
disposition; it may be, that I mistake myself, but as resentment operates so
strongly on the human breast, even the best disposed, and as slavery so
vitiates the human heart, the apprehension is far from groundless. -- This, at
least, is certain, that should the people of Boston be enslaved, and have
reason to impute their calamity in part, or principally to New York, there is
no degree of animosity and hatred they could afterward bear to New York, which
would not in a great measure be justified; and it is equally certain, that the
liberties of the betrayers would not long survive those which they had betrayed.

I must now, O citizens, entreat that you will attribute what I have offered,
to the genuine motive; to an ardent zeal for the liberties of America, and the
rights of mankind; that you will believe me at the same time most sincerely
attached to the real interests of Great Britain; no man can have a higher
reverence for the people of England than myself; I esteem them, in all respects
the first people of the universe. But when our parent is thrown into a
dilirium, by the quackery of a murdering impostor, is it not the duty of her
children to prevent her committing outrages, not only immediately destructive
to themselves, but which must end in her own ruin? When her phrenzy is past,
she will thank us for the pious restraint. There is one consideration which
renders the present delusion of the people of England with respect to America,
really wonderful; it is that the very same men should have been able to bring
about this delusion, whom they themselves have ever held in contempt and
abhorrence. The same men who within doors have violated, baffled, or eluded
their most sacred laws, dissipated and refused to account for their treasures,
treated with insult their petitions and remonstrances; and who have externally
sacrificed their interests, annihilated their importance, and tarnished their
glories? -- That these men should have wrought upon them, is so preposterous
and unnatural that the delusion cannot be of a long continuation; they must
soon open their eyes; they will then thank Providence, that the sense and
virtue of their colonies has saved them from the destruction into which their
own infatuation would have plunged them -- Such are the sentiments which I
entertain, such are the principles I possess -- and if you believe them
sincere, they will be sufficient apologies for my addressing you in this
extraordinary manner; and that they are sincere, I call to witness that Eternal
Being, who is the judge of the truth of all hearts. I shall now conclude with
observing, that there are two roads presented to you; the one leading to
security, freedom, happiness, and honor; the other which terminates in
wretchedness, slavery, and infamy to you and your children's children -- it is
of the greatest concern, therefore, to be assured of the fidelity of your
conductors. If they turn their eyes to the right or left, from the direct
object of their charge, the general welfare, to little views of imagined self
interests, you and your posterity are lost. The more we reflect, the more we
are struck with the importance of what you are now about to resolve, of the
necessity there is of paying the most serious attention to the characters of
those whom you shall appoint your Delegates. -- If amongst those proposed for
your election there should be a man whom you think averse to schemes of
non-importation and even non exportation to the islands, if necessary -- that
is in fact a man whose mind has been so narrowed by commercial habits, that he
would postpone the permanent security and freedom of the whole, to his own
temporary personal advantages: Let him be rejected, as totally unworthy of so
momentous, so dignified a trust -- Is there a man who ever did, or you suppose
ever will hold any office under a ministry odious as the present? Him reject,
as destitute of all principle. But above all, is there a man who has upon the
present occasion, been heard to propose or recommend petition and remonstrance
as the properest mode of obtaining redress? Him reject with scorn and
indignation -- for if he is in earnest, his capacity must be miserably low
indeed, and if he is not in earnest, he certainly means to betray you.

The most strenuous civil resistance is necessary to your salvation unless you
prefer a civil war a few months hence, to civil resistance now, or are
determined to submit to absolute slavery. Let your choice of Delegates be
proportioned to the importance of the occasion. -- I do not think transcendent
talents absolutely necessary; a common good understanding: sufficient, but
unquestionable heartiness, zeal, and fervor in the common cause, are
indespensible -- in short, let your choice correspond with what we are taught
to expect from the other colonies, and not only the security, happiness, and
liberties of America will be fixed on a foundation which a^es shall not shake,
but you may re-animate your parent country, by subverting a (...) of government
which must otherwise (...) an end to her existence.

ANGLUS AMERICANUS.


