A LETTER FROM A VIRGINIAN, TO THE Members of the Congress TO BE HELD AT
PHILADELPHIA, ON The first of SEPTEMBER, 1774.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1774.

A LETTER, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
IN Times of public Danger, every Man has a Right to offer his Advice; there
are some Men who think it their Duty to do it, although on common Occasions
they may be naturally too diffident of their own Opinions, or too indolent, to
give themselves the Trouble to obtrude them on the World. If such Men happen to
mistake their Talents, not from Vanity but from an Excess of Zeal, and meddle
officiously with Matters above their Reach, they may be forgiven on the Score
of their Intention: Even a modest Man is apt to over-rate his own Judgment
where his Affections and Interests are deeply concerned.

MY Zeal therefore in the common Cause must serve for my Excuse, if in the
Course of this Letter I should give my Opinion more confidently than I ought to
do, and seem to think myself, which is a very common Case, much wiser than I am.

YOU are soon to meet on the most serious Occasion that ever presented itself
to this Country since its Existence.

THE Harmony which subsisted, with little or no Interruption, between
Great Britain and her Colonies, from their very Infancy until of late, is in
Danger of being destroyed for ever. The Habits of Kindness and Affection, on
one Side, and of Respect and Obedience, on the other, (which prevailed during
so long a Period, were in the highest Degree conducive to the Prosperity of
this Country in particular, and are still necessary to its Security and
Happiness) are changed into Murmurings, Discontents, and Reproaches; and will
soon end, without some very extraordinary Interposition, in mutual and
implacable Hatred. Complaints of Grievances, real or imaginary, are heard from
one End of these Colonies to the other; the Minds of the People appear to be
agitated as at some great Crisis; they wish, by a public Consultation, to be
assured of the general Opinion, by a Representation of every Province, to
collect the calm, deliberate Determination of all the Provinces, to establish
some public Mark of mutual Confidence, that they may hold it up to the Parent
Country, in all its Weight and Importance. For this Purpose, Gentlemen, you are
delegated to the Congress. An absolute, perfect Representation of the People,
never existed perhaps, but in Theory. You, it is true, have not been summoned,
or convened, by any formal constitutional Authority, or invested with any
legislative Powers: But you have been chosen as freely as the Circumstances of
the Times would admit; with less Cabal and Intrigue than is usually employed
for a Seat in many of our legal provincial Assemblies, and without even the
Suspicion of Venality, which is but too frequently and too generally practiced
among us for that Purpose. Your Persons, Characters, and Principles, are
familiarly known to your Constituents; you have been recommended by the most
Honorable of all Interests, the general Opinion of your Knowledge, Abilities
and Virtues. We look up to you as the Oracles of our Country; your Opinions
will have the Effect of Laws, on the Minds of the People, and your Resolves may
decide the Fate of America. All Orders of Men, who enjoy the Happiness of
living under a free Government, may boldly assume the Character of Politicians;
they inherit a Right to it as much as the proudest Peer inherits a Right to his
Seat in Parliament, however ridiculous the Proportion may appear to the Conceit
and Arrogance of Men who think themselves born to domineer over their fellow
Creatures at Pleasure. High Birth and Fortune, when they are not abused, confer
the solid and splendid Advantages of Education and Accomplishments, extensive
Influence, and incitement to Glory; but they give no exclusive Title to Common
Sense, Wisdom, or Integrity. The lowest Orders of Men in such a Country, have
an unalienable Property in their Industry, their Liberty, and their Lives, and
may be allowed to set some Value at least on the only Property they can boast
of: These may be all endangered, or lost, by the Conduct of their Governors,
they have therefore a Right, as Freemen, to examine their Conduct, to censure,
to condemn it; without this Right the freest Government on Earth would soon
degenerate into the rankest Tyranny. The great Out-lines, the fundamental
Principles of out Constitution, are within the Reach of almost every Man's
Capacity; they require little more than Leisure to study them, Memory to retain
them, and Candor to form a true Judgment of them; unhappily for the Order and
Peace of Society, this inestimable Privilege is but too often abused. Men in
general are governed more by their Temper than their Judgment; they have little
Leisure and still less Inclination, to inform themselves exactly of the
necessary constitutional Powers of the supreme Magistrate, or of their own
legal Rights; they have been often told that Liberty is a very great Blessing;
they talk incessantly of it, they find something enchanting in the very Sound
of the Word; ask them the Meaning of it, they think you design to affront them;
push them to a Definition, they give you at once a Description of the State of
Nature. Their Ideas of the Nature, Origin and Conditions of civil Society in
general, are just as confused and inaccurate; they take their political as they
do their religious Opinions (upon Trust) from the Nursery, the Company they
fall into, or the Professions and Scenes in which they are accidentally
engaged. They find the Movement of the Passions a more easy and agreeable
Exercise than the Drudgery of sober and dispassionate Enquiry. Hand Bills, News
Papers, party Pamphlets, are the shallow and turbid Sources from whence they
derive their Notions of Government; these they pronounce as confidently and
dogmatically, as if a political Problem was to be solved as clearly as a
Mathematical one; and as if a bold Assertion amounted to a Demonstration.

AMBITION and Lust of Power above the Laws, are such predominant Passions in
the Breasts of most Men, even of Men who escape the Infection of other Vices,
that Liberty, legal Liberty, would be in continual Danger of Encroachments, if
it were not guarded by perpetual Jealousy. Crafty designing Knaves, turbulent
Demagogues, Quacks in Politics, and Impostors in Patriotism, have in all free
Governments, and in all Ages, availed themselves of this necessary Spirit of
Jealousy; and by broaching Doctrines unknown to the Constitution, under the
Name of constitutional Principles, by bold Assertions, partial Representations,
false Colorings, wrested Constructions, and tragical Declamations, have
frequently imposed on the Credulity of the well-meaning deluded Multitude. Thus
the most honorable Cause that wise and good Men can engage in, the Cause of
Liberty, has been often disgraced; Nations once as free and as happy as
ourselves, have been frightened into Anarchy, plunged into all the Horrors of a
civil War, and ended their miserable Career in the most humiliating and abject
Slavery, until the sacred Name of Liberty has become a Word of Scorn and
Mockery in the Mouths of Tyrants, and their abandoned Minions and Emissaries.

SUCH are the Calamities which have frequently arisen from an ardent mistaken
Zeal, and from the false Refinements of speculative Men, who amuse themsleves
and the World, with visionary Ideas of Perfection, which never were, nor ever
will be found, either in public or in private Life. You, Gentlemen, cannot
even be suspected of being under the Influence of such Delusions; there are
many among you who are eminently learned, not only in the Laws of the Land, but
in the Laws of Nature and Nations, in the general Laws of Reason and Justice,
who know their Authority and revere them, not as they have been sometimes
explained on the narrow illiberal Principles of party Spirit, but as they have
been understood, and acknowledged by the Wise of all Ages, and have served for
the Basis of the most perfect Systems of Legislation. These are the only Rules
by which all political Opinions ought to be tried and examined, by which an
honest Man and a good Citizen, can form a true Judgment of the Duty he owes to
his King and his Country.

IT would have been happy for the World on many melancholy Occasions, that the
revealed Will of God, which ought to be the sole Rule of every Man's Conduct,
the only transcendent Authority from which there lies no Appeal, had never
received but one general Interpretation with Regard to the reciprocal Duties of
the Sovereign and the People; but even that sacred and eternal Standard of
Right and Wrong, in private Life has been alternately perverted and profaned in
the political World, by the indiscreet Zeal and wild Passions of mad
Enthusiasts, or salvish Bigots, has been equally abused, to serve the Purposes
of a Charles or a Cromwell, of a Gregory, or a Venner, to throw a Veil over the
Horrors of Anarchy, and Rebellion, or to sanctify the ridiculous and damnable
Doctrines of Non-resistance, and Passive-Obedience, on a proper Application of
the general Doctrines, and Principles, I have mentioned, to the peculiar and
local Circumstances of this Country; your Proceedings, and Resolves, ought to
depend, by a competent Knowledge of the Character of the Times, when the Colony
Charters were granted; of the Kings, by whom they were granted; of the People,
to whom they were granted; of the Purposes for which they were asked and
obtained; of the Tenor and Spirit of the Charters themselves, how they were
understood, and construed by our Ancestors; by a Knowledge in short of the
History of our Country, we may discover the general Constitution of the
Colonies, and be able to judge whether the present Discontents are founded on
Truth or Ignorance.

BY a due and candid Examination of this very interesting Subject, it may
perhaps appear, that the Character of the Times, when most of the Charters were
originally granted, bore very little Resemblance to the present Times; that the
inestimable Privileges of a modern Englishman, might indeed be found in some
Degree, in the Letter of the Law, but had never been enjoyed, were generally
very imperfectly understood, and rarely claimed by our Ancestors; that even
these legal constitutional Privileges were encumbered with a Thousand legal
Customs, which they patiently submitted to, although they would exceed the
Patience of a modern Frenchman; that they felt and discovered infinitely more
Zeal, for their religious, than for their civil Liberty, and would have been
contented with half the Privileges their Posterity enjoy, for an Act of
Toleration. It will appear, that the Kings, by whom the Charters were granted,
were not despotick Kings, that they constitutionally possessed the executive,
not the supreme legislative Power, of which they only made a Part; that in all
Questions of Magnitude, they were under the Control of the other parts of the
legislative Power. That our Ancestors, were Subjects of the Kings of England,
not as the Inhabitants of Guyenne formerly were, or as those of the Electorate
of Hanover are now, but Subjects of an English Parliamentary King; Englishmen
in the fullest Sense of the Word, with the same Habits and Manners, speaking
the same Language, governed by the same Maxims, Customs and Laws, with scarce
any Distinction, but the Latitude and Longitude of their new Residence.

THAT if their Charters were granted without the Concurrence of Parliaments, it
was not because a Parliament had no Right to interfere, but because they did
not in those Days appear of Importance enough to be agitated in the great
Council of the Nation.

THAT although by their Charters, our Ancestors were empowered to make Bylaws
for their own local Convenience, they were nevertheless expressly and formally
restrained from making Laws repugnant to the Laws of England; and were
universally understood, both there, and here, to owe in Common with all
Englishmen, an Obedience to the Laws, from which no King could release them,
because no King could dispense with the Laws. That from this parliamentary
Authority, they never wished until of late, to be emancipated, but would rather
have fled to it for Protection, from the arbitrary Encroachments of a James, or
a Charles, armed with the Usurpations, and Abuses, of privy Seals,
Benevolences, Proclamations, Star Chambers and High Commission Courts, and from
the Enormities of the two succeeding Reigns; that such were the Practices of
the Times, when our early Charters bear their Dates, that if they were not
granted by parliamentary Kings, they were granted by Tyrants, and we shall gain
nothing by recurring to first Principles.

THAT no political Society can subsist, unless there be an absolute supreme
Power lodged somewhere in the Society, has been universally held as an
uncontrolable Maxim in Theory, by all Writers on Government, from Aristotle
down to Sidney and Lock, and has been as universally adopted in Practice, from
the Despotism of Morocco, to the Republic of St. Marino; as long as Government
subsists, Subjects owe an implicit Obedience to the Laws of the supreme Power,
from which there can be no Appeal but to Heaven. We for some Years past have
been multiplying ineffectual Reselves, Petitions, and Remonstrances, and
advancing Claims of Rights, etc. Our Petitions have at last been neglected, or
rejected, or censured; the Principles on which we found our Claims, have been
formally denied. To what, or to whom, shall we have Recourse? Shall we appeal
to the King of Massachusetts Bay, to the King of Connecticut, to the King of
Rhode Island, against the King of Great Britain, to rescind the Acts of the
Parliament of Great Britain, to dispense with the Laws, to which as a necessary
and efficient Part of that Body, he has so recently given his Assent?
Ridiculous as these Questions may appear, I am afraid they are but too much of
a Piece with Doctrines which have been lately broached, inculcated every where,
and almost every where received. The Colonies are constitutionally independent
of each other: They formally acknowledge themselves loyal, and dutiful Subjects
of his Majesty GEORGE the Third. But severally claim an Exemption from the
Authority of the British Parliament. A Doctrine so repugnant to the Ideas of
all our Fellow Subjects in Great Britain, can I trust, have no Place in your
Assembly. The Business you have to tranfact, is too serious to be trifled with;
the Confidence reposed in you, too sacred to be sacrificed to idle Sophistry
and visionary Distinctions; the Fate of America, may depend on your Resolves;
they should be founded on Principles that are plain, and intelligible, that are
marked with the Authority of universal Opinions and Truths.

THE supreme Power of the British Parliament over her Colonies, was ever till
very lately, as universally acknowledged, by ourselves, as by our
Fellow Subjects in England. It usurps no Claim to infallibility in its
Opinions, but gives the Subject of legal Right of petitioning, remonstrating,
of proposing Plans of Reformation, and Redress. Nevertheless, though it pretends
not to Infallibility, like all other Governments, it requires an implicit
Obedience to its Laws, and has a Right to enforce it. A Tribe of Savages,
unrestrained by Laws, human or divine, may live in some Harmony, and endure for
Ages, because in the State of Nature, there are at the most but two or three
Subjects, to contend about, and the Individuals are reciprocally overawed by
the natural Rights of private Revenge. But in civil Soceity, composed as in
commonly is, of such an infinite Number of heterogeneous and discordant
Principles and Interests, in Trade, in Politics, and Religion, where Subjects
of Contention present themselves by Thousands every Hour; no Constitution can
subsist a Moment, without a constant Resignation of private Judgment, to the
Judgment of the Public.

WHAT Part then, Gentlemen, have you left you to act, but to propose, with the
Modesty of Subjects, some practicable Plan of Accommodation, and to obey? Shall
the Time of so respectable an Assembly be squandered, in advancing Claims of
Right, that have been urged, and rejected a thousand Times; that have been
heard, considered, solemnly debated, and decided by the only Power on Earth,
who has a Right to decide them? Shall the Opinions and Desires of a small Part
of the Community, prevail against the Opinions, and Desires of the Majority of
the Community? What new Species of Eloquence can be invented to persuade? What
new Logic to convince the Understandings of our Fellow Subjects? Shall the
British Senate be governed by the pernicious Maxims of a Polish Diet, and the
Veto of a single Member, or of a few Members, however distinguished by
extraordinary Wisdom, and Virtue, obstruct or suspend, or annul the Legislation
of a great Nation?

THOSE wise and virtuous Citizens themselves hold such Doctrines in Derision.
While a Question is in Agitation, they debate with Freedom, but they claim no
blind Submission to their Opinions, no Authority, but the Authority of their
Arguments. They arrogate not to themselves, a Monopoly of all the Wisdom, and
all the Virtue in the Nation. When the Question is decided, they submit their
private speculative Opinions, to the Opinion of the Majority, to the Law of the
Land. They revere the Law, and make it the Rule of their Conduct.

You therefore, Gentlemen, the Delegates of a very numerous, and respectable
People, will surely think it below the Dignity of your Character, to assemble
with the Passions and Language of a common Town Meeting, to sit in Judgment,
like some foreign Imperial Power on the Decrees of a British Legislature; to
arraign the Conduct of Administration, in the lofty emphatick Tone of a
Manifesto. Can such Proceedings answer any Purpose, but the dangerous Purposes
of exasperating and provoking the Indignation and Vengeance of the Orders and
Degrees of Men in the parent Country? Of alienating the Affections of the
People here, seducing them from their Allegiance, inflaming their Passions, and
exciting them to popular Tumults, and Insurrections? The Order and Tranquillity
of Government frequently depends more upon the Manners and Morals of the
People, than upon their Laws and Institutions. For the Honor of our native
Country, there are I believe, few Instances on Record, of any People under a
free Government, who have passed through the same Length of Period, with so few
civil Commotions, though the Powers of Government have never been vigilantly
exerted, nor the Laws held in any extraordinary Veneration. But the Manners and
Morals of our Countrymen, are undebauched and innocent, compared with those of
the Inhabitants of older Countries, where the Instruments of Corruption, and
the Incitements of Vices and Crimes are more general. The Danger is
nevertheless the same, or greater. There are no People on Earth more secure
from the humilitaing Effects of Poverty, more superior to the Smiles, or
Frowns of Power, more unawed by the Distictions of Birth and Fortune, more
confident, or tenacious of their own Opinions, or more on a level with all the
World in their Conversation and Behavior. The Passions of such Men, agitated
by false Principles, and mistaken Zeal, are more dangerous to the Repose of the
World, than the Frenzy of the most dissolute, and abandoned Slaves. You will
surely beware how you inflame the Minds of such honest deluded Citizens, or the
Time may come, perhaps it is not very distant, that you will wish, when it will
be too late, to calm the Storm you have raised, and will tremble every Moment,
lest it burst on your own Heads.

UPON the Subject of a Non-Importation and Non-Exportation Agreement, I am at a
Loss what to say, it has been so often and so warmly recommended, as a specific
Remedy for all our Complaints, has received the Sanction of such General
Authority, that I am afraid it will look like an affront to the Understandings
of my Fellow Citizens, an Apostasy from my native Country to insinuate the
least Doubt of its Efficacy. Yet let me most earnestly conjure you, by the
common Love we bear to that Country, by the Gratitude we owe to the parent
Country, by the important Trust reposed in you, as you value your present and
future Peace, and the Interests and Happiness of your Posterity, Beware how you
adopt that Measure, how you engage in that strange conflict of Sullenness and
Obstinacy, till you have given it the most calm and serious Deliberation.

THE efficacy of the Measure, admitting it to be a practicable one, depends, I
presume, upon the Importance of our Commerce with Great Britain; it is possible
that People in general here, may have been much deceived, in this Matter, by
partial and exaggerated Calculations, made under particular Circumstances,
during particualr. Periods, to serve the Pruposes of Party. It would be
difficult, if not impossible to ascertain the exact Value of it. But if we may
trust to the Authority of Men of Eminence, who have treated this Subject, as
Politicians at large, unbiassed by partial, local, or temporary Views, Men who
have traced it through the Books of Custom-Houses, Merchants, Brokers,
Manufacturers, etc. the best Sources of Information; if we can depend on the
Opinions of the most intelligent Merchants of our own Country; if we can
believe our own Eyes, every Man of common Observation, and Reflection, must be
assured, that the amount of British Manufactures imported into this Country, is
very inconsiderable, compared with the Opinions about it, that are so
industriously circulated through all the Colonies, and so generally received. Let
us examine by the same Rule, the amount of the Inland, and Coasting Trade, of
Great Britain, and her Foreign Trade, with all the Nations on Earth; it will
appear infinitely greater, than our Countrymen in general (accustomed from the
Vanity natural to all Mankind to consider the little Scenes, and Transactions
immediately under their Eyes, as Objects of the greatest Magnitude) can form
any adequate Idea of. The Resources of her Trade are infinite, the Combinations
of it, too various and complicated, the Revolutions of it, too sudden and
frequent, to be easily explained, or understood. But we may judge of it, by the
Result, and Effect of the whole, whenever the astonishing Power of the Nation
is called forth into Exertion. Can we seriously believe, that this Wealth, and
Power, is derived almost entirely, from her North-American Colonies? Can we,
(who by our own Confessions do not yet enjoy even all the Necessaries of Life)
can we resonably hope, to starve into Compliance, so great, and so powerful a
Nation? Shall we punish ourselves, like froward Children, who refuse to eat,
when they are Hungry, that they may vex their indulgent Mothers? Or like
desperate Gamesters, stake at one throw, our small, but competent, and happy
Fortunes, against the successive Stakes, the accummulated Wealth of Ages? We
may teize the Mother Country, we cannot ruin her. Let us beware how we engage
in such an unequal Contest, lest while we are giving her a slight Wound, we
receive a Mortal one.

IF notwithstanding, we are confident, that the Measure of a Non-Importation,
and Non-Exportation Agreement, bids fair to be a successful one; it certainly
behooves us as Men, and as Christians to be sure, that it is a just Measure. A
Combination to Ruin, or to obstruct the Trade of a fellow Citizen, who happens
to differ from us, in his religious, or political Opinions, adopted in Passion,
prosecuted by the Intrigues of a Cabal, by Innuendoes, Insinuations.
Threatenings, and publicly signed, by large Numbers of leading Men, would I
presume, be a manifest Violation, of the Laws, of God and Man, and would on
Conviction, be severely punished in every Court of Justice in the Universe. In
what Colors then will appear, the Combinations of a large, and respectable
Body of Subjects, against the supreme Power of the Community? Adopted from the
same Motives, prosecuted by the same Arts, and publicly signed, in the Face of
the whole World? Happily for us, by the generous, and noble Spirit, of the
British Constitution, our own Constitution, the Crime of Treason, which in
almost every other Country, is vague, and undefined, often in the Breast of a
venal, and corrupt Judge, and made not to warn, but to ensnare the People, is
exactly and circumstantially, ascertained and defined.

SHALL we abuse the Generosity, and Beneficence of Laws, made for our
Protection? Shall we skulk, behind the Letter of the Law, while we wage War,
against the Spirit of it. Because our Ancestors had foreseen the Possibility,
of the Subjects levying Arms, against the State in Passion, and Despair, but
knew no Instance on Record, of their having meditated, in cold Blood, its
Destruction, and had therefore made no regular Provision against an Enormity,
which they presumed, could never happen.

IT is, I believe, sufficiently notorious, that there are great Numbers, of our
Countrymen, from one End of this Continent, to the other, who are averse from
this Measure, some of them from Opinion, others from Interest, and many from
downright Necessity.

FOR the Sake of common Humanity, Gentlemen, disdain to cooperate, with Hand
Bills, with News Papers, with the high menacing Resolves of common Town
Meetings; do not conspire with them, to reduce, under the Pains, and Penalties
of Disgrace, and Infamy, Thousands of your Fellow Citizens, to the cruel
Alternative, of involving themselves, their Wives, and Children, in Indigence,
and Wretchedness; or of being publicly branded, and pointed out by the frantic
Multitude, as Apostates, and Traitors to their Country.

LET us, in the Name of common Sense and Decency, be consistent. Shall we
Proteus like, perpetually change our Ground, assume every Moment, some new and
strange Shape, to defend, to evade? Shall we establish Distinctions, between
internal, and external Taxation one Year, and laugh at them the next? Shall we
confound Duties, with Taxes, and Regulations of Trade with Revenue Laws? Shall
we rave against the Preamble of the Law, while we are ready to admit the
enacting Part of it? Shall we refuse to obey the Tea Act, not as an oppressive
Act, but as a dangerous, a sole Precedent of Taxation, when every Post-Day
shows us a Precedent, which our Forefathers submitted to, and which we still
submit to, without murmuring? Shall we move Heaven, and Earth, against a
triflng Duty, on a Luxury, unknown to nine Tenths of the Globe, unknown to our
Ancestors! Despised by half the Nations of Europe! Which no Authority, no
Necessity compels us to use? There are Thousands of honest industrious
Families, who have no Resources, but in the Consequences of Exportation, and
Importation. Shall we levy a Tax. upon these innocent Citizens, a Tax unheard
of, disproportionate, a Tax, never suggested by the most inhuman Tyrant? A Tax,
to the Amount of their daily Bread? Reflect one Moment, on the Terms, in which
the Resolves of every Town Meeting, on this Continent, speak of the Boston Port
Bill? Although it is little more, than a temporary Suspension, of the Trade, of
that City, until Restitution, which God, and Man calls aloud for, be made. And
although the Ports, at a very small Distance from Boston, and every other Port on
the Continent, is as free as ever, shall we multiply these Calamities, ten
Thousand Fold? For such Calamities, must be the inevitable Consequences, of a
Non-Importation, and Non-Exportation Agreement. You ought therefore to be
confident, that it will prove effectual before you adopt it. Can any Man
seriously behave this, who is tolerably acquainted with the History, and
present State, of these Colonies? Who has visited our principal Cities and
Towns, and has observed by what Means they have risen to their Wealth, and
Importance; how they daily increase, and how their Inhabitants subsist? The
horrid Punishments, inflicted by despotic Princes, are commonly of little
avail, against a contraband Trade, where any trifling extraordinary Profit, is
an irresistible Temptation. What can we expect from a loose Agreement, where
the sole Subsistence of Thousands is at Stake? In all trading Nations, where
there are Duties, or Prohibitions, there are Smugglers, there ever were, and
ever will be, until we find some Nation, where every Individual, is a Patriot,
or a Saint.

SUCH an Agreement will have the Defect and Impotence, of Laws, framed on
monkish Ideas of Purity, against the indelible Feelings and Passions of
Humanity. Can you hope, by Promises, by extorted Promises, to restrain Men from
carrying on a clandestine Trade with Great Britain? Who Trade every Day, with
our inverate Enemies, in Defiance of all Law, and who grow Rich by the Spoils
of the fair Trader? Will it not rather happen, as it has happened already, that
Province will smuggle against Province, Citizen, against Citizen, till we are
weary, and ashamed of being the Dupes, of each other, and become the Laughing
Stock of the whole World?

LET us no longer deceive ourselves, with the vain Hopes, of a speedy Repeal of
the Tea Act, because we triumphed in the Repeal of the Stamp Act; the Acts
themsevles, are totally different in their Principles, and their Operation, the
Occasion, by no means Similar. We have advanced from one extravagant Claim to
another, made such sudden Turnings, and Windings, taken such wild, and rapid
Flights, that the boldest of our Followers, can follow us no longer; our most
zealous Advocates, are ashamed to plead a Cause, which all Men, but ourselves,
condemn. Can we any longer doubt that our Friends, on the other Side of the
Atlantic, as well as our Enemies, although they may differ in the Mode, of
exercising the Authority of Parliament over us, are almost universally agreed
in the Principle? Are we not convinced from a thousand Testimonies, that the
Clamor against us, is universal, and loud? Is this, Gentlemen, a Season to
frighten the Parent Country, into a Repeal? No Man of Spirit in private Life,
even on the slightest Quarrel, will submit to be bullied, and exposed to the
Scorn and Derision, of the little Circle he lives in. Can we seriously hope,
that a great Nation, a proud Nation, will be insulted, and degraded, with
Impunity, by her Colonies, in the Face of every rival Kingdom in Europe? Let us
then, Gentlemen, relinquish for ever, a Project fraught with Absurdity, and
Ruin. Let your Constituents hope, that the Occasion of such an important
Assembly, will not be wantonly squandered, in opprobrious Reproaches, in
bidding Defiance to the Mother Country, but in digesting and proposing some new
Plan of Accommodation, worthy her Notice and Acceptance. Disputes are generally
vain, and endless, where there are no Arbitrators to award, no Judges to
decree, where Arguments, suspected to be drawn from Interest, and Passion, are
addressed t o Interest, and Passion, they produce no Conviction. We may ring
eternal Changes, upon Taxation, and Representation, upon actual, virtual, and
Non-representation. We may end as we began, and disagree eternally; but there
is one Proposition, a self evident Proposition, to which all the World give
their Assent, and from which we cannot withold ours; that whatever Taxation,
and Representation may be, Taxation, and Government, are inseparable. On the
Subject of Taxation, the Authority of Mr. Lock, is generally quoted by our
Advocates, as paramount to all other Authority whatever. His Treatise on
Government, as far as his Ideas are practicable, with the corrupt Materials of
all Governments, is undoubtedly, a most beautiful Theory, the noblest Assertion
of the unalienable Rights of Mankind. Let us respect it as the Opinions of a
wise, and virtuous Philosopher, and Patriot, but let us likewise, as good
Subjects, revere the Laws of the Land, the collected Wisdom of Ages, and make
them the sole Rule of our political Conduct. Let not Mr. Lock be quoted
partially, by those who have read him, to mislead Thousands who never read him.
When he is brought as an Authority, that no Subject can be justly taxed without
his own Consent; why don't they add his own Explanation of that Consent? i.e.
The Consent of the Majority, giving it either by themselves, or their
Representatives chosen by them. Do we compose the Majority of the British
Community? Are we, or are we not of that Community? If we are of that
Community, but are not represented, are we not in the same Situation with the
numerous Body of Copyholders, with the Inhabitants of many wealthy and populous
Towns; in short, with a very great Number of our fellow Subjects, who have no
Votes in Elections? Shall we affirm that these are all virtually represented,
but deny that we are so; and at the same Time, be too proud to solicit a
Representation? or under the trite and popular Pretenses, of Venality and
Corruption, laugh at it as impracticable? Shall we plunge at once into Anarchy,
and reject all Accommodation with a Government, (by the Confession of the
wisest Men in Europe, the freest and the noblest Government, on the Records of
History) because there are Imperfections in it, as there are in all Things, and
in all Men? Are we Confederates, or Allies, or Subjects of Great Britain? In
what Code of Laws, are we to search for Taxation, under the Title, and
Condition, of Requisition, as we understand the Word? In what Theory of
Government, ancient or modern? Is it to be found any where on Earth, but in
modern Harangues, modern Pamphlets? And in these, only as temporary Expedients.
The Supply of Government, must be constant, certain, and proportioned to the
Protection it affords; the Moment one is precarious the other is so too; the
Moment it fails, civil Society expires. We boast much of our bountiful
Compliance with the Requisitions made during the last War, and in many
Instances with Reason; but let us remember and acknowledge, that there was even
then, more than one rich Province, that refused to comply, although the War, was
in the very Bowels, of the Country. Can Great Britain then, depend upon her
Requisitions, in some future War, a Thousand Leagues distant from
North America, in which, as we may have no immediate local Interest, we may
look perhaps, with little Concern.

FROM the Infancy of our Colonies, to this very Hour, we have grown up and
flourished under the Mildness, and Wisdom of her excellent Laws; our Trade, our
Possessions, our Persons have been constantly defended against the whole World,
by the Fame of her Power, or by the Exertion of it. We have been very lately,
rescued by her, from Enemies, who threatened us with Slavery, and Destruction,
at the Expense of much Blood, and Treasure, and established after a long War,
(waged on our Accounts, at out most earnest Prayers) in a State of Security, of
which there is scarce an Example in History. She is ever ready, to avenge the
Cause, of the meanest Individual among us, with a Power respected by the whole
World. Let us then, no longer disgrace ourselves, by illiberal, ungrateful
Reproaches, by meanly ascribing, the most generous Conduct, to the most fordid
Motives; we owe our Birth, our Progress, our Delivery to her; we still depend
on her for Protection; we are surely able to bear some Part of the Expense of
it; let us be willing to bear it. Employ then, Gentlemen, your united Zeal and
Abilities, in substituting some adequate permanent and effectual Supply (by
some Mode of actual Representation) in the Place of uncertain, ineffectual
Requisitions, or in devising some Means of reconciling Taxation, the
indispensible Obligation of every Subject, with your Ideas of the peculiar and
inestimable Rights of an Englishman.

THESE are Objects, worthy a Congress, Measures, that will confer lasting
Benefits on your Country, and immortal Honor on yourselves.

IF on the contrary, like Independent States, you arrogate to yourselves, the
sole Right of judging and deciding in your own Cause; if you persist in denying
the supreme Power of Parliament, which no Parliament will ever renounce, like
Independnet States, we have no Appeal but to the God of Battles. Shall we dare
lift up our Eyes to that God, the Source of Truth and Justice, and implore his
Assistance in such a Cause? There are Causes, where, in Spite of the
ridiculous Tenets of pious, deluded Enthusiasts, or of the wicked and monstrous
Doctrines, of Slaves and Tyrants; the very Principles, the original Principles
on which civil Society depends, require, where God and Nature call aloud for
Resistance. Such Causes existed in the horrid Catalogue of Oppressions and
Crimes, under a Philip the Second, a Katharine of Medicis, and in the List of
Grievances, during one Period at least, of the Reign of the ill-educated, the
ill-advised, the unhappy Charles; on such melancholy Occasions, Men of
Sentiment, Spirit and Virtue, the only genuine Sons of Liberty, engage in the
honorable Cause of Freedom, with God on their Side, and indignantly sacrifice
every Advantage of Fortune, every Endearment of Life, and Life itself. Do such
Causes exist now among us? Did they ever exist? Are they likely to exist?

OPEN if it be not too late, the Eyes of our infatuated Countrymen; teach them
to compare their happy Situation, with the Wretchedness of Nine Tenths of the
Globe; show them the general-Diffusion of the Necessaries, the Conveniences
and Pleasures of Life, among all Orders of People here; the certain Rewards of
Industry, the innumerable Avenues to Wealth, the native, unsubdued Freedom of
their Manners, and Conversation; the Spirit of Equality, so flattering to all
generous Minds, and so essential, to the Enjoyment of private Society, the
entire Security of their Fortunes, Liberty, and Lives, the Equity, and Lenity,
of their civil and criminal Justice, the Toleration of their religious
Opinions, and Worship.

TEACH them to compare these invaluable Privileges and Enjoyments, with the
abject and miserable State of Men debased by artificial Manners, lost to all
generous and manly Sentiment, alternately crouching and insulting, from the
vain and humiliating Distinctions of Birth. Place and Precedence, trembling
every Moment for their Liberty, their Property, their Consciences and their
Lives; Millions toiling, not for themselves, but to pamper the Luxury, and not
riot of a few worthless, domineering Individuals, and pining in Indigence, and
Wretchedness: Save them from the Madness, of hazarding such inestimable
Blessings, in the uncertain Events of a War, against all Odds, against
Invasions from Canada, Incursions of Savages, Revolt of Slaves, multiplied
Fleets and Armies, a War which must begin where Wars commonly end, in the Ruin
of our Trade, in the Surrender of our Ports and Capitals, in the Misery of
Thousands. Teach them in Mercy, to beware how they wantonly draw their Swords
in Defense of political Problems, Distinctions, Refinements, about which the
best and the wisest Men, the Friends, as well as the Enemies of America, differ
in their Opinions, lest while we deny the Mother Country, every Mode, every
Right of Taxation, we give her the Rights of Conquest.

FINIS.

