GENTLEMEN,
THE evils which we have long foreseen are now come upon this town and
province, the long meditated stroke is now given to the civil liberty of this
country? How long we may be allowed the enjoyment of our religious liberty is a
question of infinite moment. Religion can never be retained in it is purity
where tyranny has usurped the place of reason and justice. The bill for
blocking up the harbor of Boston is replete with injustice and cruelty,
thousands of innocent men, besides women and infants, are by it reduced to
indegence and distress; and though we in this town more immediately feel this
distress, yet our brethren in the other towns of this province, and all the
other colonies, must see that we suffer in the common cause, and that they
themselves must soon realize the sufferings under which we now labor, if no
means are discovered for our relief. But if any should think that this town
alone is to groan under the weight of arbitrary power, we are now furnished by
our enemies, with a still more glaring evidence of a fixed plan of the British
administration to bring the whole continent into the most humiliating bondage.
A bill has been brought into parliament apparently for the purpose of taking
away our charter rights, wherein it is to be enacted that the counselors shall
be appointed by mandamus from the king, that our justices of the superior
court, justices of our inferior courts, and justices of the peace, shall be all
appointed by the governor alone, without the advice of the council, and all of
them, excepting the justices of the superior court be removeable by him at his
pleasure, that our juries shall not be chosen by the freeholders, as they
heretofore have been, but by the sheriff of the county, and that this sheriff
shall not be appointed by the governor and council as heretofore, but by the
governor alone, so that our lives and properties are to be decided upon by
judges appointed by the governor alone, and by juries chosen by a sheriff who
must be entirely under the influence of the governor as he is appointed by him,
and is removeable by him alone, whenever he shall discover a reluctance to
conform to the will of the governor. Surely if we suffer these things we are
the most abject slaves. If a favorite of a perverse governor should pretend a
title to our lands, or any other part of our property, we need no doubt but a
very small degree of evidence in support of the claim, would be judged
sufficient, especially as the bill makes provision, that upon the motion of
either of the parties, it shall be lawful to try the cause in another county
than that in which the action was brought, so that a man is to be carried into
a distant part of the province, instead of having his cause tried in his own
county, and to be tried by strangers with whom the good or bad characters of
the parties or of the witnesses can have no weight, contrary to the very spirit
of magna charta. Of what value are our lands or estates to us, if such an
odious government should be established among us? Can we look with pleasure on
the inheritance left by our ancestors, or on the fields cultivated by our
industry? When we reflect that all our labors have made them only a more
inviting prey to our enemies, will not the vineyard of Naboth be ever in our
minds? But lest any thing should be wanting to complete our misery, another
bill is also prepared, which enables the governor to save any person or
persons, who, under the pretext of supporting or carrying into execution the
late or other acts of the British parliament, shall murder and destroy the
people of this country, from being tried in this province (even if they should
be indicted by such grand jurors as shall be chosen by the sheriff of the
county in the same manner that we have mentioned that petty jurors are to be
returned) but the person indicted with such witnesses as he and the prosecutor
(which will be the crown) shall judge proper, shall be sent to either of the
other colonies, or even to Great Britain, to be tried for murdering the
inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay. And provision is also made to prevent our
meeting together in our corporate capacity as a town, unless it be once in the
month of March for the election of the town officers, except the matter or
business of the meeting is laid before the governor, and his leave in writing
is obtained for a meeting of the town.

There is but one way that we can conceive of, to prevent what is to be
deprecated by all good men, and ought by all possible means to be prevented,
viz, The horrors that must follow an open rupture between Great Britain and her
colonies; or on our part, a subjection to absolute slavery: And that is by
affecting the trade and interest of Great Britain, so deeply as shall induce
her to withdraw her oppressive hand. There can be no doubt of our succeeding to
the utmost of our wishes if we universally come into a solemn league, not to
import goods from Great Britain, and not to buy any goods that shall hereafter
be imported from thence, until our grievances shall be redressed. To these, or
even to the least of these shameful impositions, we trust in God, our
countrymen never will submit.

We have received such assurances from our brethren in every part of the
province of their readiness to adopt such measures as may be likely to save our
country, that we have not the least doubt of an almost universal agreement for
this purpose; in confidence of this, we have drawn up a form of a covenant to
be subscribed by all adult persons of both sexes; which we have sent to every
town in the province, and that we might not give our enemies time to counteract
us, we have endeavored that every town should be furnished with such a copy on
or before the fourteenth day of this month, and we earnestly desire that you
would use your utmost endeavors that the subscription paper may be filled up
as soon as possible, that so they who are in expectation of overthrowing our
liberties may be discouraged from prosecuting their wicked designs; as we look
upon this the last and only method of preserving our land from slavery without
drenching it in blood, may God prosper every undertaking which tends to the
salvation of his people. We are, etc.

Signed by order and in behalf of the Committee of Correspondence for Boston.
BOSTON, JUNE 8, 1774.

