A COLLECTION OF Religious Tracts.
In Proportion as we die to the Love of material Objects and earthly
Affections, we advance in a spiritual Growth: we break our Bands asunder, and
rise into the Liberty of the Sons of God. The proneness of the human Mind to
confine itself to the Objects of Sense, joined to the inordinate Love of them;
strengthened by Example and Custom, do so familiarize material Nature to the
Thoughts of the learned and unlearned, that by Degrees, they become, as it
were, chained down to it; hence so great a Number fall under the Predicament of
the Apostle, Jude verse 19. "Sensual not having the Spirit."

Pref. to Swedeng.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-street, opposite the
Workhouse. M,DCC,LXXIII.

THE PLAIN PATH TO CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, SHOWING That we are to seek for
RECONCILIATION and UNION with GOD, solely by renouncing ourselves, denying the
World, and following our BLESSED SAVIOR, in the Regeneration.

TRANSLATED from the FRENCH.

JOHN xviii. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World.

MAT. xvi. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any Man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

ROMANS viii. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of Body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Third-street, opposite the
Workhouse. MDCCLXXII.

PREFACE.
THE treatise of which the following is an extract, was written in the German
language, about two hundred and fifty years ago, and since translated into the
French. -- Though the reader is not to expect elegancy of language, in writings
of that age; yet, it is thought, the plainness and honest simplicity of the
author, who had solely the amendment of the hearts of his readers in view; and
the divine unction which attends his writings, will make it acceptable and
profitable to the awakened, unprejudiced inquirers, of every religious
denomination.

In the first ages of christianity, humility and contrition of heart toward
God, and love toward men, were taught to be the most acceptable sacrifice; and
a compliance with those practical precepts so strongly enjoined, by our
Savior, was looked upon as the foundation of true discipleship and certain
test of our affection to him, John xiv. 15. If ye love me (says this blessed
Redeemer), keep my commandments. John xv. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. Again, John xv. 8. Herein is my heavenly Father
glorified, that ye bring forth much good fruit. And that none might mistake the
true way to everlasting life, he concludes the precepts he delivered concerning
it, with these remarkable words, Mat. vii. 24. -- Whosoever hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his
house upon a rock, etc.

This continued to be the state of the church, till in after-ages the life of
religion having much declined, the plain belief and practice of piety, founded
solely on the power of the gospel, fell to decay; in the place of which pomp
and show, strange modes of worship and confused and dark opinions, till then
unknown in the church, were introduced; the teachers and leaders assumed an
authority and respect from their offices, which before was paid only to their
virtues. Hence divisions and contentions ensued, by which that pure charity,
which before had united and adorned the christian church, was gradually lost to
the generality of professors. Nevertheless true religion still remains to this
day, to be the power of God to salvation, changing and purifying the heart, and
bringing it into true contrition and a submissive resignation to the will of
God. This has, ever, been found to be the effect of its operation on all those,
who by devoting themselves to God, are become the true followers and disciples
of Christ Jesus.

Amongst the many instances of this kind, which might be mentioned, a
particular one appeared, some years ago, in these parts, through the effectual
workings of grace, on a number of our neighboring Indians. These people were
very earnest for the promotion of piety among themselves, which they
apprehended to be the effect of an inward work, whereby the heart became
changed from bad to good ISA. xlix. 6. I will also give thee (i. e. Christ our
Savior) for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the
ends of the earth.

JOHN i. 9. Who was the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world.


. When they were solicited to join the other Indians in the war against the
English, they absolutely refused, whatever might be the consequence to
themselves, even if the fighting Indians should make slaves, or as they
expressed it, negroes of them, rendering this reason for it, That when God made
men, he did not intend they should hurt or kill one another. Upon being farther
conversed with, in respect to their religious prospect, he who had been the
principal instrument in raising them to a sense of good, gave in substance, the
following accounts. That being by a particular providence brought under
difficulty and sorrow, he was led into a deep consideration of the state of
things in the world, when seeing the folly and wickedness which prevailed
amongst men, his sorrows increased. Nevertheless, being impressed with a belief
that there was a great power, who had created all things, his mind was turned
from beholding this lower world, to look toward him who had created it, and
strong desires were begot in his heart for a further knowledge of his Creator.
He was then made sensible, that evil not only prevailed in the world, but that
he himself partook much of its baneful influence, and he at last found that his
own heart was bad and hard. Upon this great dejection and trouble seized his
mind, with an inquiry, What would become of his soul? In this situation he
cried unto that powerful Being who he was sensible had made the heart of man;
and after a long time of sorrow and perseverance in seeking for help, God was
pleased to reveal himself to his mind, and to put his goodness in his heart: --
He found he was, as he expressed it, raised above himself and above the world,
and felt that his heart had undergone some great change; the hardness and
badness he had so long groaned under, was taken away, EZEKIEL xxxvi. 26. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh.


it was now become soft and good; he found so much love to prevail in it, to
all men, that he thought he could bear with their revilings and abuses without
resentment, appearing sensible that as the hearts of all men were bad and hard,
till God made them good; the ill usage he received from them, proceeded from
the same evil seed under which he himself had so long groaned. This sense of
the corruption of the human heart, accompanied with a constant application to
his Maker, to take away the badness and hardness of the heart, and make it soft
and good, was what he called religion; and what, upon feeling the power of God
to his comfort in his heart, he was concerned to exhort his brethren to seek
the experience of, in themselves. And farther said, that under this
dispensation he was made sensible that the spirit of religion, was a spirit of
love, which led those who obeyed it, into love to all men That this Indian had
a true prospect of the happy effect of the power of the gospel-state, upon
those who submit to its requirings, appears from many parts of scripture,
particularly from the prophesy of the evangelick prophet, Isa. chap. xxxv. 1 --
9. The wilderness and the solitary places shall be glad for them, and the
deserts shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose: -- It shall blossom abundantly
and rejoice even with joy and singing. -- They shall see the glory of the Lord
and the excellency of our God. -- An high way shall be there, and it shall be
called the way of holiness. The way-fareing men, though fools, shall not err
therein. No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beasts shall go up thereon,
it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there. Chap. lx. 17. I
will make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness; violence shall
no more be heard in the land, nor destruction within thy borders; but thou
shall call thy wall salvation, and thy gates praise.
; but that men not keeping to this spirit of love, an opposite spirit got
entrance, in their hearts; that it was from hence, that arose all those
disorders which so much prevail amongst men. That he was also sensible there
was still an evil spirit laboring to get the mastery in his heart, in
opposition to the gospel spirit; but that those who had been visited by a power
from God, and were obedient to the degree of light and love, he was pleased to
favor them with, would be more and more strengthened and established therein.
He had also a prospect of the necessity of that baptism of spirit and fire
which the scriptures and the experience of the faithful, in all ages, have
testified every true disciple of Christ must undergo; whereby, through
mortification, and death to self, the root of sin is destroyed. This he
described by the prospect he had of something, like as an outward fire would be
to the natural body; which he must pass through in order to attain to that purity
of heart he desired to attain. He farther observed, that whilst he was
anxiously beholding this fire, he saw a very small path close to the fire, by
walking in which, he might go round the fire, and the painful trial be avoided.
-- This he understood to represent the way by which those who were esteemed
wise had sound means to avoid that probation they ought to have passed through
and yet retained a name amongst men, as though they had been purified by it.
Thus this Indian, untaught by books and unlearned in what is called divinity,
explained the mystery of godliness in a plain and sensible manner, and in that
child-like simplicity, which our Savior recommends as the badge of acceptance
with God. This is the wisdom which on account of its plainness and simplicity,
has in all ages been hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed only to babes,
who in honest sincerity of heart look solely to God in their distress.

Another instance of the like kind, has lately appeared in the case of the
conversion of a considerable number of the Indian natives of Greenland See
David Grantz's History of Greenland, printed 176.
. Those people were, during a long time, strongly solicited to become converts
to christianity but with little or no success.

As long as the poor natives had no conception nor feeling of the corruption of
their hearts; nor any longing for a better condition, but only apprehended
christianity to consist in the repetition of creeds and confessions of truths
contained in the scriptures, little or no impression was made upon them. But as
soon, as they became sensible of the corruption and hardness of their hearts,
and believed the publication of the gospel, to contain in it itself, a power
through which they might be delivered from that burden of sin and corruption
which lay upon them, they embraced it with joy, and crying to God for power,
many became the objects of redeeming grace; experiencing the stony heart to be
taken away, and a heart of flesh to be given them. And indeed the grace which
prevailed amongst these simple, ignorant people, was cause of amazement, and
such as must, by its surprising effect, oblige people to rise to the first
cause, and acknowledge it could not proceed but from God alone. The author of
the history, who was on the spot, observes, that he could not help thinking
that those skeptics, who incline to doubt of every thing, which their reason
cannot comprehend, and who deny the efficacy of the grace, or at least judge it
insufficient, toward effecting a total change of the minds and morals of men,
might be clearly convinced of their error, in beholding these Indians, who had
been born and brought up in an uncontrouled license, like wild beasts,
destitute of education, totally ignorant of religious impressions; and so
careless and remiss, that they thought of nothing but what pleased and
gratified their outward senses; these people through the grace and illumination
of the holy spirit, to become so discreet, and carefully considerate, as
voluntarily to submit their necks to the obedience of faith, and realize the
great truths of the gospel to their souls, in so experimental and happy a
manner, as to be able to deliver the most glorious testimonies thereof, with
spirit and power, declaring to others, the grace which they had experienced in
their own hearts; which together with their good deportment, amongst the
unbelievers, adorn the doctrine of God our Savior.

From these and many more instances which might be given, it evidently appears,
that the gospel is the power of God to salvation in all those who believe, and
in honest simplicity of heart resign themselves up to God JOHN i. 12. To as
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God.


. The christian religion is indeed the simplest thing in the whole world, and
the most easy to be understood if self is but truly renounced.

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
THE narrow path which leads to christian perfection, does not consist in the
attainment of much knowledge, neither in subtility of argument, nor yet in the
practice of many outward works: but it consists in this, that through grace we
crucify our flesh, with all its sins and disorderly affections, resign
ourselves with submission to the will of God in all things, and patiently bear
with the slights and abuses which may befall us from our fellow men. That we
daily take up our cross, and follow our Lord Jesus Christ, in his life and
sufferings, and in the love of our enemies: It also requires that we renounce
all inordinate love of parents, children, or friends; and that the love and
desire of riches and other earthly delights be mortified in us: Thus we may
attain to purity of heart, and be enabled to love the Lord our God, with all
our hearts, with all our souls and strength, and our neighbor as ourselves,
Mat. xxii. 37, 38. But this narrow and infallible path is become so desert, and
so much neglected, and the love of God waxed so cold, that there are very few
who are found walking therein. People are generally looking toward sensible
objects, their principal desire being that their natural appetites, their
covetousness, and their lusts may be satisfied: Too many being content with
knowing, but not complying with, their Master's Will.

The reader will find in this abstract, a summary of the christian religion,
and of the means whereby we may attain to that purity of heart and intimate
union with God, to which we all are called, and for which we were created.

If this little book should, in the beginning appear too close and severe;
nevertheless let the reader take courage and beg for divine help, and if he
perseveres in doing that which God will manifest in his heart to be his duty;
he will infallibly meet with divine aid.

CHAPTER I. Wherein is shown, that if we are desirous to live a truly christian
life, we must die unto sin, and withdraw our affections from the creatures.
EVERY person who sincerely desires to be converted to God, must, through divine
help, begin by forsaking all gross sins, and dying to every vicious
inclination, such as pride, impurity, anger, covetousness, hatred, self-love,
etc. and to all other sins, which are committed in thought, word or action. We
must turn away from all sensual pleasures, renounce our attachment and
dependence on the creatures, and from every thing that tends to increase our
natural corruption, and attachment to the world and the things of it, and every
thing wherein the good pleasure and service of God is not our principal aim. We
ought also, to be careful not to suffer our affections to fix on particular
persons, as we are too easily led aside, by conforming to other people's
natural dispositions; but let our regard be to all men, even as the sun equally
enlightens the evil and the good, Mat. v. 45. All those good things which God
in his providence favors us with, should be used with discretion for
necessities, but by no means, to indulge our fleshly appetites and desires,
either in eating, drinking, sleeping, or other corporeal wants.

And when we are thus disposed, we may be assured God will freely afford every
necessary supply, in order to enable us to fulfill the duties he requires of us.

If we sincerely desire to love God, we must, with fervent and humble sighs,
beg for divine help, carefully watch over our thoughts, words and actions, in
whatever we see, do or omit, upon all that passes both within and without us,
shunning, with the greatest care, all occasions of sin, such as needless
company, idle conversation, etc. etc. so as continually to keep our hearts in
the fear of God, which is as a fountain of spiritual strength, with the eye of
the mind bent toward him in reverence and love. For he who neglects these
divine and powerful supports, will be left as a city open on all sides, and
become a prey to worldly mindedness and sensuality, and will finally be brought
to ruin. For this reason we must exert our utmost strength against those things
which we are sensible have the greatest hold of our affections, that our hearts
being preserved in liberty, simplicity and purity, free from agitation and
uneasiness, may not become a prey to any of those evil desires, so apt to
dissipate the spirit and engross the affections. Thus may we, through timely
care, overcome all temptations; for he that is not careful to avoid small
evils, will gradually fall into greater, in which the farther he sinks, the
more difficult will his conversion to God be.

Let us be particularly careful to shun all occasion of superfluous discourse,
and watch over our words, that we utter nothing but what may tend to the glory
of God, or the good of our neighbor. Our blessed Savior himself has declared,
"That in the day of Judgment we must give an account for every idle word." Mat.
xii. 36. wherefore when we speak, let it be done with an heart full of charity;
in meekness of expression, and with deep humility.

Endeavor to avoid all occasions of strife, rather suffer loss than contend.
Maintain thy peace with God, and be careful not to give occasion of stumbling
to any one. Have also a special care over thy eyes, for it is by them thou art
drawn into temptation, and exposed to many hurtful snares.

In all trials and contradictions look up to God, earnestly begging for
strength, courage and patience; so thou may, by persevering in the exercise
of virtue, be enabled to bring thy body in subjection, 1 Cor. ix. 27. Those who
practice these precepts have good reason to hope that the spirit of God will
abide with and operate in them, and that often in a wonderful manner.

The operation of the divine power is much prevented, and the love of God
extinguished in us, by those sins which we, knowingly, suffer to prevail over
us; such as pride, hatred, presumption, self-will, evil desires, and an
unwarrantable attachment to children and relations; the desire of riches, of a
name amongst men, wrong indulgence in the gratification of our appetites, and
the like, which carry our thoughts and affections away from God, and to which
our hearts are so attached, that we are not able to free ourselves from them,
nor forsake them, for the love of God's sake. Here the creatures are possessed
of that seat which God ought to occupy in the heart. Alas! how many things do
we suffer to take hold of our minds, and how many things have we in our
intentions to do, wherein we neither see nor seek God; thus it is that the
measure of our sins are filling up, and that so many people are so long
consumed by the fire of a troubled conscience, and will finally be cast into
eternal sufferings, if they die without repentance.

There is a strong will in most people to live in a manner agreeable to their
natural will, to gather abundance of wealth, and live in affluence, without
ever making sincere and upright inquiry whether their conduct is agreeable to
God, or tends to his glory.

There are others who appear virtuous in the sight of men, yet are still under
the power of evil habits, which they conclude to be but small failings, not
thinking themselves bound to forsake them, but look upon their state as good,
because they abstain from gross sins; nevertheless, these people not being
willing to give up their hearts wholly to God, the work of religion is hindered;
and these very trifles which they indulge themselves in, and of which they
think God takes no account, become a wall of separation between God and them.
These, though they apprehend themselves secure, yet are walking as on the very
brink of hell, and frequently fall into such grievous sins as border on
destruction. Ah! how great will the lamentation of an infinite number of these
kind of people be at the last day, when the thoughts of all hearts will be laid
open, and every one shall clearly see whether in the course of their lives they
have chosen to serve God or themselves. But how few are affected with these
things; most men are, as it were, sunk into a deep lethargic state of mind,
heedless of the dangers that surround them, which, if they were sensible of,
would raise such deep distress of mind within them, as would not allow them
rest day or night till they were delivered from this deplorable condition.

As to those failings which sometimes prevail in persons otherwise sincerely
disposed to please God, which proceed from weakness, and are not the effect of
an unwarrantable attachment to the creatures, but happen through surprise, or
that weakness so prevalent in our nature, such as sudden anger, indiscreet
expressions, or the like, they are not so hurtful as when they are the effect
of indulgence or habit; the ground of the heart of such being good, when ever
they are made sensible of their fault, they are ready to condemn themselves
with true humility, and, from a lively sense of their weakness, to implore the
divine mercy to (...) them from such evils.

(...) that which is very prejudicial to us, and prevents our being possessed
with a true love to God, is a desire which prevails in many people to serve
both God and the creatures at one and the same time; this is very hurtful to
them, and prevents their being possessed of a true love to God: this the lip of
truth has declared to be impossible, Mat. vi. 24. For in that degree that the
heart is suffered to be filled with the love of the creatures, in that degree
it is emptied of God and of his grace.

We must suffer ourselves to be stripped from all love and solicitude after
terrestrial things, 1 Pet. v. 7. and be habituated, even from our youth, to
serve God in spirit and truth, if we are desirous to rejoice in old age. It
must be allowed that the beginning is difficult, but, through divine help, all
things will become easy. Our kingdom is not of this world, John xviii. 36.
therefore we may at least take as much pains and expose ourselves to as much
inconveniency for the attainment thereof, which consists in the knowledge of,
and an union with, God, as an infinite number of people do to possess those
honors and delights which belong to this world, and which are sought after by
its votaries with so much labor, patience and danger.

CHAP. II. On Repentance and true Contrition.
THE state of our minds ought to be carefully inspected into both morning and
evening, and even often during the day time, with earnest supplication that our
resolutions to live unto God might be strengthened, otherwise we shall easily
slip aside. And as soon as we are sensible that we have missed our way, and are
fallen into sin, let us retire into ourselves, with a sincere acknowledgment of
our unworthiness, and with deep sorrow for our transgressions, not so much for
the evil consequence that attend it to ourselves, but that being thereby made
more sensible of the deep depravity of our nature, and how far this depravity
separates us from the fountain of goodness, we may, by such conviction, have
our hearts the more purified, and fitted for receiving that spirit of holiness
which unites us to God. We ought always therefore, by inward recollection,
carefully to observe our failings, and freely confess them to God,
notwithstanding we are sensible they are not unknown to him.

All those seize we are possessed of, and those we are endeavoring to
attain to, which are not the gift of God, nor tending to unite us to him, are
as so many coverings, which hide us from ourselves, and prevent our knowing
ourselves as we ought; wherefore it is necessary that, through the help of grace,
we labor to be found in the practice of every virtue, returning thanks to God
for having favored us with a state of contrition and sorrow; looking with a
steady faith and an entire confidence toward our suffering and merciful
Savior, and laboring to maintain a fervent love for God, our truest friend,
who can never forsake those who have their reliance on him. Isa. live. 10.
Indeed when in faith we consider the nothingness of all the works we can do,
the enormity of our sins, and the excellency of the sufferings and merits of
our perfect Savior, how much he is inclined to forgive our sins, grant us his
help, and give us comfort, we shall be as it were swallowed up in a deep sense
of our nothingness, and of the infinite virtue contained in his merits. And
when a willingness is thus begat in us to give glory to the divine justice, and
patiently to submit to whatever chastisement is inflicted upon us, from a sense
that the justice of God is, in mercy, exercised for the destruction of our
sinful nature, with a true confidence and faith in God our Savior, he can as
easily deliver us from our sins as a drop of water is lost on a live coal.

CHAP. III. On true Humility.
HE who desires to attain and remain in as constant a state of love and union
with God, as his situation in this valley of tears will permit, must lay the
virtue of humility as a basis or foundation, and persevere therein, otherwise
the spiritual building cannot subsist, 1 Pet. v. 5. Our blessed Savior has, in
a particular manner, given us an example of the necessity of this virtue, when
he says, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. xi. 29.

Humility is nothing but a deep submission to God's Almightiness; if therefore
we desire to attain to this virtue, we must ask it of God, who himself begets
it in us, James i. 17. We must gather up all the strength of our soul, and turn
our eyes, with love, toward God, to contemplate his infinite excellency with
deep admiration, from a consideration of his Almightiness, through which he
created all things, and has called us to a state of such glory, that a greater
can hardly be conceived, having created us in his image, that we might, through
grace, be even what he is in his nature. Besides which he has given us, as we
may say, the whole world for our entertainment and pleasure, Ps. civ. 13.14.15.
And when, by means of sin, we lost this felicity, and were become miserable
brands of hell, he humbled himself so low, as even to take our nature on him,
Phil. ii. 7.8. and therein to perform such mavelous acts of goodness and
mercy, and live a life of so sublime virtue, that these ought to be the
continual objects of our contemplation and love, Heb. xii. 2.3. He was poor,
abject and despised on earth, and although he led an amiable, humble and virtuous
life, John viii. 46. nevertheless he suffered the most ignominious and bitter
death; and this through an unexpressible love for the deliverance of these very
sinners, who were his murderers, for whom he could pray, even when they were
putting him to death, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do, Luke xxiii. 34. Let us consider his daily kindness and care over us, in
providing all that is necessary either for the soul or body, and preserving us
from a thousand afflictions which might befall us each moment, if this good and
bounteous benefactor did not continually protect and succor us, Ps. cxxvii. i.

The truly humble soul who loves God, is always ready to give him the glory
which is his due; and, when under a sight of his own nothingness, will freely
acknowledge that God's goodness is purely the effect of his love to his
creatures, as they cannot add to his happiness. Such a soul, from a feeling
sense of his misery, will freely acknowledge, that from its own nature, it is
as nothing, yea less than nothing, being become as a desiled vessel, which
corrupts every thing which is poured into it; that he is a child of wrath, and
under the curse, ready every day to fall back into his fearful nothingness.
Nay, he cannot but acknowledge himself so filled with evil, and so unable to
help himself, that if God did not continually prevent him, by his grace, he
would be liable, each moment, to fall into the most enormous sins, and
precipitate himself with the devil into eternal fire. In this humble state the
soul sensibly perceives how many sins it has committed, in thought, word and
action; how unfaithful and ungrateful he has been toward so good and so
faithful a God, having omitted to seek, with sincerity, his glory to whom alone
it is due, and thus miserably lost his time; that nevertheless God has been so
good as to forgive his sins, even so fully as never to remember them any more,
Mich. vii. 3. and to cause him to pass from a life of sin to a divine life;
that thus from an enemy he is become his friend, which is a more excellent work
than to have created a world. For God not only re-establishes in such a person
what was destroyed, but also makes him a farther partaker of his most excellent
gifts, which he every day experiences to increase, if so be he, on his own
part, occasion no hindrance to the drawings of God's Holy Spirit. When thus, in
deep humility, we enter into ourselves, and consider the wonders which God has
displayed in our favor, we must acknowledge that we are not only unworthy of
the least of his benefits, but that if he should deal with us in the rigor of
his justice, and according to our deserts, Ps. cxxx. iii. we could expect
nothing but to experience his just indignation. Under this consideration we
ought patiently and resignedly to bear every dispensation of his will, though
ever so humbling, from a sensibility that we have no just cause of complaint,
but rather reason for continually returning thanks to God for the multiude of
his benefits, of which we have been such unworthy receivers, with fervent
desires that the will of God may be done in and by us, and all other creatures,
both in time and eternity. In this situation a man will easily bear to be
despised and reputed what he indeed esteems himself to be. Those who are truly
humble are not afraid of being looked upon as unworthy of honor; these equally
rejoice under the exertion of that justice of God which suffers reproach to
come upon them, as under the effect of that mercy which will cause every thing,
even that which may be esteemed deep afflictions, to work for good to all those
who love and fear him.

When we contemplate on one hand our own nothingness, and on the other view the
majesty of God and his goodness so abounding in grace and love, it is
astonishing that we are not wholly taken up in the exercise of humility, this
being the foundation of our perfection, and of that true peace of heart which
it is out of the reach and power of any creature to disturb.

Many are the straits and difficulties to which we are reduced, and the
temptations and frailties under which we are liable to fall; but when any thing
of this afflictive nature is suffered to attend, if we did but sink into our
nothingness, we might, through divine help, suffer the whole vehemence of the
storm to fall on us, without hurting of us; for if the devil, and all the
creatures, should fall on us, in this humble resigned state, they would not
hurt us, but all would work for our good, Romans viii. 18. When a man thus sinks
into his nothingness, through an humble resignation and submission to God, and
for his sake humbles himself before men, God will necessarily be united to him;
for though God is as nothing to man, yet he is not so in himself, he is the
Jehovah, in whom are all things; yet he is as nothing with respect to the
creatures, whilst their thoughts do not tend to this sovereign good, as is
written, Ps. xliii. The fool has said in his heart there is no God. Wherefore
when we are in a state of true contrition, from a sense of our nothingness,
with respect to God, we must be obliged to acknowledge the nothingness of all
our works, and that though God has so long been as nothing to us, yet we must, in
eternity, be something to God, in his wrath, except we become something to him
in time, through Jesus Christ. This is the thing principally necessary, that thou
know thyself, and the necessity thou art under to refrain from a pursuit after
vain science and needless labor, avoiding all disputes and solicitude after
earthly things, but carefully make thyself fully acquainted with the virtue of
humility, and thou will be wise and learned enough; for the excellency of
humility, and the favors and grace it draws down from God is so great, that
the tongue of man can scarcely utter it to the full.

In a truly humble state we remain empty and passive before God, as an
instrument or tool, which suffers itself to be handled and led by the hand of
God just as it seems good unto the master workman.

A person thus humbled, receives all things as coming immediately from the
hands of God, Lament. iii. 37.38. looking upon himself as unworthy of the least
favor; if sick, or in any other afflicting dispensation, he accepts of his
sickness and trouble as a messenger sent from God for his good, thanks him for
it, making this very affliction an occasion of awakening his zeal for his
service. If despised, he submits, as being what he deserves; if he is in
honor, he esteems himself unworthy, humbling himself the more on that account;
so great a sense of his nothingness prevails, that he is ready to confess
himself unworthy of all the benefits he has received, and that he has well
deserved all the afflictions and sufferings which are come upon him.

It is by thus setting the virtue of humility as a basis, that we shall attain
to that which is really and substantially good.

We must, with one of old, Job xlii. 6. be displeased with, yea abhor
ourselves, before a right amendment will take place in us, for how shall I
amend in that which does not displease me. In every afflictive dispensation,
there is nothing more effectual than this salutary dislike of ourselves, Luke
xv. 21. This will cause us to bear in patience the slights and scorns of men;
indeed nothing is of more advantage than those slights and afflictions,
provided we are capable and willing to make a proper use of them.

When a man acknowledges both with heart and mouth, that he is full of guilt,
and deserving of eternal death, such a sincere acknowledgment goes a great way
toward his justification and reconciliation with God, 2 Samuel xii. 13. who is
always ready to forgive and deliver a truly contrite sinner; but he that says
He has no sin, deceives himself, and the truth is not in him, 1 John i. 8. Our
natural as well as spiritual pride is an obstacle to our receiving abundance of
divine grace; for in the degree wherein we humble ourselves, in that degree God
exalts us; and in the degree that we exalt and love ourselves, in that degree
we are abased, Mat. xxiii. 12. Nature must pass through many deaths, before true
humility becomes so rooted in our hearts that we can bear to be despised, and
that honor from men becomes a burden to us, Mat. v. 11.12. There are people
who may, in some degree, be said to be naturally disposed to humility and other
virtues, but God does not esteem these people more holy on that account. He
only may be said to be truly humble who, through the effect of grace, is desirous
to renounce himself, and do the will of God in word and deed, Mat. xii. 50. It
is not what a man has been, nor the good works he has performed, for God
regards solely the love he bears, the inclination he has to please him, through a
pure disinterested love. True love to God is never fruitless; where ever it
dwells it brings forth most excellent fruit; where there is no fruit, there is
no true love, 2 Pet. i. 8. Thus a man may have a natural bent toward what is
called virtue, but we are no farther truly virtuous and agreeable to God, than
so far as we love him, and that is only according to the degree of our
humiliation or willingness to die to ourselves, and all that is esteemed
valuable in this world.

CHAP. IV. On renouncing our own Wills.
A MAN must entirely renounce his natural will, committing himself, and all
that he is possessed of to God's holy will, both in time and eternity, Mat. x.
37. carefully attending to the inspiration of truth, Heb. iii. 15. taking up
the cross to his own inclination, to that degree of ability and knowledge
which, through grace, is afforded him, John vi. 65. submitting himself to all
men, agreeable to the example left us by our Savior, with humility and
affection, Pet. v. 5. causing his wilful disorderly spirit to submit, saying
with the Apostle, Acts ix. 6. Lord what will thou have me to do. God, the
infinite good, is nearer to each creature than they are to themselves, Acts
xvii. 28. for nothing can happen nor subsist one moment but through his will;
wherefore they who are continually resisting him, and seeking only to fulfill
their own wills, are like a troubled sea, never at rest, and have nothing to
expect but misery hereafter. -- God dwells with him that is of a submissive
resigned spirit, making him partaker of his grace, and causing his peace to
flow into his heart. The truly resigned, meek spirited, man has not only to
expect happiness in a life to come, but to him it is began, even, here already,
upon earth, for he enjoys celestial comfort, with an assurance that nothing can
separate him therefrom, but that all that happens to him will in the end work
for his good.

True renunciation requires that we cheerfully submit our wills to God's will.
Our whole salvation depends upon our being brought into the disposition
expressed, by our dear Savior, when he said, Nevertheless, Father, not my will
but thine be done, Luke xxii. 42. The best supplication we can offer to God is,
Lord let thy will be done in me; let me be in all things conformable to thy
will. This prayer exceeds all others, and reaches even unto heaven.

Ah! how sweet a state is it to live always in submission to the divine will;
to seek him in all things, and above all things! A man who dwells in his
selfishness is neither in fellowship with God nor his children; what he once
undertakes he will not quit or give up; this springs from a bottom of pride; he
always prefers his own choice; he enjoys no peace, not being disposed to
receive God's grace. For disquiet always springs from an indulgence of our own
wills. Wherefore, if we desire peace, the first step we ought to take is to
cease from all disorderly love of ourselves; till then we will not find true
freedom, nor be masters of ourselves. The world and our other enemies attack
us, only through ourselves; wherefore if we have gained a victory over ourselves,
we shall have subdued all our other enemies. Nothing more worthy of hatred than
self-love; this is the cause of all our griefs, and this is what hinders us
from enjoying God, with all the treasures of his grace.

The less we have of selfishness, the more agreeable we are to God, and the
more disposed to receive his grace. As a man who lives in self-love cannot deny
himself, and had rather lead others, than be led by them; in the same manner, a
man who has forsaken all things, is more inclined to suffer and follow others,
than to command them; for such an one seeks to die to all pride, and God
readily compleats his work in him and leads him to perfection.

If a man should forsake a kingdom, and all the world, if he cannot renounce
himself, he has hardly done any thing.

Will thou know if thou art in the true nothingness, if thou art not yet under
the dominion of a disorderly love, observe if thou art more moved at those
revilings, injustice or other accidents, which happen to thyself, than those
which happen to others. He who is afflicted at the loss of temporal goods,
shows thereby that he is unworthy of possessing them, as claiming them in his
own right: Whereas God alone is the true owner and master of all. So also he
who resents affronts, shows that he indeed deserves to be despised, because he
arrogates to himself that vengeance which belongs alone to God, and plainly
discovers that selfishness and the love of the creatures are yet deeply rooted
in his heart.

Our Savior says, Mat. xvi. 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, (that is, his own inclination and will) and let him take up his cross
and follow me. This is the infallible way to salvation: therefore give diligent
heed to thyself, in this matter; the sooner and more thou art in the practice
of this essential duty, the easier it will become to thee. Here it is thou must
begin, if thou desire to attain to any degree of solid virtue. In that degree
thou renounceth thyself, and the creatures; so far God will visit and dwell in
thee, by his grace, and thou will be enabled to become comformable to him. The
more thou dies to thyself, the more thou will feel the good spirit predominant
within thee; for in the degree that thou art unclothed from sin in the
self-same degree will thou be raised up to the love of God, and make advances
in the way of holiness.

Wherefore give all, for all, sell all that thou have, (i. e. thyself) to
obtain all, and thou will find that all, in every thing, and withal a constant
peace in thy heart, for nothing can alter and affect that peace which has its
foundation in God. That happiness and peace which we are pursuing with so much
pain and difficulty, whilst self is only in view, will be abundantly bestowed
on us, if we renounce ourselves, and fix our love solely upon God. We must not
so much look, at what we do, as at what we are; if the bottom of our heart was
good, all our deeds would be upright and good; for a heart, whose center is
sanctified and disposed to glorify God is always favored by him.

If we gave up ourselves and were willing to hazard all, as well that which is
within, as that which is from without, we need fear no danger, and should
possess true content of spirit. There are but few who entirely give themselves
up to the will of God, for no one can so fully renounce himself, but what he
may still find something to renounce, 1 Cor. xiii. 10.

The Lord's prayer expressed, even but once, in true self-denial, for the glory
of God, is of more worth than thousands of prayers proceeding from our own
will, and under the dominion of self.

An upright man, who endeavors to renounce himself, in whatever he does, is
fixed in God; and God so far protects him, that to attack him is in effect to
attack God. All that this man does, and all that happens to him, necessarily
comes from God; hence he enjoys the greatest delight. Nothing can hurt such a
man; scorn, injustice, the devil, death or hell itself, can do him no harm.
Hence it appears that submission to the will of God both inward and outward, is
the shortest way to attain to the highest pitch of truth and perfection.

When a man truly becomes so far conformable to the will of God, as entirely to
renounce himself, ceasing from seeking his own honor and advantage; desiring
nothing but barely that the honor and good pleasure of God may, in all things,
be established; such an one will be freed from the guilt of his sins, even though
they were of the deepest dye. For what a drop of water is when compared with
the sea; such are the sins of a truly resigned penitent man, compared with the
ocean of God's mercy. But this is a mighty work, to be thus entirely given up
to do, and suffer the will of God; nature will be always seeking to satisfy
herself, and is very unwilling, totally, to submit and die.

CHAP. V. Of Brotherly love.
PURITY and peace of heart, in the love of God, is much strengthened, and
increased by a constant and sincere charity toward all men; and a tender
compassion for them, in their afflictions. This we are taught by our Savior
himself, when he says, John xiii. 35. By this shall all men know that you are
my disciples, if you have love one to another, Mat. v. 7. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And with the same measure that ye mete
with, it shall be measured to you again, Luke vi. 38. If you have but little
charity you can expect but little mercy. If you have none at all, neither have
you reason to expect to obtain any yourselves. Wherefore let us demean
ourselves toward all men, in that manner in which we desire they should act
toward us; agreeable to our blessed Savior's injunction, Mat. vii. 12. Our
hearts ought always to be disposed to succor every man, whom we perceive to be
under sufferings, either of body or mind. We ought to pray, earnestly, to God,
that he would bestow on us the gifts of compassion and brotherly love. If it is
in our power to assist our fellow creature, either in word or deed, we ought to
do it to the utmost of our power, with a free and willing heart; if much is not
in our power, however, let us do what we can, with a lively and sincere
compassion: at least give him some comfort, and we shall find God will also
extend his mercy to us.

It is our duty to respect the image of God, and to regard his divine majesty
in all men, and without delay, to use our best endeavors that every degree of
bitterness or slight may be removed out of our hearts, which may have
insensibly slipped into them, against any person, whether high or low, rich or
poor, for God is no respector of persons. Let us forgive and not condemn
others, as we desire God should also forgive and not condemn us. We ought
always to keep a severe eye on ourselves, not esteeming ourselves above
measure, rather magnifying than extenuing our own failing: On the other hard we
should look with tenderness and compassion on the failings of our neighbors;
endeavoring to behold them with an eye of indulgence; and let us be
particularly careful never to speak evil of any in their absence, James iv. 11.
If christian charity prevails with us, we shall also endeavor to think the
most favorably, even of the evil actions we hear of others; rather supposing
their intentions not so bad as represented; or to have been the effect of
weakness; that God has suffered it for their humiliation, and that if ourselves
had been exposed to the same temptation we might have fallen therein; hoping
that they may have repented and obtained forgiveness of God. Thus endeavoring
to make the best of things.

Some people are so much inclined to judge, that they are always ready to
censure and correct others; these instead of repenting, are often lost and do
great hurt to those that hear them, by raising in their minds a slight and
scorn of their neighbors; this generally proceeds from pride and an
unwarrantable esteem of themselves. Poor blind man. Why do thou not, rather,
judge and condemn thyself? How can thou be acquainted with what is hid in the
heart of thy neighbor; or what know thou of the means by which it pleases
the wisdom of God to guide him, in order to bring him to a participation of his
grace. And shall such a poor worm be weak enough to think, that, that which is
only known of God, must be conducted agreeable to thy fancy; hence thou have
reason to blush, as before God and his saints.

Those who presume to judge, in matters which God has reserved to himself, draw
on themselves unexpressible evil. When thy neighbor has taken displeasure at
thy conduct, or when he has offended thee, thou ought to seek him, with
meekness, to speak kindly to him, with an heart filled with compassion, and of
love to God; thus according to the apostles advice. To overcome evil with good,
Romans xii. 21. And if it should be thy duty to lay his failings before him, be
very careful not to make five wounds in endeavoring to cure one: But as God
waits upon and invites thee to repentance, by goodness and patience, in order
to make thee an heir of salvation; so thou ought to act toward thy
neighbor, not in slighting him on account of his weakness, but rather in
praying to God, that he would forgive him his sins; even as Jesus Christ has
prayed for thee. Otherwise thou will be sorely burdened through the freedom thou
have taken in judging other men. Wherefore rather exercise thyself in against
thyself, than be employed in insulting others, by hard speech and uncharitable
judgments.

CHAP. VI. On the contemplation of the life and sufferings of Christ, etc.
WE ought to consider and meditate, with an heart filled with love, on the
doctrine and sufferings of our crucified Savior, in order to imitate and
become conformable to him, Heb. xii. 2. Wherefore earnestly call upon God that
it may please him to imprint on thy body,and in thy soul, the image of his
death, that his holy will may be fulfilled in thee. Such meditation leads to
the possession of divine wisdom and supreme happiness; for hereby a man will be
humbled in prosperity, and meet with encouragement in adversity; and maintain
an equality of soul, both in joy and in suffering. Great are the advantages of
such a meditation; it is as a book wherein all things are found: Happy is the
man who has Christ and his sufferings always present with him, he will obtain
true wisdom and unexpressible grace. If other religious exercises are too
difficult for thee, let it be thy principle work to meditate on the sufferings
of Christ, and to preserve a lively remembrance of them in thy mind, 1 Cor. ii.
2.

Accustom thyself to compare all thou do and suffer with the life and
sufferings of Christ, and nothing will appear too difficult to thee; for God
will help thee to support thy sufferings, and will, in the end, make thee a
partaker of his mercies, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

God's unspotted purity requires that all thy sins should be thoroughly purged;
he, therefore, who has lived a great part of his life, as it were, without God
in the world, and who still lives too much to the flesh, with its affections
and lusts, can scarce sufficiently resign himself up to him in humility, and
lowliness of spirit, begging him for his mercies sake, in Christ Jesus, to
purge him from that evil spirit of rebellion, which has taken so deep a root in
his heart, and separated him from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

And if thou art one of those who have neglected or forgot this most essential
duty, until thou thinks thyself on a death bed, and should then be distressed
with a sense of thy sins; take this salutary counsel, plunge thyself, as it
were, in the ocean of thy Savior's sufferings; entreat him to wash away thy
sins, through his infinite mercy, and hereupon abandon thyself to him, with a
true faith and confidence in his holy will, and thou will experience, that the
promises of Christ will be fulfilled, viz. that he will not reject the truly
repenting sinner. And should thou survive, be careful to watch during the
remaining part of thy life, against sin, and serve God with all thy power, that
on thy death bed, thou may have a sense of peace and reconciliation with
God, which will be of more value to thee than if thou should gain the whole
world.

The sufferings of Christ ought not to be meditated on in a superficial manner,
but with a lively inward sensibility and an ardent and constant love. If thou
can not do it with tears and dolorous sight, do it with praise and
thankfulness, under a consideration of the infinite goodness of thy Savior.
And though thou can not attain to such sensible feelings as thou desire, and
thy heart should remain dry and hard: Yet cease not from such meditation; keep
thy mind in submission, and this offerings will be agreeable to God.

Thou art not only to consider thy Savior as being perfect in holiness, as a
man, but also as an Almighty God, who by his word created the heavens and the
earth, and who can also bring them to nothing: Who, though he is infinite and
incomprehensible, has condescended to abase himself so far, for the sake of so
poor a creature. From this sight thou ought to be covered with confusion, in
that thou dare give way to the least degree of pride. The sufferings of
Christ may be considered in a three-sold manner, First, In themselves, to move
us with compassion, at the sight of his poverty, his misery, his persecutions,
his sorrows and painful death upon the cross. Secondly, By his obedience, his
patience, his humility and charity, in a word all those virtues which we are
called to imitate. Thirdly, In the cause of his sufferings, which was the
ardent love he bore to us, which he manifested in so striking a manner. It was
through the effect of this love, to us his creatures, that he lived in so
destitute a state, as not to have whereon to lay his head, Mat. viii. 20. and
finally ended his life in pain, so that he spared nothing, but gave up all
freely and willingly for us. There is no mortal man who has so vehement a
desire for life as Jesus Christ had to redeem sinners, and to deliver them from
that sin, by which they had separated themselves from him. Ought not this
consideration to incite us to reciprocal love toward him. It is surprising,
that the consideration of our Savior's most bitter sufferings, does not
inflame our hearts with his love, and penetrate even to the very bottom of our
souls. But none do testify more gratitude to God, nor compassion for the
sufferings of our Savior, than he who labors to imitate him; this is as
agreeable to God, as if we gave our life for him. If we submit to his cross,
either outwardly or inwardly, this will cause our proud spirit to bend, under
his (...) of thorns, and our sufferings will produce living fruit in us.

If thou art really desirous to manifest thy gratitude for the infinite
goodness of God, and to bear in thy body the marks of the dying of the Lord
Jesus, before the world, and in the face of the celestial armies, Gal. vi. 17.
thou must submit to God, without reserve; thou must die to thy wandering eyes,
thy curious ears, thy vain talk, and to all thy fleshly lusts, Col. iii. 5.
thus wilt thy feet be, as it were, nailed to the cross. Neither thy spiritual
nor thy corporeal strength must be overcome by sloth, but thou must, agreeable
to the example of Christ, suffer thy arms to be extended in the service of God;
and thy body to persevere in spiritual exercises for the glory of thy Redeemer,
and to fulfill his will. Those spiritual sufferings, through which thou finds
thyself so pressed, ought to drive thee toward the Lord, then will thou appear
as it were clothed with his righteousness, and lovely in the sight of God and
his holy angels. Thy willingness to suffer, ought to be as a bed for thy
Savior to repose himself on: Thy resistance against sin, and thy efforts to
surmount thy evil nature will rejoice his spirit, and thy prayers allay his
grief.

And if when thou have done to the best of thy power, and art nevertheless
despised, abused, persecuted, and ranked with sinners, and thereby brought thee
more to die to thyself; and that thou freely forgives and prays for those who
abuse thee, then art thou, indeed, with Christ under his cross. When thou art
willing to be deprived of thy friends and of all that can be as a wall of
separation between God and thee, it is then thou (as it were) helps thy Savior
to bear his cross. When God will permit thee to be deprived of all comfort; to
remain in an inward dryness, without any sense of grace, in which state thou
art ready to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; and when, in
this situation, thou seeks no strange consolation, but looks to God alone in
humble submission to his will, then the more bitter thy sufferings are, and
thyself given up to God; the more thou art conformable and agreeable to him;
for this is the last trial of God's children.

Break off from those desires which thirst for any thing else but God, and turn
them entirely toward him; then, indeed, will thou satisfy that longing of thy
Savior, which causes him to weep over the stubborn and obstinate. Sigh for the
salvation of all men, commit thy soul into the hands of thy heavenly father,
with a mind turned from time to eternity, as though each hour was to be thy last,
and here thou will be conformable to thy Savior, who through much tribulation
has entered into the glory of his father. This is the path through which thou art
to follow him, if thou expectest to become a partaker of his eternal glory,
Romans viii. 17.

CHAP. VII. Of the advantage of outward suffering.
THERE are three sorts of crosses which the Almighty dispenses to his children.
The first is, when a man is converted to God from the course of the world, dies
to his evil lusts, and forsakes those sins to which he is inclined. This is
hard to the flesh, for in this case that which was before his pleasure, now
becomes his grievous pain. This is one of the heaviest crosses he has to bear,
Mat. v. 29, 30.

The other kind of cross is that which God himself dispenses, when he sends to
a man many sorts of inward and outward trials and crosses. If we could receive
these trials as proceeding from the depth of God's love, from which they indeed
proceed, Heb. xii. 7, 8. then would we be happy; for God cannot bestow on thee
a more precious gift, than when he brings any kind of sufferings on thee, this
being the only way to cure thy wounds, and heal thee of the plague and leprosy
of sin, Isa. xlv. 7. Whether thou have deserved these evils or not? Whether
through thy own fault or without thy having contributed thereto: Know this, that
it is God who sends them to thee; therefore suffer them patiently, and return
him thanks for having thus accomplished his will in thee.

And that we should not be left without a witness, of the necessity of
adversity, and suffering, all the creatures, and the very elements declare the
same. The wild beasts, the hail, snow, cold, heat, storms, plagues, war, famine
and sickness, testify to man, that it is through many tribulations that he must
enter the kingdom. These are the lively paints, colors, and drapery wherewith
God animates and perfects his glorious picture of meekness and humility in his
beloved creature man. Let all kinds of afflictions and sufferings therefore be
patiently endured by thee, if thou desire God to perform his good pleasure in
thee.

There are people who being convinced of this doctrine, are not satisfied with
those crosses which are allotted them, but are desirous to impose more upon
themselves; these do but torment themselves without reaping much fruit, as they
are building on their own will and fancy, Mat. xv. 9. they hinder God's work,
and, as it were, oblige him to wait their time. Thus it happens, that when God
would work, on such, their nature being depraved, cannot follow God's draught;
and when great temptations come, they have no strength to resist. Wherefore it
is sufficient that thou mortify thy evil lusts, and thy corruption without
tormenting thyself, but rather dwell in the patience, which is most agreeable
to God. The third kind of crosses are very bitter, for they consist in hard
temptation, in disstress and frighful darkness, which at times press so hard on
a man, that he chooses death rather than life. These trials alter a man's
nature more than the hardest outward suffering; for God sometimes so visits him
with strange inward temptations, darkness and dryness, that none can apprehend
them, but he who passes through them. Nevertheless God knows well to what end he
does these things. They are certainly the effect of his love; so that if we
bear them as we ought, they will be of unexpressible benefit unto us. For all
sufferings will be productive of good to thee, if thou can but silently
submit to them, and resign thyself up to God; he will cause good to spring up
to thee from these very sufferings; but if thou seek for comfort any other
way; comforts of another kind will also spring up in thee. Wherefore we ought
freely to offer up ourselves to God, as being willing to suffer all those
afflictions with which he shall please to visit us, whether inward or outward,
that we may therein be made conformable to Christ. For God even also suffers
with him, who wholly resigns himself to the divine will. And when sufferings
thus proceed from God, they are sweet in the end, and turn to great advantage
to us. Wherefore we ought rather to prefer scorn before honor, grief rather
than joy; for he who is assured he suffers for God's glory, cannot but feel a
lively joy proceeding from it.

All those sufferings which we suffer patiently, and from which we do not,
even, desire to be delivered, but agreeable to God's will, are more agreeable
to him, than the best of our works, and all burnt offerings, 1 Samuel xv. 22.

It is also more agreeable to God, and of more advantage to us, in our
religious progress, to suffer with pure resignation, than to be employed in
many good works; for suffering being more opposite to nature, it is thereby
more abased and the spirit the more exalted; for this reason that God requires
of a strong and vigorous beginner bodily exercises, although with discretion, in
such sort that spiritual exercise may be thereby helped; but from old men
already humbled by submission and resignation, he expects that they suffer, in
patience and resignation all that may befall them.

To be willing to suffer in and according to the will of God is so excellent a
thing, that our frail nature could not support, in this life, the fruition and
reward which God intends to give, in eternity, for the most slight sufferings,
to which we have been willing to be subject, for his sake. Wherefore it is
said, That the sufferings of this time is not to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us, Romans viii. 18. so that we cannot sufficiently
return thanks to God for those sufferings he permits to come upon us. All the
saints have drank of this cup, and have testified that it has not been hurtful
but salutary to them, Psalm. cxix. 67. James i. 12. so that they have not
refused to expose themselves thereto, and often even to spill their blood for
that cause. Let us remember that the saints were men as well as we, and that we
may obtain the same help that they were favored with, James v. 17. -- When in
seeking for rest, we turn from God and seek comfort in the creatures, we expose
ourselves to fall into enormous sins, in dangerous temptations, and finally
into eternal death; wherefore God at such times visits us with affliction, that
our lusts may be subdued, and that we may return to him with a sincere sense
and confession of our sins. Wherefore let us not fear sufferings, but rather
give thanks to God when he sends them, Job v. 17. It is a patient bearing of
sufferings which sits us for the possession of supernatural gifts. Many have
fallen by prosperity, but few have been hurt through adversity; the one as it
were, undermines the foundations of virtue and goodness, but the other lays it
steadfastly sure in a profound humility, Isa. xxvi. 16.

When we receive chastisement; when we are despised and persecuted, and bear
these trials without complaint; and that so far from allowing ourselves in any
thoughts of vengeance, we are not even anxious to vindicate ourselves, leaving
the whole to God; we shall, through divine goodness, receive a plentiful reward
of peace and comfort; and shall experience those earthly chains which bind us
to the world to be much loosened; and a desire will prevail that we may, even,
be more abased before God and men, Sam. vi. 22. To suffer patiently those
afflictions which God sends, is a principal means to obtain his grace, 2 Timothy
ii. 12. And let us be particularly careful not to give way to resentment
against such persons as God may make use of as a rod, for our amendment. But
seriously consider in what spirit we suffer, that it be done with patience and
resignation, then will all things work for our good. It is often our
impatience, under sufferings, which causes our greatest hurt.

There are those who fast, who watch, and assist the poor, or give themselves
up to other outward exercises; but we meet with very few, who can, with
patience, suffer to be despised and treated with injustice. People are
generally full of hidden pride, holding themselves in much esteem; and are
desirous to be thought well of by others. But to what purpose is it to appear
clean without, and yet to permit anger, revenge, and other impurities to remain
in the heart; this is but the whited sepulcher of a religious Pharisee. For
although outward purity is so far well, yet it cannot be accounted of any worth,
in the sight of God, whilst sin and the love of the creatures defile the inward
part; which ought to be God's dwelling place; wherefore first see that the
inside be cleansed, and the outside will soon become clean also. It Is rather a
mark of divine displeasure that we should pass the whole time of our life in
peace and happiness, without affliction, as the apostle witnesses, Heb. xii.
8. If you are without chastisement, you are bastards and not sons. Lazarus had
his evil things in this life, and the rich man his good things; but observe how
it fared with each after death. The one is comforted, the other tormented; thus
each received the reward meet for him, and such as his humility or pride had
sitted him for; thus every man receiving according to his works. It is almost
the highest degree of the spiritual life, to be destitute of comfort, either
from God or man, and to bear such a state, with patience and submission.

We may become martyrs without passing through the sword of persecution from the
world, provided we maintain true patience in sufferings.

Let us then suffer with joy, since none will be crowned if he has not warred,
2 Timothy ii. 5. A man may attain to a knowledge of himself by spiritual
exercises; but it is through suffering alone that he manifests what his growth in
religion is.

The Lord our God is with us in our sufferings, and will deliver us from them
in his own time; for he is faithful and will not suffer that we should be
tempted beyond our strength; but with the temptation will make such way, as
that we may be able to support it. The sufferings of the present time are not
to compare with the glory which will be revealed, Romans viii. 18.

CHAP. VIII. That we ought to attach ourselves to God in true love.
IT is necessary, as much as possible, to keep our minds disengaged from
outward things, looking with ardent desires toward God, our good and
beneficient Lord; continually watching, with prayer, against all vain and
needless thoughts; otherwise we shall make but little progress in virtue. We
must also be careful to avoid all sloth and idleness; for these soften the
heart, and cool charity; but let us endeavor to keep, continually, as in the
presence of God, with deep and serious recollection, remembering, that he is
near us, always beholding and ready to assist us with his grace and love.
Wherefore let us cast ourselves often, as at the feet of his divine majesty, in
deep humility, begging for the forgiveness of our sins; often meditating on the
life and sufferings of Christ, with grateful acknowledgements of his benefits,
and sincere desires to imitate him. Let us also meditate upon God's wonderful
works in his creatures; as also, on his infinite wisdom and inexpressible love.

We ought also, with deep reverence, to consider that God is in himself, the
sovereign God, incomprehensible, unmovable and infinite; that he, only, is
worthy to be sought and embraced with an entire and constant love: In him ought
all the desires of every heart to be reunited, without measure; the more he is
known, the more he is loved; and the more we draw near to him, the greater
evidence we have of his love. The most feeble ray of joy which a chaste soul,
who loves God, feels of his divine presence surpass all the pleasures the
creatures can produce; they are but bitterness compared with divine joy. He who
gives up his heart wholly to God, abides in joy, and dies with an assurance of
its everlasting continuance. He is already possessed of heaven and earth, and
will enjoy it to all eternity: For the things which God has prepared for those
who love him, are such as never entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1
Cor. ii. 9. There is no comparison to be made between the love of God and the
love of the creatures; all that appears amiable in the world will be seen to be
mere illusion, when the inward eye is opened in us. What does the love of the
world afford to its votaries, but a deplorable misuse of time, spent in vanity,
and a soul filled with sin.

This is all to be gained from the world, a short joy and long and lasting
regret and sorrow. We desire to fly from scorn and suffering, and we often
deeply plunge ourselves into them; we are not willing to bear Christ's easy
yoke, and we find ourselves oppressed under the iron yoke of vanity and sin;
but if agreeable to our Savior's exhortation, Mat. xxii. 3. We desire to love
our divine Lord, with all our heart, and with all our soul; we must turn the
inward eyes of the soul with a sweet inclination, and an invariable love
toward him; endeavoring to be always united to, and sighing sincerely after
him. This ardent love of God is the spring of perfection, it is hereby we die
to all sin and are made conformable to God, and partakers of the divine nature,
2 Pet. i. 6. But in order to attain to this happy disposition, our wills must
be given up, to do or suffer that which the holy spirit calls us to: We must
forsake all these pleasures the sensual mind (...) so much taken up with,
either in vain amusements, fleshly indulgence, unprofitable conversation, or
other vanities; these must be mortified, Col. iii. 5. as also, all other
disorderly affections, such as fear, joy, and grief; endeavoring to draw away
from the multiplicity of cares and inquietudes, so apt to carry away the heart,
that it may be fixed in God, and disengaged from all those accidents which
human life is subject to; that an equality of soul may be maintained, as well
in prosperity as in adversity; and as we cannot do this, by our own strength,
John xv. 5. we ought with the most ardent desire to beg help of God, that we
may be preserved from sin, and enabled to walk constantly in the footsteps of
Christ, in all good works; consecrating to God's glory, our wealth, our honor,
and our life itself.

Let us labor to give up our wills into God's will, to unite ourselves closely
to his will, that the fulfilling of it may be the end and purpose of all our
wishes and our sweetest pleasures; agreeable to our Savior's example, John iv.
34. then may we bear all outward evils, as shame, sickness, persecutions, and
even inward poverty and barrenness of spirit, without seeking comfort in any
creature, remaining, always, faithful to God, in all states. This hidden way is
generally made known but to God's intimate friends, that they may be willingly
stripped from all false supports, and that fervent prayers may prevail in them
for the attainment of solid virtue and divine love; which God is more ready to
give, than we are ready to ask, Isa. lxv. 24. If we earnestly pray to him from
a sincere desire to love and please him, we shall infallibly, in his time,
obtain the end of our wishes, John. ii. 4. though perhaps not till the latter end
of our lives.

God is so filled with love to his creatures, that he is better pleased to give
the greatest, than the smallest gifts. He who asks in a true considence, and
with a sincere self-denial of himself, will obtain whatever he asks, Psalm
cxlv. 18, 19. We must not imagine that he is gone far from us, because it is
not in our power to do great works, provided there be but a sincere desire
toward him, and a will to do our duty. God looks at and requires only the
heart. My Son give me thy heart, Prove. xxiii. 26. And although such a person
should think himself at a distance from God; nevertheless he is not so; for
though God has not yet revealed himself to him; yet if he remains at the door and
knocks, it will finally be opened to him, Mat. vii. 7.

All consists in our good will, and in the sincerity of our desires. He who
desires to be possessed with humility, the love of God, or any other virtue,
and seeks it with a fervent and sincere heart, has it already, and none can
take it from him. It was in this sense that a servant of God returned thanks to
his Maker in these words. I thank thee, in that I find thee in all places; that
thou accepts the sincerity of my will, and that none can falsely accuse me unto
thee.

Do thou sincerely desire to please God, to love him, to render him the most
pure praise, to renounce thyself, to do good to all men, even as thou would
have them to do to thee; in fine, to live as holy as it is possible; if this is
indeed thy case so that nothing is wanting, but strength to fulfill these good
desires, God will take pleasure in thee, and with them will also give ability
to fulfill his will agreeable to his good pleasure, for he is faithful, Phil.
ii. 13. 1 Thessalonians. v. 24.

The foundation of our love to God, lies in the sincerity of our will, and is
perfected by good works, which if they are sincere, will be constantly
maintained, to the utmost of our power, even in the midst of sufferings. Love
is as it were, imprinted in our nature, and when this love is under proper
government; man loves God more than all the creatures, and even more than
himself. It is a deplorable case, that we should have so perverted the
excellent order of our nature, as not to direct this most precious treasure of
love toward the sovereign good, but fix it on ourselves and on the poor
fleeting creatures of this world. This so much afflicts those who are indeed
the friends of God, that they could, as it were, pour down floods of tears,
under a sense, that our blessed Redeemer is thus drove away, with so much
indignity, from those hearts, for whom he laid down his life, and on whose
behalf he is still pouring forth his prayers to his Father.

Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also, Mat. vi. 21. Inquire
carefully where that treasure which thou love the most is, if in God or the
creatures. If thou love God with uprightness, thou will continually sigh
after him, as one oppressed with a burning thirst. As the hunted heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so does my soul after thee O God, is the language of
all truly longing hearts. We cannot more acceptably serve God, than in thus
desiring to keep near him, always keeping watch over our hearts, Prove. iv. 23.
God loves the heart; he looks not at what is outward; he looks not as man
looks, who sees that only which the natural eye perceives; but he looks even
into the bottom of the heart, 1 Samuel xvi. 16. He regards only a lively
inclination for divine and virtuous things. Those works done by men with esteem
and complaisancy of themselves, are disagreeable to God. Wherefore all thy
works should proceed from an heart sincerely given up to God; having the good
pleasure of him, to whom all things belong, solely in view. Wherefore in the
use of those gifts and comforts which he affords us, we ought to seek nothing
but his glory and most holy will, 1 Cor. x. 31. It is scarce to be expressed,
how much God loves a man so disposed, and how abundantly he opens to him his
hidden treasures. God is always inclined and ready to receive every one who in
sincerity of heart, is willing to be converted to him, who empties and frees
himself from the creatures; he, as it were, runs to meet such a man, and
embraces him, with sweetness and love, Luke xv. 20.

We can wish for nothing, but what is to be found in God. Do thou wish for
love, for fidelity, for truth, for comfort, all these are found without
measure, and in the most perfect manner in him? Do thou desire beauty; he is
beauty itself? Do thou desire almightiness; he is the Almighty? Do thou
wish for riches; he is the master of all things? Thus thou will find in the
only sovereign good, which is God, all thy heart can desire in the most
accomplished manner. Wherefore drive far from thee all the creatures, in order
that thou may, without ceasing, raise up thy spirit to the Creator, and thus
abide in his presence. For whilst the creatures still remain, with affection,
imprinted in thy mind; whilst thou yet esteemest these uncertain things, as
matters of weight, thou have but very little love for God, and art still much a
stranger to that which is heavenly, 1 John ii, 15.

Turn thyself each moment toward God, for he is so good, that all those who
seek him with sincerity, will obtain all things from him, Psalm clxv. 19. He
not only clears them from the punishment they have merited; but also delivers
them from their sins. Let us therefore look diligently unto him who gives those
good desires and operates through his grace, to the perfecting of them; carefully
observing the day of our visitation, that it pass not over, Isa. lv. 6. Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near.

CHAP. IX. How we may attain to a state of purity and an union with God; and
the necessity we are under of keeping our affections loose from the creatures.
IF thou desires to attain to that purity and perfection which the gospel
proposes, thou must keep in silence and retirement as much as thy several
duties will permit, avoiding the conversation of men; always seeking for time
and opportunity to meditate on God and heaven. Keep the door of thy senses shut
to all vanity; and the door of thy heart and reason closed to all images, and
impressions from passing objects. Thou ought also to hold the power of thy
desires at liberty from all that can bind thy freedom, and engage thy will in
affectionate solicitude oranxious care for the things of this life; and having
thus gathered together thy desires and thy reason, turn them toward the
sovereign and only good, and rest quiet there; thus thy mind will be raised
above temporal things, and set upon God, in a continual contemplation of him,
Psalm cxxi. We must, as it were, bind ourselves to God, in an entire
resignation to his holy will, keeping our eyes upon him, and receiving every
thing as coming from his immediate hand. But as we cannot always dwell in a
steady contemplation of God, we ought, as much as is in our power, to persevere
in such a state. And when we find ourselves deprived of the sight of God, don't
let us rest satisfied under this deprivation, but turn into ourselves, gather
all our inward strength in order to seek after God; even though it should be an
hundred times in a day, and we shall find daily more ease and satisfaction in
this labor; so that it will be easier for us to think on God in retirement,
than it was before to be scattered in the multitude of objects.

If thou desires to make any progress in this way, remember that God is every
moment saying unto thee, My child enter into thyself, watch thy heart, that it
may be kept pure from every vice, and thy desires free from all solicitude and
love of earthly things. Hold the strength of thy imagination directed toward
God, and attach thyself to him, as to the sovereign good, with fervent love;
that so thy whole soul, with all its faculties, may be gathered in God, and
become one spirit with him. This is in short, an abstract of the foundation of
all happiness. It is by this means thou shall receive all that is most sublime
and perfect, to which very few attain, because most people are so much taken up
with solicitude and love of earthly comforts.

But seek thou the hidden wisdom, which the heavenly doctor himself has
inscribed, through his divine inspiration, in the hearts of those who seek him,
with an humble confidence and serious desires, in a quiet silence, and
renouncing all fleshly freedoms, to the utmost of their power. God often
manifests more of himself to a simple country man, or to a weak woman who are
in this frame of mind, than to those wise ones of the world, whose knowledge is
not founded on a true humility of heart, Mat. xi. 25. It is a most deplorable
case, that we who were created for to be partakers of this sublime grace; who
are called to it, who may receive it continually, from God, should neglect it
in this life, to such a degree as may occasion our being eternally deprived of
it.

The soul of man is placed between time and eternity; if it turns toward time,
it forgets eternity and all divine things appear little and at a distance, as
an object appears small when we behold it afar off. In this world the body is,
as it were, in its own country, surrounded with natural conveniences, which are
as its friends, by whom it is continually served, as meat, drink, and all
terrestrial things! But the spirit is here below in misery, its friends having
their residence in heaven, Phil. iii. 20. Wherefore the body must be kept
under, by mortification, through watching and prayer, 1 Cor. ix. 27. If thou
desire to attain to a pure and divine life, dispose thyself as though thou were
to die each moment, Gal. ii. 20. as in effect thou must soon leave this body
Imagine thy soul to be already separated from the body and united to God for
all eternity; this will show the emptiness of lower things. Endeavor, by the
help of thy superior faculties, to remain always with God, whilst with thy
inferior thou submittest thyself on earth, and sink into thy proper nothingness
in profound humility. Thou ought to use temporal things only for necessity,
to lead to that happy eternity which ought to be the end thou proposest to
attain.

Shun needless employments, and conversations, and every attachment to the
creatures, even with such as may appear well disposed; such converse often
brings much dimness over the spiritual mind; wherefore we ought to give great
attention in this respect, and endeavor to maintain a due converse with God.
We shall frequently experience the falsehood and unfaithfulness of such
supports, even in those from whom we expect to receive much comfort. God is to
be met with in a more especial manner in retreat and solitude, Isa. xxx. 15.
Hos. ii. 14. Wherefore be silent, keep thyself disengaged from men, and
gathered into thyself. Seek rather the time and place where thou may be
alone, and fly the tumults and the dangers of the world. If thou really
desire to make a progress in the christian life; be advised (in true charity)
contract no familiarity with any who are not possessed of these dispositions;
make short work with all others, answer them with kindness, in few words, and
if such a behavior cause some to be offended or to speak evil of thee,
endeavor, through grace, to bear it without uneasiness or murmuring.

It is better, for thee, that God should be thy friend and thy protector
against all men, who may be against thee, than if all the creatures were on thy
side, and God should on that account be against thee.

Keep thy outward man in tranquillity, and thy soul in purity; for purity and
innocence afford more knowledge and wisdom than great study. Psalm cxi. 10.
Wis. 1.4. Turn thyself from the creatures; and if any accident befall thee, be
not hasty to come out of trouble, for he who makes haste to get from under
trouble, will not find succor from truth. Let the dead bury their dead, but
remain quiet in thyself; as if thou had forgot thyself, trust in God who will
provide all that is necessary for thee.

If thou desire to be united to God, thou must resign thy own will, thy
carnal cares and delights, in order to obtain this sovereign good: If thou
expectest that God will take his residence in thy heart, it must be empty and
naked, and thou must be poor in spirit and preserved free from solidtude, 2 Timothy ii. 4, 5. then will the sun of righteousness marvelously operate therein.
Keep out of thy mind all those images and figures which will be presenting
themselves to take possession of thy mind and heart, retain them not with thee,
and they will soon vanish away; for all images of the creatures must be erased
out of thy mind, that the mind of Christ may be imprinted therein: Neither
suffer thy will to be fixed in any thing, but let it rest upon God alone, Psalm
lxxiii. 25. Preserve thy heart in simplicity, and keep closely inward with all
thy strength; thus may thou remain firm and unshaken in the divine unity.
Watch that thou may accomplish the divine will, then will thy soul pass from
the wounds of thy Savior's humanity, to the light of his divinity, and thou will, with delight, begin to taste that which is heavenly.

If thou can even do nothing more, than to strip thyself from all
imaginations, and from all self-love; attaching thyself to God alone, there is
no temptation can overcome thee. Be not careful what derision and scorn thou
have to meet with; what perfection thou have to suffer; the word of God, which
is God himself has separated thy body from thy spirit, so that thou looks upon
a sensual man so far off as to think little of him; for the soul in this
situation is more united to God, whom it loves, than to the body it animates:
Watch carefully over thine inward man, for in him is contained all the
happiness of man, Prove. iv. 23. Remain fixed in watching over thyself, till
thou art freed from selfishness. Nature must always be watched over, 1 Cor. ix.
27. and one missstep produces another (...) Keep clear from every thing which
may captivate thy will; do not seek to please the fleshly appetite, any farther
than what is necessary; feed it with such temperance as may fit thee for
farther good works. Keep always inward, for it is there that all truth will be
made known to thee, and where thou will be taught what thou ought to do or
to leave undone.

Pass through all the accidents of life, as through that which thou hold in
little esteem; be concerned only for that which is necessary; suffer not thy
mind to be affected by what may happen to thee, whether it be good or bad;
entrust all into the hands of God, and endeavor to preserve, in simplicity,
the presence of God in thy heart. And if thou should apprehend thou have lost
this comfort, bend all thy strength to remove all obstacles, in order to its
return to thee. Those who are espoused to God, ought rather to suffer death
than voluntarily to do any thing which may displease God: Nothing ought to give
joy to such an one, but God alone, and that which pleases him: For to his
penetrating eyes all things are present. As often as a man turns his heart
toward God in true confidence, so often, though sometimes insensibly, does he
receive of the holy spirit, a fresh supply of grace. When a man, in deep
humility, sincerely labors to draw near to God, this real and sincere return
to God, will infallibly be rewarded: Whilst for all other works, where the
honor of God is not the principle end, we must expect but a slight recompense.
Do not scatter thy strength in outward words and actions, for these are
productive of great dissipation, but, with Mary of old, choose the better part,
Luke x. 42. Don't loose time in running hither and thither, of complaining of
this or the other, for this is the manner of those who have little good in
them: Thou may thereby so scatter this strength, as not to recover it in
twenty years, if ever. -- Seek rather, always solitude, and say within thyself,
He whom I seek is above all senses, incomprehensible to reason; it is a pure
heart which desires and receives him. This is he, alone, which I seek, Psalm
lxxiii. 25. Whatever else befalls me, I will bear it and travel on.

When thou thus witnessest, this Lord of all Lords sitting, as it were, on
throne of thy soul, he will enlighten thy heart and so inflame it with his
love, that thy faculties will be strengthened and made participaters of the
divine nature. Wherefore thou need no other exercise but to bring thy will
in submission to the will of God; and to make an entire offering up of thyself
on all occasions; and thus will thou return to God, from whom thou do
proceed. Wait for the Lord, be courageous and intrepid in sufferings. Yea
attend on God constantly until the time of thy deliverance be accomplished.

CHAP. X. That we ought to attend to the motion of God's spirit, within us, and
labor to preserve its presence, even whilst employed in outward concerns.
ART thou desirous of being favored by grace, abase thyself, deeply, at the
feet of God, the inexhaustible fountain of divine love, from a sense of thy
nothingness and vanity. Pray, humbly, to him that he may enable thee to glorify
him; be deeply abased in the center of thy heart; there wait for a revelation
of the will of God, in deep silence. Cease from running hither and thither, for
this exercise is better than if thou could move the whole world. If thou art
in doubt what may be most agreeable to God, inquire into thyself, and join with
that part which is most opposite to nature; for this is the safest choice, and
that to which nature is the most inclined, is the most doubtful.

There are those who look outward, when God, by his spirit, would draw them
inward, and who seek to be inwardly gathered, when he calls them to outward
service; thus they join not with, but resist God's will. Some undertake mighty
things, so that it appears as though they were like to become extraordinary
people; yet many of these are apt to return to their old course of life, to
join with nature and to seek comfort in the creatures. Others come on with
courage and pass, as it were, through fire and water, but not having passed through
death, though they endeavor to gather inward, cannot come to any settlement, but
meet with much anguish and pain; the sooner these people die to themselves, the
sooner they attain to peace.

As many diversities of dispositions as there are amongst men, so many
different means does God use to lead us to peace. That which is the life of
one, is the death of another; wherefore grace is dispensed, in common,
according to the frame and disposition of men. Be careful not to endeavor to
imitate other men's ways, except it (...) their essential virtues, for the
essential path which leads to God is but one and always the same. Nevertheless
attend to thy religious call, and inquire what God requires of thee. He who
properly attends to what passes in the inward center of his heart, and is
rightly sensible of his natural corruption, will renounce himself, and follow
God, in that path into which he pleases to lead him; such an one remains stable
in himself, and receives all which happens to him, whether inward or outward,
as coming from the hand of God. He submits to God's hidden judgment, having the
will of God and not himself sincerely in view. He will not be in doubt what he
ought to do, and will soon overcome all obstacles, however strange and
difficult they may be; such a state is of more worth than the most sublime
exercises. God will not permit such a man to go astray, however dangerous his
way may be.

A continual attention to one's self is difficult in the beginning, but it
becomes easy. When a man truly proves his whole life, his ways, his words and
habits, in order to discover if they are agreeable to the will of God, he will
learn to know himself and will discover his sins and be painfully desirous to
be delivered from them.

A man of God should accustom himself to have God, as much as possible, present
in his mind. Keep thy spirit in the same disposition, both in the time and out
of the time of prayer. Thou ought also when in company, strongly to labor
to keep God present in thy mind. Let not any thing thou see or hear be
retained or dwelt upon in thy mind, more than is really necessary, lest thy
imaginations and thy desires be defiled by strange images or a disorderly love;
for what we suffer to be impressed on our minds, whether it be agreeable or the
contrary, presents itself, and will disturb us when in prayer. Thou must not be
satisfied with having thought upon God, as a passing object, for such thoughts
soon vanish, and where there is one thought of God, there will be ten others
relating to temporal things, which drive away the first. Wherefore it is
necessary that we labor vigorously to turn our minds entirely toward God, to
preserve a sense of God's presence within, with a simple and sweet inclination
toward him; so that whatever happens to us, we may always maintain an equality
of soul, a fidelity and constant sincerity to God, that he in all things may be
the principle object of all our actions. Thus none will be able to turn, or
separate us from God. And he who remains thus united to him, will not easily be
drawn into sin. But it is a most deplorable case, that almost every one
descends from that holy mountain, and so far debases himself as to be taken up
with things of comparitively no worth. And it is a surprising instance of love,
that our Lord Jesus should, still, condescend to visit souls, who have been so
unfaithful to him.

But don't be so far mistaken as to imagine, that outward acts of obedience and
charity; such as the worship of God, visiting the afflicted, taking care of and
administering to the necessities of the poor, and such like, will draw thee away
from God, lest thou neglect thy duty under the pretense of more perfectly
serving God in spirit; it is solely thy want of submitting to the order of
truth, following thy own will and not having thy eye single enough to God,
which alone wilt hurt thee. If thou performed these outward acts of duty purely
from love to God, he would make up all wants and deficiencies to thee, so that
they would not impede thy spiritual progress. And even if thou should
sometimes find it difficult to gather in the scattered powers of thy mind. God
can easily make this up to thee; he requires but little time to perfect his
work, Ps. xxx. 9. If thy sins and thy attachment to the creatures does not
cause a distance betwixt thee and God, neither outward works, nor any accident
whatever can occasion it.

Wherefore it is not necessary to be very solicitous for the enjoyment of
inward consolation, it is sufficient that thou remain united to God, from a
sincere desire of pleasing him; for a sincere will of pleasing God exceeds all
gifts and endowments. He who finds in himself a good will and disposition to
serve him, cannot be sufficiently thankful and ought to be very careful to
preserve it to the end. Would thou know whether thy thoughts, words, and
actions are agreeable to God consider, carefully, whether thou art more weaned
from the love of the creatures, encreasest in humility and art more and more
inwardly gathered to God; if that is thy case, thou may be assured that thou
art growing in grace, but if on the contrary thy words and actions tend to
trouble and dissipate thee, it is a sign they are not wholly and purely
directed to the glory of God, and that something remains, in thee, of which God
is not solely the cause and end.

CHAP. XI. That we ought to receive all things as coming immediately from the
hand of God; and that we should place our whole trust and confidence on him
alone.
THE strong will of man acting in opposition to the divine will, is a principal
obstruction to our progress toward the land of rest, in proportion as a man is
more or less given up to do and suffer the will of God, so is he the more or
less sensibly touched with things that happen to him.

He that is truly given up receives all things as coming from the hand of God,
esteeming the creatures only as God's instruments. Hence his labor is, that
neither accidents nor adversity should be grievous to him; knowing that if God
is for him, nothing can really hurt him, Romans viii. 28. To such a man nothing
is an evil, all is equal. He is not cast down by disgrace nor exalted in
prosperity. He is able to bear pleasure and grief, sweet and bitter, honor and
shame, health and sickness, elevation and abasement with an equality of mind,
Phil. iv. 11, 13. He is always giving thanks to God, and his eye is ever upon
him from a sense of his goodness, and an assurance that all the creatures are
under his direction. The heavens and the earth are as his book in which he
reads and meditates on the mighty wonders of God; such a man being delivered
from his own will, rests in God, in an inward peace of mind, for in that degree
that we dwelt truly in God, in that degree we find ourselves in peace; and in
that degree we are out of him, in that degree we are in inquietude, John xvi.
33. It is in this peace of the soul that God dwells, and it is in him who is,
indeed, possessed of this peace that God works, and makes use of as his
instrument; Oh! how happy is such a man, thus truly given up to God, his heart
is preserved from sin, and he enjoys much divine comfort. A steady labor to
give ourselves up to God, and to be freed from any attachment to the creatures,
is the most noble exercise we can be employed in; but the great enemy of
mankind endeavors, with all his power, to draw the soul from this labor, by
temptation to anger, disquietude and cares, needless discourses, vain and
subtle studies and other misssteps. Indeed a a little matter will put us by;
wherefore be careful not to be surprised; when in danger retire quickly, as it
were, under the wing of God's care. In controversies or differences, that may
happen, give up all, that thy duty will permit, rather than dwell in contention
and debate: Whatever thou see, hear, or do, do not suffer the thought of
it to fix in thy imagination, so as that it may dwell much in thy mind, then
will it not be a temptation to thee; and that which thou have not suffered to
be imprinted on thy heart and memory will not hurt thee, thy soul will always
be gathered in its center and strong to resist temptation; wherefore forsake
thyself, whatever happens to thee, through the immutable providence of God, and
commit thy whole concerns to his care, 1 Pet. v. 7. for it is certain that if
thou castest all thy cares upon him, he will provide better for all thy wants,
both inwrardly and outwardly, than if thou wast day and night taken up with
solicitous cares and should consume thy strength therein; wherefore receive
all things with contentment, from God's paternal care over thee, with an entire
confidence in his everlasting providence; looking upon all events such as
wealth, poverty, health, sickness, good or evil, life or death as directed for
thy happiness, Mat. x. 29, 31.

God gives being, strength and motion to all things, they have their numbers
and measures, nothing can draw from under his divine providence: All things
even the least (sin excepted) are under God's direction; wherefore when thou
do not wholly confide in God, but give thyself much pains and care; he
often leaves thee in trouble and necessity, that thou mayestknow how far thy
own solicitude and carecan reach. -- God is so full of grace and so faithful,
that in him is found all that we stand in need of, Mat. vii. 7, 8. and so much
as we open the breast of our trust in him, so far he fills it; for the riches
of his grace are infinite or without end. As we can never love God too much,
neither can we confide too far in him and the more that confidence is firm,
humble, and respectable, the more and in greater abundance, do we receive what
we ask, Deuteronomy. iv. 29, 31. -- Let not even thy sins be an hinderance to thy
trust and confidence. God can as easily forgive the most enormous sins, as the
least and it is as impossible for thee to forsake only one sin by thy own
strength as a great number.

He who in his last hours puts his trust in God and gives himself up entirely
to his care, with an assurance that every thing will turn to his good, whether
joy or grief, and that he is willing and able to succor him, such an one
forces and penetrates into his heart, in such a manner that God (if we may so
speak) cannot refuse him his help, Isa. xlix. 15, 16. For if God would not
succor him, nothing could comfort him. He who asks of our Lord that which
seems impossible, with entire confidence, will sooner have his request granted,
than he who asks little with a weak confidence. For our Savior himself
declares, that every thing is possible to him that believes, Mat. ix. 23. And
he tells his disciples, Mat. xxi. 21. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, if ye
believe, ye shall receive it.

CHAP. XII. Of our indisposition to virtue; and how (...) may through the effect
of fervent prayer, be enabled to turn away from sin.
A TRUE christian ought, daily, by divine help, to grow stronger and stronger
in the path of virtue, never allowing himself to commit the least sin, either
voluntarily or through custom. For habitual sins prevent all progress in virtue;
wherefore it is absolutely necessary to watch continually over the roots of
sin, in the heart, of which great numbers often remain, tending to disorderly
passions, even in those who have been long exercised in the practice of piety;
such as anger, hatred, luxury and other vices, which have often drawn away and
sunk into perdition, even persons who had made great progress in piety and had
been much favored by God, for want of having carefully watched over these
dangerous roots. Evil thoughts and loose imaginations also greatly hinder the
divine operation, trouble the heart and drive from it the holy spirit, which
cannot dwell with impure or vain thoughts; these the more they are given way
to, the deeper roots they take in the heart.

The devil is always about us and mixes with that to which he knows our nature
is most inclined, in order to strengthen sin in us. He walks about as a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. v. 8. He seeks to find us in a
weak moment off of our watch and destitute of devotion, when one of the windows
of our senses are, as it were open, to give entrance to some bad thoughts;
then, if we are not on our guard he comes in and robs us of what we have. It is
a most lamentable case when a christian suffers himself to be overcome by
satan, more especially as we may obtain from God the most powerful help against
him, if we seek properly for it.

If thou will overcome thy spiritual enemies, thou must shun company and all
occasions of sin; keeping thy flesh under, with discretion, and driving away
satan by thy prayers.

As soon as thou art sensible of the motion of any evil passion in thee turn
from it, without delay, enter into thy nothingness, and hasten to draw near to
God, by a wise renunciation of thyself; even, as a poor beggar and servant
filled with sin. Lay before God, with a religious fear, the depth of corruption
attendant on thy nature; confide fully in him and although he does not
immediately grant thy request do not run out into words and deeds; thou shall
be safe; for it is certain that there is none but God, alone, who can and will
deliver thee from the burden of thy sins. Thou ought also, through a
contemplation of Jesus Christ, to withstand the image of, and inclination to
thy former corruptions; for as God has enclosed great virtue, even in stones
and plants, toward curing of bodily diseases; how much more think thou,
there is virtue contained in our blessed Savior's sufferings, to cure the
maladies of the soul. It is there thou ought to cast thyself, at the feet of
thy heavenly Father, that he may vouchsafe to come to thy help, through the
mediation of his Son's sufferings; it is by this holy mediation, that thou
may obtain every particular grace from God. -- When we find ourselves guilty
of any fault, don't let us dwell thereon, but gather up the scattered powers of
our minds under a sense of deep sorrow, for our transgression, having our
recourse, in simplicity, to God alone, pouring out our grief with deep sighs
into his bosom; making fervent application to our dear Lord for forgiveness and
grace in time of need; with a renewal of our good resolution of living entirely
to him, and a firm confidence in his mercy. Let us not stand, as it were, afar
off through fear of approaching him; our strength lies in being near him. On
humble application to God, confessing and forsaking our sins he will forgive
them, Sam. xii. 13.

God is much more disposed to receive us, than we are to go to him. Our daily
sins can never be more easily blotted out than by a quick, fervent and sincere
return to God and turning away from sin, to the utmost of our power. Wherefore
continually watch over thyself, and maintain a mutual return from thee to God,
and from God to thee; with sincere thanks, more especially as thou have, so
frequently, found forgiveness, through the precious treasure of the sufferings of
Jesus Christ, Zach. xiii. 1.

CHAP. XIII. How we ought to gather our minds unto God.
A SERVANT of Christ has said, If thou will gather thyself into God, thou must
be divorced from thy senses, for God is a spirit, John iv. 24. Observe if thou
have not suffered something to come betwixt thee and God, by giving way to a
self-seeking disposition. Be careful to observe by his light and grace, the
presence of the divine essence in thee, how God reveals himself to thee in
himself, and in all creatures. Go continually forth from thy selfishness and
activity; (much is contained in these expressions) and in order more distinctly
to understand them, thou must observe that the more thy soul is poured out,
through the force of reason and the senses, the more it is filled with
imaginations. The more it labors for that which is outward, the more it is
weakened and becomes inwardly sick as to God. For when the inferior faculties
attend on their own operations, the soul is obliged to cooperate with them.
Here the creatures darken the spirit, and so fill it with other objects, that
the soul cannot see God, nor give itself up entirely to him.

We must seek God in ourselves, by the strength of a chaste love, which gathers
up all the powers of the soul, and draws them from all outward dissipations and
operations; that we may re-enter the inward rest, and the door may be shut to
every figure and image which may disturb the mind. -- Wherefore let us turn our
senses, our reason and our memory with love toward God, in the center of the
soul, and there cleave to him, in humble silent adoration, where all thoughts
and imaginations are brought down and silenced; it is in this interior
recollection that grace begins its operation and from whence this pure spirit
flows into the faculties of the soul.

Turn thyself in this manner toward God, amend thy evil practices, abstract
thy senses, as much as possible from exterior objects. It is by submission of
the will, by drawing off from the creatures and a proper application of God's
gifts, that thou will be clothed with true humility, and receive the spirit.
For in order to do God's work, he requires a soul empty and freed from care;
depending on him alone: God has no want of any thing else to do his work in us,
but that we be truly emptied and stand in pure nothingness before him.

Dwell under a sense of thy proper nothingness, thy natural nothingness, thy
sinful nothingness, and there remain firm. -- And if, at any time, thou feel
thy heart raised in love and gratitude toward God, and finds a disposition to
celebrate his majesty and goodness toward thee, do it with humility and return
immediately into thy nothingness, there to meditate on this wonderful bounty as
well to mankind in general, as to thee in particular; also, to contemplate with
awe on his humanity and his sufferings. Return him hearty thanks for all these
benefits. -- Ask of him all those virtues which thou stand in need of;
submit thyself, with all thy heart to his secret will, in an entire submission
of thyself; thus flow, as it were, entirely into God. -- Embrace him, in a full
confidence; represent to thyself, at all times, thy bloody spouse, and thus
pass from the wounds of his humanity into the light of his divinity; in this
exercise adhere strongly to the advice given in scripture, Psalm xxxvii, 5, 7.
Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass.
And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the lights and thy judgment as
the noonday. Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him.

The creatures as they come out of the hand of God are good and amiable, but
they are not the goodness itself; nor are they that on which we ought to fix
our love. -- God is alone the essence of goodness and of love. Consider that
he, though so great and good is always with thee; that he looks upon thee in his
inexpressible love, that he sees thee, in all thy actions, thy words and thy
thoughts; even a thousand times better than thou see thyself, and withal is
always, through his benignity, waiting upon thee and willing to receive thee.
Wherefore labor with all thy strength and desire to be united to him, in a
perfect and efficacious love; that thy nothingness and weakness may be quite
swallowed up and reformed, so may thou become something in him, who is the only
true and truly existing being.

Then consider the secret places of the Almighty; for he is hidden in all
things as says, Isa. xlv, 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God
of Israel, the Savior. It is mavelous concerning the Almighty, that he so
hides himself that we cannot perceive nor contemplate his presence, except at
such times and moments as he disposes us, in spirit, thereto.

And yet he is nearer to all things than they are to themselves, who although he
dwells in the center of the soul, nevertheless is hid to all the senses and
unknown to all outward things, yet there is nothing so easy to be obtained as
God, where a good will and sincere desire prevails, we may reach his immensity
with a poor and broken spirit.

Thou ought to enter upon the work of thy salvation, with a resolute and
unshaken mind, which in a lively and chaste love of God, as it were, hates
itself and dying to all creatures, renounces earthly loves, that it may
eternally possess God, in a pure and faithful love. And when thy merciful
Father perceives thy heart thus purified and tending toward him, he will pour
himself into thy soul, as the sun pours out its rays into the open air.

When the spirit is sensible of the presence of God, it goes, as it were, out
of itself, all that it has leaves it, and it plunges itself into its own
nothingness, even sometimes imagining that its intelligence is more stupid than
that of the brute creation. But then the King upholds it by his divine virtue,
for the more we are abased, the more we are exalted, and we do not properly see
the height of God but in the valley of humility.

Here a man receives so great light, and so much knowledge of the truth, that
all that is not God is irksome to him, Psalm lxxiii. 15. The more humility he
maintains in his heart, the more light he receives. Hence proceeds great joy in
spirit. The whole world cannot hurt him that is fixed in this state; neither
can he ever fall from it, except he should take a delight in himself, or should
attribute to himself those graces he has received, as though he was the author of
them.

CHAP. XIV. How we may be delivered from all selfish desires; with some account
of the sufferings which God permits to come upon those he loves.
WHEN a man finds himself deeply exercised and nature is quite poor, he is, as
it were, surprised and would have something to himself; he would willingly look
into and understand the work of God; but be careful of such an an inquiry, else
the Lord may leave thee in this time of need. -- Before nature becomes wholly
mortified many sorrowful things come to pass, for she is so corrupted since the
fall of our first father, and has so vehement an inclination to satisfy
herself, that she would willingly have always before her some object, wherein
to delight herself, either in words or actions amongst men or in solitude; and
when overcome on one side, she raises on the other, always seeking to satisfy
self, even in the gifts of God; so that she prefers herself to God in
appropriating all things to herself, by which she deprives God of his praises
and glory, and imperceptibly hinders his gifts and graces from operating in the
soul.

This immoderate love of one's self reigns at this time in a deplorable manner
in all states, 2 Timothy iii. 2. Nevertheless it must perish and be entirely
extinguished. We must die to ourselves and be entirely stripped of our own
will, of a vain complacency in surveying our own seize, with delight, as
well as of all other sins, if we are sincerely willing to be united to God; but
this will not come to pass without sustaining several grievous combats, by many
victories obtained, and by renewedly making a sacrifice of our selfishness.
This is not the work of a day, it will require much pains and labor before the
mind can be drawn away from temporal things; and our own wills so reduced as to
submit to God's will as well in prosperity as in adversity. -- Contrary things
cannot subsist together. If we will have fire the wood must be consumed. The
seed must die before we can reap fruit: If thou desires that God may always
operate in thee, thou must remain in a passive state, and keep thy faculties
from their own operation, in a full and entire renunciation of self from a
sense of thy inability and nothingness. The deeper this nothingness is, the
more real is the divine operation; for our own righteousness is as filthy rags,
Isa. lxiv. 6. When God speaks, all the faculties of thy soul must keep silence
and must cease from action. This death and destruction of self is so heavy to
him that bears it and his nature so pressed thereby, that he knows not what to
do; this pain proceeds from an unwillingness in the creature to die,
nevertheless we must necessarily pass through it by virtue of the death of
Christ. The more there is of sin and selfishness in our natural state, the more
sensible is the pain. Our salvation is sooner perfected in suffering and in
cessation of action, than in activity. In this state we meet with many
hindrances, for nature is active and would willingly cooperate and have some
object wherewith to ease her pain, as pious readings, religious conversations,
and the like; but in this state it is better to deny ourselves of such
comforts, if able to support without it. For the new spiritual birth will not
attain its perfection, if not preceeded by deadly anguish; and every thing that
alleviates these sufferings, will prevent that birth which would have been
attained through a constant perservance therein.

Our dear Savior conducts those of his friends whom he would bring into the
greatest perfection, by a path so strait and desert that they are often fearful
what will become of them. He proves them for their greater advantage, as he did
that good man Job. Sometimes he withholds, from them all sense of his grace, of
his union and of his love, leaving them thus stripped and barren; as though he
had never known nor loved them. This was the state of desertion wherein our
dear Savior was in, when upon the cross he cried out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me, Mat. xxvi. 39. From whence we learn, that in whatever state
we be, either of joy or grief, we ought to remain quiet, and to labor, truly,
to give ourselves up, even though all sense of grace should be taken from us: Our
virtues mostly proceed from our afflictions as patience proceeds from
persecution; humility from disgrace; and so of all the rest.

Sometimes God permits his friends to be exposed to many sorts of temptations,
as pride, luxury, hellish envy and other sins which they thought they had
already overcome. -- They are sometimes exposed to checks of conscience, to
doubts, incredulity, blasphemy and hatred of God and to other like terrible
assaults, which it seems impossible to support. These temptations are at times
so pressing that they seem to (...) overcome us: Nevertheless there is yet some
resistance in the superior part of the soul; but which is hardly to be
perceived, on account of the obscurity and weakness in which (...) find
ourselves. -- This pain becomes the harder when the faculties of the soul most
strongly resists sin; especially in fleshly liberties, for he who is pressed
down with sorrow, willingly seeks for comfort from nature; except when
forbidden by the spirit. But whatever may be thy trials, whether light or hard,
bear them with patience, don't endeavor to withdraw from under them; but
remain in quiet, don't turn away from the presence of God, however distressing
may be the thoughts which trouble thee; let them return as they come, don't
notice them. For though all the devils in hell and the whole world should pour
into thy soul and body, all their malice and all their impurities, if thou art
truly sincere before God, and thy resolution be to die rather than voluntarily
to commit any one sin, they will purify thee in the virtue of Christ, and will
prepare thee for the most excellent gifts! If thou could only remain in
humility and be truly given up, thy heavenly Father would not fail to deliver
thee in a suitable time and send thee comfort, from himself, in a manner which
would infinitely exceed all thy afflictions. All accidents, whatever they be,
will prepare thee for God, if thou will only note and make proper use of them
in silence and patience.

It is thus God often tries his children, and they also meet with trials from
those with whom they live, by hard words and violent reproaches, condemning
their ways and actions, as mere folly and dangerous heresy and error, that
thereby, they may be truly humbled, as well in their own spirits, as in the
eyes of the world. For they must be fastened to the cross with Christ, naked
and destitute of all support, and freed from every thing they were naturally
attached to; so that their own will may be truly brought under subjection.
Wherefore suffer with patience; forsake thyself, be circumspect and keep
silence, saying in thyself, Lord thou know I seek thee alone, then God will
combat for thee. Be thou silent. Ah! if thou knew the inexpressible good
which results from this state and how great is the love of God to thee, even in
the pains he brings thee under, and with how much ease these trials drive away
the evil spirit, thou would run to meet the cross and would look upon that
day as lost, wherein thou should have no occasion of suffering.

He who can suffer in patience, with an humble trust, under the secret
judgments of God, as long as it pleases him, is sure of his protection, God
draws him to himself and fills him with his love.

Turn thyself toward God, with all thy strength, verify in acts what thou have
now read; retire into the inward center of thy heart, it is there that truth
resides; it will not be through a multitude of words that thou will attain it,
but rather in keeping silent, in suffering and remaining quiet, in denying
thyself, and confiding in God. Ever remember, what thou art, where thou art,
from whence thou sprung, and where thou would go. Take also care what thou
do, why thou do it, and persevere constantly in virtue and truth until
death.

CHAP. XV. Describing some weaknesses and frailties that attend many pious
people, the giving way to which proves a great hinderance to their
establishment in a truly christian life.
OUR spiritual progress is much hindered through giving way to self-love of any
kind, as also to an unwarrantable affection for any creature whatever. Every
love that takes possession of the heart of man, and which kindles in him the
desire of seeing, hearing, or possessing any thing, that does not tend to the
glory of God, is a disorderly love of the creatures; such as is the love and
desire after earthly things; money, wealth, houses, clothes, books, furniture
and such things which we may possess, or make use of, for necessity, or for
superfluity; and which we often seek after through fleshly liberty; setting our
affections thereon, in such sort, that we bear with impatience to have them
taken from us. Such persons, as these, are esteemed to have a propriety in
those things, as they hold them without regard, whether their possessing of
them is, or is not agreeable to the will of God; this situation is by some
spiritual writers called PROPRIETY the will of the creature not being
subservient to the divine will, which requires of those who are truly poor in
spirit, that their desires be so disengaged from what they possess, as that
they possess them, as though they possessed them not, 1 Cor. vii. 29, 31. being
ready, freely to give up and forsake all, when God requires it; so that if
these things are taken from them, by God's permission, their understanding and
will should consent thereto, without murmur.

Another hinderance arises from the desire of riches and honor; from
sensuality and immoderate indulgence, in eating, drinking, etc. giving way to
vain, needless and uncharitable words and actions; also in vain curiosity and
other dissipations and disfusions of our senses. It is by means of these
things, that we lose a taste to spiritual exercises; for a sensual man has no
relish for those things which belong to the spirit: Here the inferior powers
debase the spirit, and turn it away from the sovereign good, causing it to take
its rest in things that are sensible and vile. Truth allows us all that is
necessary, provided we do not desire to satisfy our fleshly appetites; for the
beginning of the spiritual life is a death to the natural senses; and requires
that we turn away from all the creatures in whom we used to confide; in order
that we may attach ourselves to that which is eternal and divine.

A further hinderance in our spiritual progress lies in the good opinion we
have of ourselves, and our hidden pride, this often arises from the esteem we
have of our good works, and other religious exercises; as also from the
sweetness and inward joy we are sometimes sensible of. Here the very progress
such make in virtue is itself a cause of stumbling to them; this false esteem
of their virtues becomes their chief hinderance, as it proceeds from an heart
unmortified, impure and proud; such persons possess all they have in propriety.
They depend more on their own works than on the freedom of the children of God,
purchased by the precious sufferings of Christ, in which alone, they ought to
seek for peace and rest, Romans iii. 24, 25. Hence they fall into pride; seek a
vain reputation; look upon themselves as of consequence and are too ready to
judge other people with sourness and passion. -- There is nothing so hurtful in
a spiritual life as pride and self-love; this casts many into perdition who had
made a good beginning and been once divinely favored.

There also arises a great obstruction to an establishment in religion from a
desire which prevails in some to be esteemed and favored by men, James iv. 4.
Many, from a desire of these things, do that which they ought not to do, and
omit to do what they ought, in order to gain favor, or avoid being exposed to
the jest, the scorn and hatred of men; these forget the apostolic advice, Gal.
i. 10. Do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of Christ. Such if they do not humble themselves and amend, will suffer
an irreparable damage.

An inordinate care for and desire of earthly things, is also often a
considerable hinderance; the apostle tells the believers, That he that goes to
war does not entangle himself in the affairs of this life, Tim. ii. 2, 4.
Nevertheless most are solicitous, and even torment themselves to attain to many
things they do not really stand in need of: In these the inclination is so much
on outward things, and the desire of the soul so filled therewith, that it is
painful for them, to think of, and confide in God as they ought to do. We are
indeed, exhorted in scripture to labor and be careful for that which is
necessary, nevertheless lest the heart should be carried away with such cares,
distrust and solicitude is wholly forbidden to the disciples and believers in
Christ, Mat. vi. 25, 28. These things obscure our faith in, and dependence on
God; lessen our charity to our neighbor, and expose us to many temptations and
snares of the devil, 1 Timothy vi. 9. -- We must also be very careful to preserve
our hearts from bad or vain thoughts, and even from such thoughts, which though
not evil in themselves, yet are not of use. Indulgences of this kind show the
heart to be relaxed and vain; and to have but little love to God. Those bad
thoughts and suggestions proceed from the enemy and although we may not wholly
give ourselves up to them, yet where they are indulged, they are a great
hinderance to true piety and tend to drive away the holy spirit. They
manifestly show that there is a want of mortification, and that a sufficient
watch is not kept. If a sufficient degree of zeal prevailed we could not thus
abuse our time; but these thoughts would, through divine help, be drove away and
the heart continually recur to the contemplation of Christ, and meditation of
his sufferings.

These hindrances and many more, which might be mentioned, must sooner or
later be mortified, and entirely stripped off, through the divine power, Ephesians. iv.
12. The reason that they still live in us, is because we do not closely enough
observe and watch over the inward state of our hearts. The foundation of the
heavenly life lies in retirement, silence, tranquillity and a continual
attention to the voice of God speaking inwardly to our hearts.

Those who voluntarily indulge themselves in these evil dispositions, either in
whole, or in part, will still remain alive, unto sin, nor will they be
delivered, notwithstanding their confession of them, Prove. xxviii. 13. Even the
good works of such people are defiled with sin; they can make no progress in
the spiritual life: For the vices to which they are still attached, are like so
many thick veils, black and hard, which cover the eyes of the soul, so that
they know not themselves; for the light of grace cannot enlighten them, because
this covering of their inward eyes and ears hinders them, so from seeing and
hearing that they will excuse and even vindicate their practice, which
occasions their still remaining under captivity to sin. The tie by which they
are united to the light is so small, that they easily fall into great sins, and
there is scarce one amongst an hundred of such persons, but are carried away by
death, before they are prepared. If we could but sensibly feel the deplorable
state of such souls, who after they have been in a good degree enlightened,
give way to such evil indulgences, we should very much dread the dangerous
consequences of voluntarily giving way to commit even one sin. On the other
hand, how happy is that soul who dies to itself; how pure, how chaste and free
from sin and of all inordinate desire; how quiet and free from pain and fear;
united to God in spirit here and eternally hereafter.

The sum of what has been said, is contained in two expressions, that is in
self-love and in the love of God. Self-love seeks its own advantage. The love
of God seeks his will and glory, and the advantage of others. So much love as a
man has to God so much does he despise himself, and so much does he renounce
his own will, through the power of God. Self-love can go so far as to cause us to
despise God; and the love of God can so increase, that we come so to hate
ourselves, and our own will, that in all things we wholly renounce ourselves
for the love of God: -- Hence it clearly appears that self-love and the love of
the creatures and of sin, is the spring which defiles the heart, and casts it
into trouble and disorder. God give us grace, with entire sincerity, to enter
into this labor, and to love him, in time, and dwell with him in an happy
eternity.

A SUPPOSITION OF TWO DROPS REASONING TOGETHER, BY WAY OF PARABLE. EXTRACED
FROM THE WRITINGS OF JOHN EVERARD.
SUPPOSE two drops apart from the sea, should reason together, and the one
should say to the other

Fellow drop! Whence are we? Can thou conceive either whence we come, or to
whom we belong, or whither we shall go? Something we are, but what will in a
short time become of us, can thou tell? And the other drop should answer:
Alas poor fellow drop! Be assured, we are nothing; for the sun may arise, and
draw us up, and scatter us, and bring us to nothing. Says the other again,
suppose it do? For all that, yet we are, we have a being, we are something.

Why, what are we? Says the other.

Why, brother drop! Do thou not know? We, even we, as small and contemptible
as we are, in ourselves, yet we are members of the sea: Poor drops though we
be, yet let us not be discouraged: We, even we, belong to the vast ocean.

How? Says the other, we belong to the sea, to the ocean: How can that be? We
have heard of the mighty greatness of the ocean. -- We have heard that the sea
is great and wide wherein are things creeping innumerable. -- That they who go
down into the sea, in ships they see the wonders of Lord in the deep. -- In the
sea also we hear, there be these mighty rocks, whose foundations are
unmovable. Thou say, that we are of the sea, and belong to the ocean. Where
is any such vastness or strength in us? Therefore, whatever thou say, we
cannot be of the ocean.

No, it is true, says the other; for the present we are not of the ocean,
because we are not yet joined to the ocean: And except we perish, and be
dissolved, as it were, to nothing; we are nothing, but if the sun draws us up,
scatters us and dissolves us to nothing; so that we are not seen to be so much
as drops, then are we like to be something; for then we shall return into the
mighty ocean to which we belong: And then we are of those that have in us these
rocks, these ships and fish innumerable: Then we may claim and appropriate to
ourselves, whatever may be appropriated to the sea, or to the ocean, as well as
any other drops; for then we are united and made one with the ocean.

THE APPLICATION.
SO just in like manner, suppose two mortal men reasoning together: -- The one
in fear and jealousy, and the other in vision and revelation. What are we? says
the one: We are nothing says the other; we are but a shadow, a dream, a bubble;
not so much as the drop of a bucket, or as the dust of the balance, we are but
as the morning dew before the sun, and as stubble before the sire, and as smoke
before the wind, ready to be consumed, scattered and dissolved to nothing.

Oh! says the other: Though in ourselves we are but shadows, bubbles and poor
drops, and as thou say, we are no more than a drop, a bubble, soon up and
soon down: We have no power in ourselves, yet we are, we have a being. Nay, we
are more than thou can imagine. -- Why brother, what are we? Why? I Will tell
thee what we are: We are members of the very body of Jesus Christ, we are (as I
may say) flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; and we shall be made one
spirit with him, and therefore be contented: Though we in ourselves are poor
and contemptible, and apart from him nothing, yea worse than nothing: Yet by
the grace of God we are, what we are: We (in ourselves) cannot say, I am, or I
live: We cannot call ourselves I: -- I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and in time I shall see myself to live in him, and then I may, and thou
may claim the same life, the same power with him; for we shall return into
him who is almighty; it is truth, we shall be dissolved in ourselves, but we
shall be emptied into him, who is infinitely vaster than ten thousand seas or
oceans.

Ah brother! says the other, say thou so, how can these things be? We have
heard, that Jesus Christ is God equal with his Father; that he is almighty,
incomprehensible, immense, etc. We have heard, that he has all power given him
in heaven and in earth, that he rules over all his enemies, and treads them all
under his feet; that he rules them with a rod of iron, and crushes them in
pieces like a potter's vessel. -- In us, behold, there is none of these things;
we are poor drops and weak creatures; as little as we are, we are full of
nothing but sin and corruption; we are empty, vile and despicable, not only
because of our smallness and nothingness, but by reason of our sinfulness and
impurity. Oh! says the other be contented; Corn cannot bring forth fruit
except it die, but if it die, it brings forth much fruit: Neither can a drop
return to the ocean, except it be dissolved in itself, and from its own proper
being: So, even so we, poor drops in ourselves, we are nothing, empty, poor
despised nothings, less than nothing, apart from the immense ocean; but if we
can be content to die, and forsake ourselves, then shall we return, and be made
one with that immense ocean. -- Could we but be contented to suffer ourselves
to be annihilated, and be brought to nothing we should be made something. If
that blessed sun of righteousness would but arise, dissolve us, and draw us up
into himself, then we, even we, as poor as we be, should be united and made one
with the Almighty. The only reason, why we remain such empty drops, is because
we esteem ourselves to be somewhat, when indeed we are nothing. Oh these high
swelling towering thoughts must be brought down, that so God himself may take
possession of us, that we may be joined to the Lord himself and so be made
partakers of his life and glory. As long as thou art something in thyself, so
long thou art nothing, and when thou beginnest to be nothing in thy own esteem,
then thou beginnest to be really something; then is Jesus Christ beginning to
arise and to exalt himself in thee -- till this work is done. Christ is kept
under and thyself is exalted, and it rules and governs thee and terminates all
thy actions, however they may seem to thee and to other men, as much lifted up
in themselves as thou art (I say) to thee and to others in the same sphere with
thee, they seem never so glorious and beautiful; yet Christ is crucified and
SELF is alive, and set in the throne. As David says, Up Lord! why sleep
thou? Avenge us on our adversaries. God is asleep in men, till this work is
brought about in them. -- Till thou art laid low, till thyself be brought down,
the heathen are exalted, and Jesus Christ is trampled down. -- These things, we
ought to find in our own experience. Not only to hear and read the history of
them, as done in and by others; but to see and feel, how they are really
accomplished in ourselves; for except we see these fightings, conflicting and
resisting accomplished in us: Except we have found the strong man bound in us,
and felt those fightings and resistings that he makes, till he be bound and
overcome, we are yet in our sins: In ourselves indeed, in our own wisdom we can
know nothing; and in our own strength we can do nothing; but by his wisdom and
by the communication thereof; by his power of Christ, and by his strength in
us, we shall be more than conquerors; and we shall find the words of our
Savior true in ourselves: All power is given to me in heaven and earth. --
Then is the day come that God shall wipe away tears from thine eyes, and thou
shall hear Christ himself in thee proclaiming, Behold I make all things new.
Then also art thou that blessed meek one, spoken of, Mat. v. That shall inherit
the earth.

The way to life is being dead to the world, and dead to the flesh, the world
being crucified to us and we to the world: -- Come, I Will tell thee, thou
blessed soul! To such a pass thou art now come that as thou stinkest to the
world, so the world stinks to thee; as all things are ready to forsake thee, so
thou art ready to forsake them: So that thou beginnest to see no excellency in
any thing the world presents to thee; no not in PROPRIETY, which the whole
world, ye generally all esteem so highly of, and are of all thing lothest to
forego; I say to this man, even propriety, one of the world's chiefest goods,
begins to die to him, and he to it: It departs from us, and we depart from the
love of propriety, or laying claim, with affection, to any thing in the world,
but having it, as having it not, as 1 Cor. vii. That both they that have wives
be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though
they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it; for the
fashion of this world passes away. Here is your meek man, your emptied man,
your sequestered man. This man is a man dead, and clean cast out of sight, as
David says, clean out of mind; he is as a bubble, that nobody sets by, and it
is his life, his glory, his riches to be so, and these men are fools to the
world, yea stark idiots: But yet be contented, happy, yea thrice happy are
those men, that are come to this, to be thus dead men. This was the condition,
the blessed apostles and disciples were brought to: Oh! But where are such
disciples now? As the apostle challenges, 1 Cor. i. 20. Wherenow is the scribe?
Where is the disputer of this world? Where are your great doctors, and your
learned men? Are they doctors in this school of the cross of Christ? No! No!
nothing less: Are they dead men? Are they come to this, to let others rejoice
in the heaping up riches, and adding house to house, land to land, and making
themselves and their posterity great in the world? These things should not
concern dead men: And says David again: I am as a broken pitcher, that can
hold no water: Just so is this man; he is as a broken pitcher, that can hold
nothing: -- Pour riches into him, pour health, pour wealth, pour praise, pour
honor into him, or pour into him the contrary; whatever ye give to him or take
from him, he is all one; if thou strikest him on one the cheek, he cannot
revenge, he will rather turn the other; curse him, and he will pray for thee;
and this he learns of his dear Savior Jesus Christ; and this he has attained
by being united, and by being made one with him; whose practice and command you
know it was so to do, and whose nature and life he partakes of, knowing
assuredly (by real experience) that there is no other way to find rest to his
soul, but by forsaking his own will, and living free in the world and dead unto
it and to his own proper will and affections; dead to propriety. This is the
throne of peace and rest, where God raises up the poor from the dust, and
lifted up the needy from the dunghill, that he may set them with princes, even
with the princes of his people, Psalm cxiii. 7, 8. -- Oh! How happy, and how
free does such a soul live? How at liberty and free from those chains, that
most men are fettered with? As love of money, honors, houses and lands,
distracted with hopes on one hand and fears on the other, and are never at
rest; but are like the troubled sea, tumbled this way and that way; rolling to
and again, and never quiet: But this man is delivered, set free from all such
things. What a comfort is it, not to fear death, to account death his gain (for
this man dies daily) not to fear to answer all our enemies in the gate; for
death is but one of God's bailiffs? And what care I, which of his collectors,
or toll-gatherers seize upon me? To look boldly, undauntedly on death, on
satan, on sin, as knowing them all overcome and brought under? What a comfort
is it to feel and see our graces, faith, hope and patience, etc. to revive, to
live and flourish, which in former times flagged and died? What a comfort is
this to see, that when either the north wind or the south wind blow, yet still
he is safe. Let him be in any kind of condition, yet his garden prospers, his
soul flourishes, and the spices thereof flow out; nay I will be bold to say to
this man: Nothing is a rod, nothing a judgment; let God do what he will with
him, he can see no anger, no frowns in any thing, but all that comes, is to him
mercies and loving-kindnesses; he can see a great deal of comfort in God's rod:
Thy rod and thy staff (says David) they comfort me. Then the rod is no rod,
but a favor and a mercy; for he has expanded, opened and given up himself
solely to God and his will: This is the soul that lives with God and lives in
God, this soul is at rest, and none else but this soul; for he has in part
possession of the kingdom of heaven already, and the kingdom of heaven
possession of him, he having received the first fruits, even while he is in the
body: And now is fulfilled, and the days are come, that the bride speaks of,
Cant. ii. 11, 12. For lo! The winter is past, the rain is over and gone, the
flowers appear on the earth, the time of singing of birds is come, the voice of
the turtle is heard in the land.

AN eminent servant of God, who had known deliverance from the dark powers, and
experimentally felt the powers of the world to come, a few hours before his
death, expressed himself in the following words: There is a spirit which I
feel, that delights to do no evil, nor to revenge any wrong, but delights to
endure all things, in hopes to enjoy its own in the end; its hope is to outlive
all wrath and contention, and to weary out all exaltation and cruelty, or
whatsoever is of a nature contrary to itself; it sees to the end of all
temptations; as it bears no evil in itself, so it conceives none in thought to
any other; for its ground and spring is the mercies and forgiveness of God; its
crown is meekness; its life is everlasting love unfeigned, and takes its
kingdom with entreaty, and not with contention, and keeps it by lowliness of
mind; in God alone it can rejoice, though none else reregard it, or can own its
life; it is conceived in sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it, nor
does it murmur at grief and oppressions; it never rejoiceth but through
sufferings, for with the world's joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being
forsaken: I have fellowship therein with those that lived in dens and desolate
places of the earth, who through death obtained resurrection and eternal holy
life.

VIRTUE, when abstractedly considered, often makes but a faint impression on
the human mind; but when the lives of those are set before us, who have adorned
the ordinary stations of life by a steady and uniform pursuit of virtue, and a
cheerful and resolute discharge of the duties incumbent upon them, there is
scarce any thing that can have a more happy influence upon our minds, or more
effectually induce us to seek for divine help, to rouse us from that lethargy
and inactive state into which the generality of mankind are sunk: Even the
vicious, and those who are enslaved to corruption, from a feeling view of the
happy effects of a virtuous life, are ready, with one of old, to cry out, Let
me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numb.
xxiii. 10.

IN the life of the lady ELIZABETH HASTINGS, A very amiable account is given of
the extraordinary charity, piety, etc of this lady, by Sir RICHARD STEEL in the
Tatler, No. 42, under the character of ASPASIA. She died in 1789.
we meet with an extraordinary instance of the happy effects, which
christianity has upon those who, by joining with the calls of grace, become
willing to give up their whole hearts to follow its dictates. This pious lady's
first principle appears to have been the glory of God, and the purity of her
own heart; next to this, a continual solicitude and labor to hold all her
capacities, all her power, and all her fortunes continually upon the stretch
for the good of all men, weeping with those that wept; rejoicing with those
that rejoiced; given to the hospitality; distributing to the necessities of
saints, and to those that were less so, having joy at the conversion of a
sinner, or the least appearance of it; but the care of all her cares was the
stranger; the fatherless and the widow; the needy, and he that has no helper;
the lame, the halt and the blind. -- And in this place, says the author of her
life, what shall I say! or how can I expect to be believed! The bent of her
spirit ever lay toward these: She had a share in all their sufferings; she
would often converse with them, and enquire into their history with as much
poverty of spirit, as they were in of outward condition; she would study their
particular cases, and put them in the way of better welfare; some of these were
ever in her house, and frequently in great numbers; and it was no neglect of
here is, if any one went away unrelieved with meat, physic, raiment or money;
many of these that lived remote, had yearly allowances, and large sums issued
out into distant parts of the kingdom. Her still larger applications were fixed
pensions upon reduced families, the maintenance of her own charity-school,
contributions to others, etc. etc. She was a great mistress of all parts of
economy with respect to what she laid out upon herself; her body, she knew,
was the temple of the Holy Ghost, which the believer must possess in
sanctification and honor, wherefore her support of it in meat, drink and
sleep, was ever bounded by necessity; for they that walk in the spirit, as this
pious lady did, die progressively to every vanity, and dare not indulge the
hurtful gratifications of the flesh, but labor to keep it under, as knowing it
to be the seat and repository of their most dangerous and deadly enemy.
Nevertheless she sought not her salvation by the force of her alms, highly
affluent as they were; for these, though necessary duties, yet, she well knew,
were not the charity of the gospel; not that charity which the apostle Paul so
divinely describes at 1 Cor. xiii. 3. She was sensible, that Jesus Christ must
be revealed in the heart, before we can have any just claim to discipleship,
and that it is his ruling and bringing all things therein subjection to his
spirit, that was the great and only principle of christian charity. -- She
knew, that the great scene of religion lay within, in the right government of
the heart; accordingly her eye was ever upon her heart, to see that all its
principles were cleansed from evil mixtures, had no taint from self-love, were
not sullied with vainglory; her care was to observe the tendency of all its
motions, how its struggles weakened in sinful desires, endeavoring continually
to nourish it by acts of faith in the blood of her Redeemer. She had well
learnt to overcome evil with good, to suffer long, and be kind, to bear all
things, and if ever by speech, carriage or otherwise, she suspected that she
had disturbed the spirit of any, she had no peace with herself, till she had
taken care for the recovery of theirs.

Much more might be said of the endowments and virtues of this true disciple of
Jesus Christ, more especially of her patience under sufferings, and resignation
to the divine will; under the painful dispensation she passed through, during
the last eighteen months of her life, occasioned by a cancer in her breast,
which, notwithstanding she suffered it to be separated from her body, yet in
the end occasioned her death. This painful operation she not only bore with
patience, but even rejoiced, that she was counted worthy to suffer, knowing her
Savior had suffered in his flesh, and that as sufferings was the way to his
perfection, it must also be the way to ours, this being the declared condition
of our being glorified with him, the truest marks of adoption, and the most
sovereign medicine sent from heaven for our cure. These truths this truly pious
lady was so well acquainted with, that she declared, She would not wish to be
out of her present situation, nor exchange it for any other at any price. Thus
with great meekness and tranquillity, with cheerfulness scarce to be believed,
in perfect serenity and freedom, she continued her usual life, till the time
appointed for the operation. When that time of deep trial came, she showed no
reluctance or struggle, but endured all even without complaint; only toward
the end she drew such a sigh, as the compassionate reader who reads this, may
do. Hence it appears, how those that follow the Lamb with sincerity, are
endowed with virtue and power resulting from the true spirit of his religion,
which others are unacquainted with. The night following the operation was not
indeed a night of much sleep, but of truly celestial rest; a night of
thanksgiving to her God, for the visible demonstration of his power in her, and
about her, for his stretched-out arm in her great deliverance, for the
bountiful provision he had made for the body and soul, holding all the powers
of her spirit exercised in acts of love, gratitude and adoration. She sooner
than was expected got upon her feet, and with every improvement that could be
made, into the same way of life, that she had been in before, wholly intent
upon the glory of God, and the good of her fellow creatures. But the distemper
only repressed for a time, rose up with new malignity, to the much greater
affliction of numbers in the world, than of her that bore it; for she had now
been, for some time, in the school of affliction, exercised with its sharp
discipline, and found its salutary effects. Under these sentiments her hope was
full of immortality, and the eternal weight of glory, now in full view, made
all her afflictions light. In this near and certain approach of death, her
cherishing warmth, like that of the sun, though it might be most felt by those
nearest, yet also reached those at greater distance; witness the great number
of letters she writ, and dictated to others, when she became unable to write,
full of sweet counsel, having for their argument the blessedness of piety;
pressing home the necessity of it, and setting forth its true nature; witness
also the number of persons of all conditions, who resorted at her house, to
behold the living power of religion in her, and to be benefited by her wisdom.
With some of these she continued in heavenly conferences as long as she had
strength. Her life was near drawing to its last stage, but her lamp and her
life must be extinguished together, and she must occupy till her Lord comes. --
Accordingly she convened her household, to strengthen and enforce every thing
that she had done or shown them before, by her dying counsels; and would have
extended this care to the whole village, but was restrained by the physician.
The path of the just is as a shining light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. The truly religious, whose evidences for heaven are clear,
rational, and well grounded, have a tide of joy springing up in their minds
beyond expression; something more moving and satisfactory than any one can
imagine, but they that perceive it. -- When they are just entering upon the
promised land, the splendour of the eternal day dawns upon them, and shines as
through the breaches of their shattered bodies, and raises in the inward man such
earnest of happiness, such foretastes of joy, as enables them to pass through the
valley of death in peace and triumph. As death drew near, she was in transport,
quite melted down with the impression of glory, broke out with a raised accent
into these words: Bless me, Lord! What is that I see! Oh! the greatness of the
glory that is revealed in me, -- that is before me. And some time after she had
so said, she fell asleep.

And now, reader, let me ask, What mistakes or delusions did this lady live
under; or what wrong judgment did she make of the nature and obligation of our
common christianity? Common I call it, for it is one and the same to every man,
and to every woman, wherever it is known, and to the practice of the essential
and life-giving part of it, is every man and every woman tied down at their
utmost peril. And if it be asked, what these are? The answer is, That they
cannot here indeed be well drawn out in particulars; but two principal ones, to
which the rest are reducible, are, A firm faith in, and dependence upon, Christ
-- And under the help and power of his spirit, a mighty labor to perfect that
holiness which he has taught us.

All indeed have not this lady's possibilities, and cannot give in alms
sevenfold more than they expend upon themselves; but there is scarce one, but
may give a cup of cold water, and great things are promised even to that, if it
is done in a right manner, and with a devont spirit. Again, all have not near
the same disengagements and leisure that she had, (...) have in common with
her, the same ^^^mand of their time, and therefore cannot maintain so close an
attendance upon spiritual exercises; yet nevertheless almost all may, at all
times, and in all places, preserve some sort of heavenly-mindedness, may strive
against sin, and use their best endeavors to keep themselves unspotted from
the world, and by locking up their senses against temptation, in good measure
quench the fiery darts of the enemy. -- And if of themselves they are not (as
most certainly they are not) sufficient for these things, yet the grace of God
is, if they turn to it, seek it earnestly, follow its holy motions, and put
themselves under its government. And that all may obtain the grace of God, is
certain; for it is common to all. Our gracious and merciful Savior, the sure
and faithful friend of those who are helpless and heavy laden, repeatedly
declares it to be so, and the whole tenor of the gospel contains a gracious
offer of salvation to every soul, who in sincerity prays to God for it.

A Christian's daily Conversation with GOD, Exemplified in a short Extract OF
THE HOLY LIFE of ARMELLE NICOLAS
THE person, whose daily conversation is here described, was not long since a
poor simple country maid, and servant to a great family in France. The whole
course of her life (...) very instructive, and a most shining pattern of a true
spiritual conversation. It Is remarkable, that this person who served God with
such unwearied prayer and watchfulness, was so ignorant, that she could neither
read nor write, and was in the station of a servant, constantly employed in
business and hard labor. Hence we see, that the true service of God is
spiritual, universal, plain and easy, so that no person can be excused from it
by any pretense whatsoever.

It Is not so much the changing of places, or names, or modes and forms, of any
thing without us, as the changing of our will and heart, that will render our
service acceptable to God. -- Hence the scripture declaring, what sort of
change is to be wrought in a soul, requires a translation from darkness to
light, ( Acts xxvi. 18.) from death to life, ( Ephesians. ii. 5.) and from being lost
to be found again.

The Lord give his grace to all that heartily desire is, always to walk before
him after such a pious manner as this devout soul did! wherefore she herself
gave the following account to the author of her life.

As soon as I wake in the morning, I throw myself into the arms of my heavenly
love, as a child into the arms of his father. I rise with a design to serve and
please him, and if I have time to pray, I fall upon my knees in his holy
presence, and speak to him as if I really saw him with my bodily eyes. I give
myself up wholly to him, and desire him to fulfill all his holy will in me, and
that he would not suffer me that day to do the least thing which might be
offensive to him. In short, I love and praise him as much and as long as my
affairs permit; though very often I have hardly so much time as to say the
Lord's prayer. But I do not trouble myself about that; for I have God always in
my heart, as well when I am about my business, which I do in obedience to his
will, as when I retire on purpose to pray to him. This he himself has taught
me, that whatever I do out of love to him, is a real prayer.

I dress myself in his presence, and he shows me that his love supplies me with
raiment. And when I go about my business, even then does he not forsake me, nor
I him, but he converses with me; yea, I am then as much united to him, as when
I am at my prayers, set apart on purpose for my spiritual recollection. Oh! how
sweet and easy is all labor and toil in such good company! Sometimes I
perceive such strength and support in my mind, that nothing is too hard for me.
Nothing but the body is at work, the heart and myself burn with love to God.

When the body begins to be weary, or to repine, or to desire unseasonable
rest, being oppressed with uneasiness; my divine love enlightens me forthwith,
and shows me how I ought to suppress those rebellious motions of corrupt
nature, and not to nourish them at all, either by word or deed. -- This love
keeps the door of my lips, and watches over my heart, that it may not in the
least contribute to such irregular passions.

But if, at any time, for want of care, I am surprised with these or the like
faults, I cannot be at rest till I have obtained pardon, and God be reconciled
to me. I lie prostrate before his footstool, confessing all my faults to him,
and there I continue till he has forgiven me, renewed his friendship with me,
and confirmed it more than before. If people persecute me, and by soul and
uncharitable censures raise scandals upon me, or any other way afflict me; or
if evil spirits attack me with their crafty and cunning temptations, I then
presently run to my heavenly love, who readily stretches forth his sacred arms
to receive me, showing me his heart and wounds open for my security, in which I
hid myself as in a strong castle and fortress. -- And then I am so mightily
strengthened, that if the whole army of hell itself, together with all the
creatures, should rise up against me, I fear them not, because I am under the
protection of the most high God, his love being the hiding place and safeguard
of my soul.

If God at any time hides his face, making as if he would go away from me, I
tell him, O! it is no matter, my love, conceal thyself as much as thou please,
nevertheless I Will serve thee; for I know thou art my God. And then I stand upon
my guard more than ever, to be faithful to him, for fear of displeasing my
love. And at the same time perceiving the greatness of my misery and poverty, I
insist the more upon the merits of our Savior, and resolve to rest contented,
though it should please him to leave me all the days of my life in such a
condition. But he never lets me continue long under these circumstances, and if
I may venture so to speak, he cannot forbear loving me, any more than I can
live without him.

If I am persuaded on holidays to be merry in company, I excuse myself. For
nothing can be compared to the pleasures of my love, which are so much the
sweeter and greater for my withdrawing from all company whatsoever. If people
wonder, how I can stay always at home alone, I think within myself: O! if you
knew the glorious company I have, you would not say that I was alone; for I am
never less alone, than when I have nobody with me.

The night coming on, and every one going to rest, I find rest only in the arms
of divine love: I sleep leaning on his holy breast, like a child in his
mother's bosom. I say, I go to sleep, but being still busied about the love and
praises of my God, till I fall quite asleep. Many times this love rouses up all
my senses, so that I cannot sleep the greatest part of the night, but I spend
it in the embraces of the grace of God, which never forsakes such a poor
miserable creature as I am, but preserves me, and takes special care of me.

If in the night the evil spirits hover about, to torment or to surprise me,
(which often happens) this divine love guards me, and fights for me. Yea, he
gives me grace too, to resist them courageously, as if I were awake. For they
seldom continue long to assault me, unless it be in my sleep.

And this is the life I have led for these twenty years past, without
perceiving the least change of that love which was poured out into my heart,
after my sincere conversion unto him. Nay, I have observed its daily increase,
though every day it seemed impossible to endure any addition to what I already
enjoy. But truly, it is an infinite love, which satisfies and nourishes me, so
that every day I have a new hunger, though methinks I can receive no more, than
what I possess already every moment.

THE author of her life says, concerning the manner of her expressions, that
they were always very modest, without any noise or vehemence: her common
discourses were always holy and edifying; whereas others too commonly mis-spend
their time in useless conversation and unprofitable talk.

For a long while she could bear no other discourse but of God and his holy
love. I I cannot imagine, said she, how a soul, created for heaven, can be
concerned about the dross of this world. From that time, if she happened to be
in company, where the subject of the discourse was but indifferent, either she
did not mind it at all, entertaining herself in the mean while with God; or, as
soon as she thought it proper, she diverted and changed the discourse; thinking
it but lost time, which was spent in the trifles of this world.

To every body that had a mind to be acquainted with God Almighty she gave this
advice: To be silent, and to learn to keep their thoughts together in the
center of the heart: for this (said she) is the beginning of our union with
God, and by these means the soul forgets earthly things, and raises herself up
to the contemplation of heavenly objects. We ought to lose our familiarity with
the creatures, if we desire to enjoy the conversation of the Creator; a moment
of which does afford more delight and satisfaction, than all the finest
discourses in the world.

The real experience she had of the inward and spiritual life of grace, and of
the manifold operations it was attended with, does abundantly appear from the
larger account of her life and conversion.

One time when her mistress was afraid that Armelle was like to run quite mad
by an excess of devotion, she forbad her all spiritual exercises, and would not
let her go even to church, except on the Lord's day only: Armelle, being
sensible of the false step her mistress took, smiled within herself, saying,
Truly, I am not mad, after I have found my beloved, whom I now love with all my
heart. I remember a time, when I was seeking only God without me, and then I
was mad indeed. -- This mistress of hers being of a sour and morose humor,
showed a deal of ill nature to Armelle, of which, however, she never
complained, but rather thanked God, that he was pleased to make this a means of
her fuller purification. Some seeing what she suffered in that house, advised
her entirely to quit that place; she replied, according to her usual
earnestness: Why should you have me to flee from the cross which the Lord
himself has entailed upon me? No, by no means: I shall never do it, except they
turn me away by force. In which unexpected answer her friends entirely
aquiesced, never prompting her again to quit a place where she had daily
opportunity to practice patience and self-denial; virtues so much contrary to
the whole bent of corrupt nature, and yet so necessary for rightly framing a
christian life and conversation. At another time she said: If the soul be but
well grounded in the favor of God, and lively affected with the operations of
his grace, all the insults of the devil, and of the creatures, are borne with
joy and comfort. But this is misery indeed, when the Lord himself withdraws
from the soul, and lets her shift for herself.

In what company soever she was, she talked of nothing more, than of being
faithful to God. Nothing dropped more from her mouth, than, Let us be faithful,
let us be faithful to the Lord. This word she thought sit for any time, and
suitable to every company. Being asked by her friends, whether she had nothing
else to say, she answered: Don't wonder at my saying this over and over again.
If I should live a thousand years, I should still tell you the same thing. For
it is faithfulness, wherein the perfection of a christian life consists.

Of the constraining power of the divine love she has the following expression:
Whenever I happened to adhere a little too much to my natural inclinations,
(apt to steal in upon the mind under the specious pretense of necessity) I was
immediately reproved by the love of God. This divine love is like a careful
tutor, who takes all the pains imaginable for advancing his pupil in the way of
learning he is engaged in; and for this reason keeps his eye constantly fixed
on him, both to correct his failings, though never so small, and to prevent his
being led away by any thing that might divert him from his chief employment.
Thus, says she, dealt the Lord with me. He kept me closely confined to an holy
awe and wariness; and when I happened by one oversight or other to withdraw, as
it were, from his eye, he in that very moment pursued after me, and recalled me
to my duty. But all this was done with so much love and tenderness, that it
must be a heart of brass, if not mollified by such endearing marks of love and
kindness.

She often wondered at some people's dilatory doings in the service of God, and
said, it was a cunning fetch and stratagem of the devil, to make people put off
from one day to another such designs as might serve to advance the glory of
God, and the good of our fellow creatures. For, said she, if often happens that
grace which at one hour offers itself to a man, in order to support him under
some difficult enterprises, is not so easily met with at another time. And
besides this, how uncertain is our life! nay, if we were sure to live longer,
yet ought we not to linger upon that account at all, nor to defer from one day
to another what might be done this day. A man that is full of delays in the
service of God, must needs have but little love at the bottom. Wherever love is
raised to any considerable degree, there the soul cannot rest, whilst there
remains any thing to be done required by the beloved. -- And this dilatory
temper, she said, was a great impediment in the way of perfection. Many souls
were convinced of the will of God, but being too backward constantly to
struggle against the corrupt propensities of their dull and lazy temper, they
made but a slow progress in the work of religion. They say, tomorrow,
tomorrow it shall be done in good earnest; but that tomorrow never comes. The
consequence whereof is, that the longer they flatter themselves in their
disorderly and wonted customs, the less able they are to resist them at last at
all: the Lord leaves them now to their own will, since they did not improve
faithfully what once they had received.

Her humility was also grounded on a true and solid foundation. She confesses,
that the infinite love of God kept her undefiled as to the vanity of pride. I
was astonished, says she, when I was told to watch against pride, for I thought
whilst I was well in my wits, I could not possibly be proud. I was so fully
convinced that every thing really good was from God, that if all angels and men
had offered to persuade me to the contrary, I should never have believed them.
-- And this sense fortified me against every kind of pride.

Because her love to God was so great and fervent, the love she bore to her
fellow creatures was also wonderfully influenced and inflamed thereby. -- When
she considered the woeful state of the wicked, and the dreadful judgment that is
like to befall them at last, she then felt a more tender and commiserating love,
and her very bowels began to yearn for compassion. When she looked upon the
happy state she was arrived to, and the severe doom attending such prosligate
wretches, she used to say, she seemed unto herself like one that had been in a
great storm at sea, and by stress of weather like to be cast away every minute;
but getting off at last safe and sound, remembered now ashore the dangers his
brethren and near relations were still exposed to, being tossed up and down in
the huge ocean, and left to the mercy of the roaring billows. Alas! said she,
thus it is with me, when I lay to heart the the danger sinners run themselves
into. For the more endearing marks of divine grace the Lord has been pleased to
bestow upon me, the more fervent is my desire, that also others might partake
of the same with me.

AND now, ye learned men, and refined wits of the age, come hither and admire
the ignorance and simplicity of this poor country-maid! Consider how far she
exceeds your high flown superficial wisdom, and the dark flashes of human wit
and learning? And was it possible for her to attain to this heavenly wisdom and
divine knowledge, to such a nobleness and elevation of mind, without the scraps
and assistance of artificial learning and philosophy? then truly there must be
another school wherein those that flow unto the Lord, (Ps. xxxiv. 5.) are
lighted. Indeed to know the love of Christ, passes all knowledge, Ephesians. iii.
19. Concerning which our Savior was pleased thus to express his grateful
sentiments with hearty joy and heavenly triumph: I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight, Matthew. xi. 25, 26.

FINIS.
THE DREADFUL VISITATION, IN A SHORT ACCOUNT of the PROGRESS and EFFECTS OF THE
PLAGUE, The last time it spread in the city of London, in the year 1665,
extracted from the memoirs of a person who resided there during the whole time
of that infection.

O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end.

Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK on the North side
of Market-Street, between Second and Third Streets. MDCCLXXIV.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE PLAGUE.
AMONGST the many calamities with which the Almighty is pleased to visit the
children of men, in order to reduce them to a just sense of their own weakness
and entire dependence upon him, there is scarce any that are more productive of
true penitent humiliation, and of a sight of what is really good and truly
evil, than those contagious distempers, which an offended God sometimes suffers
to rage amongst the people. In the year 1665 the city of London was sorely
visited by the plague: An account of the progress and effects of that
visitation was kept by a citizen who remained there during the whole time of
the sickness, and appears to have been candid and judicious in his remarks
thereon. I trust my readers may, in a short description of that memorable
judgment, meet with such lessons of best wisdom, which nothing can so
effectually produce, as a close and serious converse with death and the grave.
The introduction of this contagion in London was by some goods imported from
Holland, which had been brought thither from the Levant. It first broke out in
the house where those goods were opened, from whence it spread to other houses.
In the first house that was infected there died four persons: A neighbor who
went to visit them returning home, gave the distemper to her family, and died
with all her household. The parish officers who were employed about the sick
persons being also infected, the physicians perceived the danger, and, upon
narrow inspection, assured, that it was indeed the plague with all its
terrifying particulars, and that it threatened a general infection. The people
began now to be alarmed all over the town; the usual number of burials within
the bills of mortality for a week were generally about 240 to 300, but from the
17th to the 24th Jan. the printed bill was 474. However this went off again,
and the frost continuing very severe till near the end of February, the bills
decreased again, and people began to look upon the danger as good as over; but
in May the bills greatly increased, and the weather becoming hot, the infection
spread again, in a dreadful manner.

I lived, says the author, without Aldgate, and as the distemper had not
reached to that side of the city, our neighborhood continued easy; but at the
other end of the town the consternation was very great, and the nobility and
gentry thronged out of the town with their families in an unusual manner;
nothing was to be seen but wagons, carts and coaches with goods and people,
and horsemen attending them, hurrying away; then empty wagons and carts
appeared, who were apparently returning to fetch more people, besides
innumerable numbers of people on horseback, fitted out for traveling. This was
a very melancholy prospect; indeed there was nothing else of moment to be seen;
it filled my mind with very serious thoughts of the misery that was coming upon
the city, and the unhappy condition of those that would be left in it. By the
end of July the contagion had spread and increased to a great degree: Sorrow
and sadness sat upon every face; and though some parts were not yet
overwhelmed, all looked deeply concerned. London might well be said to be all
in tears, the mourners did not go about the streets, for nobody made a formal
dress of mourning for their nearest relations, but the voice of mourning was
indeed heard in the streets; the shrieks of women and children at the windows
and doors of their houses where their dearest relations were dying, were so
frequent to be heard as we passed the streets, that it was enough to pierce the
stoutest heart in the world. Tears and lamentations were seen almost in every
house, especialiy in the first part of the visitation; for toward the latter
end people did not so much concern themselves for the loss of their friends,
expecting that themselves would be summoned the next hour.

It was a time of very unhappy breaches amongst us; in matters of religion,
divisions and separate opinions prevailed; the Church of England was lately
restored, and the Presbyterians and other professions had set up their meetings
for worship, apart, in which they were frequently disturbed, the government
endeavoring to suppress their meetings. But this dreadful visitation
reconciled the different parties, and took away all manner of prejudice and
scruple from the people. But after the sickness was over, that spirit of
charity subsided, and things returned to their own channel again. Here we may
observe, that a nearer view of death would soon reconcile men of good
principles to one another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy situations
in life, and our putting these things far from us, that our breaches are
somented, and that there is so much prejudice and want of christian charity and
union amongst us. A close view and converse with death, or with diseases that
threaten death, would scum off the gall of our temper, remove our animosities,
and bring us to see with different eyes. On the other side of the grave we
shall all be brethren again.

The inns of court were now all shut up, there was but few lawyers to be seen
in the city, indeed there was no need of them, for quarrels and divisions about
interest had ceased; every body was at peace.

It was also worthy of observation, as well as fruitful of instruction, to
observe with what alacrity the people of all persuasions embraced the
opportunities they had of attending upon the public worship, and other
appointed times of devotion, as humiliations, fastings and public confessions
of sins, to implore the mercy of God, and avert the judgment which hung over
their heads. The churches were so thronged, that there was often no coming
near, no, not to the very door of the largest churches. There was also daily
prayers appointed morning and evening, at which the people attended with
uncommon devotion.

All plays and interludes which had lately began to increase amongst us, were
forbid to act; the gaming-tables, public dancing-rooms and musick-houses,
which multiplied and began to debauch the manners of the people, were shut up
and suppressed, finding indeed no trade; for the minds of the people were
generally humbled and agitated with other things, death was before their eyes,
and every body began to think of their graves.

The infection still gradually increased till the middle of August, when there
died a thousand a day, by account of the weekly bills, though they never gave a
full account by many thousands; many of the parish officers were taken sick
themselves and died when their account was to be given in. The parish of
Stepney alone had within the year, one hundred and sixteen sextons,
grave-diggers and carriers of the dead, etc. Indeed the work was not of a
nature to allow them leisure to take an exact tale of the dead bodies, which
were all thrown together in the dark in a pit, to which no man could come near
without the utmost peril.

I had, says the author, the care of my brother's house, which obliged me
sometimes to go abroad. In these walks I had dismal scenes before my eyes, as,
particularly, of persons falling dead in the streets, terrible shrieks of
women, who in their agonies would throw open their chamber-windows, and cry out
in a dismal surprising manner; it is impossible to describe the variety of
postures in which the passions of the poor people would express themselves.
Passing through Token-House yard, of a sudden a casement violently opened just
over my head, and a woman gave three frightful screeches, and then cried: Oh!
Death, Death, Death, which struck me with horror and a chilness in my very
blood. There was nobody to be seen in the whole street, neither did any window
open, for people had no curiosity now in any case. I went on to pass into
Bell-Alley, where there was a greater cry than that; I could hear women and
children run screaming about the rooms like distracted, when a garret-window
opened, and somebody from a window on the other side asked, What is the matter?
Upon which it was answered, Oh Lord! my old master has hanged himself. The
other asked again, Is he quite dead? And the first answered, Ay, ay quite dead
and cold. This person was a Deputy-Alderman and very rich. But this is but one
instance; it is scarce credible what dreadful cases happened in particular
families every day. People in the rage of the distemper or in the torment of
the swelling, which was indeed intolerable, becoming raving and distracted,
oftentimes laid violent hands upon themselves, throwing themselves out of
windows, or breaking out of the houses, would dance naked about the streets,
not knowing one ecstasy from another; others, if not prevented, would run
directly down to the river, and plunge into the water. Some dying of mere grief
as a passion, and some of fright and surprise, without having received the
infection. It often pierced my very soul, to hear the groans and cries of those
who were thus tormented; but this of the swellings was accounted the most
promising particular in the whole infection; for if these swellings could be
brought to break and run, the patient generally recovered. Whereas those who
were struck with death at the beginning of the distemper, and had spots come
upon them, often went about indifferent easy, till a little before they died,
and some till the moment they dropped down; such would be taken suddenly very
sick, and would run to some convenient place, or to their own houses if
possible, and there sit down, grow faint and die.

Death did not now hover over every one's head only, but looked into their
houses and chambers, and even stared in their very faces; and though there was
some stupidity and dullness of mind, yet there was a great deal of just alarm
sounded in the inmost soul: Many consciences were awakened; many hard hearts
melted into tears; many a penitent confession was made of crimes long
concealed. People might be heard even in the streets as we passed along calling
upon God for mercy, through Jesus Christ, and saying: I have been a thief; I
have been an adulterer; I have been a murderer, and the like; and none durst
stop to make inquiry into such things, or to administer comfort to the poor
creature, who in the anguish both of soul and body thus cried out. Many were
the warnings that were then given by dying penitents to others, not to put off
and delay their repentance to a day of distress, that such a time of calamity
as this was no time for repentance. I wish, says the author, I could repeat the
very sound of those groans and exclamations that I heard from some poor dying
creatures, when in the height of their agonies and distress, and that I could
make him that reads this, hear as I imagine, I now hear them, for the sound
seems still to ring in my ears. In the beginning of September the number of
burials increasing, the churchwardens of Aldgate parish ordered a large pit to
be dug, to hold all the dead which might die in a month, it was about forty
feet long and sixteen broad; some blamed the churchwardens for suffering such
a frightful gulf to be dug; nevertheless in two weeks they had thrown more than
eleven hundred bodies into it, when they were obliged to fill it up, as the
bodies were come within six feet of the surface. My curiosity drove me to go
and see this pit, when there had been near four hundred people buried in it. I
got admittance into the churchyard, by means of the sexton, who was a
sensible, religious man. He would have persuaded me not to go, saying, That it
was indeed their duty to venture, and in it they might hope to be preserved;
but that, as I had no apparent call, he thought, my curiosity could not justify
my running that hazard. I told him, I had been pressed in my mind to go, and
that perhaps it might be an instructing sight. Nay, says the good man, if you
will venture upon that score, in the name of God go in; it will be a sermon to
you, it may be the best you ever heard in your life. His discourses had shocked
my resolution, and I stood wavering for a good while; but just then I heard the
bell-man, and the cart, loaded with dead bodies, appearing, I went in. There
was nobody, as I could perceive, at first with the cart but the buriers, and
the man that led the cart; but when they came to the pit, they saw a man
muffled in a cloak who appeared in great agony; the buriers immediately
gathered about him, supposing he was one of those poor delirious or desperate
creatures, that would sometimes run to the pit, wrapped in blankets, and throw
themselves in, and as they said, bury themselves. When the buriers came to him,
they soon found he was neither desperate nor distempered in mind, but one
oppressed with a dreadful weight of grief, having his wife and several children
all in the cart, that was just come in with him, and he followed in agony and
excess of sorrow. He calmly desired the buriers to let him alone, said he would
only see the bodies thrown in, and go away; so they left importuning him. But
no sooner was the cart turned round, and the bodies shot into the pit
promiscuously, which was a surprise to him, for he at least expected, they
would have been decently laid in, though indeed he was afterward convinced
that was impracticable, I say, no sooner did he see the sight, but he cried out
aloud, unable to contain himself, and fell down in a swoon; the buriers ran to
him, and took him up, and when he was come to himself, led him to a place where
he was taken care of. He looked into the pit again, as he went away, but the
buriers had covered the bodies so immediately with throwing earth, that nothing
could be seen. The cart had in it sixteen or seventeen bodies. Some were wrapped
up in linen sheets, some in rugs, some little other than naked, or so loose,
that what covering they had fell from them, in the shooting out of the cart,
and they fell quite naked among the rest; but the matter was not much to them,
or the indecency much to any one else, seeing they were to be huddled together
into the common grave of mankind; for here was no difference made, but poor and
rich went together; there was no other way of burials, neither was it possible
there should.

John Hayward, under-sexton, that is, grave digger and bearer of the dead,
never had the distemper at all, but lived about twenty years after it. His wife
was employed to nurse the infected people; yet she herself never was infected.
The only preservative he used against the infection, was holding garlic and
rue in his mouth, and smoking tobacco; this I had from his own mouth. His
wife's remedy was washing her head in vinegar, and sprinkling her head-clothes
so with vinegar, as to keep them always moist; and if the smell of any of those
she waited on was more than ordinary offensive, she snuffed vinegar up into her
nose, sprinkled her head-clothes and held a hankerchief wetted with vinegar to
her mouth.

And here I must not omit mentioning the disposition of the people of that day,
with respect to their charity to the poor, which indeed was very large both in
a public and a private way. Some pious ladies were so zealous in this good
work, and so confident in the protection of providence, in the discharge of
this great duty, that they went about themselves distributing alms, and
visiting the poor families that were infected, in their very houses, appointing
nurses and apothecaries to supply them with what they wanted; thus giving their
blessings to the poor in substantial relief, as well as hearty prayers for
them. I will not undertake to say, that none of these charitable people were
suffered to die of the plague, but this I may say, that I never knew any of
them miscarried, which I mention for the encouragement of others in case of
like distress; and doubtless, if they, that give to the poor, lend to the Lord,
and he will repay it, those that hazard their lives to give to the poor, and to
comfort and assist them in such a misery as this, may hope to be protected
therein.

From the middle of August to the middle of September the infection still
increased and spread itself, with an irresistible fury; it was reckoned, that
during that time there died no less than sixteen hundred a day, one day with
another. It was then that the confusion and terror was inexpressible; the
courage of the people appointed to carry away the dead, began to fail them; the
vigilance of the magistrates was now put to the utmost trial. At last the
violence of the distemper came to such a height that the people sat still
looking at one another, and seemed quite abandoned to despair. In a word,
people began to give themselves up to fear, that there was nothing to be
expected but a universal desolation. This despair made people bold and
venturous, they were no more shy of one another, as expecting there was now no
avoiding the distemper, but that all must go, this brought them to crowd into
the churches, they inquired no more what condition the people who sat near them
were in, but looking upon themselves also as so many dead corpse, they came to
the churches without the least caution, and crowded together, as if their lives
were of no consequence, compared to the work which they were come about:
Indeed, their zeal in coming, and the earnestness and affectionate attention
they showed to what they heard, made it manifest what value people would put
upon the worship of God, if they thought, every day they attended at the
church, would be their last. It was in the height of this despair, that it
pleased God to stay his hand, and to slacken the fury of the contagion, in a
manner as surprising as that of its beginning, and which demonstrated it to be
his own particular hand above the agency of means; nothing but omnipotent power
could have done it; the contagion, despised all medicine; death raged in every
corner, and had it gone on as it did then, a few weeks more would have cleared
the town of all its inhabitants. In that very moment when thirty thousand were
dead in three weeks, nay, when it was reported three thousand died in one
night, and an hundred thousand more were taken sick, when we might well say,
Vain was the help of man, it pleased God to cause the fury of it to abate, and
by his immediate hand to disarm the enemy. It was wonderful! The physicians
were surprised, wherever they visited, to find their patients better, and in a
few days every body was recovering: Nor was this by any medicine found out, or
any new method of cure discovered, but it was evidently from the secret
invisible hand of him that had at first sent this disease, as a judgment upon
us. Let the philosophers search for reasons in nature to account for it, and
labor as much as they will to lessen the debt they owe to their maker; those
physicians who had the least share of religion in them, were obliged to
acknowledge, that it was all supernatural. The streets were now full of poor
recovering creatures, who appeared very sensible and thankful to God for their
unexpected deliverance: Yet I must own, that as for the generality of the
people, it might too justly be said of them, as was said of the children of
Israel, after they had been delivered from the host of Pharaoh, that they sung
his praise, but they soon forgot his works.

The author, who was preserved unhurt with his whole family, during the time of
the sickness, gives in his memoirs a particular account of the many reasonings
and fears which affected his mind, before he could come to a fixed conclusion,
whether to stay, and take his lot in the station in which God had placed him,
or by leaving the city, run the hazard of unsettling himself, and lose his
effects which lay scattered among the merchants. At the earnest solicitations
of his brother he had concluded to go; but being always crossed in this design
by several accidents, it came one morning, as he expresses it, very warmly in
his mind, whether these repeated disappointments were not intimations to him,
that it was the will of heaven he should not go, which was succeeded by a
further thought, that if this suggestion was from God, he was able effectually
to preserve him in the midst of all deaths and dangers that would surround him,
and that if he attempted to secure himself, by fleeing from his habitation, and
acted contrary to these intimaons, which he believed to be divine, it was a
kind of flying from God, who could cause his justice to overtake him, when and
where he thought fit.

But what finally sixed him in a resolution to stay, and cast himself entirely
upon the protection and good pleasure of the Almighty, was, that at a time,
when his thoughts were more than commonly serious upon this weighty subject,
turning over the bible which lay before him, he cried out, Well, I know not
what to do, Lord direct me! at that juncture happening to stop and casting his
eye on the second verse of the 91st Psalm, he read to the 10th, as follows,
viz. I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in him
will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under
his wings shall thou trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou
shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrows that flies by
day, nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction
that wastes at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shall
thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Because thou have made the Lord
which is thy refuge, even the most high thy habitation: There shall no evil
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling, etc.

THE END.
THE MIGHTY DESTROYER DISPLAYED, IN SOME ACCOUNT OF THE Dreadful HAVOC made by
the mistaken USE as well as ABUSE of DISTILLED SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.

BY A LOVER OF MANKIND.

ECCLESIASTES vii. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man
upright; but they have sought out many inventions. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by
JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, between Second and Third Streets, in Market-Street.
M.DCC.LXXIV.

THE MIGHTY DESTROYER DISPLAYED, etc.
OBSERVING some years ago the dreadful havoc made by the excessive use of
distilled spirituous liquors in this part of the world, I was induced to insert
in one of the almanacks an extract of what had been written on that subject by
Dr. Hales, fellow of the Royal Society, containing his own remarks, with the
sentiments of several persons of note in the physical way; whose knowledge of
the nature of distilled liquors, as well as of their effects on the human
frame, best qualified them to give a right judgment thereon. And as the
excessive and indeed mistaken use of these liquors continues, and rather
increases, on this Continent, it is thought a republication of those sentiments,
with some additions, may, through divine blessing, be beneficial to many;
particularly to some well-minded people, who are under mistaken prejudices on
this most interesting subject. "My principal and indeed only motive," says this
benevolent author, is to endeavor to rouse the caution and indignation of
mankind, against those mighty destroyers and debasers of the human species,
fermented distilled spirituous liquors; those worse than infernal spirits,
which bewitch and infatuate the nations with their sorceries. -- An evil so
amazingly great, that did not woeful experience too fully prove it, it seems
incredible, that any whom it concerns could possibly be so negligent, as not to
use their utmost endeavors to suppress this destructive manbane.

That eminent physician Dr. Hoffman expressly cautions against the use of
distilled spirituous liquors. "Because," says he, they are, above all things,
most unwholesome, being caustic burning spirits; which, by inflaming the
solids, and thickening the fluids, cause obstructions, which bring on many
fatal diseases, such as hectic fevers, jaundices, dropsies, etc. whereby
multitudes are yearly and daily destroyed. He also observes, that they rot the
entrails, such as the liver, stomach and bowels; as it is evident, not only by
opening the bodies of those who are killed by drinking them, but also by what
is observed in Germany of the effect which the caustic, fiery, remaining wash
of the distillers, has on the guts of hogs; which are thereby so tendered, that
they cannot make puddings with them. -- He farther observes, That the flesh of
such hogs will not keep, even when salted, so well as the flesh of other hogs.
Dr. Cheyne, in his essay of health and long life, says, All people, who have
any regard to their health and lives, ought to tremble at the first cravings
for such poisonous liquors. The maladies begot by them, bring forth necessity
upon necessity of drams and gills; till, at last, a kind dropsy, nervous
convulsion, flux, if not a fever, or phrenzy, sets the poor soul free. It has
often raised in me the most melancholy reflections, to see the virtuous and
sensible, bound in such chains and fetters, as nothing less than omnipotent
grace or the unrelenting grave could release them from.

Doctor Short, in his history of mineral waters, page 225. says, The oftener I
reflect on the mischief done by distilled spirits, the more I am confirmed,
that the human race had been happier had drams never been known: and I cannot
help cordially joining with Doctor Allen, in his Synopsis Medici, A. 1633. That
the plentiful devouring of those spirits has killed as many thousands of men,
as there are stars in the sky. Nay, ten times ten thousands have died by these,
more than all the rest of the poisons whatever.

Doctor Lind, in his treatise on the scurvy, says, He observed most destructive
distempers to be much increased, even to mortality, by distilled spirituous
liquors; which sailors are too apt greedily to swallow down. And Doctor Hales
observes, from the remarks made to him by an eminent surgeon, That the stomachs
of great dram-drinkers were contracted into half the common natural size, and
hard; somewhat like leather, that had been held to the fire. The consequence of
which was, loss of appetite, and a wasting consumption.

It is pretended, that drams comfort, warm, and defend from the severity of
weather, to which men are sometimes exposed; without which, they say, they
should perish with cold; which is probably, in a great measure, true of those
who are habituated to drink them; the blood of such being thereby so much
impoverished, that it is well known many of the drinkers of drams are cold and
lifeless in the midst of summer, without frequent repetitions: this is what
some of them have owned. But on the other hand, how much more able are sober
persons to endure cold and hardships? their vital heat not being extinguished
by intemperance, does, by its kindly genial warmth, more effectually secure
them from the inclemency of the weather, than the false flash of a dram.
Besides, it is well known, that men did not perish in the coldest countries for
want of drams formerly, when they were not to be had. Of the undoubted truth of
this, Captain Ellis gives a full proof in the account of his voyage to Hudson's
Bay, page 199. Where he observes, That the natives on the very cold coast, of
that Bay, to whom the French are kinder than to sell distilled spirituous
liquors, are tall, hardy, robust and active; whereas those of them that are
supplied with drams from the English, are a meagre, dwarfish, indolent people,
hardly equal to the severity of the country, and subject to many disorders.

And as to the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors in very hot climates,
(as on the coast of Guinea) it is observed, that the French and Portuguese, who
do not indulge in distilled spirits, are healthy compared with the English;
who, drinking freely of spirits, etc. die fast. Thus, also, it is observed of
the women in the West Indies, that being sober, they live long; but it is often
otherwise with the men, who are more generally intemperate.

The unhappy dram-drinkers are so absolutely bound in slavery to these infernal
spirits, that they seem to have lost the power of delivering themselves from
this worst of bondage. How much then is it the bounden duty of those, who have
it in their power, to withold this destructive man-bane, either as parents,
masters, or rulers to the people committed to their trust.

Since then the evil is become so notoriously epidemical as to debilitate and
destroy multitudes, in most parts of the world; it behooves all, who have any
bowels of pity for their fellow creatures, more especially the governors of the
nations, as guardians and tender fathers, to guard the people committed to
their charge from this mighty destroyer. Can there be any consideration, of
sufficient weight, to the contrary. Is it sound policy to encourage vice in the
people, because a present revenue arises from their debaucheries? Where will
the revenue be, when the people, who should pay them, are destroyed? Are not a
hardy, industrious healthy people, always found to be the most able to
contribute amply to the support of government? And will not temperance, in the
end, be found a more effectual means to increase the real wealth and strength
of a nation, than to make drunkenness the cheapest of vices? But if the
consideration of the inhumanity of being instrumental to the destruction of
multitudes, and in a manner, in some parts of the world, of whole nations, is
not of weight enough to influence; yet, sure, the awful consideration, that it
must needs be highly displeasing to our merciful Creator, to have his favorite
creature man thus debased, disgraced, and destroyed both in body and soul,
ought to have its due weight. Can it in reason be expected, that he will always
remain an unconcerned spectator of such astonishing proceedings? And will he
not in mercy visit the nations for these things, to prevent the still much
greater ruin of future generations, in conformity to his usual method of
proceeding, when irregularities are arrived to great excesses? This disease has
now attained to so enormous a pitch, that it is much to be feared nothing less
than God's severe fatherly correction, will effectually cure it in many of the
nations; who seem as supine and unconcerned about it, as if only so many
thousands of locusts were destroyed thereby: for if in fifty or sixty years
this destructive pest has spread thus far and wide, how vastly greater will the
havoc amongst mankind be in an hundred years more, if some check be not put to
its career?

If it had been said, an hundred years ago, to any of the rulers of the
nations, that they should patiently, and even unconcernedly, see such
multitudes of their subjects destroyed both body and soul, and that only for
siltny lucre; would they not, with indignation, have said as Hazael did to
Elisha, 2 Kings viii. 13. But what is thy servant a dog, that he should do this
great thing? The plain truth is, that it is with the nations as it frequently
happens to private persons, that when they grow gradually from bad to worse,
they, at the same time, become more and more hardened, so as to be even
reconciled to practices for which they had at first the utmost detestation and
abhorrence; for familiarity takes away our attention, and robs things of their
power to strike strongly upon us.

Though thousands and tens of thousands perish every year by distilled
spirituous liquors, yet few appear to lay it effectually to heart. I must here
except the heads of the poor wild Indians, of the Six Nations situate back of
New York, and other parts of North America, who being sensible of the great
destruction made amongst them by distilled spirituous liquors, have long since,
and do still continue, earnestly to desire, that no such spirit should be sold
to their people. At a treaty held at Carlisle in this province, with the
deputies of the Six Nations, the Delawares and other western Indians, in the
year 1753, Scarrooyady, one of the chiefs of the Six Nations, speaking on
behalf of all the Indians present, expressed himself to the following effect,
viz. The rum ruins us: we beg you would prevent its coming in such quantities,
by regulating the traders. We never understood the trade was for whiskey A
spirit made of grain.
. We desire it may be forbidden, and none sold in the Indian country; but that
if the Indians will have any, they may go amongst the inhabitants, and deal
with them for it. When these whiskey traders come, they bring thirty or forty
cags, puts them down before us, and make us drink, and get all the skins that
should go to pay the debts we have contracted, for goods bought of the fair
trader; and by these means, we not only ruin ourselves, but them too. These
wicked whiskey sellers, when they have once got the Indians in liquor, make
them sell their very clothes from their backs. In short, if this practice be
continued, we must be inevitably ruined. We most earnestly, therefore, beseech
you to remedy it. The Indian speaker gave, as is usual with them in matters of
moment, a treble string of wampum, in confirmation of this request. The
destructive effect of distilled spirits, have also extended their baneful
influence amongst the people of Africa. It is, in a great measure, through the
introduction of those infernal spirits, that the poor negroes have been as it
were bewitched, and prevailed upon to captivate their unhappy country people,
in order to bring them to the European market: hence devastation, bloodshed and
misery have spread in their land; many thousands, and hundreds of thousands,
have been doomed to a miserable thraldom; and many, very many, brought to a
cruel and untimely end: innumerable instances might be mentioned, to confirm
this melancholy truth; of which I shall mention two, viz. Andrew Brue, the
noted French factor, who resided sixteen years in Guinea, tells us, That, in
general, brandy is the best commodity amongst the negroes, as they love it to
excess: that it is easy, from hence, to estimate the vast profit made by the
company, when its storehouse is well provided with this liquor. And Francis
Moor, the English factor, in his account of Africa, says, That it was to the
king of Barsailly's insatiable thirst for brandy, that his subjects freedom and
families were in so precarious a situation, etc. etc.

It is no uncommon thing for habitual rum-drinkers, when a fit of sickness
comes on, which they conclude will be their last, to desire to have plenty of
rum by them; by which means, they continue intoxicated till death: to so
astonishing and deplorable a sottish condition have they reduced themselves!
This is a case so calamitous to mankind, that to have a thorough sense of it,
and yet not to remonstrate, nor earnestly caution against it, is certainly as
criminal as it is unfriendly not to warn a blind person of a dangerous
precipice or pit; yet, alas! how unconcerned are the greatest part of mankind
at this most enormous ruin of multitudes! In trials for life, what diligence is
used to find the occasion of the loss of one subject! What care will not a
faithful physician bestow for the preservation of one life! How did the wise
Romans honor him, who saved the life of one Roman citizen! But in the present
case, it is not one, nor one hundred, nor one thousand, but probably no less
than a million that perish, yearly, by this worst of plagues. How then dare the
governors of nations be unconcerned or silent in a cause in which humanity,
virtue, and the real welfare of mankind, both civil and religious, are so
deeply concerned? A cause, which tends not only to the weakening the faculties,
enervating the bodies of men, but also in debasing the species, and shortening
the lives of multitudes.

But the most afflictive and dreadful effect of the common use of distilled
spirituous liquors, are, that it not only heightens the passions of men and
depraves their morals; but what is infinitely worse, and ought to be an
awakening consideration, they become profane and abandoned, and to the last
degree regardless of their duty to God and man; the feelings of the mind are
gradually benumbed, and an insensibility to the healing influence of religion
ensues.

The Almighty who has so curiously wrought our wonderful frame out of the dust,
knowing how prone we are to disorder it by irregularities, has of his tender
fatherly care of us, not only implanted in us a strong desire of life and
self-preservation, but has also strictly warned us to avoid all destructive
irregularities and vices, and to practice those virtues which are so well
adapted to our nature, that they have a direct tendency to give health to the
soul, as well as marrow to the bones, Prove. cxi. 8. Yet how is this delicate,
this curiously wrought frame, abused and disordered by repeated irregularities
of many kinds, but never before to the enormous degree that it has of late
years arrived at by the excessive abuse of these fermented, distilled
spirituous liquors, which, by their mischievous effects, seem to claim Satan
himself for their author. The benevolent author first mentioned from whose
collection great part of the foregoing is collected, observes, That if any of
his readers should think the subject is overpressed, such are desired to
consider that the calamitous urgency of the case absolutely requires the most
pathetical expostulation, to rouse the attention and indignation of mankind,
against this greatest of all plagues that ever befell unhappy man, which is both
our sin and our most severe punishment.

Dr. Cheyne farther observes, That if only the profligate, the scoundrel, the
abandoned run into these excesses, it were as vain to endeavor to reclaim
them, as it were to stop a tempest, or calm a storm: But that now the vice is
become epidemical, since it has got not only among mechanics and tradesmen, but
among persons of the brightest genius, the finest taste, and the most
accomplished parts. And oh! that I could (adds the doctor) give my conscience
the lie in not mentioning them, even among the first and least fallen part of
the creation itself, and those of them too, of the most elegant parts and the
strictest virtue, even of those who are in other respects blameless. Since the
case is so, it will not be amiss to show, to the evidence of a demonstration,
the folly as well as fruitlessness of such a course. A fit of the colic, or of
the vapors; a family misfortune; the death of a child, or of a friend, with
the assistance of the nurse or the next neighbor, often gives rise and becomes
the weighty causes of so fatal an effect. A little lowness requires drops,
which pass readily down under the notion of physic: Drops beget drams, and
drams beget more drams, till they come to be without weight and without measure
-- did this bewitching poison actually cure or relieve them from time to time,
something might be said to extenuate the folly and the frenzy of such a course,
but on the contrary, it heightens and enrages all their symptoms and sufferings
ever afterward, excepting the few moments immediately after taking it down;
and every dram begets the necessity of two more to cure the ill effects of the
first, and one minute's indulgence they purchase with many hours of greater
pain and misery, besides making the malady more incurable. Low spiritedness
itself is no disease; besides there are remedies that will relieve it so long
as there is any oil remaining in the lamp. -- Exercise, abstinence and proper
evacuations, with time and patience, will continually make it tolerable; very
often they will perfectly cure. The running into drams is giving up the whole
at once, for neither laudanum nor arsenick will kill more certainly, although
more quickly.

The mistaken use and grievous abuse of rum and other distilled spirits,
perhaps in no case appear more palpably than at the time of harvest, a business
which, under the Mosaic Dispensation, was particularly enjoined to be carried
on with humiliation and thanksgiving, and ought by all means, to be observed as
such under the gospel; but through the abuse of spirituous liquors, is made an
occasion of a greater abuse of the creature and dishonor of the Creator; this
arises, in many, from a mistaken persuasion that hard labor, particularly that
of the harvest field, cannot be carried on without a quantity of rum or other
distilled spirits; and in support of this opinion, we are frequently told of
the many people who have died in the field through extreme heat and fatigue,
and it is supposed that many more would die, if a plentiful use of spirituous
liquors was not allowed. But this I am persuaded is a great mistake, it being
much more likely that the free use of rum occasioned the death of those people;
the quantity they had swallowed down, sending a greater flow of spirits into
the head than the strength of the body could support. Indeed the repeated large
quantities of rum commonly drank during the whole time of harvest, keeps up the
blood in a continual serment and fever, in which state people cannot have a
proper restorative sleep; their constitutions are thereby enervated, their
lives shortened, and an unfitness for religious impressions generally prevails.

These most solemn and weighty considerations, have induced some well-minded
people to endeavor to lead, by their example (...) their friends and
neighbors into a contrary practice; and under these attempts, experience has
made it manifest, that very little or no strong liquor is necessary at those
times; indeed they have been convinced that the harvest and other laborious
work, can be very well managed without making use of any spirituous liquors at
all. If such labor was carried on with steadiness and proper moderation, there
would certainly be no need of a recruit of strength being sought for by that
means; more frequent intervals of rest, with a little food, oftener allowed the
reapers, and small drinks; such as molasses and water made agreeable with a
little cider, small beer, or even milk and water, would fully enable them to
perform their work to their employer's satisfaction and their own advantage;
and the overplus wages they would receive, instead of the spirituous liquors
usually given, might be sufficient to purchase bread for their families.

This sober and moderate manner of proceeding was certainly the general
practice in this province, for a considerable number of years after its first
settlement, when but small quantities of strong liquors, and often none at all
could be procured In a printed oration, not long since pronounced by Dr. Rush,
before the Philosophical Society of this city, we are told at page 65, Some of
you may remember the time, and your fathers have told those of us who do not,
when the diseases of Pennsylvania were as few and as simple as those of the
Indians. The food of the inhabitants was then simple; their only drink was
water; their appetites were restrained by labor: religion excluded the
influence of sickening passions: private hospitality supplied the want of
public hospitals: nature was their only nurse: temperance their principal
physician.
, The people in those early times maintained their health, and were enabled to
perform their labor to satisfaction. But this did not long continue, the great
call for our provisions visions brought us into connections with those
countries from whence rum was procured; and the desire of gain has since in a
progressive increase, induced our traders to bring us plenty of distilled
spirits, and together with them diseases and death in return for our flour, and
other useful produce. So early as the year 1728, Extract from the Pennsylvania
Gazette, for the year 1728. Philadelphia, the 7th of the 11th month, 1728, we
have the following surprising though authentic account of rum imported in
Pennsylvania the last year.

6 Puncheons, 1556 Hogsheads, 927 Tierces, 276 Barrels,
Which, by computation is 224,500 gallons, of which there was exported but
11400 gallons.

So that by a modest computation there has been consumed in one year, at least
twenty five thousand pounds in rum. This excessive drinking of rum, as it has
slain its thousands, is likely to destroy its ten thousands, for by its
corrosive and fiery property, it debauches the stomach, dries up the radical
moisture, poisons the juices, inflames the blood; unsheaths the bowels,
debilitates the nerves and stupifies the brain.


we find the introduction and consumption, of rum had made an amazing progress,
and began to rouse the attention of some of the considerate, may I not say, of
the lovers of their country in that day. And from the too apparent general use,
there is no room to suppose but that it has gone on in an increased proportion
to our numbers; though not now so easily ascertained, from the additional numbers
of ports, and various means of procuring it: Nor ought we to omit, in such
accounts, the large quantities of whisky and other liquors distilled amongst
ourselves from grain, fruit, and molasses, which cannot well be calculated.

I have heard of several thoughtful people who, from a persuasion that the
common method of giving spirituous liquors to laborers was exceeding hurtful,
have made it a condition with those they have employed, not to use any
spirituous liquors in their fields; these have had their work performed to good
satisfaction, and without any damage ensuing to their laborers. Nay, where
they have remained any considerable time with such employers, they have
generally acknowledged themselves sensible of the benefit arising from having
thus totally refrained the use of those liquors. A particular instance of this
kind occurred last summer, in the case of Joshua Evans, of Haddonfield; this
considerate person being convinced that the use of rum and other spirituous
liquors, was extremely hurtful to the laboring people; more especially during
the time of harvest, apprehended it to be his duty, to become an example in
opposition to this pernicious custom; and he concluded to run all risques of
loss and damage, which might happen to himself by the delay of bringing in his
harvest, rather than comply with a custom which he apprehended to be so
destructive of his fellow men.

He therefore offered sixpence per day more than other farmers, to such
laborers as were willing to assist in bringing in his harvest, on condition
that no spirituous liquors should be used in his fields. Notwithstanding the
singularity of such a proposal, a sufficient number of laborers offered
themselves, to whom he remarked, That the hurrying manner in which the people
drove on their labor in the harvest field, caused an unnatural ferment and
heat in their bodies, and of course an excessive thirst ensued, which often
occasioned their drinking water, or small liquors, in such immoderate degree as
to become hurtful and very dangerous, that this was generally assigned as a
reason for the use of spirituous liquors: That, in order to avoid these
extremes, he proposed to lead them himself in the harvest work, desiring they
would go no faster than he did; they acted accordingly, and his corn was cut
down and brought in as well, if not better, than ever it had been before; and
though the people drank little but water or milk and water, choosing it rather
than cider and water, or small beer, which they were not used to; they went
through their business with satisfaction to him and themselves. This person has
pursued the same course with laborers he has hired for other work; who, though
accustomed to spirituous liquors, after having served him several days, have
frankly acknowledged they had done very well without them, finding themselves
in a better state both of body and mind, than when they began to work for him.

This is a plain instance in contradiction to the common prejudice, that
laboring people cannot with safety perform their work without using those
liquors. Several more examples might be instanced of some considerate people
who have made it a rule not to make any use of spirituous liquors, either
amongst their workmen in the prosecution of their trades, or on their
plantations. To these experience has shown, that their people could not only do
as well without it, but found themselves much better in health, and well
satisfied in mind.

Several physicians of eminence have declared themselves in favor of this
sentiment; amongst others, the celebrated doctor Buchan, in his Domestic
Medicine, or Family Physician, a work so well esteemed as to have been, within
these two years, twice reprinted in this city. At page 71, of the English
edition, he says, Many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without
drinking strong liquors. This, though a common, is a very erroneous notion. Men
who never tasted strong liquors are not only able to endure more fatigue, but
also live much longer than those who use them daily The few of these, who
notwithstanding their excess, may have attained to a considerable age, it is
most reasonable to suppose, would have lived much longer, had they been
temperate.
. But suppose strong liquors did enable a man to do more work, they must
nevertheless waste the powers of life, and of course occasion premature old
age. They keep up a constant fever, which wastes the spirits, heats and
inflames the blood, and predisposes the body to numberless diseases.

At page the same, the author tells us, That all intoxicating liquors may be
considered as poisons. However disguised, that is their real character, and
sooner or later they will have their effect. It is a prevailing opinion in
savor of drinking spirituous liquors at harvest, and other hard labor, that
it gives relief by throwing out the sweat. Now, moderate quantities of any
small liquor, even water itself, if not drank too cold, and particularly if
sweetened with molasses, and a little sour'd with some proper acid, would
certainly answer the purpose, without the bad effects which attend the use of
spirits.

It is well known that a pint of good molasses will, in distillation, afford
rather more than a pint of good proof rum; therefore must contain as much, if
not more real strength than the same quantity of rum, without any of its
noxious qualities; being then in the state the Almighty first formed it, the
fiery property so clothed and united with the earthy and balsamic parts, as to
cause it to be quite friendly to our nature, and not liable to intoxicate; as
the spirit alone will, when separated by distillation from the other parts.

Small beer or water mixed with some of our home-made wines; or, as before
said, water mixed with a due quantity of molasses, made agreeably acid, to such
as choose it, by mixing it with a due proportion of cider, or some other acid
liquor, or even good vinegar We find by history, that the Roman soldiers in
their long marches, often through parching deserts, loaded with heavy armor,
used vinegar and water as the most suitable refreshment, they carried with them
two vessels, either of tin or leather, the one filled with water, the other
with vinegar. It also appears from scripture, in the case of Ruth, when in the
harvest field of Boaz, that it was customary to make use of vinegar, as a
suitable refreshment in that labor. Ruth, chap. ii.

I was informed by a person who resided some time with the Indians, that they
made a drink with parched corn, which was very agreeable and refreshing. The
corn, after being parched, is pounded and sifted, the mealy part mixed in
water, with molasses or sugar, to this some proper acid might be added, which
would make it yet more agreeable and wholesome.


; milk and water, or even water itself, if used with caution, will answer all
the purposes of common drink for laboring people.

Amongst the several prejudices in favor of the mistaken use of spirituous
liquors, there is none gives it a greater sanction or support, than the
prevailing opinion, even with persons of reputation, that what they term a
moderate quantity of rum mixed with water, is the best and safest liquor that
can be drank; hence confirming it, that spirit in one form or other is
necessary. To such who have not been accustomed, and think they cannot
habituate themselves to drink water, there may appear to be some kind of plea
in this argument, especially to travelers, who often meet with beer, cider, or
other fermented liquors that are dead, (...), sour, or not properly fermented,
which tend to generate air in the bowels, producing colicks, etc. But I believe
if those persons suffered the weight of the subject, and the consequence of the
encouragement they thereby give to the use of these destructive spirits, to
take proper place with them, it might suggest the propriety, if not necessity,
of introducing a more salutary practice to themselves and families. That pure
fluid (water) which the benevolent father of the family of mankind points out
for general use, is so analogous to the human frame, that except in a very few
cases, people might with safety gradually use themselves to it: And as to such
well disposed people who still retain a favorable opinion for the use of
spirit mixed with water, ought they not, even from love to mankind, to
endeavor to refrain from, and example others against it, (on account of the
prodigious havoc made by the use of spirits) agreeable to the example set us
by the Apostle Paul, Cor. viii. 13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend; how
much more then ought they to refrain from that which may tend to establish
mankind in a practice so generally destructive; more especially when they
consider the danger themselves are in, of increasing the quantity of spirit
with their water; as it has been observed, that the use of this mixture is
particularly apt, almost imperceptibly, to gain upon those who use it; so that
many otherwise good and judicious people, have, unwarily to themselves and
others, fallen with the common herd, a sacrifice to this mighty devourer. And
where water is met with, as is sometimes the case, which is scarce fit to
drink; its vain to think to remove the noxious qualities by mixing it with
spirit; for though bad water may be made more palatable by mixing spirit with it,
yet all the bad qualities of the water will remain, to which will only be
superadded the bad qualities of the spirit. There are many ways proposed by
which water may be helped without any such additions, as by filtration, through
porous stones, or through an earthen vessel, in the bottom of which there is a
quantity of sand, which retains the noxious mixture. Hard water may be made
soft by boiling, or by being exposed to the sun and air. Some propose mixing
water, which is impure, with loam; this being well stirred and left to settle,
the noxious parts will subside with the loam, and the water may be drawn off
clear and fit for use.

Dr. Cheyne in his treatise before mentioned, observes, That without all
peradventure, water is the primitive original beverage; as it is the only
simple fluid fitted for diluting, moistening and cooling -- the ends of drink,
appointed by nature, and happy had it been for the race of mankind, if other
mixed and artificial liquors had never been invented. It has been an agreeable
appearance to me, says this author, to observe with what freshness and vigor
those who, though eating freely of flesh meat, yet drank nothing but this
element, have lived in health, indolence, and cheerfulness to a great age.
Water alone is sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in
drink. Strong liquors were never designed for common use. They were formerly
kept in England, as other medicines are, in apothercaries shops. Speaking of
the effects of wine (a liquor in general much less hurtful than distilled
spirits) which he says to have been so much in use at the time he wrote, that
the better sort of people scarcely diluted their food with any other liquor, he
remarks, That as natural causes will always produce their proper effects, their
blood was inflamed into gout, stone, and rheumatism, raging fevers, pleurisies,
etc. Water is the only dissolvent or menstruum, and the most certain diluter of
all bodies proper for food.

Doctor Short, in his discourse of the inward use of water, speaks much in its
commendation. He says, we can draw a very convincing argument of the excellency
of water, from the longevity and healthfulness of those who at first had no
better liquor, and the health and strength of body and serenity of mind of
those who at this day have no other common liquor to drink. Of this the common
people amongst the Highlands of Scotland, are a sufficient instance, amongst
whom it is no rarity to find persons of eighty, ninety, yea an hundred years of
age, as healthy, strong, and nimble, as wine or ale bibbers are at thirty-six
or forty I was informed by a person of credit, from his own observations in
Scotland, of the strength and hardiness of the common people there; and of
their ability to bear cold and fatigue; though the cold is great in winter, and
their support in some parts principally, if not wholly when abroad, confined to
oatmeal and water; he has seen a shepherd laid down to rest or sleep on the
mountain, without any shelter, wrapped up in his played in cold snowy weather,
such as would have froze most other people.
. The excellency of water, the doctor says, may be argued from the great
success people, otherwise despicable, have attained over other nations, while
they remained content with the product of nature for drink. Of this the
Persian, Grecian, and Roman monarchies are instances. This was also the case of
our ancestors, the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, whilst their manners remained
simple, and their food and drink such as nature had provided, they increased to
such a degree, that their country not being able to contain them, they were
obliged to send out swarms of people to seek for settlements in the more
southern parts of the world; these gradually settled themselves in the
different parts of the Roman empire: But since those Northern Kingdoms have
forsaken the wholesome customs of their forefathers, and habituated themselves
to the use of strong liquors, they are so enfeebled, and their numbers have so
much decreased, that many parts of their own country now remain uncultivated.
The rulers easy under the pecuniary advantages which arise, themselves enslaved
to the practice of drinking to excess, look without concern on this enormous
ruin of multitudes of their fellow men. Thus it is in Russia, where a vast
revenue is raised from distilled spirituous liquors, and a multitude of people
proportionably large, are destroyed thereby. Again says the doctor, There is a
ridiculous maxim used by drinkers, that water makes but thin blood, not fit for
business -- I say it is water only that can endue its drinkers with the
strongest bodies and most robust constitutions, where exercise or labor is
joined with it, since it best assists the stomach and lungs to reduce the
aliments into the smallest particles, that they may better pass the strainers
of the body, which separates the nutritious parts of the blood to be applied to
the sides of the vessels, and exercise invigorates the fibers and muscles;
whereas the rapid motion of the blood excited by drinking spirituous liquors,
can not fail of being prejudicial to the body, it will cause the watery parts
to dissipate and the remaining grow thick and tough, and the event be
obstructions, inflammations, imposthumations, etc. -- and though strong liquors
afford a greater flow of spirit for a short time, yet this is always followed
with as much lowness of spirit; so that to gain a necessary stock of spirits,
the person is obliged to repeat the same force, till he learns a custom of
drinking drams. In this we are confirmed, if we consider the great strength and
hardiness of poor rusticks in many parts of the world, whose provisions is
mostly vegetable food, and their drink water. The doctor adds, That it often
happens that persons of tender, weakly, crazy constitutions, by refraining
strong liquors and accustoming themselves to drink water, make shift to spin
out many years.

Doctor Cadogan, in his treatise on the gout, lately printed in this city,
tells us, That water is the only liquor nature knows of, or has provided for
all animals, and whatsoever nature gives we must depend upon it, is best and
safest for us; accordingly we see that when we have committed any excess or
mistake of any kind, and suffer for it, it is water that relieves. Hence the
chief good of bath, spa, and many other medicinal waters, especially to hard
drinkers. It is that element that dilutes and carries off crudities and
indigestions, etc. the mineral virtues they contain may make them tolerable to
the stomach in their passage, but do, as I believe, little more in the body, it
is the water that cures. Wine was given us as a cordial.

Cheyne says he has known men of weak and tender constitutions, who could
neither eat nor digest upon drinking wine, who, by drinking at meals common
water heated, have recovered their appetites and digestion, etc. have thriven
and grown plump. Speaking of malt liquors, he gives it as his sentiment, that a
weak stomach can as readily, and with less pain, digest pork and pease soup, as
Yorkshire or Nottingham ale: he adds, That they are of so glutinous a nature as
to make excellent bird lime, and when simmered sometime over a gentle fire,
make the most sticking, and the best plaster for old strains that can be
contrived. Even the small beer that is commonly drank at London, if it be not
well boiled, very clear, and of a due age, must be hurtful to persons of weak
nerves and slow digestion.

Doctor Buchan tells us, The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the
common people of England, cannot fail to render the blood sizy and unfit for
circulation, from whence proceed obstructions and inflammations of the lungs.
Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wine, do not run less hazard; these
liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in
pieces.

Doctor Short, page 33, after describing the many distempers produced by
drinking of malt and other fermented liquors, adds, That seeing constitutions
differ, it is not to be expected that spirituous liquors should produce all the
same symptoms in one and the same person, yet that all drinkers have several of
them; and if they come not to that height, its because they afterward use
great exercise or hard labor, with sometimes thin diluting liquors, which
prevent their immediate hurting Doctor Edward Bancroft, in his natural history
of Guiana, which includes the colonies of Surinam, Barbices, etc. writes, That
the inhabitants derive no small assistance from the Indians -- some of whom
reside on almost every plantation. -- These Indians however, are debauched by
luxury and intemperance, and their manners but ill agree with those of the
Indians who have preserved their natural innocence and simplicity. They are
encouraged in their propensity to intemperance by the whites, who freely supply
them with rum, thereby to attach them more firmly to their service, which
considerably impairs their health and diminishes their numbers. -- Speaking of
the diseases incident to the country, he says, These are as numerous as in
other countries, where they have been augmented by cookery, with its
stimulating, provocative arts, exciting inordinate appetites, by multiplying
the variety of dishes, which blended in the stomach, compose such an
incongruous medly, that the digestive organs cannot possibly assimilate the
pernicious mass to wholesome chyle. Nor has intemperate luxury been confined to
this single innovation. Water, the natural drink of mankind as of all other
animals, is now contaminated by the mixture of pernicious spirits, which have
poisoned one of the principal blessings of life. From this source are derived
those tribes of diseases which oppress humanity.
.

Its customary, and often necessary in the summer season, particularly in
afternoons, for people who are spent by labor or application, to have recourse
to some kind of refreshment. This is generally of two kinds, very different in
their nature and effect, viz. The one is a mixture of spirituous liquors, as
punch, grog, etc. or fermented liquors, as cider, beer, etc. The other is mild
and diluting, such as tea, or coffee, etc. The use of spirituous or fermented
liquors, for the reasons already given, are hurtful and dangerous; more
especially, as the sorrowful experience of many within knowledge, has taught
that there is very great danger of even sober people who use them, with what is
termed moderation, becoming habituated and gradually increasing their strength
and quantity, till it proves the ruin of themselves and families.

This caution can scarcely be too often repeated, as it has been so frequently
the melancholy situation of persons, otherwise valuable members of society. But
the use of mild diluting drinks, such as coffee, or the several sorts of teas,
either of our own produce or those brought from the Indies, may be truly termed
innocent and friendly to our natures, and very proper to promote a good
perspiration and recruit our spirits when dissipated through application or
labor. And as the use of these innocent dilutors have not escaped censure,
more especially from persons who are attached to the use of spirituous or
fermented liquors; it may be agreeable to the reader, to hear the sentiments of
doctor Cheyne on the subject. And here it may be well to remark that these
observations were addressed to the people of England, where the heat not being
so great as in these parts, those restorative dilutent drinks are not so
frequently necessary. A dish or two of coffee, the doctor says, with a little
milk to soften it, in raw or damp weather, or on a waterish and phlegmatic
stomach, is not only innocent but a present relief. -- Tea The middling priced
is esteemed the most wholesome.
, particularly Green, when light and softened with a little milk, if neither
too strong nor too hot, he looks upon as a very proper dilutent, very suitable
to cleanse the alimentary passages, and wash of the scorbutic and urinous
salts: He also recommends tea made of sliced orange or lemon, as one of the
best promoters of digestion after a full meal, or when people are dry between
meals. As to persons of weak and tender nerves, who find that upon using of
these drinks with freedom, or in too great quantity, they fall into lowness and
trembling; such ought to use them with moderation and caution.

Again we know, says he, that warm water will most of any thing, promote and
assist digestion in persons of weak stomachs and tender nerves; by this alone I
have seen several such persons recover to a miracle, when cold mineral waters,
bitters, cordials, and drams have done rather harm than good. -- Tea is but an
infusion in water of an innocent plant: Innocent, he says, because we find by
its taste, it has neither poisonous, deleterious, nor acrimonious qualities;
and we are certain from its use, in the countries it come from Chambers in his
dictionary of arts and sciences, tells us, That the Chinese are always taking
tea, especially at meals; it is the chiefest treat wherewith they regale their
friends. The most moderate take it at least thrice a day.
, (which are larger than Europe) that they receive no damage from it; but on
the contrary, that it promotes both digestion and perspiration. The arguments
for its relaxing the coats of the stomach and bowels by its heat, are of no
force; for unless it be drank much hotter than the blood, it can do no hurt
that way. -- However, I would advise those who drink tea plentifully, not to
drink it much hotter than blood warm, whereby they will receive all its
benefits, and be secure against all the harm it can possibly do.

Doctor Engelbertus Kaempfer, physician of the Dutch embassy to the emperor of
Japan, in his account of that country, giving a particular account of the
growth, preparation, and use of tea; says, It is so common in Japan, that
travelers drink scarce any thing else upon the road. -- The fresh gathered
leaves are dried or roasted over the fire in an iron pan, and when hot, rolled
with the palm of the hand on a matt, till they become curled. They have public
roasting houses built for this very purpose, and contrived so that every body
may bring their leaves to be roasted. The doctor makes no distinction between
green and bohea; the only difference from his account, arises from the
different time of gathering. The first, gathered whilst the leaves are tender,
has the best flavor and is most valuable; the second is less so: the last,
gathered when the leaves are full grown is the cheapest. He gives it as his
sentiments, from his observations of the effect of tea, that when properly
prepared and of a due age, it gently refreshes the animal spirits, and
wonderfully chears and comforts the mind; it opens obstructions, cleanses the
blood, and more particularly removes that tartarous matter which is the
efficient cause of gravelly and gouty distempers. This he says it does so
effectually, that he never met with any who was troubled either with the gout
or stone, amongst the tea-drinkers of Japan. He adds that he is wholly of
opinion that the use of teas would be attended with the same success in the
like cases, even in Europe, were it not for an hereditary disposition, for
either of these distempers derived to some persons from their ancestors; and
which is frequently cherished and fomented by a too plentiful use of wine,
beer, strong liquors and flesh meats. It appears the use of tea meets with
opposition in the East countries, as well as amongst ourselves, from those
persons whose practice contradicts the use of these kinds of innocent diluting
drinks: for the doctor remarks, That in Japan the use of tea is very much cried
down by those persons who are lovers of sakki beer, which is there brewed from
rice.

All the good qualities ascribed by the above mentioned physicians, to foreign
tea, may be as truly applied to teas made of our own country produce, such as
sage, balm, burnet, sassafrass, etc. etc. these I am persuaded would answer
all, if not more and better purposes than the foreign teas. But I spare to say
much on this head at present, lest by discouraging the use of any mild diluting
drink, (especially one in such general use, and which simply considered as a
diluent, must be acknowledged a good substitute,) any strength should be given
to the use of spirituous or fermented liquors in its stead.

We may also make a very good refreshing drink of the nature of coffee; from
roasted wheat, barley, rye, or chestnuts, full as agreeable, wholesome, and
nourishing, if not much more so than coffee itself.

Upon the whole it may be asked, What can be done toward preventing or putting
a check to the prodigious havoc made by the present use of spirituous liquors?
To this I shall reply with the respectable author first mentioned. Let such
lawmakers, governors, and rulers, who retain any love and pity for their fellow
men; let these be earnestly requested seriously, and solemnly to consider,
whether it is not their indispensable duty to use their utmost endeavors, that
a stop may be put to this dreadful calamity; let not the apprehension of loss
or any present inconveniency, deter any from doing their duty in this respect,
because there cannot any inconveniences possibly arise from the redress of
this grievance, which deserves to be named with those evils which will be the
undoubted consequence of its continuance. The reasons that have hitherto
prevailed to the countenancing of this most destructive practice, ought surely
to be rejected with scorn and indignation, when the welfare of such vast
numbers are so deeply concerned. What multitudes of lives would thereby be
saved, and what innumerable outrages, as theft, murder, etc. prevented: To
rectify which, were an apparently vain and fruitless attempt, while drunkenness
is made the cheapest of all vices. A vice which can no otherwise be effectually
prevented from raging with its present excessive enormity, and spreading
devastation all around, but by laying such high taxes upon distilled spirituous
liquors, as well those made amongst us, as those imported from abroad, as will
make the drinking it sufficiently expensive to put it out of the reach of so
great a number of insatiable drinkers, to use it; at least in its present
degree of strength. -- Alas, says he, how astonishing a calamity is this,
depraving the morals and shortening and destroying the lives of such
multitudes, probably no less than a million yearly all over the world -- were
but one fourth of this number yearly destroyed by raging pestilence, with what
earnest supplications would mankind deprecate so terrifying and sore an
affliction. How severe a judgment is it, when God leaves men to be their own
scourgers? with how unrelenting and unmerciful a heart do they execute the most
severe punishment upon themselves! -- Particulars who view this matter in its
full importance, will query, What can an individual or private man do in the
case? To these it may be observed, That as popular amendments consist wholly of
the actions of individuals, every one who is sincere in his desires, that a
remedy may be applied to this mighty evil, must, to the utmost of his power,
discourage the increase of spirituous liquors either by importation,
distillation, or otherwise, and not deceive themselves, or rather suffer the
God of this world to deceive them by means of the specious pretenses commonly
advanced; such as, That other people will be active in augmenting the quantity
if they do not; or, That however people may abuse themselves through excess, yet
what is deemed a moderate quantity, may lawfully be used; but it may easily be
shown, that these and other arguments commonly advanced, are vain, though
plausible pretenses; that the true motive is the desire of gain: That every new
importer and distiller, (and oh that the vender also may bring his situation to
the true balance) becomes a party to the evil; gives fresh strength to the
practice, by holding out an additional quantity, and of course making it in
some degree cheaper, at least easier for their fellow men to come at, to the
destruction of their brethren, children of the same father, and who as
christians they profess to love as themselves.

And as for such who, though convinced of the impropriety of the practice, yet
for fear of not having their labor performed, or for other reasons, cannot
prevail upon themselves to refrain giving it to their servants and laborers,
let these at least so weaken and qualify it, as to prevent its immediate
destructive effects.

A very eminent physician has given the following direction for the benefit of
those who have not wisdom enough left at once to abandon the odious and
pernicious practice of drinking distilled spirituous liquors, viz. By degrees
to mix water with the spirit; to lessen the quantity every day, and keep to the
same quantity of water, till in about the course of a week, nothing of the dram
kind be used along with the water. By this means the person will suffer no
inconveniency, but reap great benefit upon leaving off drams or spirits, as has
been tried by many. If any gnawing be left in the stomach upon quite leaving it
off, a little warm broth, weak tea, or any thing of that kind, will be of
service. The appetite always increases in a few days after leaving off drams,
unless by the too long continuance of them, the tone of the stomach is
destroyed. And when the stomach is thus affected, a cup of carduus, camomile
tea, wormwood or centaury every morning fasting and every evening, will be
found a good remedy.

Some GENERAL MAXIMS, mostly drawn from the foregoing, which as they cannot be
too obviously held up in the view of the young and inconsiderate, its hoped the
observant reader will excuse the repetition.

THE great rule of diet is to study simplicity: Nature delights in the most
plain and simple food; and every animal, except man, follows her dictates.

Nothing conduces more to health and long life, than abstinence and plain food,
with due labor.

Water alone is sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in
drink: It is the universal dissolvent nature has provided, and the most certain
diluter of all bodies proper for food; quickens the appetite and strengthens
digestion most. Doctor Cheyne and doctor Cadogan.

Strong and spirituous liquors were never designed for common use: They were
formerly kept in England, as other medicines are, in apothecaries shops: If
freely indulged, they become a certain though slow poison. Cheyne.

All intoxicating liquors may be considered as poisons; however disguised, that
is their real character, and sooner or later they will have their effect.
Doctor Buchan.

Every act of intoxication puts nature to the expense of a fever, in order to
discharge the poisonous draught; when this is repeated almost every day, it is
easy to foresee the consequence.

Fevers occasioned by drinking, do not always go off in a day, they frequently
end in an inflammation of the breast, liver, or brain, and produce fatal
effects.

There is no danger in leaving off drinking strong liquors at once, the plea
for continuing them being false and groundless. Cheyne.

Strong liquors do not prevent the mischiefs of a surfeit, nor carry it off so
sefely as water, though they seem to give present relief. Cheyne.

Many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without drinking strong
liquors. This though a common, is a very erroneous opinion: Men who never tasted
strong liquors, are not only able to endure more fatigue, but also live much
longer than those who use them daily. Buchan.

Every thing that has past the fire, so that it has had due time to divide and
penetrate its parts, as in distillation, as far as it possibly can, retains a
caustic corrosive and burning quality ever afterward.

In the continued distillation of spirits, the action of fire is so strong as
to reduce them to liquid fire at last; which will of themselves evaporate in
visible flames and fumes, Cheyne.

The great quantity of viscid malt liquor drank by the common people of
England, cannot fail to render the blood sizy and unfit for circulation, from
whence proceed obstructions and inflammations of the lungs, etc. Buchan.

Malt liquors (excepting clear small beer of due age) are extremely hurtful to
tender and studious persons. Cheyne.

There are few great ale drinkers who are not phthisical, nor is that to be
wondered at, considering the glutinous and almost indigestible nature of strong
ale. Buchan.

Those who drink ardent spirits or strong wines do not run less hazard; these
liquors heat and inflame the blood, and tear the tender vessels of the lungs in
pieces. Buchan.

Doctor Cadogan in his late treatise on the gout, says, He cannot allow him to
be strictly temperate, who drinks any wine or strong liquors at all, unless it
be medicinally.

THE END.
THOUGHTS UPON SLAVERY.
I. BY slavery I mean domestic slavery, or that of a servant to a master. A
late ingenious writer well observes, "The variety of forms in which slavery
appears, makes it almost impossible to convey a just notion of it, by way of
definition. There are however certain properties which have accompanied slavery
in most places, whereby it is easily distinguished from that mild domestic
service which obtains in our own country See Mr. Hargrave's plea for Somerset
the negro.
."

2. Slavery imports an obligation of perpetual service, an obligation which
only the consent of the master can dissolve. Neither in some countries can the
master himself dissolve it, without the consent of judges appointed by law. It
generally gives the master an arbitrary power of any correction not affecting
life or limb. -- Sometimes even these are exposed to his will: or protected
only by a sine, or some slight punishment, too insiconderable to restrain a
master of an harsh temper. It creates an incapacity of acquiring any thing,
except for the master's benefit. It allows the master to alienate the slave, in
the same manner as his cows and horses. Lastly, it descends in its full extent
from parent to child, even to the latest generation.

3. The beginning of this may be dated from the remotest period, of which we
have an account in history. It commenced in the barbarous state of society, and
in process of time spread into all nations. It prevailed particularly among the
Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, and the ancient Germans: And was transmitted by
them to the various kingdoms and states, which arose out of the ruins of the
Roman empire. But after christianity prevailed, it gradually fell into decline
in almost all parts of Europe. This great change began in Spain, about the end
of the eighth century: And was become general in most other kingdoms of Europe,
before the middle of the fourteenth.

4. From this time slavery was nearly extinct, till the commencement of the
sixteenth century, when the discovery of America, and of the western and
eastern coasts of Africa, gave occasion to the revival of it. It took its rise
from the Portuguese, who to supply the Spaniards with men, to cultivate their
new possessions in America, procured negroes from Africa, whom they sold for
slaves to the American Spaniards. This began in the year 1508, when they
imported the first negroes into Hispaniola. In 1540 Charles the fifth, then
king of Spain, determined to put an end to negro-slavery: Giving positive
orders, That all the negro slaves in the Spanish dominions should be set free.
And this was accordingly done by Lagasca, whom he sent and empowered to free
them all, on condition of continuing to labor for their masters. But soon
after Lagasca returned to Spain, slavery returned and flourished as before.
Afterward other nations, as they acquired possessions in America, followed the
examples of the Spaniards; and slavery has now taken deep root in most of our
American colonies.

II. Such is the nature of slavery: Such the beginning of negro-slavery in
America. But some may desire to know, what kind of country it is, from which
the negroes are brought? What sort of men, of what temper and behavior are
they in their own country? And in what manner they are generally procured,
carried to, and treated in America?

1. And first, What kind of country is that from whence they are brought? Is it
so remarkably horrid, dreary and barren, that it is a kindness to deliver them
out of it? I believe many have apprehended so: But it is an entire mistake, if
we may give credit to those who have lived many years therein, and could have
no motive to misrepresent it.

2. That part of Africa whence the negroes are brought, commonly known by the
name of Guinea, extends along the coast, in the whole, between three and four
thousand miles. From the river Senegal, (seventeen degrees north of the line)
to Cape Sierra Leona, it contains seven hundred miles. Thence it runs eastward
about fifteen hundred miles, including the Grain-Coast, the Ivory-Coast, the
Gold-Coast, and the Slave-Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From thence
it runs southward, about twelve hundred miles, and contains the kingdoms of
Congo and Angola.

3. Concerning the first, the Senegal-Coast, Mons. Brue, who lived there
sixteen years, after describing its fruitfulness near the sea, says, "The
farther you go from the sea, the more fruitful and well-improved is the
country, abounding in pulse, Indian corn, and various fruits. Here are vast
meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle. And the villages
which lie thick, show the country is well peopled." And again: "I was
surprised, to see the land so well cultivated; scarce a spot lay un-improved:
The low lands divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice: The higher
grounds were planted with Indian corn, and peace of different sorts. Their beef
is excellent; poultry plenty and very cheap, as are all the necessaries of
life."

4. As to the Grain and Ivory Coast, we learn from eye witnesses, that the soil
is in general fertile, producing abundance of rice and roots. Indigo and cotton
thrive without cultivation. -- Fish is in great plenty; the flocks and herds
are numerous, and the trees loaded with fruit.

5. The Gold-Coast and Slave-Coast, all who have seen it agree, is exceeding
fruitful and pleasant, producing vast quantities of rice and other grain,
plenty of fruit and roots, palm-wine, and oil, and fish in great abundance,
with much tame and wild cattle. The very same account is given us of the soil
and produce of the kingdoms of Benin, Congo and Angola. -- From all which it
appears, That Guinea in general, far from being an horrid, dreary, barren
country, is one of the most fruitful, as well as the most pleasant countries in
the known world. It is said indeed to be unhealthy. And so it is to strangers,
but perfectly healthy to the native inhabitants.

6. Such is the country from which the negroes are brought. We come next to
enquire, What sort of men they are, of what temper and behavior, not in our
plantations, but in their native country. And here likewise the surest way is
to take our account from eye and ear witnesses. Now those who have lived in the
Senegal country observe, it is inhabited by three nations, the Jalofs, Fulis,
and Mandingos. The king of the Jalofs has under him several ministers, who
assist in the exercise of justice. The chief justice goes in circuit through
all his dominions, to hear complaints and determine controversies. And the
viceroy goes with him, to inspect the behavior of the Alkadi, or Governor of
each village. The Fulis are a numerous people; the soil of their country
represented as rich, affording large harvests, and the people laborious and
good farmers: Of some of these Fuli blacks who dwelt on the river Gambia,
William Moor the English factor gives a very favorable account. -- He says,
they are governed by their chief men, who rule with much moderation. Few of
them will drink any thing stronger than water, being strict Mahometans. The
government is easy, because the people are of a good and quiet disposition; and
so well instructed in what is right, that a man who wrongs another is the
abomination of all. -- They desire no more land than they use, which they
cultivate with great care and industry: If any of them are known to be made
slaves by the white men they all join to redeem them. They not only support all
that are old, or blind, or lame among themselves; but have frequently supplied
the necessities of the Mandingos, when they were distressed by famine.

7. The Mandingos, says Mons. Brue, are rigid Mahometans, drinking neither wine
nor brandy. They are industrious and laborious, keeping their ground well
cultivated, and breeding a good stock of cattle. Every town has a governor, and
he appoints the labor of the people. The men work the ground designed for
corn; the women and girls, the rice-ground. -- He afterward divides the (...)
rice among them: And decides all quarrels if any arise. All the Mohammedan
negroes constantly go to public prayers thrice a day: there being a priest in
every village, who regularly calls them together: Some authors say, it is
surprising to see the attention and reverence which they observe during their
worship. -- These three nations practice several trades; they have smiths,
sadlers, potters and weavers. And they are very ingenious at their several
occupations. -- Their smiths not only make all the instruments of iron, which
they have occasion to use, but likewise work many things neatly in gold and
silver. It is chiefly the women and children who weave fine cotton cloth, which
they dye blue and black.

8. It was of these parts of Guinea, that Mons. Adanson, correspondent of the
royal academy of sciences at Paris from 1749 to 1753, gives the following
account, both as to the country and people. "Which way soever I turned my eyes,
I beheld a perfect image of pure nature: An agreeable solitude, bounded on
every side by a charming landscape; the rural situation of cottages, in the
midst of trees; the ease and quietness of the negroes, reclined under the shade
of the spreading foliage, with the simplicity of their dress and manners: The
whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and I seemed to
contemplate the world in its primitive state. They are generally-speaking, very
good-natured, sociable and obliging. I was not a little pleased with my very
first reception, and it fully convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made, in the accounts we have of the savage character of
the Africans." He adds, "It is amazing that an illiterate people should reason
so pertinently concerning the heavenly bodies. There is no doubt, but that with
proper instruments, they would become excellent astronomers."

9. The inhabitants of the Grain and Ivory-Coast are represented by those that
deal with them, as sensible, courteous, and the fairest traders on the coasts
of Guinea. They rarely drink to excess: If any do, they are severely punished
by the king's order. They are seldom troubled with war: If a difference happen
between two nations, they commony end the dispute amicably.

The inhabitants of the Gold and Slave-Coast likewise, when they are not
artfully incensed against each other, live in great union and friendship, being
generally well-tempered, civil, tractable, and ready to help any that need it.
In particular, the natives of the kingdom of Whidah are civil, kind, and
obliging to strangers. -- And they are the most gentleman-like of all the
negroes, abounding in good manners toward each other. The inferiors pay great
respect to their superiors: -- So wives to their husbands, children to their
parents. And they are remarkably industrious: All are constantly employed; the
men in agriculture, the women in spinning and weaving cotton.

10. The Gold and Slave Coasts are divided into several districts, some
governed by kings, others by the principal men, who take care each of their own
town or village, and prevent or appease tumults. -- They punish murder and
adultery severely; very frequently with death. -- Theft and robbery are
punished by a fine proportionable to the goods that were taken. -- All the
natives of this coast, though heathens, believe there is one GOD, the author of
them and all things. They appear likewise to have a confused apprehension of a
future state. And accordingly every town and village has a place of public
worship. -- It is remarkable that they have no beggars among them: Such is the
care of the chief men, in every city and village, to provide some easy labor,
even for the old and weak. Some are employed in blowing the smiths bellows;
others in pressing palm-oil; others in grinding of colors. If they are too
weak even for this, they sell provisions in the market.

11. The accounts we have of the natives of the kingdom of Benin is, that they
are a reasonable and good-natured people, sincere and inoffensive, and do no
injustice either to one another or to strangers. -- They are civil and
courteous: If you make them a present, they endeavor to repay it double. And
if they are trusted, till the ship returns next year, they are sure honestly to
pay the whole debt. -- Theft is punished among them, although not with the same
severity as murder. If a man and woman of any quality, are taken in adultery,
they are certain to be put to death, and their bodies thrown on a dunghill, and
left a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just and honest in their
dealings; and are also very charitable: The king and the great lords taking
care to employ all that are capable of any work. And those that are utterly
helpless they keep for GOD's sake; so that here also are no beggars. The
inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people. They discover a
good understanding, and behave in a friendly manner to strangers, being of a
mild temper and an affable carriage. -- Upon the whole therefore the negroes
who inhabit the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the southern bounds
of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless, brutish, lazy
barbarians, the fierce, cruel, perfidious savages they have been described,
that on the contrary, they are represented by them who had no motive to flatter
them, as remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have for
improving their understanding: -- As very industrious, perhaps more so than any
other natives of so warm a climate. -- As fair, just and honest in their
dealings, unless where whitemen have taught them to be otherwise: -- And as far
more mild, friendly and kind to strangers, than any of our forefathers were.
Our forefathers! Where shall we find at this day, among the fair-faced natives
of Europe, a nation generally practicing the justice, mercy, and truth, which
are related of these poor black Africans? Suppose the preceding accounts are
true, (which I see no reason on pretense to doubt of) and we may leave England
and France, to seek genuine honesty in Benin, Congo, or Angola.

III. We have now seen, what kind of country it is, from which the negroes are
brought: And what sort of men (even whitemen being the judges) they were in
their own country. Enquire we, Thirdly, In what manner are they generally
procured, carried to, and treated in America.

1. First. In what manner are they procured? Part of them by fraud. Captains of
ships from time to time, have invited negroes to come on board, and then
carried them away. But far more have been procured by force. The christians
landing upon their coasts, seized as many as they found, men, women and
children, and transported them to America. It was about 1551, that the English
began trading to Guinea: At first, for gold and elephants teeth, but soon
after, for men. In 1566, Sir John Hawkins sailed with two ships to Cape Verd,
where he sent eighty men on shore to catch negroes. But the natives flying,
they fell farther down, and there set the men on shore, "to burn their towns
and take the inhabitants." But they met with such resistance, that they had
seven men killed, and took but ten negroes. So they went still farther down,
till having taken enough, they proceeded to the West Indies, and sold them Here
it may be well to give a particular account of that transaction in the very
words in which it is transmitted to us by early historians, as it is a clear
proof, that it was solely from a desire of gain that the English first
undertook to seize and bring the unhappy Africans from their native country;
and is a clear and positive refutation of those false arguments frequently
advanced in vindication of the slave trade, viz. That the first purchase of
negro slaves by the English, was from motives of compassion, with views of
saving the lives of some of those blacks who being taken prisoners in battle,
would, if not thus purchased, have been sacrificed to the revenge of their
conquerors: but this plea is manifestly false; from all the accounts we have of
the disposition of the negroes in those early times, they appear to have been
an innocent people, gentle and easy in their nature; rather averse to war, as
is the general disposition of the natives of these warm climates; till being
corrupted by an intercourse with the Europeans, and stimulated by the excessive
use of spirituous liquors, they were induced to join them in their cruel
depradations against their unhappy countrymen. The account given of that
transaction by Thomas Lediard in his naval history, at page 141, is in the
following words: That Sir John Hawkins in his several voyages to the Canary
islands, understanding that negroes were a very good commodity in Hispaniola,
(then settling by the Spaniards) and that they were easy to be had in great
numbers on the coast of Guinea. Having opened his mind to his friends, he soon
found adventurers for his undertaking; amongst whom were Sir Lionel Docket, Sir
Thomas Lodge, and others: and having fitted out three small vessels, manned
only with 100 men, he departed from the coast of England in October 1562, and
sailed first to Tenerisse, where he took in several refreshments; from thence
to the coast of Guinea, where he got in possession, partly by the sword, and by
other means, upwards of three hundred of the natives, besides several
commodities which that country afforded: with this booty he set sail for the
island of Hispaniola in the West Indies, where he disposed of his negroes. Two
years after, he went another voyage on the coast of Guinea; there he staid
several days at the island Sabula, where every day they took some of the
inhabitants; burning and ravaging their towns: when having completed their
number of negroes, they set sail for the West Indies.


.

2. It was some time before the Europeans found a more compendious way of
procuring African slaves, by prevailing upon them to make war upon each other,
and to sell their prisoners, -- Till then they seldom had any wars: But were in
general quiet and peaceable. But the white men first taught them drunkenness
and avarice, and then hired them to sell one another. Nay, by this means, even
their kings are induced to sell their own subjects. So Mr. Moore (factor of the
African company in 1730) informs us, "When the king of Barsalli wants goods or
brandy, he sends to the English governor at James' sort, who immediately sends
a sloop. -- Against the time it arrives, he plunders some of his neighbors
towns, selling the people for the goods he wants. At other times he falls upon
one of his own towns, and makes bold to sell his own subjects." So Mons. Brue
says, "I wrote to the king (not the same) "if he had a sufficient number of
slaves I would treat with him. He seized three hundred of his own people, and
sent word, he was ready to deliver them for the goods." He adds, "Some of the
natives are always ready" (when well paid) "to surprise and carry off their own
countrymen. They come at night without noise, and if they find any lone
cottage, surround it and carry off all the people." -- Barbot, (another French
factor) says, "Many of the slaves sold by the negroes are prisoners of war, or
taken in the incursions they make into their enemy's territories. -- Others are
stolen. Abundance of little blacks of both sexes, are stolen away by their
neighbors, when found abroad on the road, or in the woods, or else in the
cornfieldsd, at the time of year when their parents keep them there all day to
scare away the devouring birds." That their own parents sell them, is utterly
false:

3. To set the manner wherein Negroes are procured in a yet stronger light, it
will suffice to give an extract of two voyages to Guinea on this account. The
first is taken verbatim from the original manuscript of the Surgeon's Journal.

"SESTRO, Dec. 29, 1724. No trade to day, though many traders came on board.
They informed us, that the people are gone to war within land, and will bring
prisoners enough in two or three days; in hopes of which we stay.

"The 30th. No trade yet: but our traders came on board today, and informed us
the people had burnt four towns: So that tomorrow we expect slaves off.

"The 31st. Fair weather: but no trading yet. We see each night towns burning.
But we hear, many of the Sestro men are killed by the inland Negroes: So that
we fear this war will be unsuccessful.

"The 2d. of January. Last night we saw a prodigious fire break out about
eleven o'clock, and this morning see the town of Sestro burnt down to the
ground." (It contained some hundred houses.) "So that we find their enemies are
too hard for them at present, and consequently our trade spoiled here.
Therefore about seven o'clock we weighed anchor, to proceed lower down."

4. The second extract taken from the journal of a Surgeon, who went from
New York on the same trade, is as follows. "The Commander of the vessel sent to
acquaint the king, that he wanted a cargo of slaves. The king, promised to
furnish him, and in order to it, set out, designing to surprise some town, and
make all the people prisoners. Some time after, the king sent him word, he had
not yet met with the desired success* Having attempted to break up two towns,
but having been twice repulsed: But that he still hoped to procure the number
of slaves. In this design he persisted, till he met his enemies in the field. A
battle was fought, which lasted three days. And the engagement was so bloody,
that four thousand five hundred men were slain upon the spot." Such is the
manner wherein the Negroes are procured! Thus the christians preach the gospel
to the heathens!

5. Thus they are procured. But in what numbers and in what manner are they
carried to America? -- Mr. Anderson in his History of trade and commerce,
observes, " England supplies her American colonies with Negro-slaves, amounting
in number to about an hundred thousand every year." That is, so many are taken
on board our ships; but at least ten thousand of them die in the voyage: About
a fourth part more die at the different Islands, in what is call the Seasoning.
So that at an average, in the passage and seasoning together, thirty thousand
die: That is, properly are murdered. O earth, O Sea, cover not thou their blood!

6. When they are brought down to the shore in order to be sold, our surgeons
thoroughly examine them, and that quite naked, women and men, without any
distinction: Those that are approved are set on one side. In the mean time a
burning iron, with the arms or name of the Company, lies in the fire, with
which they are marked on the breast. Before they are put into the ships, their
masters strip them of all they have on their backs: So that they come on board
stark naked, women as well as men. It is common for several hundreds of them to
be put on board one vessel; where they are stowed together in as little room,
as it is possible for them to be crowded. It is easy to suppose what a
condition they must soon be in, between heat, thirst, and stench of various
kinds. So that it is no wonder, so many should die in the passage; but rather,
that any survive it. Thomas Philips in his account of a voyage he made to
Guinea, and from thence to Barbados, with, a cargo of slaves relates, "That
they took seven hundred slaves on board. When they were brought in the vessel,
the men were all put in irons, two and two shackled together, to prevent their
mutinying or swimming ashore. The negroes, he says, are so loath to leave their
own country, that they have often leaped out of the canoe, boat and ship, into
the seas, and kept under water till they were drowned, to avoid being taken up,
and saved by the boats which pursue them." -- They had about twelve negroes who
willingly drowned themselves; others starved themselves to death -- Philips was
advised to cut off the legs and arms of some to terrify the rest; (as other
captains had done) but this he refused to do: From the time of his taking the
negroes on board, to his arrival at Barbados, no less than three hundred and
twenty died of various diseases: Which the author says. "was to their great
regret, after enduring much misery and stench, so long, among a parcel of
creatures nastier than swine: No gold-finder, says Philips, can suffer such
noisome drudgery as they do who carry negroes, having no respite from their
afflictions so long as any of their slaves are alive." How unreasonable was it
in Philips, thus to reflect on negroes; could such a number be crowded together
in so warm a climate, even if they had all been healthy, without being
extremely offensive: How much more when so many lay sick, dead and dying. He
speaks of the English people's great sufferings by nastiness, stench, etc. but
he forgets the sufferings of the poor blacks, which must have been incomparably
greater than their's; not to mention the painful sorrow, and anxiety of mind
these distressed creatures must have labored under.




7. When the vessels arrive at their destined port, the Negroes are again
exposed naked, to the eyes of all that flock together, and the examination of
their purchasers: Then they are separated to the plantations of their several
masters, to see each other no more. Here you may see mothers hanging over their
daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears, and daughters clinging to
their parents, till the whipper soon obliges them to part. And what can be more
wretched than the condition they then enter upon? Banished from their country,
from their friends and relations for ever, from every comfort of life, they are
reduced to a state scarce any way preferable to that of beasts of burden. In
general a few roots, not of the nicest kind, usually yams or potatoes, are
their food, and two rags, that neither screen them from the heat of the day,
nor the cold of the night their covering. Their sleep is very short, their
labor continual, and frequently above their strength; so that death sets many
of them at liberty, before they have lived out half their days. The time they
work in the West Indies, is from day break to noon, and from two o'clock till
dark: During which time they are attended by overseers, who, if they think them
dilatory, or think any thing not so well done as it should be, whip them most
unmercifully, so that you may see their bodies long after whealed and scarred
usually from the shoulders to the waist. And before they are suffered to go to
their quarters, they have commonly something to do, as collecting herbage for
the horses, or gathering fuel for the boilers. So that it is often past
twelve, before they can get home. Hence if their food was not prepared, they
are sometimes called to labor again, before they can satisfy their hunger. And
no excuse will avail. If they are not in the field immediately, they must
expect to feel the lash. Did the Creator intend, that the noblest creatures in
the visible world, should live such a life as this!

"Are these thy glorious works, Parent of Good?"

8. As to the punishments inflicted on them, says Sir Hans Sloan, "they
frequently geld them, or chop off half a foot: After they are whipped till they
are raw all over, some put pepper and salt upon them: Some drop melted wax upon
their skin. Others cut off their ears, and constrain them to broil and eat
them. "For Rebellion," (that is, asserting their native Liberty, which they
have as much right to as to the air they breathe) "they fasten them down to the
ground with crooked sticks on every limb, and then applying fire by degrees, to
the feet and hands, they burn them gradually upward to the head." Sir Hans
Sloan after describing the severe tortures practiced on the negroes, sums up
the pains they are made to suffer under the terms of exquisite and extravagant.

Now must not the reasonable and humane nature of those who order these
dreadful tortures as well as those who execute them, be changed into develish,
who can thus put their fellow creatures to such extravagant, such exquisite
torment? And for what? Often, even for that which their tormentors themselves
would have done if in their situation. If through the exertion of barbarous and
unjust laws, the natural attendant on slavery, these our hapless fellow men are
doomed to die, yet in their deaths, let it at least be remembered that they are
men. We hear with horror and detestation of some such execution in the
inquisitions and under some tyrannic governments; but these inhumanities are
certainly contrary to the genius and disposition of the British nation, and
quite abhorent of its laws, which do not allow of tortures either in
punishment, or to extort confessions. Sir I Dalrymple in his memoirs says that
the Parliament in the declaration of right asserted, that pitying and
respecting humane nature, no cruel and unusual punishment should be inflicted.

How Britons can so readily admit of a change in their disposition and
sentiments, as to practice in America what they abhor and detested in Britain,
can be accounted for on no other principle, but as being the natural effect of
slave-keeping, which as the celebrated Montesquieu observes, "insensibly
accustoms those who are in the practice of it, to want all moral virtues, to
become haughty, hasty hard hearted, passionate, voluptuous and cruel. The evil
attendant on the condition of the poor slaves will end with their lives, and
the merciful father of the family of mankind will doubtless look on their deep
affliction, and where their hearts are thereby humbled, requite them good in
another state of existence for their sufferings in this: but with respect to
their lordly oppressors, this horrible abuse of their fellow men, will
doubtless extend its baneful influence even into the regions of eternity. It is
surprising that the thoughtful people, where slavery prevails should so little
advert to its dreadful consequent effects to themselves and families,
particularly on the necessity they are in of sending away their offspring from
under their own paternal care, in very early life, lest their tender minds
should be corrupted, and every noble and generous sentiments eradicated by the
oppression and cruelty they are daily witnesses of. -- That parents should be
thus incapacitated and deprived of the opportunity and satisfaction of forming
the minds of their offspring to virtue and happiness, but that this most sacred
and delightful trust must be left to the care of the hireling and the stranger,
must to every tender thinking parent, appear an evil of so afflictive a nature,
and so contrary to the divine order, that no human advantage can compensate for.

The author of the history of Jamaica, wrote about the year 1740, in his
account of the sufferings of the negroes, says, The people of that island have
indeed the severest ways of punishing; no country exceeds them in a barbarous
treatment of their slaves, or in the cruel methods by which they are put to
death. After confirming what is before said* he adds, "They starve them to
death, with a loaf hanging over their mouths. I have seen these unfortunate
wretches gnaw the flesh off their shoulders, and expire in all the frightful
agonies of one under the most horrible tortures. He adds, I incline to touch
the hardship which these poor creatures suffer in the tenderest manner, from a
particular regard which I have to many of their masters; but I cannot conceal
their sad circumstances entirely: the most trivial error is punished with
terrible whipping. I have seen some of them treated in that cruel manner, for
no other reason but to satisfy the brutish pleasure of an overseer, who has
their punishment mostly at his discretion. I have seen their bodies all in a
gore of blood, the skin torn off their backs with the cruel whip, beaten pepper
and salt rubbed in the wounds, and a large stick of sealing-wax dropped
leisurely upon them. It is no wonder, (adds this author) if the horrid pain of
such inhuman tortures incline them to rebel." The same author gives us extracts
of some of the laws of Jamaica relating to the punishment of slaves, taken as
he says, from a general collection of the plantation laws, the printed
statutes, or the secretary's-office, viz.

"If any slave by punishment from his owner for running away, or other offense,
suffer in life or limb, none shall be liable to the law for the same; but
whosoever shall kill a slave out of wilfulness, wantonness, or bloody
mindedness, shall suffer three months imprisonment, and pay fifty pounds to the
owner of the slave. If the party so offending be a servant, he or she shall
have on the bare back thirty-nine lashes, and also (after the expiration of the
term with his or her master or mistress) shall serve the owner of the deceased
slave the full term of four years. If any person kill a slave stealing or
running away, or found by night out of his owner's ground, road, or common
path, such person shall not be subject to any damage or action for the same.

"Those that go out in parties to reduce the negroes, shall receive from the
treasurer for every rebellious negro that shall be killed, bringing in his head
to any justice, forty pounds; for every negro taken and brought in alive, and
not maimed, ten pounds, to be paid by the owner, who is hereby obliged under
the penalty of fifty pounds, to transport such slave so taken; and in case the
owner cannot be found, then the treasurer shall pay the ten pounds, receive the
slave, sell and transport him, and retain the produce to be employed in the
said service."

The following advertisement was taken from one of the North Carolina news
papers. "Runaway last November, from the subscriber, a negro fellow named Zeb,
about 36 years of age, about 5 feet 8 inches high, a very good cooper by trade
etc. -- As he is outlawed, I will pay twenty pounds proclamation money out of
what the act of assembly allows in such cases, to any person who shall produce
his head severed from his body, and five pounds proclamation money if brought
home alive."

JOHN MOSLEY.

An advertisement of the same kind was printed in London, in the general
evening-post, Jan 1, 1774, said to be taken from the Williamsburgh gazette,
where after describing the negro, the master adds, "The said fellow is
outlawed, and I will give ten pounds reward for his head severed from his body,
or forty shillings if brought alive." As strange as such publications may
appear to such whose hearts as are not hardened by the practice of slavery, yet
I am informed advertisements of this kind are frequent in the southern colonies.

It is alleged by the planters in excuse for these unnatural, these monstrous
cruelties, that the greatest severity, the most cruel punishments, are
absolutely necessary for the management of slaves, on account of those train of
vices which slavery necessarily introduces. A late author remarks how shocking
it is to think that those unhappy victims must from the nature of the thing
become dangerous and refactory, in proportion to the greatness and generosity
of their minds.

Can there be a more dangerous maxim, than that necessity is a plea for
injustice? For who shall fix the degree of this necessity? What villain so
atrocious who may not urge this excuse? or as Milton expresses it --

-- And with necessity
The tyrant's plea, excuse his devilish deed.
How many thousands and tens of thousands has this devilish plea of necessity
brought to a cruel and untimely end? What account will in future states of
existence, be given to the father of the family of mankind, for the lives of so
many of our fellow men so inhumanly murdered. A particular instance of the
destruction of human beings, under the pretense of necessity, is related by
captain Cook, in his voyage round the world, in company with messieurs Banks
and Solander, in the year 1768, being at Rio Janiero, one, if not the principal
town of Brazil; he relates, page 29, "That the inhabitants, who are very
numerous, consists of Portuguese, Negroes and Indians. The township of Rio
Janiero, which he was told was but a small part of the province, is said to
contain thirty-seven thousand white people, and six hundred and twenty nine
thousand blacks, many of whom are free, in the proportion of seventeen to one."

Page 34. (he tells us "The riches of the place consists chiefly in the mines;
that much gold is brought from these mines, but at an expense of life that must
strike every man, to whom custom has not made it familiar, with horror. No less
than four thousand Negroes are annually imported on the king's account to dig
in the mines; and (he adds) we are credibly informed, that the last year but
one before we arrived here, this number fell so short, probably from some
epidemic disease, that twenty thousand more were draughted from the town of Rio
Janiero."




9 But will not the laws made in the Plantations, prevent or redress all
cruelty and Oppression? We will take but a few of those Laws for a specimen,
and then let any man judge.

In order to rivet the chain of slavery, the law of Virginia ordains, "That no
slave shall be set free, upon any pretense whatever, except for some
meritorious services, to be adjudged and allowed by the governor and coucil:
And that where any slave shall be set free by his owner, otherwise than is
herein directed, the churchwardens of the parish wherein such negro shall
reside for the space of one month are hereby authorized and required, to take
up and sell the said negro, by public outcry."

Will not these Lawgivers take effectual care, to prevent cruelty and
oppression?

The law of Jamaica ordains, "Every slave that shall run away, and continue
absent from his master twelve months, shall be deemed rebellious:" And by
another law, fifty pounds are allowed (...) those who kill or bring in alive a
rebellious slave." So their law treats these poor men with as little ceremony
and consideration, as if they were merely brute beasts! But the innocent blood
which is shed in consequence of such a detestable law, must call for vengeance
on the murderous abettors and actors of such deliberate wickedness.

11. But the law of Barbados exceeds even this. "If any negro under
punishment, by his master, or his order, for running away, or any other crime
or misdemeanor, shall suffer in life or member, no person whatever shall be
liable to any fine therefore. But if any man of WANTONNESS, or only of
BLOODY-MINDEDNESS or CRUEL INTENTION, wilfully kill a negro of his own" (Now
observe the severe punishment!) "He shall pay into the public treasury fifteen
pounds sterling! And not be liable to any other punishment or forfeiture for
the same!"

Nearly allied to this is that law of Virginia: "After proclamation is issued
against slaves that run away, it is lawful for any person whatsoever to KILL
AND DESTROY such slaves, by SUCH WAYS AND MEANS AS HE SHALL THINK FIT.

We have seen already some of the ways and means which have been thought fit on
such occasions. And many more might be mentioned. One gentleman, when I was
abroad thought fit to roast his slave alive! But if the most natural act of
"running away" from intolerable tyranny, deserves such relentness severity,
what punishment have these lawmakers to expect hereafter, on account of their
own enormous offenses?

IV. 1. This is the plain, un-aggravated matter of fact. Such is the manner
wherein our African slaves are procured: Such the manner wherein they are
removed from their native land, and wherein they are treaed in our Plantations.
I would now enquire, whether these things can be defended, on the principles of
even heathen honesty? Whether they can be reconciled (setting the Bible out of
the question) with any degree of either justice or mercy.

2. The grand plea is, "They are authorized by law." But can law, human law,
change the nature of things? Can it turn darkness into light, or evil into
good? By no means. Notwithstanding ten thousand laws, right is right, and wrong
is wrong still. There must still remain an essential difference between justice
and injustice, cruelty and mercy. So that still I ask, Who can reconcile this
treatment of the negroes, first and last, with either mercy or justice.

Where is the justice of inflicting the severest evils, on those that have done
us no wrong? Of depriving those that never injured us in word or deed, of every
comfort of life? Of tearing them from their native country, and depriving them
of liberty itself? To which an Angolan, has the same natural right as an
Englishman, and on which he sets as high a value? Yea where is the justice of
taking away the lives of innocent, inoffensive men? Murdering thousands of them
in their own land, by the hands of their own countrymen: Many thousands, year
after year, on shipboard, and then casting them like dung into the sea! And
tens of thousands in that cruel slavery, to which they are so unjustly reduced?

3. But waving, for the present, all other considerations, I strike at the root
of this complicated villainy. I absolutely deny all slave-holding to be
consistent with any degreee of even natural justice.

I cannot place this in a clearer light, than that great ornament of his
profession, judge Blackstone has already done. Part of his words are as follows:

"The three origins of the right of slavery assigned by Justinian, are all
built upon false foundations. 1. Slavery is said to arise from captivity in
war. The conqueror having a right to the life of his captive, if he spares
that, has then a right to deal with him as he pleases. But this is untrue, if
taken generally, That by the law of nations, a man has a right to kill his
enemy. He has only a right to kill him in particular cases in cases of absolute
necessity for self-defence. And it is plain, this absolute necessity did not
subsist, since he did not kill him, but made him prisoner. War itself is
justifiable only on principles of self-preservation. Therefore it gives us no
right over prisoners, but to hinder their hurting us by confining them. Much
less can it give a right to torture, or kill, or even to enslave an enemy when
the war is over. Since therefore the right of making our prisoners slaves,
depends on a supposed right of slaughter, that founddation failing, the
consequence which is drawn from it must fail likewise."

"It is said, Secondly, slavery may begin, by one man's selling himself to
another. And it is true, a man may sell himself to work for another: But he
cannot sell himself to be a slave, as above defined. Every sale implies an
equivalent given to the seller, in lieu of what he transfers to the buyer. But
what equivalent can be given for life or liberty? His property likewise, with
the very price which he seems to receive, devolves ipso facto to his master,
the instant he becomes his slave: In this case therefore the buyer gives
nothing, and the seller receives nothing. Of what validity then can a sale be,
which destroys the very principles upon which all sales are founded?"

"We are told, Thirdly, that men may be born slaves, by being the children of
slaves. But this being built on the two former rights, must fall together with
them. If neither captivity, nor contract can by the plain law of nature and
reason, reduce the parent to a state of slavery, much less can they reduce the
offspring." It clearly follows, that all slavery is as irreconcilable to
justice as to mercy.

4. That slave-holding is utterly inconsistent with mercy, is almost too plain
to need a proof. Indeed it is said, "That these negroes being prisoners of war,
our captains and factors buy them merely to save them from being put to death.
And is not this mercy?" I answer, 1. Did Sir John Hawkins, and many others,
seize upon men, women and children, who were at peace in their own fields or
houses, merely to save them from death? 2. Was it to save them from death, that
they knocked out the brains of those they could not bring away? 3. Who
occasioned and fomented those wars, wherein these poor creatures were taken
prisoners? Who excited them by money, by drink, by every possible means, to
fall upon one another? Was it not themselves? They know in their own conscience
it was, if they have any conscience left. But 4. To bring the matter to a short
issue. Can they say before GOD, That they ever took a single voyage, or bought
a single negro from this motive? They cannot. They well know, to get money, not
to save lives, was the whole and sole spring of their motions.

5. But if this manner of procuring and treating negroes is not consistent
either with mercy or justice, yet there is a plea for it which every man of
business will acknowledge to be quite sufficient. Fifty years ago, one meeting
an eminent statesman in the lobby of the house of commons, said, "You have been
long talking about justice and equity. Pray which is this bill? Equity or
justice?" He answered, very short, and plain, "D -- n justice: It is
necessity." Here also the slave-holder fixes his foot: Here he rests the
strength of his cause. "If it is not quite right, yet it must be so: There is
an absolute necessity for it. It is necessary we should procure slaves: And
when we have procured them, it is necessary to use them with severity,
considering their stupidity, stubbornness and wickedness."

I answer, You stumble at the threshold: I deny that villainy is ever necessary.
It is impossible that it should ever be necessary, for any reasonable creature
to violate all the laws of justice, mercy, and truth. No circumstances can make
it necessary for a man to burst in sunder all the ties of humanity. It can
never be necessary for a rational being to sink himself below a brute. A man
can be under no necessity, of degrading himself into a wolf. The absurdity of
the supposition is so glaring, that one would wonder any one can help seeing it.

6. This in general. But to be more particular, I ask, 1. What is necessary?
And, secondly, To what end? It may be be answered, "The whole method now used
by the original purchasers of negroes, is necessary to the furnishing our
colonies yearly with an hundred thousand slaves." I grant, this is necessary to
that end. But how is that end necessary? How will you prove it necessary, that
one hundred, that one of those slaves should be procured? "Why, it is necessary
to my gaining an hundred thousand pounds." Perhaps so: But how is this
necessary? It is very possible you might be both a better and an happier man,
if you had not a quarter of it. I deny that your gaining one thousand is
necessary, either to your present or eternal happiness. "But however you must
allow, these slaves are necessary for the cultivation of our islands; inasmuch
as white men are not able to labor in hot climates It is not proposed to
remove the negroes from laboring in the several provinces and islands where
they are now employed; in order to employ white men in their stead, what is
proposed, is only to prevent any farther import of negroes, except those who
may come voluntarily and in a free condition; and to fall upon such just
regulations and proper encouragement with respect to those already amongst us,
that from dangerous grudging slaves, they may become willing hearted laborers,
who having an interest in the peace and welfare of the country, will be parties
in its strength and support. But whilst deficiencies by the death of the
laboring slaves can be so easily made up by the continual fresh imports from
Guinea, and the planters find it cheaper to make new purchases than to raise
the children, or spare and cherish the parents at those already in their
service, little amendment can be expected in the hardship they are put to, and
the cruelties exercised upon them. Surely the number already in our colonies
and islands, which on a calculation made four or five years past, was between
eight and nine hundred thousand, besides that there has been a vast number,
said to be about (...) hundred thousand since yearly imported: all these, with
their increase, if well used, would certainly be sufficient to perform all
necessary labor.

If an end was put to the import of negroes, and the odious and cruel
distinction of master and slaves, with all its attendant horrors should cease,
many laboring people from Europe, who are new discouraged from an apprension
of being put on a level with slaves, would probably be willing to come over and
engage in the service.

John Miller, professor of law at Glasgow, in his late observations concerning
distinction of ranks in society, observes, "That the slavery established in our
colonies is an object of great importance, and is attended with difficulties
which cannot be easily removed. It has been thought that the management of our
plantations requires a labor in which free men would not be willing to engage,
and which the white people are from their constitution incapable of performing.
How far this opinion is well founded according to the present manner of
laboring in that part of the world, seems difficult to determine, as it has
never been properly examined by those who are in a condition to ascertain the
facts in question. But there is ground to believe, that the institution of
slavery is the chief circumstance that has prevented those contrivances to
shorten and facilitate the more laborious employments of the people, which
takes place in other countries, where freedom has been introduced. With regard
to the planting of sugar, experiments have been made in some of the islands,
from which it appears, that in some species of cultivation, cattle might be
employed with advantage, and that the number of slaves might be greatly
diminished But these experiments have been little regarded, in opposition to
the former usage, and in opposition to a lucrative branch of trade which these
innovasions would in a great measure destroy. At any rate, the interest of our
colonies seems to demand, that the negroes should be better treated, and even
that they should be raised to a better condition. -- The author of a late
elegant account of our American settlements, has proposed, that small wages
should be given them, as an encouragement to industry. If this measure were
once begun, it is probable that the master would soon find the utility of
pushing it to a greater extent. Nothing can appear more astonishing than the
little attention that has hitherto been paid to any improvement of this nature,
after the good effects of them have been so fully illustrated in the case of
the villains in Europe. At the same time, it affords a curious spectacle to
observe, that the same people who talk in so high a strain of political
liberty, and who consider the privilege of imposing their own taxes, as one of
the unalienable rights of mankind, should make no scruple of reducing a great
proportion of the inhabitants into circumstances by which they are not only
deprived of property, but almost of every right whatsoever. Fortune, perhaps
never produced a situation more calculated to ridicule a grave and even a
liberal hypothesis, or to show how little the conduct of men is at bottom
directed by any philosophical principles."

We have accounts from England of some regulations that have taken place in the
Spanish colonies, which do the Spaniards much honor, and are certainly worthy
our imitation; they are to the following effect: -- "As soon as a slave is
landed, his name, price, etc. are registered in a public register, and the
master is obliged by law, to allow him one working day in every week to
himself, besides sundays: so that if the slave chooses to work for his master on
that day, he receives the wages of a freeman for it; and whatever he gains by
his labor on that day, is so secured to him by law, that the master cannot
deprive him of it. As soon as the slave is able to purchase another working
day, the master is obliged to sell it to him at a proportionable price, viz.
one fifth part of his original cost, and so likewise the remaining four days at
the same rate, as soon as the slave is able to redeem them; after which he is
absolutely free." This is such encouragement to industry, that even the most
indolent would be tempted to exert themselves. Men who have thus worked out
their freedom, are inured to the labor of the country, and are certainly the
most useful subjects that a colony can acquire.


." I answer, 1. It were better that all those islands should remain
uncultivated for ever, yea, it were more desirable that they were all together
sunk in the depth of the sea, than that they should be cultivated at so high a
price, as the violation of justice, mercy, and truth. But, Secondly, the
supposition on which you ground your argument is false. For white men, even
Englishmen, are well able to labor in hot climates: provided they are
temperate both in meat and drink, and that they inure themselves to it by
degrees. I speak no more than I know by experience. It appears from the
thermometer, that the summer heat in Georgia, is frequently equal to that in
Barbados, yea to that under the line. And yet I and my family, (eight in
number) did employ all our spare time there, in felling of trees and clearing
of ground, as hard labor as any negro need be employed in. The German family
likewise, forty in number, were employed in all manner of labor. And this was
so far from impairing our health, that we all continued perfectly well, while
the idle ones all round about us, were swept away as with a pestilence. It is
not true therefore that white men are not able to labor, even in hot climates,
full as well as black. But if they were not, it would be better that none
should labor there, that the work should be left undone, than that myriads of
innocent men should be murdered, and myriads more dragged into the basest
slavery.

7. "But the furnishing us with slaves is necessary, for the trade, and wealth,
and glory of our nation:" Here are several mistakes. For 1. Wealth is not
necessary to the glory of any nation; but wisdom, virtue, justice, mercy,
generosity, public spirit, love of our country. These are necessary to the real
glory of a nation; but abundance of wealth is not. Men of understanding allow,
that the glory of England was full as high, in Queen Elizabeth's time as it is
now: Although our riches and trade were then as much smaller, as our virtue was
greater We are told in Hill's naval history, page 239, That when captain
Hawkins returned from his first voyage to Africa, he was sent for by Queen
Elizabeth, who expressed her concern to him, lest any of the African negroes
should be carried off without their free consent, declaring it would be
detestable, and call down the vengeance of heaven upon the undertakers. --
Captain Hawkins promised to comply with the Queen's injunction, but acted quite
contrary to his promise, which occasioned that author to remark, "That here
began the horrid practice of forcing the Africans into slavery, an injustice
and barbarity which so sure as there is vengeance in heaven for the worst of
crimes, will sometime be the destruction of all who act, or who encourage it."

Geraldus Cambrensis, a noted author who lived about six hundred years past, in
his observations concerning the causes of the prosperity of the English
undertakings in Ireland, when they conquered that island, tells us, "That a
synod or council of the clergy being then assembled at Armagh, and that point
fully debated, it was unanimously agreed, that the sins of the people were the
occasion of that heavy judgment then fallen upon their nation; and that
especially their buying of English men from merchants and pirates, and
detaining them under most miserable hard bondage, had caused the Lord by way of
just retaliation, to leave them to be reduced by the English to the same state
of slavery; whereupon they made a public act in that council, that all the
English held in captivity throughout the whole land should be presently
restored to their former liberty."


. But, Secondly, It is not clear, that we should have either less money or
trade, (only less of that detestable trade of man-stealing) if there was not a
negro in all our islands, or in all English America. It is demonstrable, white
men, inured to it by degrees can work as well as them: And they would do it,
were negroes out of the way, and proper encouragement given them. However,
Thirdly, I come back to the same point; better no trade, than trade procured by
villainy. It is far better to have no wealth, than to gain wealth, at the
expense of virtue. Better is honest poverty, than all the riches bought by the
tears, and sweat, and blood of our fellow creatures.

8. "However this be, it is necessary when we have slaves, to use them with
severity." What, to whip them for every petty offense, till they are all in
gore blood? To take that opportunity, of rubbing pepper and salt into their raw
flesh? To drop burning sealing wax upon their skin? To castrate them? To cut
off half their foot with an axe? To hang them on gibbets, that they may die by
inches, with heat, and hunger, and thirst? To pin them down to the ground, and
then burn them by degrees, from the feet, to the head? To roast them alive?
When did a Turk or a Heathen find it necessary to use a fellow creature thus?

I pray, to what end is this usage necessary? "Why, to prevent their running
away: And to keep them constantly to their labor, that they may not idle away
their time. So miserably stupid is this race of men, yea, so stubborn, and so
wicked." Allowing them to be as stupid as you say, to whom is that stupidity
owing? Without question it lies altogether at the door of their inhuman
masters: Who give them no means, no opportunity of improving their
understanding: And indeed leave them no motive, either from hope or fear, to
attempt any such thing. They were no way remarkable for stupidity, while they
remained in their own country: The inhabitants of Africa where they have equal
motives and equal means of improvement, are not inferior to the inhabitants of
Europe: To some of them they are greatly superior. Impartially survey in their
own country, the natives of Benin and the natives of Lapland. Compare, (setting
prejudice aside) the Samoeids and the Angolans. And on which side does the
advantage lie, in point of understanding? Certainly the African is in no
respect inferior to the European. -- Their stupidity therefore in our
plantations is not natural; otherwise than it is the natural effect of their
condition. -- Consequently it is not their fault, but yours: You must answer
for it, before GOD and man.

9. "But their stupidity is not the only reason of our treating them with
severity. For it is hard to say, which is the greatest, This, or their
stubbornness and wickedness." -- It may be so: -- But do not these, as well as
the other, lie at your door? Are not stubbornness, cunning, pilfering, and
diverse others vices, the natural, necessary fruits of slavery? Is not this an
observation which has been made, in every age and nation. -- And what means
have you used to remove this stubbornness? Have you tried what mildness and
gentleness would do? I knew one that did: That had prudence and patience to
make the experiment: Mr. Hugh Bryan, who then lived on the borders of
South Carolina. -- And what was the effect? Why, that all his negroes (And he
had no small number of them) loved and reverenced him as a father, and
cheerfully obeyed him out of love. Yea, they were more afraid of a frown from
him, than of many blows from an overseer. And what pains have you taken, what
method have you used, to reclaim them from their wickedness? Have you carefully
taught them, "That there is a GOD, a wise, powerful, merciful Being, the
Creator and Governor of Heaven and Earth? That he has appointed a day wherein
he will judge the world, will take an account of all our thoughts, words and
actions? That in that day he will reward every child of man according to his
works: That "then the righteous shall inherit the kingdom prepared for them
from the foundation of the world: And the wicked shall be cast into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." If you have not done this, if you
have taken no pains or thought about the matter, can you wonder at their
wickedness? What wonder, if they should cut your throat? And if they did, whom
could you thank for it but yourself? You first acted the villain in making them
slaves, (whether you stole them or bought them.) You kept them stupid and
wicked, by cutting them off from all apportunities of improving either in
knowledge or virtue: And now you assign their want of wisdom and goodness as
the reason for using them worse than brute beasts!

V. 1. It remains only, to make a little application of the preceding
observations. -- But to whom should that application be made? That may bear a
question. Should we address ourselves to the public at large? What effect can
this have? It may inflame the world against the guilty, but is not likely to
remove that guilt. Should we appeal to the English nation in general? This also
is striking wide: And is never likely to procure any redress, for the sore evil
we complain of. -- As little would it in all probability avail, to apply to the
parliament. So many things, which seem of greater importance lie before them
that they are not likely to attend to this. I therefore add a few words to
those who are more immediately concerned, whether captains, merchants or
planters.

2. And, first, to the captains employed in this trade. Most of you know, the
country of Guinea: Several parts of it at least, between the river Senegal and
the kingdom of Angola. Perhaps now, by your means, part of it is become a
dreary uncultivated wilderness, the inhabitants being all murdered or carried
away, so that there are none left to till the ground. But you well know, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, fierce, cruel,
treacherous, or unkind to strangers. On the contrary, they were in most parts a
sensible and ingenious people. They were kind and friendly, courteous and
obliging, and remarkably fair and just in their dealings. Such are the men whom
you hire their own countrymen, to tear away from this lovely country; part by
stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars, which you raise or
foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from their parents,
parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives from their
beloved husbands, brethren and sisters from each other. You have dragged them
who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their native shore.
You have forced them into your ships like an herd of swine, them who had souls
immortal as your own: (Only some of them have leaped into the sea, and
resolutely stayed under water, till they could suffer no more from you.) You
have stowed them together as close as ever they could lie, without any regard
either to decency or convenience. -- And when many of them had been poisoned by
foul air, or had sunk under various hardships, you have seen their remains
delivered to the deep, till the sea should give up his dead. You have carried
the survivors into the vilest slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery
as is not found among the Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in
America.

3. May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as
well as to those you are concerned with.

Is there a GOD? You know there is. Is He a just GOD? Then there must be a
state of retribution: A state wherein the just GOD will reward every man
according to his works. Then what reward will he render to you? O think
betimes! Before you drop into eternity! Think now, He shall have judgment
without mercy, that showed no mercy.

Are you a man? Then you should have an human heart. But have you indeed? What
is your heart made of? Is there no such principle as compassion there? Do you
never feel another's pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity
for the miserable? When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breasts, or the
bleeding sides and tortured limbs of your fellow creatures, was you a stone, or
a brute? Did you look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the
agonizing creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled
remains into the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear drop from your
eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do
not, you must go on, till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the
great GOD deal with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their
blood at your hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gemorrah than for you! But if your heart does relent, though in a small degree,
know it is a call from the GOD of love. And to day, if you hear his voice,
harden not your heart. -- To day resolve, GOD being your helper, to escape for
your life. -- Regard not money! All that a man has will he give for his life?
Whatever you lose, lose not your soul: nothing can countervail that loss.
Immediately quit the horrid trade: At all events, be an honest man.

4. This equally concerns every merchant, who is engaged in the slave trade. It
is you that induce the African villain, to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: By
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers
him to go on: So that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes, and stupefied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. "Master, (said a slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) "what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy, and master Billy, and carry them into
our country, and make them slaves, how would you like it?." His answer was
worthy of a man: "I will never buy a slave more while I live." O let his
resolution be yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business.
Instantly leave it to those unfeeling wretches, "Who laugh at human nature and
compassion!" Be you a man! Not a wolf, a devourer of the human species! Be
merciful, that you may obtain mercy!

5. And this equally concerns every gentleman that has an estate in our
American plantations: Yea all slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
men-buyers are exactly on a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, "I pay
honestly for my goods: and I am not concerned to know how they are come by."
Nay, but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know they are honestly come by.
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know, they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by
means, nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house-breaking, or
robbery upon the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of
more complicated villainy, of fraud, robbery and murder) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans: in particular by murders, of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain, and the African butchers.
You therefore are guilty, yea, principally guilty, of all these frauds,
robberies and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion:
they would not stir a step without you: -- Therefore the blood of all these
wretches, who die before their time, whether in their country, or elsewhere
lies upon your head. The blood of thy brother, (for, whether thou will believe
it or no, such he is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee
from the earth, from the ship, and from the waters. O, whatever it costs, put a
stop to its cry before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the
half of your goods, deliver thyself from blood-guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed,
thy furniture, thy house, thy lands are at present stained with blood. Surely
it is enough; accumulate no more guilt: spill no more the blood of the
innocent! Do not hire another to shed blood: Do not pay him for doing it!
Whether you are a christian or no, show yourself a man; be not more savage than
a lion or a bear!

6. Perhaps you will say, "I do not buy any negroes: I only use those left me
by my father." -- So far is well: but is it enough to satisfy your own
conscience? Had your father, have you, has any man living, a right to use
another as a slave? It cannot be, even setting revelation aside. It cannot be,
that either war, or contract, can give any man such a property in another as he
has in his sheep and oxen. Much less is it possible, that any child of man,
should ever be born a slave. Liberty is the right of every human creature, as
soon as he breathes the vital air. And no human law can deprive him of that
right, which he derives from the law of nature.

If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of mercy, nor of
the revealed law of GOD) render unto all their due. Give liberty to whom
liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of human
nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary
choice. -- Away with all whips, all chains, all compulsion! Be gentle toward
all men. And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he should
do unto you.

7. O thou GOD of love, thou who art loving to every man, and whose mercy is
over all thy works: Thou who art the father of the spirits of all flesh, and
who art rich in mercy unto all: Thou who have mingled of one blood, all the
nations upon earth: Have compassion upon these outcasts of men, who are trodden
down as dung upon the earth! Arise and help these that have no helper, whose
blood is spilt upon the ground like water! Are not these also the work of thine
own hands, the purchase of thy Son's blood? Stir them up to cry unto thee in
the land of their captivity; and let their complaint come up before thee; let
it enter into thy ears! Make even those that lead them away captive to pity
them, and turn their captivity as the rivers in the south. O burst thou all
their chains in sunder; more especially the chains of their sins: Thou, Savior
of all, make them free, that they may be free indeed!

The servile progeny of Ham
Seize as the purchase of thy blood!
Let all the heathen know thy name:
From idols to the living GOD
The dark Americans convert,
And shine in every pagan heart!
FINIS.
SIMILAR causes will produce similar effects; the dreadful consequence of
slavery is the same amongst every people and in every nation where it prevails:
this truth is verified in the following accounts of the inhuman treatment the
negroes met with both from the Hollanders and the French.

The first is taken from the late writings of Edward Bancroft, an English
physician, who resided some years in that part of America, called Dutch Guiana,
which includes the several settlements of Surinam, Barbices, Demarara, etc. The
insensibility with which this author relates and vindicates the cruelties and
indignities exercised, by the Dutch, on the miserable Africans, show that the
advantage accruing to him from the labor of the slaves, as well as his
connection with their oppressors, had its usual and natural effects, in
obscuring his understanding, and hardening his heart against the dictates of
reason and humanity.

The French author appears to have been in a very different situation; he was
an officer belonging to the troops quartered in the island Mauritus, now called
The Isle of France, who not reaping any advantage from the labor of the
slaves, nor having any dependence on the planters, his mind remained so
unprejudiced, that the dictates of reason and tender feelings of humanity, had
free liberty to exert themselves.

Doctor Bancroft, whilst he is giving his readers a genuine relation of the
prodigious oppression and cruelty exercised on the negroes, advances such
arguments in defense of the practice of slavery, as are, indeed, a dishonor to
reason, and shocking to humanity. He tells us, That the labor of the country
is almost wholly performed by negroes -- that they are kept at a submissive and
humble distance, by severity of discipline, which he is so hardened as to say,
not only contributes to the safety of the white inhabitants, but even the
happiness of the slaves, because, adds he, the impossibility of attaining is
ever found to destroy the desire of enjoyment, and rigid treatment, by
annihilating every hope of liberty, renders the slaves content with the
enjoyment of slavery. -- He acknowledges, That the negroes are indeed spurred
to industry by the whip of correction, which is ever at their heels, and not
sparingly exercised; but, that there is no medium: either the minds of the
slaves must be depressed by abject slavery, or the lives of the masters are in
imminent danger: For this reason (he says) they have been oppressed by many
humiliating penalties and distinctions. The evidence of slaves relating to
white persons are of no validity. An attempt to strike a white inhabitant is
punished with death. Their masters or overseers have not only the power of
inflicting corporal punishment, but are in some measure allowed to exercise a
right over their lives, since the putting a negro to death is attended only
with a pecuniary punishment. In which situation, he confesses, they are subject
to many complicated species of misery, exposed to the tyrann^ of the imperious,
and lust of the libidinous; and to an incessant toil which will have no period
but with their lives. Thus this author through the whole of his reasoning,
manifestly shows the depraving effect which the sight and practice of those
hard and cruel measures which are attendant on slavery, has upon the heart and
reason of men, otherwise of good judgment. -- Hence he adds, That though this
treatment has the appearance of cruelty, and cannot be reconciled to the
principles of justice and equity, yet many things which are repugnant to
humanity, may be excused on account of their necessity and for
self-preservation. -- Speaking of the provision made for the negroes in food
and clothing, he says, The expense of maintaining them in this climate is very
trifling -- they are assigned a piece of ground, from this the slave is
supplied with a sufficient stock for his sustenance; on which however he is not
allowed to labor but only on sundays; receiving from his master a weekly
allowance of dried fish to the amount of a pound and an half; which is all that
his master contributes toward his food. The females receive the same
treatment, and the drink of both is nothing but water: yet from this water and
vegetables, with a morsel of dried fish, these people derive sufficient
nutriment to sustain the hardest labor in the most enervating climate. The
clothing of the negroes (who work in the fields) is scarce sufficient to
answer the demands of (...) indignation against the murderer, or commiseration
for the unhappy victim; they seemed quite hardened to such scenes. He heard but
one person take any manner of notice of the matter.

Another instance fell under the immediate notice of a person of credit, when
in the island of Jamaica, now residing in this city. Hearing a grievous cry, he
went to the place from whence it came, where he saw a young negro woman of
about eighteen years of age, swung by her hands, with heavy weights at her
feet, and a man lashing her naked body with a hard whip; making pauses from
time to time, and flinging pickle or salt and water on the wounds, the whip had
made. The sight was so horrible, that he turned from it and came home. Sometime
after, looking out, he saw this same young woman carried dead on a board: She
had been cruelly whipped to death; neither did he observe that this pitious
spectacle drew the concern or hardly attention of the people.

A third instance happened in Charlestown, in the presence of a person now
residing there. A vessel had taken in a number of slaves, on the coast of
Guinea, amongst these was a man, who probably from the dignity of his situation
in his own country, or from some other cause, did not show such submission as
the ship's people expected and require of slaves. They attempted to tie him
with ropes, but that not answering their purpose, they confined him in irons,
and otherwise so tormented him during their passage from Guinea, in order to
bring down his spirit, that when they arrived at Charlestown, he was in so
weak a condition as to be scarce able to walk to the place of sale, but as he
was urged on with the whip. When the slaves returned in the evening, this man
remaining unsold, was forced along with the rest toward the vessel, he walked
on for a while, till he came to the marketplace, where he fell; but the whip
being exercised upon him, he rose, and going on a little farther dropped down
dead. The relater, a person of credit, saw the transaction, and exclaimed
against the barbarity; but no notice was taken, either judicially or otherwise;
he was dragged along and flung into the sea, to be devoured by the sharks.

The last instance I shall mention, happened in Carolina, on board a vessel
with slaves from Guinea, related by a person lately in this city from thence.
It seems the poor negroes had let in a persuasion, from a fire appearing on the
shore, that the white people proposed to put them to death; this made them
unwilling to leave the ship: However they were all made to comply except one
man, who had taken so strong hold of some part of the ship, that the sailors
were not able to loose him. This raised the anger of the captain to so great a
degree, that he struck the poor fellow so hard a blow, with something like an
handspike, as broke both his arms, whereby the captain looking upon the fellow
as disabled and unfit for sale, gave him another blow on the head, which caused
his brains to fly about the vessel.

"We know, says a late respectable author, that the negroes (employed in our
plantations) are purchased from their princes in Guinea, who pretend to have a
right to dispose of them, and that they are like other commodities, transported
by the merchants, who have bought them into America, in order to be exposed to
sale. If this trade admits of a moral or a rational justification, every crime,
even the most atrocious, may be justified. Government was instituted for the
good of mankind; kings, princes, governors, are not proprietors of those who
are subject to their authority; they have not a right to make them miserable.
On the contrary, their authority is vested in them, that they may, by the just
exercise of it, promote the happiness of their people. Of course they have not
a right to dispose of their liberty, and to sell them for slaves. Besides, no
man has a right to acquire or to purchase them: Men and their liberty are not
either sileable or purchaseable. -- No one, therefore, has any but himself to
blame, in case he shall find himself deprived of a man, whom he thought he had,
by buying for a price, made his own; for he dealt in a trade which was illicit,
and was prohibited by the most obvious dictates of humanity. For these reasons,
every one of those unfortunate men, who are pretended to be slaves, has a right
to be declared to be free, for he never lost his liberty; he could not lose it;
his prince had no power to dispose of him. Of course the sale was ipso jure
void. This right he carries about with him, and is entitled every where to get
declared. As soon, therefore, as he comes into a country in which the judges
are not forgetful of their own humanity, it is their duty to remember that he
is a man, and to declare him to be free. I know it has been said, that
questions concerning the state of persons ought to be determined by the law of
the country to which they belong; and that, therefore, one who would be
declared to be a slave in America, ought, in case he should happen to be
imported into Britain, to be adjudged according to the law of America to be a
slave; a doctrine, than which nothing can be more barbarous. Ought the judges
of any country, out of respect to the law of another, to show no respect to
their kind and to humanity. Out of respect to a law, which is in no sort
obligatory upon them, ought they to disregard the law of nature, which is
obligatory on all men at all times, and in all places: Are any laws so binding
as the eternal laws of justice? It is doubtful, whether a judge ought to pay
greater regard to them, than to those arbitrary and inhuman usages which
prevail in a distant land? Aye, but our colonies would be ruined, if slavery
was abolished. Be it so; would it not from thence follow, that the bulk of
mankind ought to be abused, that our pockets may be filled with money, or our
mouths with delicacies? The purses of highwaymen would be empty in case
robberies were totally abolished; but have men a right to acquire money by
going out to the highway? Have men a right to acquire it by rendering their
fellow creatures miserable? Is it lawful to abuse mankind, that the avarice,
the vanity, or the passion of a few may be gratified? No! There is such a thing
as justice, to which the most sacred regard is due. It ought to be inviolably
observed. Have not these unhappy men a better right to their liberty and to
their happiness, than our American merchants have to the profits which they
make by torturing their kind? Let therefore our colonies be ruined, but let us
not render so many men miserables. Would not any of us, who should -- be
snatched by pirates from his native land, think himself cruelly abused, and at
all times intiled to be free. Have not these unfortunate Africans, who meet
with the same cruel fate, the same right? Are not they men as well as we, and
have they not the same sensibility?"

"But it is false, that either we, or our colonies would be ruined by the
abolition of slavery. It might oecasion a stagnation of business for a short
time. Every great alteration produces that effect: Because mankind cannot on a
sudden, find ways of disposing of themselves and of their affairs: But it would
produce many happy effects. It is the slavery which is permitted in America
that has hindered it from becoming so populous, as it would otherwise have
done. Let the negroes free, and in a few generations, this vast and fertile
continent, would be crowded with inhabitants; learning, arts, and every thing
would flourish amongst them: Instead of being inhabited by wild beasts, and by
savages, it would be peopled by philosophers, and by men." Prins. law of Scott.

"He who detains another by force in slavery, is always bound to prove his
title. The slave sold or carried into a distant country, must not be obliged to
prove a negative, that he never forfeited his liberty. The violent possessor
must in all cases show his title, especially where the old proprietor is well
known. In this case, each man is the original proprietor of his own liberty.
The proof of his losing it must be incumbent on those who deprive him of it by
force." Syst. mor. phil.

"Long and serious reflections upon the nature and consequences of slavery have
convinced me, that it is a violation both of justice and religion; that it is
dangerous to the safety of the community in which it prevails; that is it
destructive to the growth of arts and sciences; and lastly, that it produces a
numerous and very fatal train of vices, both in the slave, and in his master.
-- Freedom is unquestionably the birth right of all mankind; Africans as well
as Europeans: to keep the former in a state of slavery, is a constant violation
of that right, and therefore also of justice. -- The British merchants obtains
the negroes form Africa, by violence, artifice, and treachery, with a few
trinkets to prompt those unfortunate people, to enslave one another, by force
or stratagem. Purchase them, indeed they may, under the authority of an act of
the British parliament. An act entailing upon the Africans (with whom we were
not at war, and over whom a British parliament could not of right assume even a
shadow of authority) the dreadful curse of perpetual slavery, upon them and
their children forever. There cannot be in nature, there is not in all history,
an instance in which every right of men is more flagrantly violated." Lee's Add.

EXTRACT of a Sermon preached by the Bishop of Gloucester, before the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel at their anniversary meeting, on the 21st of
February, 1766.
FROM the free-savages I now come (the last point I propose to consider) to the
savages in bonds. By these I mean the vast multitudes yearly stolen from the
opposite continent, and sacrificed by the colonists to their great idol, the
GOD OF GAIN. But what then, say these sincere worshippers of Mammon, they are
our own property, which we offer up. Gracious God! to talk (as in herds of
cattle) of property in rational creatures! creatures endowed with all our
faculties, possessing all our qualities but that of color; our brethren both
by nature and grace, shocks all the feelings of humanity, and the dictates of
common sense. But, alas! what is there in the infinite abuses of society which
does not shock them? Yet nothing is more certain in itself, and apparent to
all, than that the infamous traffic for slaves directly infringes both divine
and human law. Nature created man free,; and grace invites him to assert his
freedom. In excuse of this violation, it has been pretended, that though
indeed these miserable outcasts of humanity be torn from their homes and native
country by fraud and violence, yet they thereby become the happier, and their
condition the more eligible. But who are YOU, who pretend to judge of another
man's happiness? That state, which each man, under the guidance of his maker,
forms for himself; and not one man for another. To know what constitutes mine
or your happiness, is the sole prerogative of him who created us, and cast us
in so various and different moulds. Did your slaves ever complain to you of
their unhappiness amidst their native woods and deserts? Or, rather, let me
ask, did they ever cease complaining of their condition under you their lordly
masters? Where they see, indeed, the accommodations of civil life, but see them
all pass to others, themselves, unbenefited by them. Be so gracious then, ye
petty tyrants over human freedom, to let your slaves judge for themselves, what
it is which makes their own happiness. And then see whether they do not place
it in the return to their own country, rather than in the contemplation of your
grandeur, of which their misery makes so large a part. A return so passionately
longed for, that despairing of happiness here, that is, of escaping the chains
of their cruel task masters they console themselves with feigning it to be the
gracious reward of heaven in their future state; which I do not find their
haughty masters have as yet concerned themselves to invade. The less hardy
indeed wait for this felicity till overwearied nature sets them free; but the
more resolved have recourse even to self-violence, to force a speedier passage.

But it will be still urged, that though what is called human happiness be of
so fantastic a nature, that each man's imagination creates it for himself, yet
human misery is more substantial and uniform throughout all the tribes of
mankind. Now, from the worst of human miseries, the savage Africans by these
forced emigrations, are entirely secured, such as the being perpetually hunted
down like beasts of prey or profit, by their more savage and powerful
neighbors -- In truth, a blessed change! -- from being hunted to being caught.
But who are they that have set on foot this general HUNTING? Are they not these
very civilized violators of humanity themselves? Who tempt the weak apoetites,
and provoke the wild passions of the fiercer savages to prey upon the rest."

THE END.
Pure and Spiritual Worship: A SERMON. Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, November
12, 1690.
BY STEPHEN CRISP.
THE Worship of God, of the Great God, is pure: he is a Holy God, Of Purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity; and they who will worship God, whose Souls are
breathing to have a Return of a Testimony in his Sight, must offer up pure
Worship, and it must come from that which is pure: For that purpose the
Greatness of the Love of God is made manifest in Christ Jesus; and there is a
diffusing of his Grace and Virtue in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men, whereby he has laid a Foundation for his own Worship; because his Worship
must be pure. Therefore he has freely given unto us, through his Son, the
Knowledge of that pure Principle of Life and Grace, from whence and out of
which, all true Worship does spring, and all true Honor to God arises, and
real Obedience to his holy Will springs forth out of that which is from himself.

And therefore all that will be Worshippers of God aright, must first know and
be sensible wherein the Ability and Capacity stands, that may enable them to so
great and so good a Work. Some have conceived it to stand in their own Will,
and according to the Working of their own Will, they have framed Worships,
Religions, and Observations, thinking thereby to please God: But you know the
Apostle in a few short Words lays down a positive Christian Doctrine, Without
Faith it is impossible to please God.

Now this does declare and signify, that there must be something upon which
this Faith must work, that must be the Object and Foundation of it: Faith as it
works in the Creature, works upon something; it lays hold upon something in
which there is a Capacity of pleasing God. Now if we are all by Nature Children
of Wrath, and that no one of himself can please God, then there must be
something that is supernatural that must be the object of that Faith, by which
Men alone can please God; and this must be made manifest to the Creature for
its Help, for to be its Director and Supporter in that Work, that is too mighty
for himself, too great a Work for a Man or Woman, too deep, too profound for
any Man's Abilities, Power, Wisdom, and Acquirements, that he can attain to in
this World, to worship God aright: To worship God, that is, to perform a pure
Worship to a pure God; Who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? Now if we
are all obliged to bring a clean Worship, a pure Worship to a pure and Holy
God, who has created us and all Things; where shall we have it? Not out of an
unclean Heart, not out Of a defiled Mind; there is no bringing it forth from
thence, for that is the State and Condition that Men are fallen into by Sin, in
which their Minds and Consciences are defiled, their Hearts are polluted, and
their Affections depraved and set upon wrong Objects; and in this State none
can serve God aright: That which is pure and holy must be first made known,
revealed, discovered and believed before People can perform a right Worship to
God.

And therefore in vain it is, to go and drive People to this and that Worship,
and force People to this and that Service and Conformity, upon the Account of
the Worship of God. This is vain Worship; when they have done all, it is not
acceptable to God; the poor Creature has no return from the the Lord, for God
accepts no Service or Worship, but only through his Son. And if so be, Men cannot
pray and preach in the Spirit of his Son, and cannot present their complaints
and Supplications to God, but by the Assistance and Help of his blessed Spirit,
there is no Reason in Religion why People should expect a Return and Answer
from God of the Prayers they make: For it is the general Doctrine of
Christendom, That Christ Jesus is appointed of God for a Mediator between God
and Man, and all the Acceptance we have, or desire to have, must be through
him: and therefore if we pray without him, and perform this and the other
Duties without him; it is contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity to think
that ever we should have Acceptance in God's Sight.

Therefore there is a Necessity for every Man and Woman that desires to be
religious, that has a religious Mind, and is willing to worship God, and serve
God aright, there is a Necessity that they come to the Knowledge of Christ, who
tells us that he is The Way to the Father: They that go any other Way go a
wrong Way: but they that go unto God by Christ, they do receive from him Power
to draw near to God; and through him they receive from God all those Blessings
that their Souls stand in need of.

So here would be an End of all Religions the World is full of, of all the
several Worships that Men have made: They have invented and found out several
Ways for People to worship and serve God; This and the other Ceremony, this and
the other Observation and Method of Preaching and Praying: If all this be
without the Assistance and Divine Help of the Mediator, through whom alone we can
justly expect Acceptance at God's Hands, it is all good for nothing. Therefore
the first Lesson of a Christian in Point of Worship, is that he come to the
Knowledge of Christ, by whom, and through whom he may expect Favor with God.

Now say some People, We are already come to the Knowledge of Christ, we have
read the Relation in the Gospel of his Conception, Birth, Life and Death,
Resurrection and Ascension: Now whether this Belief does give a Man this Kind
of Christian Knowledge, that does open a Door and Way for him into the Presence
of God: This is a Question that ought seriously to be considered, for if we err
in this Question, we err in all; this is like stumbling at the Threshold, and
never come into the House. If we mistake in laying hold of Christ, we mistake
in our Worship, and in all Matters that relate to Life and Salvation.

For if we must have another Sort of Knowledge of Christ than we can have from
the Reports of others; if I must have Christ revealed in me before I can have
the Hope of Glory; if I must have the Spirit of Christ in me, to help me to put
up my Requests and Supplications before he can present them to the Father, then
all literal Knowledge and Faith cannot stand Men in any Stead, but this is
evident by the Testimony of all the Writers of the New Testament. Christ and
his Apostles did concurrently signify, that the Hope of a Christian, that the
Power and Strength of a Christian, it all lies in this, in that they had known
the Revelation of Christ, and the powerful Operation of the Spirit working in
them; this was that which was well pleasing to God; many Scriptures might be
spoken of, but you know the Scriptures, and can read them, and see in them the
concurrent Testimony of all Holy Men to this Day, that the Knowledge they had
of Christ was a divine Knowledge, a spiritual Knowledge, it was knowing him
after the Spirit, it was a Revelation of Christ in them, that separated and
distinguished them from Reprobates, even the Knowledge of God through Jesus
Christ their Lord: Why should not we come to this Knowledge as well as they?
The Lord is the same, and his Power is the same and his Arm is not shortened:
We may see as much Need of divine Assistance, and divine Love as ever Men did;
we can perform no Duty, either of Prayer or Preaching, without divine
Assistance; not so much as a Sigh or Groan, that may have Acceptance with God,
without the Help of his Spirit, Romans viii. 26. The Spirit helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit itself makes Intercession for us with Groanings which cannot he
uttered. If we go about the Duty of Prayer without divine Assistance, we see
what sad Work we make of it; if we pray not in the Spirit and with the
Understanding, how can we receive the Thing we pray for? But if we Pray in the
Spirit, and with the understanding also, then the Spirit helps our Infirmities;
the Spirit that came from God brings us the Things we stand in Need of.

So that a Christian has a Foundation for his Worship and Christian
Performance; what is that Foundation? Nothing that is corrupt, if it be, it is
good for nothing; for nothing that is corrupted and that defiles, can be
acceptable and pleasing to God; we are all polluted and defiled by Nature; how
can carnal Men worship a Spiritual God? Carnal Men that are in Death and
Darkness, cannot worship that God that is Light, and dwells in Light, that is
inaccessible, that is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. Carnal Men want a
Foundation for their Worship, and will do till they come to that Foundation
that God has laid.

Now, that I may speak intelligibly what the Lord has laid upon my Heart, I
would say thus; There is an universal Benefit and Privilege distributed and
given freely of God, unto the Sons and Daughters of Men, in their natural
State, through his Son Jesus Christ, in that he has caused his Light to shine,
and his Grace to be extended to every Man; for the Grace of God which brings
Salvation (for it is not by Works) has appeared unto all Men, and brings
Light, by which every Man may see how to worship God; God has enlightened
every Man, and this Light comes by Christ the Mediator; this Mediator is the
Way that Men must walk in, if they will come back again to God; for Men are run
out and departed from God; if Men will draw near to God, and take some
Footsteps toward the Kingdom of God, from the Kingdom of Sin and Satan, they
must mind the Way, the Way must be their Director, they must not go which Way
they list.

This is that which was prophesied of Christ, says God by the Prophet Isaiah,
I will give him for a Leader. I would fain return to God, and go out of the
Kingdom of Sin and Satan, to the Kingdom of God: God has given Christ to lead
me, if I knew that Way he would lead me in, I would go that Way. As soon as a
Man takes hold of Christ, his Grace, and Spirit, and Life, he will be ready to
say, I am corrupt, my Senses are corrupt, my Mind is depraved, my Conscience
defiled and polluted; but I have found out something or that God has bestowed
upon me, that is Essential, Holy and Pure, that did never consent to my
Corruption, but is a Witness for God against it: Here now a Christian lays hold
on Christ, the Leader; which Way will he lead me? If thou layest hold of this
Guide, he will lead thee out of Evil, he will teach thee to cease to do Evil,
and speak Evil: This Light will lead thee to Nothing that will dishonor God,
or defile thy own Soul: But this is not all, we must not only cease to do Evil,
but we must be doing something; there must be a breaking off from Pride,
Foolish Jesting, Evil Communication; but this is not all that he will lead me
to; let us learn that Lesson, Cease to do Evil. This Doctrine was preached
before Christianity was preached, as it is now preached; the Prophets of old
preached this Doctrine to the Jews that were under an outward Administration,
Cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, then I will plead with you, and
discourse with you, says the Lord: Come now let us reason together, says the
Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though
they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

This is the first Lesson that a true Christian learns in his turning to God,
in his Change and Translation, to cease from that which is Evil: Here is a
Cessation of Rebellion, and her is some hopes of being reconciled to God; a Man
has beer a Rebel against his Maker, but he has now received help to resist
those Temptations that prevail over him: But there is no worshipping yet, there
is a forward mind in Men to do something that is pleasing to God; but there are
some that are not troubled at all for their Evil Ways, and dread not God's
Anger, but make a mock at Sin, that draws others to it, and make themselves
merry in it: But there is a sort so far touched with a divine Sense of God's
Love to them, that they have also a Sense of his Anger and Indignation, because
of their Sin; and they would fain be out of his Anger; and who can blame them?
When a Man feels the Anger of God burning like a Fire in his Bosom, who can
blame that Man if he desire Peace with God? If he be under a Sense of the
Displeasure and Indignation of the Almighty, he must not haste too soon out of
that Condition he is brought into; for this is God's Purpose, and this is the
Fruit of all his Troubles and Afflictions, to take away Sin: God had no other
End or Design in the Affliction that came upon him, than to take away Sin; when
God has brought a People into a distressed and dejected State for their Sin,
the Fruit that God expects, is the taking away of their Sin, and he will hide
Pride from them, and humble them before him; if this be the Purpose of God that
he intends to purge and purify his People; then says the poor Creature, if God
design to purify me from Sin, then I will pray to God to support me, and bear
me up under his Indignation: That is the Cry of the Soul that he may not be
brought too soon from under the Judgment of God, but he may be supported and
hid in the Hollow of God's Hand, until the Time of Remission and Refreshing
comes, that he may behold the Light of God's Countenance.

Here is Encouragement for every one that is acquainted with this divine
Principle of Grace, that will be led by it, and follow it so far as to be led
out of Evil; then they will be fitted to do something in the Work of God; every
Sigh and Groan that thou have the Assistance of the Spirit of God to help thee
in, is Part of Worship: All thy Brokenness of Heart is part of Worship; hereby
thou acknowledgest the great God, that he is able to help thee on in thy Way,
and to pardon thy Iniquity, and blot out thy Transgression, and give thee all
those heavenly Blessings that thy Soul does stand in Need of: Then thy Soul
will bow down to God in Acts of holy Worship, and say, with an humble
Confidence and Expectation, God will do all these things in me, and for me,
that will promote my Salvation. It is nothing in Religion for People to go from
Praying and Preaching to Sinning; but God must have a holy Sacrifice, and that
must come out of a pure Heart: Now when a Man is brought by the Help of God,
and by the divine Assistance of the Mediator, Jesus Christ, to break off from
his Sin, then he stands fair to become a Child of God, and to be a Servant of
God, and to do something for God in his Generation, and to offer to God Praise
and Thanksgiving, and to perform all other Duties that God shall lead him into.

But some will say, What, must we do any thing? I have deeply weighed that
Question, what a poor Man or Woman must do, that is come out of Bondage? There
is a Propensity in People to be doing, they would fain do something, they would
be doing; they say, What shall I do? If I do something that pleases not God, I
had better let it alone; and I can do nothing acceptable to God without divine
Assistance: Such an one that sees his own Impotency and Inability will cast his
Care upon God, and will say, The Lord is able to lead me and guide me: I am
ready to do thy Will, O God: Make it clear to me that this is thy Will, and
that this is that which thou requirest, I am ready to do it, though it be cross
to mine own Will: He is ready to go on in God's Way, in the Way of
Christianity; such an one that has the true Knowledge of Christ, if he speaks,
the Spirit of Christ speaks in him; if he prays, it is through the Assistance
of the Spirit of Christ, through whom God alone is appeased and reconciled, and
through whom they may receive a Blessing from God's Hands: But for Men to run
on in their own Wills, and to do a thing because they will do it, they had
better sit still; this doing in their own Wills, has filled the World with a
Sort of Christians that want Acceptance with God, which is to be had alone
through the Lord Jesus Christ; and the Want of the Guidance of God's Holy
Spirit, is the Misery and Downfall of Christianity in our Days.

Therefore it is our Work and Business to build upon that Foundation which God
has laid; no Worship is pleasing to God, but that which arises from that
Spring that is pure and Holy: If I cannot find that which will keep me from all
pollution and defilement, if I cannot find that, I must stay till I can; for to
begin a Worship and a Religion without that which I know is acceptable to God,
it is but lost Labor, and Time spent in vain.

Therefore, Friends, let every one that desires to be religious, turn their
Mind inward, wait for the Gift of God, which is essentially pure, that never
did consent to Evil, that never mixed with the Corruption of Nature, but bears
witness to the Light, that will guide you and lead you, and conduct you, first
out of Sin, and then it will lead you into that Worship and Religion, and the
Performance of those Things that are pleasing to God. They that are come to
this Worship, they do not only know what the Lord requires of them, and when he
requires it of them, but they are given up into the Hands of God; they pray,
preach, exhort and live according to the Will of God.

It is hard for People in a carnal State to believe this; but you that are
Believers, that are come to know the Gift of God in yourselves, and the
Necessity of being ruled by him; you will believe us, for none else will
believe us; let us preach to as many People and Nations us we will, none will
receive us as true Ministers, but those that have the Truth in their own
Hearts; if there be any that despises the Grace of God in his own Heart, he
hates that which chides and reproves him; if there be such a Man, he will hate
me because I am a Minister and a Witness of the Grace of God, and of that Truth
in the inward Parts, which is the Ground and Foundation that Man has of
Acceptance with God. A wicked carnal Wretch will say, I hate such an one, I
hate the Light, that which checks me, and witnesses against me, thou art such
an one as bear Witness against me, therefore I hate thee: It is very true,
it cannot be otherwise: Now our Desire and Labor is, that Men may come to the
Love of the Truth in themselves.

You know there are a great many other Ministers, whose Labors are to persuade
People to believe what they say: to lay down a Doctrine, and prove it by
Scripture and Reason, and set it home upon their Minds by such Testimony as the
Scripture affords, and hereupon they prevail upon the Minds and Judgments of
People, to believe what they lay down.

It is easy to lay down a Position and prove it, and convince People that it
must be according to Scripture; but when a Person is convinced of a Principle
of Truth, he is not Regenerate thereby and come to God; therefore, though he
cannot deny the Doctrine of Truth in Words, yet he can deny it in Works, and
does not rightly come to love it. If People would believe what we say, and
observe what Argument we bring for proving a Position, they may be convinced of
the Doctrine of Truth, and come to a Profession of it, and yet be Strangers to
it, till they come to love it in themselves; if it were not for this, we would
leave Preaching, if God had not given a Measure and Manifestation of the Spirit
to every Man to profit withal: You have it in yourselves, we are but as
Monitors to you, to put you in Mind of it; you have so much Business in the
World, that you have not had leisure to take Notice of it.

A Man may have a rich Jewel, and be poor notwithstanding, till he comes to
know the Value of it. A Man has a rich and precious Jewel, a Pearl bestowed
upon him that would make him rich in Faith and Love to God, and qualify him for
the Kingdom of God, and make him an Heir of it, but he knows not, nor
understands the Value of it, and esteems it not; therefore God has raised up
Ministers to put you in mind of it, that you may be happy forever, and live in
Blessedness to all Eternity; Whoever has an Ear to hear, let him hear; and
when they hear what we say, let them take the Benefit of it to their own Souls.
We bring not Truth to you, but God has bestowed it upon you; you will be rich
indeed, if you do as a Man that bought a Field where the precious Pearl was,
and dug till he found it. Come to the Foundation upon which you should build
all your Hopes of Happiness, and depend not upon your own Works, or religious
Performances, for Acceptance with God; for there is no Acceptance with God, but
only through Christ, we are only accepted of God through him: Those that will
become Christians indeed, and worship God as he has ordained and appointed
himself to be worshipped; they must come to the Principle of Light and Grace in
their own Hearts, which they have in, and through Christ, and they will find
Acceptance with God.

The Kingdom of GOD within: A SERMON. Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, July 26,
1691.
YOU have read and heard much concerning the Day of the Lord, as a great and
notable Day; many of you are now living Witnesses that the great, and notable
Day of the Lord is coming, in which the accomplishment of great and notable
Things, the mighty Works of God, which have been prophesied of, may be lawfully
expected. It is the Work of every Christian to wait upon the Lord in the Light
of this Day, and to be acquainted with the Works of the Lord, both inwardly and
outwardly; for the Day of the Lord is a Day of Power, and that Power of God
works wonderful Things; and if we were not kept in the Light of that Day, the
Lord may work great things, and we not know it; we shall be looked upon as
careless and negligent Witnesses of the Works of the Lord, as those that do not
regard them. If you would be faithful Witnesses, you must have regard to the
Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his Hands. One that is minded to be a
faithful Witness, he will take Notice of what is said and done; you are called
to be Witnesses of the Works of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Doings; you
must stand where you may hear, and see, and understand what the Lord is about
to do at this Time.

In your Testimony and Witness bearing, the greatest Thing we have to expect in
this Day of the Lord is, that God will set up the Kingdom of his Son Christ
Jesus; and unto this all the Prophets did bear witness in their Time, and now
it is our Turn to bear witness of it by sensible and living Experiences of the
Accomplishment of those Things that they prophesied of, that the Lord will set
up the Kingdom of Christ, and bring down and lay waste the Kingdom of
Antichrist. This our Savior taught his Disciples to pray for, sixteen hundred
years ago, that the Kingdom of God might come; and all the true Disciples of
Christ ever since have prayed for the coming of this Kingdom, and many of them
have seen the coming of it, and rejoiced; and others have died in the Faith of
it, and have been gathered into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But, my Friends, that which chiefly concerns us at this Day, is to behold the
Kingdom of Christ, the eternal Son of God, within us, to go forward and
prosper; and the Kingdom of Antichrist suppressed and destroyed, and utterly
laid waste; and this is wrought two Ways, 1. Inwardly. 2. Outwardly.

First, Inwardly, There is a greater Inclination in the Minds of People, to
look more at the Operation of God's Power in this great Work outwardly, than to
look at it inwardly, but unto that there must be a daily Cross taken up, and it
is my Business at this Time to tell you in the Name of the Lord, that your Duty
and mine is to turn our Minds to the Working of the Power of God in ourselves,
and to see that other Kingdom of the Man of Sin weakened and brought down
within us; then there is no Fear but he will carry on his Work outwardly, and
we shall see as much of that Work as belongs to our Generation; but the great
Matter and chief Concernment of you and me, is to see the Kingdom of God set up
within us, which stands in Holiness and Righteousness: Our Business is to walk
till we see the Righteousness of this Kingdom set up within us in our Hearts
and Souls, and to have a real change made.

We all know, and we must confess, that wre have been subject to the Man of
Sin, whatsoever we are now. We have seen the Reign and Government, the Rage and
Tyranny of the Wicked One that has led us into Rebellion and Disobedience to
the Lord our Maker; how do we like that Government to be ruled by the Devil,
and to be led Captive, and to be made to do his Will, and to rebel against God
that gave us our Life, and our Breath, and our Being? How do we like that
Government of Satan? I hope we do none of us like it. It was so with me, and
they that are under the tyrannical Government of Satan, have many Cries and
Wishes in their Souls that they were freed and delivered from it, and brought
under the Government and Obedience of Christ Jesus: and they were able to serve
God as they ought to do, that they might be translated from the Kingdom of Sin
and Satan, into the Kingdom of the blessed and dearly beloved Sen of God.

This has been the Cry of some ever since they have known the World; and I am
persuaded it is the Cry of many at this Day: I have good news to bring you; not
that the Day of your Redemption draws nigh, but that it is come; the Day of
Redemption is now come, and there are a great many blessing and glorifying the
Name of God that they are redeemed, and delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, and have more Joy and Delight in the Service of God, that made
them, than ever they had in the Service of the God of this World.

But may not some say, How shall this great Work be wrought; for it is a great
Work, and we verily think that nothing but an Almighty Power can effect it? For
there are many in this Assembly have been trying to no Purpose, and done what
they could in their own Strength* to deliver their own Souls from Death, and
yet they find themselves in Bondage still; nay, they have called in the Help
and Assistance of those that they thought to be stronger than themselves, and
all have failed, and they are yet weak and entangled, and they cannot find
themselves at Liberty to serve the Lord as they ought to do.

I am of this Mind, that nothing but the Almighty Power of God can do it; and
when you come to my Experience, to know this as I have done, then I hope you
will seek after that, and you will see good Reason for it; and you will then
come to this Profession, If the Lord puts not forth his Almighty Power, I must
then perish, for there is no other Power can deliver me: When you come to know
this, what must you do? Why, you must wait for the Revelation of that Power
that will take you off from all Trust and Confidence that you have ever had in
any Thing else; a Man that has nothing to trust to but the Almighty Power, and
Mercy, and Goodness of God, he puts his whole Trust and Confidence therein, or
else he knows he must perish.

When a Man or Woman comes to this pass, that they have nothing to rely upon
but the Lord, then they will meet together to wait upon the Lord: And this was
the first Ground or Motive of our setting up Meetings; and I would to God that
this was the use that every one would make of them that come to them, then they
would be justly and properly used according to the End of the Institution of
them at first; we should use them as poor desolate helpless People that are
broken off from all their own Confidence and Trust, and have nothing to rely
upon but the Mercy and Goodness of God; and if he pleases to reveal his Power
among us, we know that he is able to save us; and we have met with the
Revelation of God's Power; and when we have met together in Simplicity of Mind,
the Lord was pleased to communicate his Spirit to us, and open a Door for us,
and discover and reveal to us that it was the Day of his Power: And when we
came to examine ourselves, whether we were willing in this Day of God's Power
(for the Prophet gives us a Note of Distinction between the People of God, and
other People; Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power, which is as
much as to say, God discovers and reveals his Power to them, such a People are
willing to give themselves over to the Government of it, when we found we were
subject to it) we had Joy in believing, before we attained the End of our Hope;
it was Gladness to us we found ourselves willing; and I am persuaded that every
one of you would be glad to find yourselves willing to part with that which you
cry out of.

What a Cry is there of our Bondage and Corruption, and of our being led
Captive by our Lusts? We may hear such a Cry from one End of the Kingdom to the
other: People cry out of the Bondage of Corruption, and of their Subjection to
Sin and Satan: I would they were in earnest; there is not that Earnestness and
Reality in Men and Women that God looks for, and so there comes nothing of it.
There is no Redemption, and no Deliverance, the Lord does not hear them, though
they come now adays into his Presence, to offer up their Prayers: I would have
you to be in good earnest, I wish well to you all; and it would be hard to say
that you do not wish well to yourselves: Here lies your Welfare, that you find
yourselves willing to be subject to the Power that made you; you have been
subject doubtless to the Power that destroyed you; that Power that never gave
you Life and Breath, has been instrumental of your Destruction: The Power of
the God of this World never did Men good, but destroyed them, deceived them,
and deprived them of their Lives.

Now if there was but a Willingness in every one of us, freely to give up
ourselves to that Power that created us to obey his Will: I am sure there is
never a Man or Woman among us shall long be without the knowledge of it. If I
am but willing to be subject to the Law of him that made me, it will not be
long before he discover it to me, and reveal his Power in me in the Glory and
Excellency of it; that Power which is more able to preserve me than all the
Power of Men on Earth, or all the Power of the Devils in Hell is able to
destroy me. When the Lord shall discover and reveal his Power in you, you will
be willing to be subject to it.

But methinks the Sound and Noise of Flesh and Blood grows loud here: I would
be subject to God, but I would not have him cross mine interest, and deprive me
of that I love and thirst after: I would not have him imbitter my carnal
Delights and Pleasures, and undo me as to my Reputation in the World.

You may see whence this comes, that you would make a Bargain, and draw a
Contract with the God of your Lives about these Things, this is a nonsensical
Thing; because of all People in the World, you are a People that have had a
Veneration for the Holy Scriptures, the Scriptures of Truth, and have been
acquainted with them so familiarly as with any Book in the World, wherein you
find Articles drawn, long ago fixed and sealed; and no new ones are to be
drawn. If any one will be my Disciple, John or Thomas, James or Peter, or
whosoever he be, he must take up his Daily-Cross, and deny himself, and follow
me. Now here is a Contract made, therefore turn aside from all Kind of
Reasoning and Consulting with Flesh and Blood.

If you will become spiritual, and partake of spiritual Blessings and Benefits,
I would advise you to turn from all Kind of Reasonings that come from the Bit
of Darkness, that has thus far deceived you, and will ruin you for ever, if
you hearken to them: For assure yourselves new Gospel-Terms no Man can make;
and if any come to preach new Gospel-Terms, count him a Deceiver; for there is
no possibility of being a Disciple of Christ, but by taking up a Cross daily,
and denying ourselves, and following him as our Leader and Guide. To him I must
go, and go in no other Way, speaking nothing, or doing nothing but what is holy
and pure; he must conduct me in my Walking, guide me in my Way, and justify me
in it: This is to be a true Disciple of Christ.

As soon as he comes to adhere, and join to the Power of God revealed in his
Soul, he sees the coming of the Kingdom of God, he sees it at a Distance, he
says within himself, and makes this Conclusion, I will follow my Captain, I
will become subject to the Kingdom of Christ. If I obey this divine Principle
of the Grace of God, and the Gospel of Christ, I shall be his Disciple. I read
in his blessed Book, That as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the
Children of God. I am not to propose new Terms, but accept of the old Terms of
the Gospel of Christ: I see that the Kingdom of God is to be set up, and the
Kingdom of the Devil to be brought down in me; if I follow this divine
Principle, I should never follow the Devil more; if he would have me lie, I
shall refuse, and say I cannot; if he would have me run into vain and corrupt
Communication, and foolish Jesting, that will be a Bridle to me, that I cannot
do it.

I speak now to Persons that live under the Light of the Gospel of Christ, and
that are subdued by his Grace; I would speak that which all the Logic in the
World cannot overthrow, that which the most cunning Logicjan, with all his Wit
and Quirks, cannot refute and prove erroneous. If a Man be led by the Spirit of
God, he cannot lie; this is a common Cure for all Men; if I be led by the
Spirit of Truth, and hearken to the Principle of Truth in my own Soul; this
will cure and heal me of the Wounds and Maladies of my corrupt Nature, and set
me at Liberty from my old Master; I do not like his Service.

I hope if any of you like the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan, you will
desire Liberty before you die: Why do not you desire it now? It may be thou
think to enjoy a little Liberty and Reputation, and Pleasure in Sin for many
Years, for Six or Seven, Nine or Ten Years, and then break off from it, and
repent and turn to God: How do thou know that thou have Ten Days to live? It
is of high Concernment to every one of us to wait for a Discovery of
Gospel-Liberty, and an Ability and Power in his Soul, to enable him to break
off from the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan, that he has so long lived
under; and to wait upon God with Patience for the setting his Soul at Liberty,
and setting up the Kingdom of Christ within him, and pulling down the Kingdom
of Satan, that he may be brought into the Kingdom of Christ, that consists in
Peace and Righteousness and Joy in the Holy Ghost. These are the Things that
follow one another; when Righteousness is set up in me, I shall not be
disturbed, I shall have Peace; and if I have Peace I shall have joy, and this
joy is in the Holy Ghost the Apostle says the Kingdom of God consists in these
Things.

Now that every one might be persuaded that God has given a Measure of his
Grace to them, as well as to other Folks: Let them consider and say within
themselves, God has not shut me out of the Number of his People: He has
knocked at the Door of my Heart, to bring me to Repentance, he has waited upon
me so long, surely he has a Mind to save me: Would he call upon me, but that
he intends I should repent and turn to him?

But where is the Power? You will say knocking at the Door of the Heart, and
Checks of Conscience, we understand them; but we understand not where the Power
is, to be comformable to the Will of God.

People will never understand it while they are in the Kingdom of Satan, and
under the Power of the Prince of Darkness; the Apostle tells us, That the God
of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not lest the Light of
the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine upon them.
If Men saw the Beauty of the Gospel, they would run after it, and embrace it;
therefore the Devil blinds their Minds, that they should not see the Beauty and
Amiableness of the Gospel, and like the Terms of it: He has the Rule and
Government of the Children of Disobedience. So long as I live in Subjection to
that devilish hellish Power, which leads me forth into Sin: I shall be a
Stranger to God's Power, that would enable me to break off from it.

You never read in Scripture of any that ever came to be saved by the Power of
God, but there was Faith mixed with it, that came to join with that Power of
God, Our Saiour said to the impotent Man, Thy Faith has made the whole; thy
Faith joining with that Power of God. We shall be made strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might, and be able to withstand Temptations.

As soon as the Soul of Man joins with the Grace of God, he does forsake the
Service of his old Master and Governor, Sin shall no longer have Dominion over
him; though he may meet with the same Temptation, it shall not have the same
Power over him, but he will be enabled, by the Grace of God to withstand it,
and overcome it. If you ask such a Man, how it is that he overcomes that
Temptation that formerly prevailed over him; he will tell you, I have now an
Helper, I am now joined to the Grace of God in my Soul, therefore do I
withstand Temptations, and have Power over them. Thus comes the Kingdom of
Christ to be set up in the Soul, and this is that which will fit and prepare us
for the everlasting Kingdom of God: They that do wait upon God, shall see this
Work wrought inwardly in them, they know more by Faith than they can see by
Sense.

I know and am certain, that the Power the Devil has in the World, shall be
broken down, and Righteousness shall be exalted, and Justice and Equity shall
prevail in the Nations. I shall not perhaps live to see it, but I may see it by
Faith; I have seen enough for my Generation, and they that live in the next
Generation shall see it also; for the Church of God is the same from one
Generation to another. Now unto us it is given to see the Things that in former
Generations were prophesied of, God having (says the Apostle) provided some
better Thing for us, that they without us, shall not be made perfect.

The Church of God from one Generation to another, have their Measure and
Degree of Service, and bear their proper Testimony, and leave the rest to
succeeding Generations: It concerns us in our Generation to see a Change made
inwardly in our Souls, and the Kingdom of Christ set up within us, and the
Kingdom of Satan brought down in ourselves. This does not concern my Son or
Grandson only, but it concerns me, and when they grow up to mature Age, in
their Time it will concern them. Therefore that which is most profitable to us,
is, that we have such a Station, and stand in such a Place in our Time, where
we may see the Work of God carried on.

I have considered many a Time, that there are many brave Men and Women in this
Age, that might have been eminent Witnesses of God in this World, and borne
their Testimony to his Truth, but their Faith has been weak and ineffectual:
They have discovered their unbelieving Hearts, and have joined with the common
Herd of the World, because they thought such great Things could never be done,
that the Kingdom of Satan could never be pulled down and destroyed, and the
Kingdom of Christ set up within us. But I would hope better Things of you,
Things that accompany Salvation and that he that has begun a good Work in you
will carry it on to Perfection; that living Praises and joyful Thanksgivings
may be rendered to him who alone worthy, who is God over all, blessed for ever;
to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Necessity of an Holy Life and Conversation. Preached at ST.
MARTIN'S-LE-GRAND, March the 26th, 1687.
O HOW happy are they that have Bread in their own Houses! and that can draw
Water out of their own Wells! These have a blessed glorious Dewlling Place,
these are the Children that their Father provides for: All the divine Treasures
and the Riches of heavenly Things are laid up for these; O that all that have a
Sight of this blessed State, were got into it! that their Minds might not more
wander, that People might not be scattered in their Thoughts, that when they
meet together, they might have their Expectations entirely from that God whom
they profess to worship: Lord thou have said that thou will teach thy People
thyself; here a Cry goes up to the Lord, and their Expectations through Faith
pitched upon God; they never meet in vain, but a Well springs up, and the Water
of Life comes to them, by which they meet with divine Refreshments; for, you
know, the Promise that our Lord made to his Disciples, He that drinks of the
Water that I shall give him, shall never thrist more. Why, will once drinking
serve? Because I have tasted of the living Water that the Lord Christ gives me;
will that serve? No, but he gives me a substantial River, that is the Reason
why I shall thirst no more, it shall be in me a Well of living Water, springing
up to everlasting Life; blessed are the Witnesses of it; these are they that
are satisfied concerning Religion and Doctrine, they are satisfied concerning
Worship, they are looking after no new Things; when they meet together, they
meet in the Name of the Lord, and they have their Eyes to him, who is a
Fountain, and they discern a Brightness and a Glory that is unspeakable; and
the Glory that is speakable, that appears many Times through Instruments, will
not satisfy them; there is something beyond that, which must satisfy; this will
never do it: People will never be satisfied with hearing, nor never satisfied
with seeing, till they come to hear and see that which is unutterable, and then
they are satisfied; Christ had preached many Sermons in the hearing of his
Disciples, and there were a great many said, That there was never any Man spoke
like him, preached like him; yet one of them that was nearest to him, and most
acquainted and intimate with him, after some Years meeting and hearing of his
Sermons, he cries out Show us the Father, and it suffices us.

My Friends, this comes near to many of your States; many of you have heard
long, and have heard the speakable Word of God, that which could be uttered,
that which could be spoken forth, by the Demonstration of the Holy Ghost, by
them that have received of the Father; this you have heard long, and yet there
are many of you, that if you come to a serious Search, you will find a Want,
you will find still that you have not that Satisfaction that puts you beyond
Doubt, beyond Fear; there is something that stands in the Way, that hinders
your Enjoyment of the unspeakable Glory of the unspeakable Word, and this will
never be removed, but by your innocent submitting to the Work of the Power of
God in your own Hearts, that so you may not only be Believers, but come to be
really baptized, and then all is out of doubt; for our Lord said, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved; he does not say, He may be saved,
but, He shall be saved.

Woeful Experience has told us in our Days, That a great many have believed the
Truth, and yet they are never like to be saved, they have made Shipwreck of
their Faith; but if they had been baptized, if they would have endured the
Baptism, if they would have been buried with Christ in Baptism, they should
have been saved every one of them; and now there are a great many that remain
in the Belief of the Truth and yet they are not baptized, they are not dead,
not buried, notwithstanding they have received like precious Faith with us,
that Faith which is of the Operation of God, and that is like precious in its
Nature to all that do receive it, and would work the same Effect in all too, if
it were not obstructed; but notwithstanding they have received Faith toward
the saving of their Souls, yet their Souls are Captives, their Souls are
subject to Lusts, and Pleasures, and Vanities, and unto empty and foolish
Things, and to Passions and Corruptions, after they have received Faith.

For if you take one that is a Believer of Truth, that is overtaken with his
Lust, and Passions, and Corruptions, he will commonly own that he believes the
contrary, he believes that these Things should not be, that it ought to be
otherwise: This is the Signification of Truth against Untruth: If it should be
otherwise, why is it thus then? Why, he finds a Life to spring up in that which
is corruptible, that is always contrary to the Life of God, and at Enmity with
it: What shall I do? I believe the Truth, I know it is an holy Thing, it leads
all that submits to it to an holy Life, and there is this and that unholy
Thing, this and that corrupt Thing remains, what shall I do?

It is an evident Demonstration that thou want the Baptism of him in whom
thou believe; thou have believed in Christ Jesus that comes after John, and
was before him; and now having believed in him, thou want to be baptized by
him, and for want of that, the Pollution and Corruption that was grown up in
thy Nature, in the Time of thy Alienation prevails still upon thee, contrary to
thy Faith; and there is no coming to obtain this Baptism, but by sinking down
into that which will slay thee, that which will kill thee: But there is such a
shifting to save ones Life, there are so many Twistings and Twinings of People
to save their Lives, that at last they lose them; but there are none that could
ever find that Life that is eternal, but those that are willing to be given up
to the Dead, and submit to this Baptism, that is, by the Holy Ghost and by
Fire: These only do come to Life, they come to the Resurrection, for you never
knew any that died this Death but they rose again; it is as impossible for
Death to hold any one down that is buried in this Baptism, as it was impossible
to hold Christ down, when he was in the Grave; The same Power that brought
again our Lord Christ from the Dead, the same Power it is that quickens us,
while we remain in these mortal Bodies, after we have sustained this Death and
Crucifiction.

But who can believe this saying? for this is a hard Saying, who can bear it?
Is it not enough that I am a Believer, which makes me a Friend, and entitles me
to a Community among you, and as long as I hold the Truth, and profess the
Truth, I am looked upon as one of your Society? This is very true, this does
entitle People unto the outward Privileges of the Church of Christ; but there
is another inner Court, that lies under the Angel's Reed, the Measuring-Reed,
that is to be measured, the Temple is measured, and every Worshipper in the
Temple is measured; there was an outward Court, that was for representing the
Church of God in general, from the particular; the outward Court was not
measured, that the Gentiles might come in; the unbaptized People, which were
never regenerated, they might come so far as the outward Court, but this did
not entitle them to the Privileges of the House of God, nor to any Worship or
Sacrifice that was accepted upon God's Altar.

It concerns you and me (my Friends) to be serious about Matters of this Moment
and Importance, and not spend your Days, and, as it were speak by rote, under
an airy Profession, though of Truth itself, without considering what Progress
you have made, what Benefit you have obtained, and whether you are come not
only to the Shadow of good Things to come, but to the very Substance of the
heavenly Things; for the Comers to the outward Worship, could never with those
Sacrifices they offered be made perfect; the Comers thereunto were not made
perfect as to the Things pertaining to the Conscience, speaking there of the
outward Worship, Heb. 10.1. but coming to the heavenly Things, whereof the
other were but a Shadow, they made People perfect, as to the Conscience, and
did bring them to Salvation. The Apostle alludes to this Baptism, for he speaks
in a Figure of the Eight Persons that were saved in Noah's Ark; then he brings
down the Allegory to Christian Baptism, not only the Baptism of John, the
Forerunner of Christ, that preached of Christ, but to the Christian Baptism
itself; By the like Figure whereof Baptism now saves us, says the Apostle,
not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience. What does he mean by Baptism saving us? He means, the Answer of a
good Conscience toward God, through the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead;
so that Christian Baptism did bring along with it the cleansing and putting
away of all Sin out of the Conscience, that might bring them under Doubts and
Scruples; and then there is an arising of Jesus, the Savior in the Conscience,
the Mediator that brought them to answer for them in the Sight of God; for if
People be conscious of Sin; and do leave off their Sin, this does not yet
cleanse the Conscience; for there still remains a Conscience of Sin: it is not
the leaving off our Sin that makes our Atonement with God, or that expiates
our Guilt, or does away the Guilt of the Sins that we have committed; but there
must be a Forsaking and a Leaving off Sin by the Virtue and Power of the
Spirit, by which we are enabled, not only to leave off Sin, but are guided and
directed to the Mediator, whose Blood alone reconcileth us to God, and
cleanses us from all Sin. If I should never commit a Sin while I live, it is
not this simply in itself that will make me have the Answer of a good
Conscience in the Sight of God; for there remains the Guilt of Sin contracted
in the Days of Unbelief, which is a Bar and Hindrance that none can approach
the Holy God but in the Atonement and Salvation that comes by Jesus Christ;
for all that believe and obey the Gospel are accepted in Christ, and upon the
Account of Christ's precious Blood, that cleanses us from all Sin and
Unrighteousness. Whom does it cleanse? Those only that forsake their Sins, and
by his Power are brought to a holy Life; they by the Virtue of his Power, and
the Cleansing of his Blood, come to have their former Sins removed from them,
as far as the East is from the West.

But what is this to them that remain in their Sins? what is this to them that
are not baptized? for the Dead that have not put off the old Man, nor put on
the new Man, but have only put on the Name and Profession of Christ, and put on
the outside of him, his Garment, but have not put him on, they are not created
again in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that they might walk in them? No wonder
there remains a Conscience of Sin in them, there is a Bar that hinders them
from the Sight of the Glory of God, and from real and true Satisfaction,
concerning their Atonement and Reconciliation with God, and this hinders them
from the Enjoyment of that Peace that passes understanding; and it is no
Wonder, because they are not come to this Baptism that brings the Answer of a
good Conscience in the Sight of God; they are not risen with Christ; how should
they? for they are not buried with him, Romans vi. 3. Know ye not that so many of
us (says the Apostle) as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his
Death; therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as
Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of Life; here is a Change figured out between them that
had partaken of the spiritual Baptism, and were come again to the Participation
of Life in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ and those that were not baptized.

So it is now with every one that comes to believe the Truth, and make a
Profession of it: there is a Way cast up, and there is a Door opened for
Salvation; but the grand Question that every one ought to enquire about, and
put to themselves, is, What Progress they have made this Way? Whether they are
baptized yet or no? Whether they have put off the old Man with his Deeds, and
put on the new Man and the new Man's Deeds, which are Righteousness and
Holiness? They that find that, though they are Believers, they are short of
this, they do also find that their Shortness is their Hindrance, their
Shortness in not coming up to the Pattern that has been showed them, is their
Hindrance, so that they enjoy not the things here spoken of the being under
this Sense, and really sitting under this Sense in a Meeting, though there
should be no Man speaking to them outwardly, yet being come to this Faith, and
made Partakers of this Baptism, People would find in their own Bosoms the
hidden Word of Life ministering to their Condition; they would have enough,
there would not be a Famine of the Word unto them, nor they should not need to
be in Expectation of going out to this or the other Instrument, but they would
be satisfied when they are met together with the Presence of the Lord, that the
Lord is in the midst of them, ministering them the Word of Life, in his
Operating and Working, speaking in a Tongue that every one can understand it,
speaking with a kind of Voice and Language, that every one may understand his
own State and Condition; and this is the Way that God brought up People from
the Beginning, to the Knowledge of Heavenly Things, and opening of the
Mysteries of Salvation; we had it not of Men, but of Jesus our Lord; he was our
great Minister, we waited upon him, and trusted in him, and he taught us
himself; he has ministered to us at our silent and quiet Waiting upon him those
Things that were convenient for us; we might well say, He gave us our Food in
due Season; he has not only given strong Meat unto Men, but has ministered of
the sincere Milk of his Word unto Babes, that lived in Sincerity and
Self-denial, loving God above all things; and he taught and conducted us in our
Way, this Way of Simplicity, until our Understandings came to be opened, until
our Souls came to be prepared to receive the Mysteries of his Kingdom.

In those Days there were some that started up in Knowledge, and that built
their Nests on high, and took Flax and Wool, and Silver and Gold, and decked
themselves with them; but the Lord found them out, and brought them down, and
took the Crown from their Head, and clothed them with Dishonor: So God does
from Age to Age, his Judgment will begin at his own House if you would Grow in
the Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, then grow
in Humility and Self-denial, and keep a constant watch upon your Hearts;
examine your Hearts, and Commune with yourselves upon your Beds, and be still;
take Heed lest you sin against the Lord, and provoke him; There were some that
provoked the Lord of old, and they committed two great Evils, What be they?
They have gone away and forsaken the Fountain of living Water; as much as to
say, they have not the Dependence upon an invisible Power, as they ought to
have; for I am a living Fountain, and it is by an invisible Power that I am able
to counsel and teach, direct, and purify and open their Understanding; but they
have forsaken me, that is one great Evil; and the other is, they would not be
without some what, they have forsaken the Lord, and they would have somewhat
instead of God: They have dug to themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold
no Water. And how many in this Age have committed these two great Evils?

My Friends, examine yourselves; are there not many that have been guilty of
these two great Evils? They do not keep their close Dependence, Trust and
Reliance upon the invisible Power of God, as they profess they ought to do, but
are hurried away from it; some by the Love of the World, some by Lusts and
Pleasures, some by Passions, and others by worldly Interests, are drawn away
from the Power, to do and say that which the Power is against: Is not this a
Forsaking of the Lord, the living Fountain? What do they do then? Are they not
for this and that, and the other Man? for hearing this and the other Man's
Word, and digging to themselves broken Cisterns? And have they not their Trust
and Confidence in going to Meetings, in commending this and the other Way? Have
they not their trust in their Profession outwardly, when it ministers nothing
to their Souls, so that they secretly wither for all this? If you had all the
Men and Angels that were ever sent of God, appointed to preach to you, that
could not minister Life to you, unless there be that Faith that stands in the
Power of God. The Faith that stands in any Man's Words, that will not overcome
your Lusts: but the Faith that stands in the Power purifies the Heart, it will
not suffer any unclean thing there. As for Preaching, let a Man preach against
this and the other Lust and Corruption, there it will remain for all his
Preaching, unless Men know God's Power and Life in which there is
Righteousness; for Words and Knowledge, and Sight and Speculation, will never
give People Victory over their Sins.

Therefore you know, every one who is settled must be settled where the
Foundation of Religion is; it is not coming to Meetings, and owning this and
the other Doctrine which is the Foundation of our Religion; God has revealed
his Power to every one of us; God has not given his Spirit to Preachers and
Prophets only, for then there would be a Famine of the Word, as was in Israel,
The Priest's Lips preserved Knowledge. If you did take away the Priest, you did
take away their Knowledge. The Prophets had the Word of God, and they only
spoke the Word of God. If the Prophet was taken away, then the Word of God was
taken away. The Lord threatened to send a Famine among them, they grieved and
vexed, and killed and destroyed the Priests and Prophets; therefore says the
Lord, I will send a Famine among you, not of Bread, but of the Word, and they
shall go from City to City, and enquire for the Word of the Lord.

Thus it was in the Jewish Church; if there was a Prophet they would go 30, 40,
or 100 Miles to him that had the Word of the Lord; They shall go from City to
City to enquire for the Word of the Lord: but blessed be God we are come to
another Day, for now the Word of the Lord is manifested in the Hearts of all
that believe; they know the Word: I do not say all that believe do preach the
Word, or ought to preach; but the Word preaches to them; they are not as
broken Cisterns that can hold no Water; when they find the Word and hear it,
they speak it presently what is ministered to their own Condition, that they
tell to other Folks; when People come to the Blessing of this Dispensation that
God's Word reveals in their Hearts, they then know what the Signification of
it is, they understand the Doctrine of it, the Doctrine preaches Holiness to
them, not that they should preach Holiness and yet remain Unholy; not that they
should preach Humility, and yet remain Proud: It preaches Holiness, Humility
and Singleness of Heart to a Remnant, that like good Scholars and Disciples
learn the Lessons and Doctrine of the Word of God.

Now when thou have learned them well, and art come to see the Effect of the
Word, and do bring forth the Deeds and Works which are the Fruits of
Holiness, Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, and with Humility known and
witnessed in Christ Jesus, and art not only meek in Show, but meek and low in
Heart; when People come to be meek and lowly, and of a clear Conscience, purged
from all dead Works to serve the living God; then if the Lord gives them a Word
of Exhortation, of Doctrine or Counsel it is very welcome, and it has a Savor
through the Blessing of God, and they come by it to be built up in their most
holy Faith, and this Word is brought forth in Holiness and Righteousness in
their Lives, and shows itself in a Life of Holiness; then thou will shine in
thy Conversation to all that thou conversest with, so that they may see thee to
be such a Man or Woman as have been with Jesus, and learned of Jesus, and
receivedst a Word engrafted; when thou do receive the Word into thy Heart,
there is the Engrafting of it: If it has not Root there, then, says Christ,
My Word does not abide in you. If you feel something of this invisible Word in
your Hearts, it brings you to a Resolution to serve God, and to keep yourselves
from Sin, and to answer the Profession which you make of God; this is the
Effect of the Word of God, if it does abide in you. Does it abide? You shall
know anon or Tomorrow, so soon as a Temptation comes to stir you up to Pride
or Passion, to Fraud or Deceit, then you will see whether the Word abide: If it
abide, you sin not.

This is Scripture, a certain Foundation Doctrine, that may be as safely
preached as any Doctrine: If the Word abide in you, you sin not; What of that?
Let the Word go, and you will sin, whenever you are tempted to it. I write to
you young Men, because you have overcome the wicked One, you are strong and the
Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked One. We shall see
as soon as Temptation meets with thee, whether the Word abides in thee; if it
abide, thou will not Sin, but resist the Tempter. Set thy foot upon the
Temptation, and go over it, and thou will have the Dominion; and this will make
thee a free Man or Woman, and thou will stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made thee free. The Apostle supposes them free, and that they have
got Dominion; then Stand fast, says he, in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made thee free. It is a Liberty not of Lust and Sin, but a Liberty of the Soul;
the Soul now is not at the Devil's Will and Call.

For it is a Shame to the Doctrine of Christianity, that we profess Things, and
yet deny them in Practice: We profess that there is a Power in Christ to keep
and preserve us out of Sin, and we profess to believe that this Power is
communicated to them that do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for their
Preservation; that is, he will not withold it from them: We profess these
Things in the Face of the whole World; and yet when the Devil calls one Man to
Covetousness, and another to defraud his Neighbor, and another to defile
himself, he is drawn away thereby; what Hypocrisy is here, to profess this, and
act the contrary? I do not wonder that they who profess they cannot live a Day
without Sin, that they should fall; but they that profess to believe there is
Power enough in Christ, and that it is offered to them; for them to live in Sin
and yield to Temptation, this is horrid Wickedness. They that are of an upright
single Mind, would die before they would sin, knowing that God is Almighty and
gracious, and willing to bestow his Power and Wisdom, and Grace upon them that
ask it; they would die rather than sin against God presumptuously: Let it cost
me my Goods, my Estate, my Liberty, or my Life, How can I do this great
Wickedness, and Sin against God? They love God above all; you never heard them
complain that they wanted Power, For the Lord is at their right Hand, and they
shall not be moved. They cannot fall; though they are tempted, they will not
fall into Temptation. They have Power when they see the Devil before them, to
put him behind them; the Nobility of their Extract, of their new Birth and
Regeneration puts such a Temper and Disposition into their Souls, that they
scorn to be at the Devil's Command, as if they were his Children.

Oh! it is a noble and honorable thing to be a Child of God, a very high
Dignity to be in such an honorable Relation to God, and to have a Right to the
heavenly Mansions, To sit down in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. I would to
God you were all ready for it, that you had the Wedding Garment on, that you
might not be bound Hand and Foot, and cast into utter Darkness. What is the
Reason that you do not sit down in this heavenly Frame and Temper, and draw the
Waters of Salvation out of your own Souls: Could the Lord do any Thing more
than he has done, and could his Servants do any more than they have done for
your Help? Are not their Labors Demonstrations of it? We have been as Epistles
of Christ written in your Consciences: We have been testifying that there is
something wanting in too many the Want of resigning up themselves to the
Baptism of the Cross. People are willing to be counted Friends; but they are
Friends of God, that do whatsoever he commands them; that is the Christian
Lesson, not to say I will be a Friend to you, and a Friend to the Church, and
to such a Sort of People; but I will be a Friend to God, and do whatsoever he
commanded me; whatsoever Command God lays upon you, either to take up a Cross,
or to deny yourselves and follow him.

Learn this Lesson, and you will be Disciples indeed, and Members of the Church
too; not members of a Church privileged outwardly only, but Members of a Church
of the Firstborn, and you will have your Names written in Heaven; when one
comes to have his Name written in Heaven, he comes to know his Name, it is a
white Stone, not a speckled one; they that have it, they know it, they are not
ignorant of one another's Names that are written in this Book; they have a
Fellowship that nobody can declare; their Communion is in that Bread and that
Cup: This is a Cup of Blessing indeed, and this has blessed us, and will bless
us: God will preserve a People in this Fellowship. You that are at a Distance
now, you must come nearer to him; God will choose a People by whom his Name
shall be magnified; because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, we
cannot but desire this for all, especially for the Household of Faith; we cannot
but desire their Perfection, their growing up in the Grace of God, that they
might come to be Partakers of Heaven. And in the next Place, our Love is to all
People, every where; we would be glad that all were saved; they that despise us
when we are speaking of heavenly Things, speaking like a Child, like a
stammering Child, speaking of the glorious Excellencies of God, of the
Loving Kindness of God, speaking of those Things which God has spoken to our
Souls, they that despise these Things, we would be glad that they might be
saved: If they were Partakers of these Things, they would be glad as well as
we, and they would be more really happy in respect to this World, for the Time
that they are to live here; they would live a happier Life, even in this World,
and they would have everlasting Life in the World to come.

The Love of Christ constrains Men thus to judge, that every one that has
received like precious Faith, ought to answer that Grace and Faith which God
has ministered to them in an holy Life and Conversation, and every one who is a
Stranger to this Thing, ought to be of an enquiring Mind and an open Heart to
wait for the Day when God will visit them with the same Grace; when you give up
yourselves to a daily Cross, as Christ's Disciples, you will not be running
after any one to teach you to know the Lord, for you will all know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest; I that have been but a little convinced, shall
I know the Lord? Thou shall know the Lord, thou that art dead in thy Sins and
Trespasses, thou that have not known the Blood of cleansing, thou shall know
the Lord to be thy Judge, and thy Lawgiver, to teach thee how thou must live,
walk, and act; and is not that a good Knowledge? This is the Way they reckoned
upon in old Time, it is a notable Expression, The Lord is our Judge; there is
the Beginning, he began there, Judgment began at the House of God; those he
brings into his House, he brings them under the Discipline of his House, The
Lord is our Judge, he is our King and Lawgiver, and he will save us; this same
Exercise of Discipline under Judgment brought to them the Faith and Experience
of his being their Lawgiver, and this brought them to a Faith of the last
Sentence, we shall be saved; and the Lord answers such a People, That he will
bring Salvation to them, Salvation shall be for Walls and Bulwarks: Did the
People of this Nation but know Salvation was brought near to them, and that it
was their Bulwark, there would not be a Crying up of this and the other rotten
Thing for a Bulwark.

We talk of a Bulwark as well as others; we have a Bulwark, blessed be the God
of Heaven, made of better Stuff than theirs; for it is the Salvation of God
which has kept us from the Pollution of Sin, and from a running into all
Excess and Riot that others have run into; it has kept us from the Evil, it
has kept Evils out of us, and we have found that certainly true, That all
Things work together for Good, to them that love God, and fear God; that all
the Providence of God together, they have all wrought for our Good; and this
is the Bulwark that we have trusted in, and it has served hitherto, and it
will serve us and our Posterity to the End of the World. This is a Bulwark that
will never be stormed, that will never be thrown down nor laid waste: Though
all the Powers on Earth, and all the Potentates in this World should agree
together, they shall not prevail against it; we have Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks; if I be within these Walls, Salvation is round about me; if I am got
into this eternal Bulwark, I am safe from the Devil and his Instruments; here
is a Bulwark to be relied upon.

Many wonder we differ with them in some Opinions; we have that Confidence in
this Bulwark, that we desire not another; God will last and abide for ever, so
will this Bulwark; all the Care that I take, and all the Care that you should
take, is to keep within these Walls: Do not sally out, if you go out, the Devil
is watching, and seeking continually whom he may devour; he will catch
straglers; if that People will go out for Profit, or for Pleasure, or Interest,
the Devil will catch them: What, such People talk of Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks? the Devil has got them in his Snare, and they are caught in
Drunkenness, Uncleanness and other Sins; the Reason is, they have gone out of
their Bulwark, they have sallied out of their Walls, for the Devil could never
have fetched them out.

O take Heed, says the Apostle, lest there spring up in any of you an Evil
Heart of Unbelief in departing from the living God; as if he had said, You are
Christians now, you are a People come to a good Estate in Christ; but consider
you have no Strength to stand but in him, no Power to keep yourselves but in
him; Take Heed at all Times that there spring not up in you an evil Heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the living God; take heed lest there spring up in
you such a Thought as this; I may take this Pleasure, and the other Profit:
Consider that thou die and witherest if thou depart from the living God; take
heed of taking Liberty above the Fear of God: It is not our Talk of Salvation
for Walls and Bulwarks that will do us good but our keeping within these Walls.

I remember a notable Saying of the Apostle, which has a great Emphasis in it,
and a great Deal of Doctrine, he writes to the Church after they were become a
People of Professing Christians, Take heed lest you come to be beguiled by the
Serpent, as he beguiled Eve; he did not speak of Jezabel, a wicked Woman; but
he spoke of Eve, a good Woman created after the Image of God, in Righteousness
and Holiness: They were come to a Life of Sanctification, to a Life that was
hidden from Ages and Generations; You must look to yourselves, and look upon
yourselves as in the State of your Mother Eve, a Woman brought forth in
Righteousness and Holiness, that might have stood in that Primitive State,
notwithstanding all the Subtilty of all the Serpents in the World; but letting
her Ear hearken to this Old Serpent, she was beguiled; there grew up a
Consultation in her reasoning Part; it may be so as he says, I will try.

So I say to you that are come to a State of Sanctification, and in some
measure to know the cleansing Power of God, and that you have not believed in
it in vain, but it has effectually wrought some Change and Alteration in you,
and is still carrying on the Work of your Salvation: Many Temptations will
attend you, and many Snares will be laid in your Way, but God has preserved
you to this Day: I know the Devil's Wiles and Temptations are manifold; they
are fitted to every one's Inclinations, fitted to every Opportunity, and to
every Occasion in this World; Men are tried every Way by the Tempter, to see
which Way he may ensnare them; he tries every Way to ensnare and entangle the
simple, that he may turn them to the right hand or to the left, that their
Souls may be destroyed and perish.

I cannot speak to you by a more emphatical Word, by a more familiar
Exhortation than this, Take heed you be not beguiled as Eve was: many will be
tempted as she was; but I would not have you do as she did, and yield to the
Temptation: Take heed that you do not defile yourselves, but keep your Garments
white; you that have been washed and cleansed, labor to keep yourselves
unspotted from the World; this is pure Religion and undefiled, that which has
enlightened many a Nation, and shall enlighten many of those whose Religion is
to be undefiled, and to keep themselves unspotted from the World: I pray God
increase the Number of them, that so the blessed Work of Sanctification, that
has begun in this Way, may be carried on to his Praise, and the Salvation of
our Souls, to the spreading forth of his Glory, and the exalting of his Name;
that the Strangers which are scattered and desolate, may be brought into his
holy Way, and walk in it; that we all, in a Fellowship together, walking in
that holy Way, may through the Eternal Spirit, offer Praise and Thanksgiving to
God, who is worthy to receive Glory and Honor, Power and Dominion, for ever
and ever. Amen.

THERE is a divine Philosophy and there is also a false Philosophy. This last
leads to Infidelity and Atheism; it confines (...) Speculation to Matter, and
aims at explaining every Thing from no higher Principle; it denies all
Communications betwixt the Soul and the spiritual World; and so banishes Man
from his own Country. On the contrary, divine Philosophy ascends from visibles
to invisibles, and traces Effects from their next immediate Cause up to their
first Cause which is God. When this Light breaks in upon the Soul, she, as it
were, soars above the Regions of Sense; a new World opening to her View: She
beholds her original Dignity, feels her Immortality, and seems, in some Sort,
to have already entered upon the Blessedness of it, through a Faith more
luminous than the brightness of the Sun, and a Love stronger than Death. Two
Philosophers of these distinct Classes differ vastly from one another; the
Feelings of the one are all earthly, those of the other, heavenly. The one
guesses and studies, and, with Labor, reasons to give Plausibility to his
System, which at best is but Darkness, whilst the clearest Conviction flashes
on the Mind of the other.


