Mr. Fish's DISCOURSE ON The Art of War BEING Lawful and Necessary.

The Art of War Lawful, AND Necessary for a Christian People, Considered and
Enforced IN A DISCOURSE, The Substance of which was delivered IN UPTON, May 26,
1773. To a Company of Youth, voluntarily engaged in acquiring the Use of Arms.
By ELISHA FISH, A. M.

Also he bade them teach the Children of Judah the Use of the Bow. King DAVID.
BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, at the Heart and Crown
in Cornhill, 1774.

THE Writer of this small artless Discourse, thinks it no more than an act of
Justice to himself, to say, it now so much out of Season, and after long Delay,
makes its public Appearance through the repeated Importunity of the Hearers,
and is now submitted to the public Eye, with his earnest With and Prayer, that
it may serve the Purpose designed, by exciting the young Men to whom it was
first delivered, in their commendable Exercises, and stir up others to the like
Exercises; and be also an Occasion of moving some more able Pen to spread this
martial Fire through our happy Land.

The AUTHOR.

The Art of War, Lawful and Necessary.
GENESIS XIV. 14. And when Abram heard that his Brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained Servants, born in his own House, three Hundred and eighteen,
and pursued them unto Dan.
THESE Words teach us, the wise foresight of holy Abram, in training his
servants to the use of arms, in a time of profound quiet, when all was peace
and serene; left he and all his, should fall an easy prey to the ambition or
avarice of his enterprizing neighbors. Here also we perceive the alertness of
Abram, when he heard that his brother was taken captive, he immediately arms
his servants and takes the field with his little band; in which his pious
benevolence to his oppressed kinsman shines; he does not delay or hesitate, but
is alive and in action; he not only arms his servants, but pushes forward to
Dan. The courage and faith of Abram is not less conspicuous, in this
enterprise, when we recollect, from our context, that the army, which
captivated his kinsman, was now flushed with uninterrupted success, in wasting
the neighbor countries, vanquishing five kings in the vale of Siddim; this
army was not only numerous, but used to battle and conquest: In this view,
Abram's courage and faith equals almost anything on sacred record, in pursuing
such an army, with his three hundred and eighteen raw soldiers, however well
disciplined; but moved with faith and a desire to defend the rights of human
nature, he pursues them to Dan.

Still our context furnishes us with a notable stroke of Abram's conduct, in
which he shows his skill and prudence, as a general, in dividing his little
band, that they might appear the more formidable, and in attacking them by
night, which added surprise and concealed the smallness of his numbers; and God
crowned this attempt with success, so that he smote and pursued this powerful
army, and recovered the spoil and captives out of their hands.

Yet again, Abram is more illustrious in the other part of his conduct, who now
being furnished with rich spoils, and revered for his glorious and surprising
victory over these powerful kings, had now an opportunity to set himself up for
a king, and enslave his fellow-men in that part of the world; like Nimrod, who,
being a mighty hunter, takes the occasion from his skill and success in killing
beasts, to set up for a king: But we behold Abram shining in his justice,
generosity and mercy to the king of Sodom, in restoring to him both spoil and
captives; and his humility shines also in retiring into private life, thereby
manifesting his design, in training his servants, to be a defense of human
rights, and not a scheme to aggrandize or enrich himself. In these parts of his
conduct Abram far excels Alexander, whose glory rose from his art and success
in depriving men of their natural rights: But the glory of the Patriarch Abram,
as a victorious general, was his defending and restoring those rights to his
fellow-men and brethren.

From this bright and striking example of the illustrious Abram, who is the
father and pattern of believers, we see it is lawful and necessary for
Christians to be trained in the use of arms.

I. It appears from the pious and excellent example of this holy Patriarch
Abram, as father and pattern of all believers, to the end of the world, that it
is lawful for Christians, as his children, to learn the art of war and use of
arms, for their defense, when the case requires it, as did Abram. Here notice,
this use of arms is only lawful from Abram's example, when, like Abram, it
serves the defense of human rights, or destroys such who are unworthy to live,
by reason of their conduct toward God or man; but is not lawful for the
purposes of avarice and ambition, by which human rights are swallowed up. This
did not Abram.

2. The smile of Providence on this conduct of Abram, in pursuing and smiting
these four kings, with his handful of trained servants, gives reason to
believe, that this expedition was of God, as it is recorded in another case,
for there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. I Chron. v. 22.

3. The lawfulness for Christians to learn and improve the art of war, may be
fairly collected from the answer of John, the forerunner of Christ, who came to
prepare the way for the gospel kingdom: When the soldiers likewise demanded of
him, saying, and what shall we do? And he said unto them, do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. Luke iii. 14.

In this answer, the gospel Elias, who came to prepare the way of the Lord, and
make his paths straight, does not give the least intimation that the calling of
soldiers was unlawful, or that the gospel kingdom, now at hand, would render
such an employment useless, or sinful; although such an intimation seems to be
unavoidable (in faithfully answering the question proposed) if the art of war,
and employment of soldiers under the gospel were unlawful and sinful. Here the
argument is not to be suspected, on the suggestion, that John might either want
courage or faithfulness in this answer: The known character of John, as
resembling or being the gospel Elias, in his faithful and bold reproofs,
refutes this suggestion; and this was manifest, not only in his reproving cruel
Herod, but in pointing out to the soldiers the reigning vices, which seem to be
entailed on standing armies, viz. violence, false accusation, and discontent
with wages; the demonstration of which we have sadly experienced in this Land.
Hence, from John's answer, we may conclude the art of war or business of
soldiers is lawful for Christians.

4. The lawfulness of acquiring art in war, by a christian people, may be
strictly proved from the nature and reason of things. For if it be in the
nature and reason of things lawful for Christians to enjoy their lives,
liberties and property, it must be lawful, in the same nature and reason of
things, to use the means necessary to defend and preserve these enjoyments; for
to suppose a right to life, liberty and property, and no right to the means
necessary for the defense and preservation of the same, is one of the greatest
absurdities in nature. Therefore, in the proceeding view of this point, we may
surely conclude, it is lawful for Christians to learn and use the art of war,
for their own defense and safety, and the defense and safety of others, as the
case shall require.

The second thing before us was, to point out the necessity for Christians, or
a christian people, to be trained in the use of arms.

1. This necessity may be fairly pointed out, by considering the common share
Christians have with others in human rights and privileges. It being a part of
a reasonable creature, and necessarily belongs to his character as such, to
preserve his life, liberty and property, by all lawful means; then all the
proper and lawful means for this end, are necessary, for all who share in these
common rights of human nature; for nothing is more disagreeable to common
sense, then to suppose a right to any thing, as belonging to human nature, or
men in general, and yet to suppose it unnecessary to use the proper means to
preserve this right. Hence it appears needful for Christians to use the art of
war as a part of their natural, and so necessary defense; seeing they lose none
of their natural rights by becoming Christians. Now, if any should allow, that
it belongs to men, as men, to use all the proper and lawful means to preserve
their natural rights, and as such they may use the art of war; but allow not
the necessity or propriety for Christians to use this means of
self-preservation; this is in effect to deny that the common rights of men are
allowed and necessary for Christians; one of the most strange positions ever
devised by mortals.

2. The necessity for a christian people to learn the art of war rises into
view, when it is considered as the only sure check on designing and ambitious
rulers, who are so often attempting to enslave and oppress those for whose good
they are advanced to power and authority, and only can be awed by the evidence
that the people are used to the art of war, and therefore have it in their
power to right themselves, when the case requires it. In this light, the use of
arms, kept up and understood among a christian people is necessary and vastly
important, as a restraint or check on aspiring and wicked rulers: For the best
civil constitution in the world will not restrain such rulers, whilst they have
nothing to fear from the power of the people: And what power is there in the
people for such to fear, without skill in war? Truly none. In this view, the
art of war, for a christian people, to preserve their own natural, civil and
religious rights, is most necessary and important; without which they may not
reasonably expect to enjoy, or transmit to posterity, their common rights, as a
free people; freedom cannot long continue where the authority of the people is
lost. All nations and past ages bear witness to this truth by sad experience.
Thus, if we turn our eyes to those countries where tyranny reigns, we shall see
the power of the people lost, and the skill in arms confined to a few
mercenaries, as tools to their princes; and by this method lordly power
disposes all things according to the will of the prince; which may kind heaven
forbid ever being our lamentable case!

3. This necessity, for a christian people being trained in the use of arms, is
also pointed out by the certainty that earth and hell are combined to persecute
the people of God. See the Apostle's declaring this matter, But as then he that
was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so
it is now. Gal. iv. 29. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the
earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man-child. Rev. xii. 13.
This rage and combination of earth and hell against God's true people renders
the art of war necessary for true Christians, as a means to preserve themselves
from the persecuting fury of evil men, moved with the rage of the old dragon.
It is a most apparent truth, that in all cases, the means of preservation ought
in wisdom and prudence to be proportioned to the real danger a people are in.
Hence, the more and stronger are their enemies, the greater is the necessity
for a christian people to be skilled in the art of defense.

4. The absolute necessity for a christian people to learn the art of war opens
to our sight, if we only recollect, that without it, a people are in such a
defenseless state, that their wealth does but expose them, by encouraging and
tempting their ambitious or covetous neighbors to make them a prey; which has
often been the case. And to prevent this, and other evils, no doubt Abram
trained his servants to the use of arms. And besides, the experience of all
nations in times of war, fully discovers, that neither numbers nor courage,
without order and art, are sufficient to protect a nation or people.

This has been remarkably verified in the empire of Russia; where they neither
wanted courage nor numbers, but art in war; therefore were easily vanquished by
a handful of well-disciplined Swedes, until they acquired art in war, by which
they recovered themselves, and are now esteemed and revered by their
neighbors, and perhaps as good soldiers as any in the world, having of late
done such things in arms, against the Turks, as will make them famous in ages
to come. In this light, the necessity of learning the art of war, for our own
defense, strongly urges itself upon us.

5. The sixth command of the decalogue, "Thou shall not kill," lays this
necessity powerfully upon the people of God. For, if they may not be guilty of
shedding their own blood, or the blood of others, they must use all proper
means to preserve their own lives, and the lives of others, or else be
accessory to their own destruction: Now then let Christians see and feel the
necessity of acquiring the art of war, in obedience to God's command, and out
of regard to their natural, civil and religious rights, and for
self-preservation, and for the preservation of their dearest* friends and most
important enjoyments, on earth or in heaven; that in doing this they may have
consciences void of offense toward God and man.

6. The enemies of God's church in the world, that surround his people,
acquiring the use of arms, render it necessary for the people of God to be
trained in like skill. Thus we hear holy king David lamenting over Saul and his
sons, who fell by the archers on the mountains of Gilboa, and, He bade them
teach the children of Judah the use of the bow. Now then, in imitation of king
David, we may say, let the children of New England learn the use of the
firelock, lest their brave commanders fall by the art of her enemies, on her
pleasant mountains, in some future day; when, like David, too late to save our
brave leaders, we bade teach the use of firearms, and art of war.

Finally, it appears as necessary for a christian people to know and use the
art of war, for their security, as it is to know and use the art of husbandry
for their support in life: And it is as reasonable to expect, in ordinary
cases, our provision without labor, as our protection without the art of war,
or skill in arms. Because God is able to defend his people, without art in war,
shall we be careless, and take no pains to learn the skill of defense? We might
as well argue, because God is able to provide for his people without work, and
sometimes has doneit, asin the wilderness; therefore we may be idle and commit
ourselves to Providence: Such reasoning is unworthy of men, or Christians. In
this short view of the necessity for a religious people to learn and improve
the arts of war, for their protection; and the importance of this art
increasing as a people increase in wealth and riches, in fine fields, and fair
buildings, is undeniable. Otherwise, the increase or growth of a people will be
but the stronger temptation, and richer prey, for some aspiring or covetous
Nimrod, skilled in the art of war. And it is likely to be our case in this
land, at no great distance of time, if we do not, like Abram, train our
households for war, in a time of profound peace and quiet. Now we may close
this discourse by a few observations.

1. It is to be observed, although it be most evidently lawful for a christian
people to learn and use the art of war, yet it is only so with regard to lawful
war, which is for the defense and recovery of human rights, or as an act of
benevolence to human creatures, and in obedience to the immediate command of
God, in executing his just vengeance on the wicked. The art of war, as now
used, to rob and enslave nations, and deprive them of their liberty and
property, in order to aggrandize others, is a most vile and sinful abuse of
human skill or art, and ought to be considered, at this day, in that light, as
a sore judgment and scourge on the world.

2. Let it be observed, that the art of war is not the less lawful or necessary
for the people of God, because others abuse it to deprive their
fellow creatures of their natural rights; but the more lawful and necessary for
them, that they may be the more able to resist such abuse of human art,
maintain or recover their own rights; for othewise they would be, without a
constant miracle, instantly devoured by those enemies of human freedom, that
dwell around them. And I hope we have none, or at least but a very few, who
would expect such a miraculous protection at this day. Under this observation
we are naturally drawn to survey a little the sweets of life, the almost divine
pleasure of freedom, the tender and dear relations of nature, the tents of Shem
in which we dwell, the fruitful fields that surround us, and quiet dwellings in
which we now rest, the honest earnings of our hands with the sweat of our
brows, or the patrimony of our dear ancestors. And then turn our thoughts on
the gloomy prospect of a bloody carnage of our dear countrymen and friends, in
the high places of the field, our wives and children torn from our bosoms, our
lives in jeopardy every moment, our liberty turned to slavery, our religious
assemblies the glory of our land no more, our houses and fields turned to
strangers! And all this loss and misery come upon us for our neglect to improve
in the use of arms and art of war! With these thoughts, who would forbear to
imitate Abram in training his servants, or encouraging the art of war, as
necessary for a christian people; and peculiarly so for this now flourishing
country, that it is growing wealth, in a defenseless state, tempt not it is
enemies to lay it waste?

3. Hence it is beyond dispute, that an attempt to increase the knowledge of
arms among us, at this time, is highly commendable in itself, and may be of
vast and noble consequence, if attended with prudence and care, so that no
occasion may be given, justly to complain, that vice is encouraged and
increased thereby.

4. The business of this day being of this nature, and a free will offering, is
to be justly and highly commended, if soberly and wisely conducted; especially,
seeing we are in danger, otherwise, to lose the use of arms, it being about
eight years since the military company in this place has been regularly called
upon to attend such exercises, by the proper officers; which, no doubt, is the
case through this whole regiment. If this should continue and spread in other
regiments all over the province, and no private care be taken, it would soon
render our state defenseless, in a great measure: But to prevent this, may the
laudable temper of martial exercise diffuse itself through all ranks in the
province; and we become a regularly disciplined, or trained soldiery, that none
may be tempted to enslave or spoil us, for a prey to themselves.

5. The harmony and readiness of submission to those who act the part of
officers on this occasion, will put an honor on your persons, recommend your
business, and be one part of the beauty, as well as profit, in this attempt, to
increase your acquaintance with the necessary art of war, and without such
harmony your design will be frustrated in a great measure, and yourselves
disgraced.

6. The conduct in closing the day, on such occasions, will be considered, as
your honor or dishonor; your honor, in seasonably and soberly returning to your
respective families, as men who would prove that you had no sordid and base
purposes to serve, by your meeting together; thus your design will appear
honest, sincere and praiseworthy: But if, instead of this, you spend the
evening following such exercises at taverns, in drinking and the like debasing
and immoral practices, it will dishonor your business, and give occasion to
speak evil of you and your exercises, as a source of corruption, and unworthy
to be encouraged by sober men.

Finally, my young brethren, I wish you may be good soldiers in the use of
arms, for your king and country; but above all, that you may be reminded, by
this day's exercise, of being good soldiers under King Jesus; fighting against
all spiritual enemies, with spiritual arms, for an eternal crown.

AMEN.

