THE American Querist: OR, SOME QUESTIONS PROPOSED RELATIVE TO THE PRESENT
DISPUTES BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN, AND HER AMERICAN COLONIES.

BY a NORTH-AMERICAN.

We are not to think every clamorous Haranguer, or every splenetic Repiner
against a Court, is therefore a PATRIOT. Bishop Berkley. BOSTON: Reprinted by
MILLS and HICKS, and Sold at their Printing-Office in School-street, 1774.

THE AMERICAN QUERIST.
1. WHETHER Americans have not a right to speak their sentiments on subjects of
government; and whether all attempts to check and discourage freedom of speech,
any farther than to prevent the licentious abuses of it, are not to be
considered as unwarrantable usurpations, tending to introduce and establish a
bondage of the worst kind?

2. Whether Americans have not an equal right to express their sentiments, when
they happen to differ from, as when they happen to correspond with, the popular
opinion?

3. Whether I differ more from another, than he differs from me; and,
consequently, whether he has a better right to abuse me for a difference of
sentiment, than I have to abuse him?

4. Whether bigotry be not naturally productive of intolerance, and whether
higotry and intolerance in politics be not as absurd in reason, as mean in
their nature, and as destructive to society, as bigotry and intolerance in
matters of religion?

5. Whether there can be a greater proof of bigotry, either in religion or
politics, than an obstinate resolution to hear or see nothing that is offered
on the subject in question, by persons who are supposed to be of different
sentiments?

6. Whether such a resolution be not also a proof, that a man in conscious of
the weakness of his cause, and afraid of the force of those arguments which may
be offered against him?

7. With regard to the present disputes between the British American colonies
and their mother country, whether there be not many of the colonists, who, by
refusing to hear or see what is offered on the side of government, It is said
that many persons, and some who hold places of trust under government, have put
a stop to their Newspapers, not because the advocates for the colonies are not
allowed fair play by the printer, but because those who are disposed to think
more favorably of the administration than some of their neighbors, are
allowed to speak.
betray the abovementioned consciousness and fear?

8. Whether political bodies do not resemble animal bodies in many respects;
and whether, when they are disordered, the same regimen and management which
are needful for one, may not be proper for the other, in similar cases?

9. Whether the American colonies do not consider themselves as composing one
distinct political body "They form one political body, of which each colony is
a member."
; and whether this body does not appear at this time to be deeply disordered?

10. Whether the disorder of the colonies, to speak in language taken from
animal bodies, be not of the feverish kind, as it is attended with an
irregular, high pulse, and discovers, in some parts, a dangerous swelling and
inflammation; and whether it has not been occasioned, in a great measure, by
their own imprudence and intemperance?

11. Whether heating doses do not, in all cases, tend to increase a fever; and
whether inflammatory publications and harangues be not so many heating doses,
with regard to political bodies?

12. Whether, in investigating the nature and cause of disorders, and in fixing
upon a method of cure, we ought not to have recourse to plain facts, and to
general and established principles, instead of being governed by the advice,
and relying upon the opinions of notorious quacks and empiricks, who have an
interest in deceiving us?

13. Whether some degree of respect be not always due from inferiors to
superiors, and especially from children to parents; and whether the refusal of
this on any occasion, be not a violation of the general laws of society, to say
nothing here of the obligations of religion and morality?

14. Whether what constitutes right conduct among men, does not constitute
right conduct among societies, or bodies of men, with regard to one another;
and whether the latter can be less criminal, or their conduct less disgusting
and shocking to the genuine feelings of the moral sense, when they transgress
the common rule of duty, than the former?

15. Whether Great Britain bears not a relation to these colonies, similar to
that of a parent to children; and whether any parent can put up with such
disrespectful and abusive treatment from children, as Great Britain has lately
received from her colonies?

16. Whether all true friends to the colonies, with whatever zeal they may
think themselves bound to assert and support their claim, ought not, from a
regard both to duty and safety, on every proper occasion, to express their
disapprobation of a behavior, which is indecent and shameful in itself, and
which has brought upon the Americans the indignation of a power, which the
proudest nation in Europe reveres, and under whose resentments the strongest
would tremble?

17. Whether it be a mark either of wisdom or candor to believe, declare, or
insinuate, that Great Britain has acted altogether from wrong motives, and the
colonies altogether from right ones?

18. Whether there can be any medium between being subjects and not subjects;
and whether, if the Americans be not British subjects, they are not, with
regard to Great Britain, aliens and foreigners?

19. Whether, if the colonies be a part of the great British community, they
are not necessarily subject in all cases, to the jurisdiction of that
legislative power which represents this community, or, in other words, to the
British parliament?

20. Whether the supreme legislative authority of every nation does not
necessarily extend to all the dominions of that nation; and whether any place,
to which this authority does not extend, can justly be said to be a part of its
dominions?

21. Whether, in consequence of a general grant, particular claims, founded
upon partial constructions and remote inferences, which are contrary to the
apparent interest and design of the granter, can be valid, either in law or in
equity?

22. Whether any direct evidence has hitherto appeared in favor of the
exemption for which the colonies contend; and whether it does not concern the
managers of their cause, previously to any other steps, to produce such
evidence in support of their claim?

23. Whether there be any proof or probability, that, when the first grants of
land in America were made by the British crown to British subjects, it was
intended by the former, or understood by the latter, that they were to be no
longer subject to the supreme legislative authority of the British nation?

24. Whether, supposing this to have been really intended, it was in the power
of the crown to alienate any part of its dominions, without the adivce and
consent of parliament?

25. Whether the above supposition does not imply, that the executive power is
able at pleasure, to annul, alter, or restrain the legislative power, which is
the greatest absurdity?

26. Whether the exemption contended for be not inconsistent with the nature of
dependent colonies, and compatible only with the idea of independent states?

27. Whether a right in the colonies to choose which laws of Great Britain they
will obey, and which they will disobey, would leave any obligation to obedience
at all?

28. Whether, in such a case, the Americans, being not English subjects, can
claim the protection of the English laws, or talk of their rights as
Englishmen, with any propriety?

29. Whether there has ever been a time, since the settlement of the colonies,
in which the nation appears to have thought, that it had not a full and
complete right of jurisdiction over them, notwithstanding the privileges
granted them by charter?

30. Whether there has ever been a time, in which the colonies appear to have
thought, that the nation had not a full and complete right of jurisdiction over
them, till about the year 1764?

31. Whether more was expressly granted or meant to be granted, by charter to
any of the colonies, than authority for regulating respectively their own
police; and whether such an authority, granted for the purpose of internal
regulation and government, can be fairly construed to exempt any society, or
incorporated body whatever, from the supreme legislative power of that nation,
to which it belongs?

32. Whether, on the contrary, obedience to the laws of Great Britain, without
any restriction or exception, was not clearly observed in all the charters
granted to the colonies; and particularly, whether the right of parliament to
lay taxes, was not expressly and literally observed in the charter of
Pennsylvania?

33. Whether therefore the Pennsylvanians ought not now to be out of the
question, as they can have no plausible pretense for urging a claim, from which
they have been precluded by their own former stipulation?

34. Whether the first charter which was granted, for the purpose of
colonization, by the crown of England in 1606, and the second, which was
granted three years afterward, did not subject the two Virginia companies to
laws made by a council of the proprietors residing in England, first nominated
by the crown, and afterward to be elected by the proprietors residing in
England; and whether the same charters did not provide, that even the King
might tax all the inhabitants within the grant, by his sole prerogative,
without consulting his parliament, and appropriate the moneys, thus raised by
taxes, for the use and benefit of the crown only?

35. Whether the territory granted upon these terms did not extend from
latitude 34 to latitute 45, and include all the country lying between Carolina
and Nova Scotia, and consequently the present New England colonies; the
inhabitants of which originally settled under the very charters
abovementioned, after having purchased from one of those companies?

36. Whether the Massachusetts company had authority, under their first
charter, to assess or tax the inhabitants for any purposes whatever; and
whether their having levied money of the inhabitants was not alleged in the
writ of scire facias issued against their charter, in the reign of Charles the
second, as an act of notorious delinquency, upon which, judgment was given
against them in the court of King's Bench, and the charter vacated?

37. Whether, in the new charter, which was granted them by William and Mary,
and under which they have been governed to the present year, the power of
levying taxes is not restrained altogether to provincial and local purposes,
and allowed to be exercised over such only as are inhabitants and proprietors
in the province, so that the English traders and their goods, which may happen
to be in any of the ports of the province, are entirely exempted from this
authority?

38. Whether the whole tenor of this charter does not operate against the claim
that is made by the people of the Massachusetts Bay, evidencing the limitation
of their legislative authority, instead of restraining the power of the British
parliament?

39. Whether the charter granted to Lord Baltimore, in 1632, did not expressly
provide, that the inhabitants of Maryland, for the suture, should be separated
from Virginia, and not dependent upon the government of that, or any other
colony; BUT, that they should be subject immediately to the CROWN of England,
as depending thereof forever?

40. Whether the charters granted by Charles the Second, to the inhabitants of
Connecticut and Rhode Island, are more than bare charters of incorporation,
erecting them respectively into corporate bodies, and empowering them to
perform corporate acts, in the same manner, say the charters, as other our
liege people of this our realm of England, or any other corporation, or body
politic, within the same; necessarily implying, that they were thought to be
within the realm of England, and subject in all cases, to the supreme authority
of the realm?

41. Whether the charter of Carolina, granted in the same reign, did not fully
declare the like dependency of the inhabitants, in the following words: Our
will and pleasure is, that they be subject immediately to our crown of England,
as depending thereof forever; and that the inhabitants shall not, at any time,
be liable to answer to any matter out of our said province, other than in our
realm of England, and dominion of Wales?

42. Whether subjection to the Crown of England ever meant, in public
instruments, subjection only to him, who held the crown of England, in his
private or personal capacity; and whether the laws do not always mean, by the
authority of the crown, the supreme authority of the nation, represented by the
crown?

43. Whether the use of the great seal of England, in ratifying the grants
abovementioned, does not prove that, in each instance, the whole affair, on one
side, was a public transaction, and in behalf of the nation, and that the
subjection, or dependency expressly reserved, was to be of the same extent with
the authority that required it?

44. Whether it does not appear from acts that have been made in evey reign,
since the founding of the colonies, that it was the sense of Parliament, that
its authority over the American plantations was as full and unlimited, as over
any other part of his Majesty's dominions?

45. Whether the preamble to an act of the parliament, in 1650, although the
act itself was unconstitutional and invalid, did not express the opinion of the
wisest men in the nation, and even of the sons of liberty, at that time, with
regard to the point in question, when it declared, concerning the colonies, and
plantations in America, that they had ever since the planting thereof, been,
and ought to be, subject to such laws, orders and regulations, as are or shall
be made by the parliament of England?

46. Whether the following acts viz. of the 12th, 15th, and 25th of Charles II.
-- of the 7th and 8th of William and Mary, and more particularly and act passed
the same year, entitled, An act for preventing frauds, and regulating abuses in
the plantations, and an act of the 11th, of the "same reign," for the trial of
pirates in America, an act of the 9th of Queen Ann, for establishing the
post office in order that her Majesty may be supplied, and the revenue arising
by the said office better improved, settled and secured to her Majesty, her
heirs and successors -- and the several acts made in the late reign, relating
to the manufacturing of hats, the naturalization of foreigners, and rendering
lands in America assets, etc. I say, whether such a succession of such acts
does not afford complete evidence, that the parliament has always claimed, and
exercised, an unlimited jurisdiction over the colonies, whenever the occasion
was thought to require it?

47. Whether in the late reign, when the assembly of Jamaica withheld the usual
grants for the support of government in that island, and the ministry desired
the opinion of those two eminent lawyers, Sir, Clement Wearg, and Sir Philip
York, then attorney and solicitor general, on this point, whether the King, or
his privy council, had not a right to levy upon the inhabitants the taxes that
were wanted; they did not reply in the following words: That if Jamaica was
still to be considered as a conquered island, the King had such a right; but if
it was considered in the same light with the other colonies, no tax could be
imposed on the inhabitants, but by the assembly of the island, or by act of
parliament.?

48. Whether the right of parliament to impose taxes upon the colonies, which
appears to have never been questioned in England, was not generally admitted in
the colonies, and the exercise of it thought expedient and necessary so very
lately as in 1755?

49. Whether the congress at Albany in that year, consisting of gentlemen of
the first character from most of the colonies, did not approve of, and agree
to, the proposal of general Shirley, that application should be made to
parliament, to empower the committees of the several colonies to tax them, in
proportion to their respective abilities, in order to raise a general fund for
the common defense?

50. Whether, when Mr. Shirley's plan, including this proposal, was laid before
the assembly of New York, it was not resolved by that house, after a proper
discussion of all the particulars, That the scheme proposed by governor
Shirley, for the defense of the British colonies in North America, is well
concerted, and that this colony joins therein?

51. Whether it could have been the opinion of general Shirley, or of the
gentlemen at the congress, or of the house of assembly in New York, that the
parliament could delegate a power to others, with which they were not vested
themselves?

52. Whether it has not been a standing maxim with our judges and lawyers,
however some of them may have departed from it lately, that the original
settlers of the colonies brought over with them the laws of England that were
then in force, from which they were not released by any subsequent charters;
and that all acts of parliament that have passed since that period, in which
the design of extending them to the colonies is expressed, have, and ought to
have, the force and obligation of laws upon the colonies in general?

53. Whether the utmost claim of the colonies, at the time of the late
stamp act, was more than an exemptior from the authority of parliament, as far
as it related to internal taxation, for the purpose of a revenue?

54. Whether it was not then allowed by the public advocates for American
liberty, that the parliament had a right to regulate the trade of the colonies,
and to lay duties both on their imports and exports The very respectable author
of a leading pamphlet in those times, entitled, Considerations on the propriety
of imposing taxes, etc. declares his opinion in the following words. The
subordination of the colonies, and the authority of the parliament to preserve
it, have been fully acknowledged. Not only the welfare, but perhaps the
existence of the mother country, as an independent kingdom, may depend upon her
trade and navigation, and these (may depend) so far upon her intercourse with
the colonies, that, if it should be neglected, there would soon be an end to
that commerce, whence her greatest wealth is derived, and upon which her
maritime power is principally founded. From these considerations, the right of
the British parliament, to regulate the trade of the colonies, may be justly
deduced; a denial of it would contradict the admission of the subordination,
and of the authority to preserve it; resulting from the nature of the relation
between the mother country and her colonies. It is a common, and frequently the
most proper method to regulate trade by duties on imports and exports. The
authority of the mother country to regulate the trade of the colonies being
unquestionable, what regulations are most proper, are to be of course submitted
to the determination of the parliament; and if an incidental revenue should be
produced by such regulations, these are not therefore unwarrantable.

A right to impose an internal tax on the colonies, without their coment, for
the single purpose of a revenue, is denied; a right to regulate their trade.
without their consent, is admitted. The imposition of a duty may, in some
instances, be the proper regulation. If the claims of the mother country and
the colonies should seem on such an occasion to interfere, and the point of
right to be doubtful (which I take to be otherwise) it is easy to guess that
the determination will be on the side of power, and that the inferior will be
constrained to submit.

The worthy author of the Pennsylvania Farmer's Letters. says, The parliament
unquestionably possessed a legal authority to regulate the trade of Great Britain
and all her colonies: Such an authority is essential to the relation between a
mother country and her colonies, and necessary for the common good of all. He
who considers these provinces, as states distinct from the British empire, has
very slender notions of justice, or of their interests: We are but parts of a
whole, and therefore there must exist a power somewhere to preside and preserve
the connection in due order; this power is lodged in the PARLIAMENT.


?

55. Whether the parliament, receding from, but not meaning to give up, the
right of taxation, did not then meet the colonies upon their own ground,
exercising no more than the right that had been admitted, of regulating their
trade, and imposing duties upon a few of their own exports to the colonies?

56. Whether a regard to decency and consistency ought not to have produced in
the Americans a quiet and peacable submission to an act, which was framed on
the very principles that had been so lately established, in behalf of the
colonies? -- But,

57. Whether the colonies did not then introduce a new distinction, to take off
the force of their former concessions, contending that duties laid upon the
necessaries of life, such as paper, glass and paint (which, by the way, can be
called necessaries only by a violent hyperbole) were equivalent to an internal
tax, and therefore inadmissible?

58. Whether the parliament, in farther compliance with this distinction, did
not then withdraw the duties they had laid upon such necessaries, reserving
only as a mark of their authority to impose taxes, a small duty of three pence
per pound, upon an article of sheer luxury, which can never be materially
useful to any of the colonies, and which has been very hurtful to all of them,
occasioning such an expensive manner of living as the inhabitants in general
are unable to afford?

59. Whether the opposition now made to this trifling duty, upon a hurtful
luxury, is not as general, as vigorous, as clamorous, and as injurious to
private property, and the alarm of danger to our constitutional rights, sounded
with as much vehemence and vociferation, as in the time of the stamp act?

60. Whether the facts here alluded to, following one another in so close a
succession, do not amount to a clear proof, that every indulgence or concession
granted to the colonies operates against the authority of parliament, as for
every inch given from a principle of generosity, an ell is demanded as matter
of right; and whether the inference be not natural, that nothing less will
satisfy the colonies, than an absolute renunciation of all claim of authority
or jurisdiction, in the British parliament?

61. Whether the maxim, that Englishmen are bound by no laws but such as they
consent to, either personally or by their representatives, has not been grossly
misunderstood by our American patriots, and very absurd inferences been drawn
from it?

62. Whether the English constitution does not make the king and parliament the
representatives of all the people withing the kingdom, whether they be actual
electors or non-electors?

63. Whether a great part of the people in England can be said to give their
consent to the laws that are made, by any other representatives than these?

64. Whether persons who have a right to vote in the election for members of
parliament, are not often bound by laws, to which they consent in no shape,
except as abovementioned; they not approving of the laws; and even the members
for the county or borough in which they voted, opposing and protesting against
the laws at the time of making them?

65. Whether, for instance, a duty has not been laid upon hops, and an excise
upon cider, when the hop-growers, and the makers of cider, and their friends in
parliament, have used their utmost influence to prevent the passing of the law?

66. Whether, therefore, the consent given by them to the law, was not a
consent without their approbation or liking; and whether such a consent, which
is the only one given by many Englishmen, be the privilege for which the
colonies contend?

67. Whether therefore the maxim, that Englishmen are bound only by laws to
which they consent, can be true, otherwise than of the nation collectively, or
the body of the people, while great numbers of them are forced to submit to
many laws with reluctance?

68. Whether, if it were allowed to the colonies to send members to parliament
of their own choosing, they would accept of the offer?

69. Whether, while they would refuse to send members to parliament, they have
any right to exclaim against acts of parliament, on account of their having no
members in parliament to represent them distinctly?

70. Whether the privileges enjoyed by virtue of the English constitution of
government are not political privileges; and whether the natural right of the
Americans can entitle them to the political privileges of Englishmen, and more
than to the political privileges of Dutchmen This query is occasioned by the
resolves of some of our former assemblies, and of some of our late
county-committees, and by an English pamphlet, lately reprinted in New York,
entitled, Considerations on the measures carrying on with respect to the
British colonies in America. The author of the pamphlet, who writes altogether
ad populum, founds the claim of the Americans, first, upon the natural rights
of mankind; secondly, upon the English constitution; and, thirdly, upon the
provincial charters. He offers not much in support of the first of these
points, because the position would not admit of much to be said in its favor;
he says but very little in support of the second, because he has more respect
for those able persons who have handled the subject before him, than to go over
it again so much to its disadvantage; and he says nothing at all upon the
third, because he very judiciously thinks it best, to leave the particulars of
this subject to themselves (the Americans) who are best acquainted with them.
?

71. Whether upon a review of the arguments that have been used in favor of
the colonies, it be reasonable to expect that the British parliament will be
convinced by them; or that, without conviction, after their right to govern,
and regulate the trade of the colonies; has been so indecently questioned and
denied, they will not assert it in such a way, as shall be thought most
expedient and effectual.

72. Whether an effectual support of the authority of parliament, after such a
denial of it, can be supposed to have so light an effect upon the property of
Americans, as the small duty upon tea, if quietly submitted to, necessarily
would have?

73. Whether therefore those patriotic gentlemen, and patriotic laborers and
mechanics, who have urged on a greater evil, in order to avoid a less, are in
reality, whatever they may have intended, friends to their country?

74. Whether interested, designing men, -- or men who court popularity as the
great Sultana of their affections -- or ignorant men, bred to the lowest
occupations, who have no knowledge of the general principles upon which civil
society should be always established -- are any of them qualified for the
direction of political affairs, or ought to be trusted with it?

75. Whether the old rule, Ne futor ultar crepidam, be not a good rule and
proper for this day?

76. Whether the colonies, in a great measure, have not, for ten years past,
been under an iniquitous and tyranical government, namely, the government of
unprincipled mobs; and whether experience has not yet convinced us, that this
made of governing a country is most detestable?

77. Whether the sons of liberty have ever willingly allowed to others the
liberty of thinking and acting for themselves; and whether any other liberty
than that of doing as they shall direct, is to be expected during their
administration?

78. Whether it would not be safer, both to our liberty and property, to be
under the authority of the British parliament, and subject to all those duties
and taxes which they might think fit to impose, than to be under the government
of the American sons of Liberty, without paying any duties or taxes at all?

79. Whether the unavailing opposition that has been made to parliament, has
not, since the commencement of the present year, been a greater expense to the
Americans, if we allow for the neglect of business, and extraordinary tavern
expenses, than all the duties with which the parliament would probably charge
us, would amount to in fifty years?

80. Whether if the British parliament should only leave us to ourselves, as
some wise persons have seriously advised; or if we were able to compel them to
submit to our own terms, which no wise person can imagine that we are; either
event would not be as great a calamity to the colonies, in its natural
consequences, as the pestilence or a famine?

81. Whether, without the superintending authority of Great Britain to restrain
them, the colonies would not probably be soon at war among themselves; and
whether without the same authority to protect them, they would not probably
soon become a prey to some foreign power.

82. Whether, if the connection of the colonies with Great Britain were
dissolved, they must not immediately put themselves under the protection of
some maritime power, less able to defend them, and less disposed to indulge
their froward and petulant humor?

83. Whether, in such a case, they would not be obliged to pay dearly for the
protection afforded to their ships abroad, or to their seaports at home; and
whether this would not be a much heavier burden, than that of the duties that
have been demaned by the British parliament?

84. Whether there can be any prospect of peace or safety to the colonies,
while they are under the displeasure, and exposed to resentment of
Great Britain?

85. Whether therefore the reconciliation of Great Britain to her colonies be
not a matter of capital and supreme importance, to promote which, every
American is bound, in duty to his country; and as he values the peace of
Jerusalem, to contribute his best wishes, prayers and endeavors?

86. Whether every thing that tends to obstruct so desirable an event, ought
not to be conscienciously avoided, and treated with abhorrence?

87. Whether Great Britain can be supposed at present to be in such a
condition, or of such a temper, as patiently to put up with our bullying and
abusive language, to submit to our reproaches, or to be intimidated with our
threatenings?

88. Whether on the other hand, the continuance of such provocations will not
necessarily increase the indignation of a power that is irresistible by us, and
render an accommodation impracticable, but upon terms the most humiliating to
the colonies?

89. Whether the several colonies, by having chosen delegates to represent them
at the congress, have not taken the matter in dispute out of the hands of the
people; and whether those, who, notwithstanding, still endeavor farther to
inflame the passions As a specimen of the language with which the minds of the
deluded Americans are poisoned against the government, by some of our weekly
newspapers, the following passage is selected from HOLT's paper of August 18:

"We are assured that Captain William Bull, in a sloop from this place, but
last from the West Indies, is arrived at Wilmington, North Carolina, and that
the inhabitants of that place have bought his vessel, and are loading her with
provisions for the support of the town of Boston; which ought to be supported
at the expense of the last mite, and even the last drop of blood in
North America, for their noble stand against the oppression and tyranny of a
miserable, corrupt, debauched, and almost bankrumpt administration, devoid of
sense, humanity, and every principle superior to that of mere brutes; an
admistration, compared with whom a common highway robber is almost a saint."


of the populace, already intoxicated with a few magical founds, are not to be
considered and treated as incendiaries, scattering abroad the firebrands of
faction, in order to bring on the conflagration of their country?

90. Whether what is farther to be offered on the subject in dispute, should
not be addressed to the gentlemen of the Congress, who are entrusted with, and
answerable, in no small degree, both in this world and the next, for THE FATE
OF THE COLONIES; and whether, in that case, if we mean not to affront them,
cool and impartial representations and reasonings ought not to characterise our
future political productions?

91. Whether full confidence ought not to be reposed in the wisdom, the
prudence, and patriotic spirit of our representatives at the congress, who are
generally men of property, and have much more to risque than most of their
constituents?

92. Whether it be not time for our farmers and mechanics, and laborers, to
return to their business, and the care of their families; and all scrious
Christians, to a sense of their duty?

93. Whether it does not become us to employ the present interval of reflection,
in examining, how far the principles that have been propagated amongst us are
conformable to reason, and productive of good or evil to society; and whether,
in reality, they deserve to be countenanced or discouraged?

94. Whether it would be amiss, at the same time, to consider, how far the
Supreme Governor of the world, from whose jurisdiction no resolves of
town-meetings can exempt us, may be supposed, from the declarations he has
made, to approve of our conduct?

95. Whether the prosperity of states, and of all public societies, does not
depend upon his blessing; and whether his blessing is to be otherwise expected,
than in the way of conformity to his precepts?

96. Whether he has given any dispensation to the body of the people, under any
government, to refuse honor, or custom, or tribute, to whom they are due; to
contract habits of thinking and speaking evil of dignities, and to weaken the
natural principle of respect for those in authority?

97. Whether, on the contrary, he does not command us to submit to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; and require us, on pain of damnation, to
be duly subject to the higher powers, and not to resist their lawful authority?

98. Whether, if it should smally appear, that the claim of the British
parliament is just, and according to law, it be not a necessary consequence,
that the colonies have resisted that power, which is ordained of God, and are
in the high road to open rebellion?

99. Whether those, who on the present occasion, so zealously proclaim their
attachment to revolution principles, give not too much reason to expect, that
they are fond of revolutions? But after all,

100. Whether it be not a matter both of worldly wisdom, and of indispensable
Christian duty, in every American, to fear the Lord and the King and to meddle
not with them that are GIVEN TO CHANGE?

FINIS.

