A FRIENDLY ADDRESS TO ALL REASONABLE AMERICANS, ON THE SUBJECT OF OUR
POLITICAL CONFUSIONS: IN WHICH THE NECESSARY CONSEQUENCES OF Violently opposing
the KING's TROOPS, AND OF A GENERAL NON-IMPORTATION ARE FAIRLY STATED.

Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth?

ST. PAUL. NEW YORK: Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXXIV.

A FRIENDLY ADDRESS, etc.
Friends, Countrymen, and Fellow Subjects!
"OUR civil government (says an excellent English Writer) is happily placed
between the two extremes of despotic power and popular licentiousness: it is
wisely composed of such a due mixture of the several simple forms of
government, those of one, of a few, and of many, as to retain as far as
possible the advantages, and to exclude the inconveniences, peculiar to each;
and the parts are so nicely combined and adjusted, that the several powers
cooperate and move on together in concert and agreement, mutually tempering,
limiting, and restraining, yet at the same time aiding, supporting, and
strengthening each other."

This frame of government, for the admirable wisdom of its structure, has
always been the wonder of the world; and under its protection and mild
influence, the subjects of Great Britain are the happiest people on earth. But
of all the subjects of Great Britain, those who reside in the American Colonies
have been, and, were they sensible of their own advantages, might still be, by
far the happiest: surrounded with the blessings of peace, health, and
never-failing plenty -- enjoying the benefits of an equitable and free
constitution -- secured by the protection and patronage of the greatest
maritime power in the world -- and contributing, in but a small proportion, to
the support of the necessary public expenses.

Under these advantages, the colonies have hitherto flourished beyond example.
They have become populous, both by natural increase, and the yearly influx of
foreigners, the sure indications of a happy country; and they have become rich,
by practicing, at their ease, the peaceful arts of agriculture and commerce.
And were they to pursue the same path which has brought them thus far, there is
no doubt but they would go on to flourish and prosper in the same proportion,
till, in process of time, they would exite either the admiration or envy of the
whole human race. The advice therefore of MOSES to a people highly favored of
Heaven, is justly applicable to them; and nothing could be wanting to their
happiness, but hearts to follow it, Only take heed to thyself, says he, and
keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have
seen, and lest they depart from thine heart, all the days of thy life.

But a far different prospect, at this time, presents itself to view. The
darkness of a rising tempest is beginning to overspread our land. The thunder
roars at a distance, and appears to be swiftly approaching. It is high time
therefore to awaken the thoughtless to a sense of their danger, and to think of
providing for our common safety.

There is, there can be, but one way to prevent the ruin that threatens us. Our
own misconduct has brought it forward; and our immediate reformation must stop
it progress. He must be blind, that is not convinced of this; and he must be
infatuated, that will pursue the road, which evidently terminates in darkness
and destruction.

Whether the British Parliament has been right or wrong in its late
proceedings, toward the Colonies; our behavior has been such as every
government must and will think intolerable. If the supreme power of any kingdom
or state, through want of due information or attention, should adopt measures
that are wrong or oppressive, the subjects may complain and remonstrate against
them in a respectful manner; but they are bound, by the laws of Heaven and
Earth, not to behave undutifully, much more not to behave insolently and
rebelliously. The bands of society would be dissolved, the harmony of the world
confounded, and the order of nature subverted, if reverence, respect, and
obedience, might be refused to those whom the constitution has vested with the
highest authority. The ill consequences of open disrespect to government are so
great, that no misconduct of the administration can justify or excuse it. The
guilt of it is so aggravated, that Christians are required, under the heaviest
penalty to avoid it, and to be subject to the higher powers, of whatever
character, for conscience's sake. No tyrant was ever more despotic and cruel,
than Nero, and no Court ever more corrupted than his; and yet to the government
of this cruel and despotic tyrant, and his corrupt ministry, peaceable
submission was enjoined by an Apostle, who had a due regard for the rights and
liberties of mankind. To disturb or threaten an established government, by
popular insurrections and tumults, has always been considered and treated, in
every age and nation of the world, as an unpardonable crime: and were we the
subjects of the Grand Turk, it is as certain that we ought not to encourage
such practices, as that St. Paul and St. Peter, who condemned them, were
inspired men.

But my design is not to consider, how far the conduct of the Colonies is, or
is not, conformable to the rules and precepts of the Christian religion; but,
how far it is to be condemned or justified by the maxims of sound policy and
prudence. Our temporal interest and safety are considerations which all will
regard, how much soever they may slight or despise the obligations of religion.

The voice of complaint, to call it no worse, is now heard through every corner
of our land; and we are daily exhorted to prepare for the defense of our
liberties, and all that is sacred, with united efforts. -- But before we
proceed, it concerns us to be well informed, both as to our real danger, and
the steps proper to be taken

Were the Americans actually in a state of oppression, it would show their
wisdom and prudence, to submit with patience to their present condition, rather
than to provoke the power that oppresses them, without some fair prospect of
obtaining relief. One degree of distress, in consequence of the weight of
illegal power, is a grievance; ten degrees of distress are proportionably a
greater evil; but bad as it is, he must be an idiot or a madman, who would not
prefer them to twenty. But it appears to me that, of all people under heaven,
the King's subjects in America, have hitherto had the least ground for
complaint; and that the present confusion of the Colonies has been occasioned
by misinformations and false alarms. If none of our legal rights have been
invaded, no injury has been done us; if we have not been injured, we have no
room for complaint; and we can never be justified in resenting that, which it
would be unreasonable to complain of.

My Friends, Countrymen, and Fellow Subjects! suffer, for a few minutes, an
American, one who has often gloried in the title, who loves his country as
much, and has as great a regard for its honor, as any of you, to reason and
expostulate with you, in plain language, on a subject now of the highest
importance, both to you and him.

You are taught to exclaim loudly against the arbitrary proceedings of the
British Parliament. But consider; wherein have they been arbitrary, and in what
do you suffer? Why, it seems, a duty of three pence a pound, has been laid, by
Parliament, upon their teas exported to America; and we cannot purchase the
tea, without paying the duty. But if this may be called a burden, so may the
weight of an atom on the shoulders of a giant: besides, this burden may be
easily avoided; for we have no occasion to purchase the tea, and unless we
purchase it, we are under no obligations to pay the duty.

You will say: the Parliament had no right to lay the duty. But I suppose we
are, most of us, but indifferent judges of the rights of Parliament; or
however, the Parliament must act according to their own judgment, and not
according to ours, if it be different from theirs. They assert, and believe,
that they have the right in question; and we have never proved that they have
not. Nay, we ourselves have always believed and allowed that they have it, till
the present occasion. I might add, that we have always allowed that they had a
right to regulate not only the trade, but all concerns of the Colonies; such a
power they have always exercised, and we have submitted to their acts. Thus,
for instance, we have paid a duty on wine and molasses, in obedience to
Parliament, and without protestations or remonstrances; and, for the same
reasons, we are as much obliged to pay the duty on tea. If we would act
consistently, we should either refuse to pay the duty on wine and molasses, or
consent to pay it on tea; for it is, in both cases, imposed from the same
principle, and has the same effect.

Perhaps it will be replied, These and all other duties ought to be rejected,
because they are precedents, and intended to prepare the way for higher
demands; and if Parliament has a right to take from us one penny, without our
consent, it has a right to strip us of our whole property, and to make us
absolute slaves.

This, I believe, is the first time that a sovereign power has been in want of
precedents, to justify its making laws to govern any part of its dominions. It
is a contradiction in the nature of things, and as absurd as that a part should
be greater than the whole, to suppose that the supreme legislative power of any
Kingdom does not extend to the utmost bounds of that kingdom. If these
Colonies, which originally belonged to England, are not now to be regulated and
governed by the authority of Great Britain, then the consequences are plain;
they are not dependant upon Great Britain -- they are not included within its
territories -- they are no part of its dominions -- the inhabitants are not
English, they can have no claim to the privileges of Englishmen; they are, with
regard to England, foreigners and aliens; nay, worse, as they have never been
legally discharged from the duty they owed it, they are rebels and apostates.
On the above supposition, they are, at best; as much the dominions of Denmark
or Russia, as of Great Britain; for there can be no difference in this case,
unless one has an authority over them, which the others have not. But if Great
Britain possesses a sovereignty over the Colonies, she certainly has a right,
at least, to regulate our commerce; and especially to regulate the importation
of such articles of mere luxury, as we can choose whether we will be concerned
with, or not, with but little inconvenience to ourselves. Now the present duty
on tea is exactly such a regulation.

You allow that this duty is a thing that is but trifling in itself; but then
you conceit that you ought to oppose it, because it is a precedent, which
hereafter may be used to your disadvantage. I am sorry to see that men can be
so easily deluded by such sophistry. Can you imagine that Parliament will not
do whatever they think right to be done by them, without waiting for
Precedents? Yet precedents of their own for regulating the trade of the
Colonies, are not wanting. Every reign, since the settlement of the Colonies
has produced them; in consequence of which you are daily paying duties that, in
every view, are as liable to exception, as the duty on tea. From hence it is
evident, that you yourselves have no inclination to be governed by precedent,
whatever regard the Parliament may be supposed to have for them.

As to the argument that, If Parliament has a right to take from us one penny,
without our consent, it has a right to strip us of our whole property; although
so great a man as Mr. LOCK was the father of it, it appears to me to be weak
and sophistical. A right to do what is reasonable, implies not a right to do
what is unreasonable. A father may have a right over his son, so far as to send
him on an errand, or upon any reasonable service, without having such an
absolute authority as can oblige him to throw himself down a precipice, or to
hang himself. In like manner, cases may happen, in which it would be reasonable
for Parliament to take from us some small matter, though we were unwilling to
part with it; but the case can hardly be supposed, in which it would be
reasonable to take from us every thing, unless we should have forfeited it.
Every society has a right to make a moderate use of its power over its own
members, but not to abuse it. There can be no right to do what is
unquestionably wrong.

But you will say, it is wrong to tax us at all, without our consent. But the
duty on tea, which has occasioned all our confusions, is not such a tax; for
unless you consent to the tax, you are not to pay the duty. You may refuse it,
if you please, without incurring any penalty, or considerable inconvenience. As
to such taxes as arise from the general regulation of American commerce, they
must be imposed without our formal consent, if they are imposed at all. For if
all the Colonies must be consulted, and all must agree, before such a
regulation can take place; it is easy to foresee, that nothing of this kind can
be established, as nothing can be proposed, in which all the Colonies, having
each its peculiar views and interests, would be likely to agree. Therefore
Great Britain must either impose such duties upon our imports and exports, as
may be thought proper for the good of the whole community, without our consent,
or she must not attempt to regulate our trade; and if she is not to superintend
and regulate our trade, she had better relinguish at once her claim of
authority over her colonies; after which they cannot expect to enjoy her
protection.

But you further object, that if we are to be bound by laws to which we have
never consented, we have not the rights of Englishmen. In answer to this, let
me remind you, first of all, that it never was, nor can it be, the right of
Englishmen to be exempted from the authority of an English or British
Parliament. It is not a proper consent to the laws enacted by the British
Parliament, but the being bound by those laws, that distinguishes a British
subject from a foreigner. So long as a man resides within any dominions, he is
a subject of it, and is obliged to submit to its laws, as far as they concern
him, whether he approves of them or not. There are many people in England, who
are natives of the country, that do not consent to acts of Parliament that are
passed, unless by a bare fiction of the law; which can make a nominal consent,
but not a real one. This is always the case of the Minority, where there is a
division, whose votes are overruled by the major part; for the law necessarily
passes, not only without, but contrary to, their consent.

Besides, there are millions of people residing in England, who have no votes
in elections, and are never consulted about the expediency of laws. I hope
these are all Englishmen, although they give no other consent to acts of
Parliament, to which they are bound to submit, than what is implied in their
freely residing within the jurisdiction and protection of Parliament. In this
sense, the Americans, by fixing themselves, and continuing to reside, within
the British dominions, consent to be governed by the British laws. When the
Colonists first settled on English American ground, they well knew that the
authority of Parliament was not to be suspended or withdrawn, in their favor;
and they knew too, that they had no power of sending representatives to
Parliament of their own choosing. On these terms they willingly settled here;
and they have always enjoyed every advantage which they originally expected to
receive, and which was contracted for in their stipulation with the Crown, and
they can have no just reason to complain on this account. Yet notwithstanding
all this, they have been lately told by their agents, who had it from the best
authority, that if they chose to send over persons to represent them in
Parliament, they should be admitted to seats in the House. In my opinion, they
have done wisely in not accepting of the offer; but after refusing it, they
have surely no reason to complain, that they have no representatives in the
Parliament that must govern them.

It has been frequently asserted, in justification of your claim, that, as the
charters granted by the Crown, have allowed a legislative authority to the
several Colonies, the inhabitants are to be bound by no laws, but what are made
by their respective provincial legislatures, to which they consent by
representation. With regard to this doctrine, I beg leave only to ask a few
questions. Can you be made to believe, that it was ever the intention of the
Crown, to establish by charter a power of legislation, in any of the Colonies,
that is sovereign, independent, and incontrolable by the supreme authority of
the nation? Can you imagine, that in any instance, more than a subordinate
right of jurisdiction was meant, for the internal regulation of the district
mentioned in the charter; or conceive that such a grant can place you beyond
the reach of parliamentary authority? Would not the arguments that perhaps have
deceived you, prove as strongly, that the charter of the city of Albany,
granting a power to make laws for its internal regulation, provided they are
not contrary to the laws of the Province, places the inhabitants of that city
beyond the reach of laws made by the assembly of New York?

You, one and all, talk of your rights by charter: but are not some of the
Colonies without charters? And do all the charters convey exactly the same
privileges and rights? Do any of them say, that you shall not be bound by laws
made in Great Britain? Nay, does not the charter of Pennsylvania say expressly,
that taxes may be laid upon the inhabitants by act of Parliament? None
therefore have a right to plead their charters, in the present controversy,
with the mother country, who reside in the colonies that are without charters,
or in Pennsylvania; and it is high time for those who reside in the other
colonies, to furnish some kind of evidence, that their charters give them the
right for which they contend. They have not yet done this; they have not
attempted to do it; I suspect they never will attempt it; and I challenge them
to do it if they can. You may have heard some of them declaim on this topic,
and you may hear them again; but, if you expect the proof called for, you will
be disappointed.

What has been offered is in order to show, that, in reality, no proper right
of the colonies is infringed by the late act of Parliament, that imposes a
small duty on the teas exported to America. And here it is worthy of notice,
and we ought to attend to it all along as we proceed, that the colonies of
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia, are not affected by any other of the late
acts of Parliament; and have no dispute of their own with the mother country,
but what arises from the tea-act.

But let us now suppose, that we have been really injured by this act; and that
our paying the duty would be dangerous to our constitutional liberties. On this
supposition, which the Americans in general seem to have adopted as the true
state of the case, the great question is, -- What method the colonies ought in
wisdom to pursue, in order to get rid of the duty?

Different measures have been already taken, in the different colonies, to
avoid the operation of the act. In South Carolina, the obnoxious tea was
landed; but the inhabitants formed a resolution, to which they have the virtue
punctually to adhere, not to purchase it. Happy would it have been for the
colonies, if this measure had been universally taken! In that case, we should
still have enjoyed tranquillity, uninterrupted by seditious alarms; and the
black cloud, charged with storm and thunder, that now darkens our land, would
not have collected.

In most of the other colonies, the tea was not suffered to enter their ports;
but it was sent back unhurt. This indeed, in all its circumstances, must be
considered as a kind of insult upon government; but yet it was such a species
of misbehaviour, as, in all probability, the nation would have overlooked, and
many of the friends of America would have thought worthy of commendation. But,
as the evil genius of the colonies would have it, the tea that was sent to
Boston, was neither stored, nor sent back, but outrageously destroyed by the
hands of violence.

Whatever may be thought of consigning, or sending back the tea, there are but
few people so abandoned to all sentiments of fitness, propriety, and justice,
as to think the destruction of it excuseable; and the government at home, as
all governments would in the like case, thought it unsufferable. -- It was soon
determined, to inflict an exemplary punishment upon the town that was guilty of
such shameful and flagrant injustice; and an act was passed, for shutting up
the port of Boston, till proper satisfaction should be made for so provoking an
outrage.

It is certain, that all the Americans are out of the reach of this act; that
it was not intended to affect them; and therefore that they have nothing
immediately to do with it, excepting the inhabitants of Boston themselves.
Accordingly I should have passed it by, as foreign from our part of the
dispute, had it not been voted by all our county and provincial COMMITTEES, to
be dangerous to the liberties of the British colonies. For this reason I shall
offer some observations on what appears to have been the policy of the act;
which I shall address to those only, who are so reasonable and modest as to
allow, that the tea ought not to have been destroyed.

If the conduct of the Bostonians, in destroying the tea, was criminal, it
deserved punishment; and punishments should always be regulated by the nature
and degree of the crimes for which they are inflicted, and the circumstances
that attended the commission of them. Now the crime of the Bostonians was a
compound of the grossest injury and insult. It was an act of the highest
insolence toward government; such as mildness itself cannot overlook or
forgive. The injustice of the deed was also most atrocious: as it was the
destruction of property to a vast amount, when it was known that the nation was
obliged in honor to protect it. At the same time it was very notorious, that
the intention of the perpetrators was, by this example, to lead and excite
others, when the expected opportunity should present, to the same wanton excess
of riot and licentiousness. Under these circumstances, sound policy was thought
to require, that both a severe and a speedy punishment should be inflicted --
severe, that it might bear some proportion to the guilt; and speedy, that it
might prevent the like mischief in other instances.

Many, I know, who admit that Boston ought to have been punished, yet exclaim
loudly against the punishment decreed by Parliament, as being too severe in its
manner: And if any other punishment had been inflicted, many of them, I dare
say, would have exclaimed still. For when people are once disaffected toward
an administration, whether with or without just reason, they will always find
some pretense for blaming any measure that can be taken by it.

As to the severity of the punishment in question, it was no more than shutting
up a port, till satisfaction should be made for a flagrant injury and insult,
of which it had been guilty. While this restraint was laid, a free use of all
the neighboring ports was allowed; so that no people but the inhabitants of
the town of Boston were intended to be punished by this act; and a sufficient
time was indulged them to remove all their vessels out of their harbor, that
they might be usefully employed during the restraint of their port. And as soon
as compensation should be made for the injury done, and a proper acknowledgment
of the offense committed, every appearance shows that government intended to be
satisfied, and to remove the punishment. For provision was made, that, on such
an event, the King might immediately suspend the operation of the act, without
waiting for the meeting, or the formal proceedings of the Parliament, which
might require time. Surely none, who have as high a sense of public guilt, as
of private, can think this punishment too severe for the crime, considered
under all its aggravations. For, no people are entitled to the use of any
advantage, which they wantonly abuse to the injury of others.

An outcry is also made, that the punishment of the Bostonians was hasty and
precipitant, offering no alternative, and not suffering the party to be heard.
It is freely confessed that, in common cases, none ought to be punished without
a regular trial and conviction. But here the case was uncommon and
extraordinary. The most essential rights of government were audaciously invaded
-- the crime was notorious and unquestionable -- a regular trial must have been
the work of time -- and while this would be depending, it was imagined the evil
would spread. Both the letter and spirit of the law had been openly insulted
and defied, by the people in Boston; and, in such a case, the forms of the law,
in bringing them back to a sense of their duty, when it was apprehended that
the delay of punishment would be dangerous to the community, were thought to be
dispensible. Such considerations indeed will not authorize a judge, or any
court of justice, to proceed in this compendious manner; but when a case comes
before the whole legislative body, they have always the power to dispense with
the ordinary forms, and to do what is conceived to be most conducive to the
public safety. For, to use the words of the justly celebrated Dr. BLACKSTONE,
The bare idea of a state, without a power, somewhere vested, to alter every
part of its laws, is the height of political absurdity.

It is moreover objected, that such a mode of punishment involves the innocent
in the same calamity with the guilty. In answer to which, it is sufficient to
observe, that this inconvenience must always attend all punishments inflicted
on a people, whether by God or man, and necessarily arises from the condition
of the world. There is no body of people so bad, but many innocent persons are
intermixed with them. At the very worst, there is always a number of innocent
children, who are connected with, and dependent upon, the proper delinquents.
The consequence of which is, that no people, and commonly no individual, can
possibly be punished, without hurting some innocent persons. The objection
therefore, if it has any weight, will hold good against all public, and most
private punishments, of what kind soever. In the town of Boston there are many
innocent, worthy and respectable persons (many more than is commonly imagined)
who are as free from the public guilt, and hold it in as much abomination, as
any men within his Majesty's dominions. For their sake, more especially, those
who have the greatest regard for the honor of government, wish that the
punishment could have been avoided. But as this was politically impossible,
they must bear their own share, with prudence and patience, as well as they
can, -- enjoying a consciousness of their own innocence, -- maintaining their
integrity, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation -- and looking
forward to that time, which I hope is not distant, when they may expect to be
distinguished with such favors as the public can give.

The resolves of the abovementioned committees also express, their brethren in
Boston, meaning the offenders against government, are to be considered as
suffering in the common cause of American liberty. But I hope the
licentiousness of their behavior, is not avowed to be any part of the system
of American liberty; and I should be extremely sorry to find, that the common
cause of the colonies requires such defenses as theirs. If a raving enthusiast,
in order to promote the cause of American liberty, should take it in his head
to assassinate his Prince, and afterward should be punished for his treason;
he might with equal propriety, be considered as suffering in the cause of
American liberty. But, in that case, I believe no sober Americans would think
themselves bound to abet the assassination; and for the same reasons, we are
under no obligations to abet the destructive violence of the people in Boston,
or to endeavor to skreen it from public justice. So far as they meant well,
they ought to be commended; but so far as they did wrong, they ought to be
condemned. And we both expose ourselves, and injure our cause, by appearing to
countenance their lawless and unwarrantable proceedings.

The same resolves also condemn, as oppressive and dangerous, the other act for
altering the administration of justice in the Massachusetts Bay; and it has
been used as an instrument, in the hands of our popular incendiaries, for
farther enflaming the minds of the Americans against the King and his
Ministers. But it deserves notice, that the alteration made by the act, is
rather an imaginary than a real evil. For it introduces into that province a
regulation, which is far from being inconsistent with the happiness of the
people; as it only reduces them to a form of proceedings, under which the
inhabitants of New York and New Jersey have been as happy as any people in
America. Indeed it abridges them of some privileges that had been granted by
charter. But no privileges are curtailed by the act, but such as had been
abused and forfeited over and over, and such as probably would continue to be
abused, to the great injury and disturbance of that province, as well as to the
dishonor and reproach of the nation^ It is the opinion of the best friends to
the rights of mankind, that charters may be forfeited; and, it is a proof of
the mildness, not of the rigor, of the administration, that the Massachusetts
charter, after so many abuses and provocations, has not been totally vacated,
rather than abridged.

Besides the two last-mentioned acts, there is a third, for settling the
government of Quebec, which has been as successfully applied to the same noble
purpose of enraging the Americans against the measures of government; and more
lies and misrepresentations concerning this act have been circulated, than one
would think malice and falsehood could invent. It is positively asserted, and
generally believed, on the evidence of positive assertions, that by this act
the Popish religion is established, throughout the vast extent of country now
subject to the government of Quebec; and that the Protestant religion is there
obliged to skulk in corners, not daring to lift up its head. Whereas, if we
have recourse to the words of the act, we shall see, that the Popish religion
is no more than tolerated within that dominion; which was one of the conditions
on which the country surrendered itself to the crown of Great Britain; and that
a proper foundation is laid for the establishment of the Protestant religion,
which is meant to take place. Tithes, which are the property of the tolerated
Romish church in all the parishes, are indeed ordered to be paid, as formerly,
to the minister of the parish; but the very moment a man declares himself a
Protestant, he is freed, by the act, from the obligation to pay tithes to the
Popish incumbent. In that case, it is provided, that his Majesty, his heirs or
successors, may make such provision out of the -- accustomed dues and rights,
for the encouragement of the Protestant religion, and for the maintenance of a
Protestant clergy within the said province, as he or they shall, from time to
time, think necessary and expedient. It is true, the Papists in Canada might
have had a toleration less generous than is granted them, without the
Parliament's allowing to the clergy their tithes, or to the parishes their
churches. But such a toleration, although it might have fulfilled the letter of
the articles of the treaty, would not have answered their expectations, nor
have left upon their minds favorable impressions of the British justice and
honor. If we had taken from them their churches, or stripped the clergy of
their tithes, which might have been done with equal propriety, it would
probably have increased the number of his Majesty's disaffected American
subjects; which appears to be too great without them. And as to trials by
juries, they are affirmed to be excluded by the act; but the assertion is
groundless and false. Juries are no more excluded from Canada, than they are
excluded from the other American colonies. They have never been established by
act of Parliament in any of the colonies, excepting the late act for the
regulation of the Massachusetts Bay. They owe their being in America to acts of
our provincial Assemblies, confirmed at home; and the provincial legislature of
Canada may introduce them as soon as they please, and it is expected that they
will, as soon as the inhabitants desire them, or the state of the country will
admit of them. See this point cleared up, in a candid and satisfactory manner,
in a pamphlet entitled, The Justice and Policy of the Act of Parliament, for
making more effectual Provision for the Government of Quebec, which has been
lately reprinted by Mr. GAIN. See also a defense of the general policy of this
act, in A Letter (said to be wrote by Lord Lyttelton) to the Earl of Chatham,
reprinted by Mr. RIVINGTON.


I have taken this notice of the three last acts relating to the colonies, in
order to show, that in themselves they are not of so alarming a nature as has
been represented, and that they wear not that tremendous aspect which our wild
imaginations have given them. Two of them were meant as punishments for crimes
against the state, and to make examples of those who were considered as the
greatest offenders, and from whose republican spirit a general mischief was
apprehended. The design of the other act was to secure to a new colony the
religious toleration it had a right to demand, and otherwise to ease the minds
of a numerous body of people, whose behavior toward government had been
decent and unexceptionable since they owed it allegiance, and who were likely
to prove his Majesty's most loyal and faithful subjects in his American
dominions.

Notwithstanding all that has been suggested, and in spite of all that can be
said, I am aware our political incendiaries will go on in their own way, and
still contend, that these acts are tyrannical and arbitrary, and threaten the
destruction of American liberty. But if we would recollect ourselves, and
attend a moment to the conduct and characters of these men, we should be
convinced that no representations of theirs are worthy of regard. For, in all
their motions, they discover themselves to be under the undue influence of
prejudice and passion. Through this dark and misty medium every object appears to
them under a violent distortion; and as thus distorted, they must ascribe it to
others. No wonder then, that they put the very worst constructions upon, and
assign the very worst motives for, all the proceedings of the British
Parliament.

However, let us now suppose the truth and reality of the facts as stated by
them; yet the inferences they intend, will by no means follow. Supposing Popery
were actually established in Canada, on the request of the inhabitants; would
it follow, that it was designed also to establish it in the other colonies,
where the inhabitants are averse to it? Can any man, in his senses, believe
this to be the design of Parliament? Again: supposing the punishment inflicted
on the Bostonians to be arbitrary and severe; yet those who are free from their
guilt, and mean not to contract it, have no reason to fear the like punishment.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then not
be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of
the same: for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. So far as
we are innocent, we are safe; but if we undertake to justify or abet the crimes
of others, we share in their guilt; and particularly, if we are fomenters of
the sedition that rages in Boston, we must take the consequence.

But the Bostonians, you say, are over-punished. If that be the case, they are
entitled to our pity, and to our influence in obtaining a mitigation of their
punishment. But this can be no reason, for our putting ourselves in the same
predicament with them, for making ourselves partners in their guilt, or for
bringing upon ourselves a similar punishment. We must be fools to think of
doing this; and if they desire us to do it, their modesty is like that of the
fox in the fable, who, because he happened to have lost his own tail, requested
of his brother foxes, that they would all suffer their tails to be cut off too.
But the foxes had more wisdom than to comply; and so should we have. As the
punishment of the Bostonians was designed to be local, and peculiar to them; we
have no business to cause it to be general. Their case is not yet ours; and,
God grant that it never may be!

The proper dispute subsisting between Great Britain and any of her colonies,
excepting that of the Massachusetts Bay, is only de Lana Caprina, about an act
imposing a duty of three pence a pound upon tea. This is the only ground we
have for complaining of the administration; and yet this has occasioned,
throughout our colonies, such an indecent and violent opposition to government
as is truly astonishing. Can such behavior on so slight a provocation, proceed
from dutiful and loyal subjects? No; it is impossible. Whatever we may think,
or say, of ourselves; if we had any true principles of loyalty, or any
tolerable sense of the duty that is due to the supreme legislative power, under
which the providence of God, and our consent, have placed us, no trifling
considerations could prevail with us to behave toward it in so petulent and
disrespectful a manner. But there is too much reason to believe, that our minds
are unprincipled, and our hearts disposed for rebellion. Ever since the
reduction of Canada, we have been bloated with a vain opinion of our own power
and importance. Our case has produced pride and wantonness. We have been
intoxicated with such draughts of liberty, as our constitutions would not bear;
and under this intoxication, we have conceited that all the privileges indulged
us were the effects of fear. From thinking, we have proceeded to speaking,
disrespectfully of our mother country; and our language now is -- It is
contrary to reason and nature, that the petty island of Britain should govern,
and give laws to, the extensive and mighty regions of America.

Yet whatever time may produce, at present the petty island of Britain is able
to govern ten such Americas as this, if she will exert her power. But she
wishes by lenity and forbearance and indulgence (I will venture to use these
words, notwithstanding her demand of a duty of three pence a pound upon her
tea, if we see sit to make use of it) I say, she wishes by lenity, forbearance
and indulgence to secure our affections, and to render us sensible, that our
greatest political happiness must arise from her smiles and fostering
protection. We should be fully convinced of this, were it not for our
ignorance, and want of consideration; and willing to confess it, were it not
for our pride. But if we determine to deny her authority, or to question her
right to command us; she will prove to the world, and bring us to confess, that
though she is ancient, she is not superannuated or exhausted; and that she
still possesses the spirit and vigor that have animated her best years.

Were she only to do nothing, but barely to leave the Colonies to themselves
with their jarring principles, and interests, and projects; we should soon see
province waging war against province, and our country would be involved in such
misery and distress as are beyond all our present conceptions. Should it be
known abroad that Great Britain had withdrawn her protection, and would no
longer interest herself in our preservation and safety; within the compass of
one year our seaports would be ravaged, and our vessels plundered or seized as
soon as they left our harbors. We should therefore soon feel the necessity of
purchasing the protection of some maritime power, and on terms not of our
proposing, but of theirs; and which could never be able to secure us against
any hostile attempts of Great Britain, should she see fit to make any; while
she maintains that Empire of the sea which she now holds, and of which all the
Maritime powers of the world are unable to dispossess her.

But replies the ignorant and deluded American: Notwithstanding all that can be
said of the naval strength of Great Britain, it is asserted by our patriotic
leaders, and we have reason to think, that these colonies, of themselves, are
able to withstand all her force. The judgment of Heaven visibly appears in this
dreadful infatuation. It was but a few years ago, that we believed, and found
by experience, that the colonies were unable to withstand the militia of
Canada, supported by a few regiments of regular troops from France. That this
was the general opinion, most of us may remember; and it is evident from the
messages that passed between Governor SHIRLEY and the House of Representatives
of Boston, from the address of the assembly of Virginia to the King at the
beginning of the late war, and from many other authentic documents of that
period. The Colonies then humbly and ardently implored that Great Britain would
speedily step in to their rescue, and preserve them from a destruction that
threatened to overwhelm them. Their prayers were soon heard; and what was the
consequence we all know. The strong bulwarks and fortresses of Canada were
stormed, and the country conquered by the discipline and invincible bravery of
but a small part of the British troops.

There is no room to doubt but such an army as was employed in the reduction of
Canada would be more than sufficient for the conquest of all the disaffected
American Colonies, should such a resolution become necessary in order to reduce
them to obedience. For they are open and accessible on every quarter, and have
not a single fortress to cover them, nor one regiment of regular troops to
defend them; and they are without military stores, without magazines, and
without the skill that is necessary for supporting an army. Under such
circumstances what would the boasted numbers of our inhabitants avail us
against an attack from Great Britain? If an army was sent in upon us, which a
body of forty thousand of our militia was unable to withstand (for it is
impossible that a greater number of undisciplined men could act to advantage)
it would be able to carry desolation through the whole country; and all the men
in the Colonies were they firmly united, would not be able to oppose it. But
yet if the army here supposed, should be found unequal to the design of
reducing the Colonies, Great Britain could send of her own troops a second, of
equal strength to the assistance of the first; to these she could add a third
of Hessians, a fourth of Hanoverians, and so on till the work were completed.
She could easily take possession of all our seacoasts where our wealth is
principally seated, and force us to fly into the back parts of the country for
immediate safety. There an army of Canadians might be ordered to meet us, and
unnumbered tribes of savages might be let loose upon us at the same time, while
our lands would he uncultivated, our stores exhausted, our families
unsheltered, and those that happened to escape the sword, glittering and
flaming both in the front and rear of our settlements, would soon perish by
sickness or famine.

All that is here mentioned Great Britain is able to do; and all this I believe
she would do, should she be obliged to enter into a war with the Colonies --
provided the Americans had resolution and firmness enough (for so some would
call it) to hold out to such extremity. But I am too well acquainted with their
character to expect that they would prove thus obstinate in the day of trial.
When they come to find that on their side there can be no prospect of victory,
but that every day must deepen their distress and render their condition worse
and worse; their natural understandings will return to them, and irresistibly
plead the necessity of a submission as soon as possible. In that case happy
would it be for them, if they could be considered only as conquered enemies;
but alas! they must be viewed in the light of vanquished rebels, and treated
accordingly. Their leaders must be given up into the executioner's hands,
confiscations of their estates forfeited by rebellion, must follow, and all
must be left at the mercy of their vanquishers. When one people is conquered by
another in war, private property is restored to its former possessors; but when
rebellions are crushed, the most to be expected is, that the lives of those
that belong to the lower classes will be spared.

To this wretched and accursed state of rebellion, the principles that have
been propagated, and several steps that have been taken in the American
Colonies directly tend. Nay, a rebellion is evidently commenced in New England,
in the county of Suffolk, without room for retreating. The inhabitants of that
large and populous county have openly bid defiance to the united authority of
the King, Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; they have most
contemptuously rejected the regulations of their courts of justice etc.
established by Parliament; and not only so, but they have set up in direct
opposition. to their authority, a government of their own. In the spirit of
outrageous licentiousness, they have compelled by brutal violence, those
respectable gentlemen that held Commissions under the Crown, to resign them in
forms of their own inditing, and to relinquish their stations; and they have
appointed others of the same factious and turbulent disposition with themselves
to fill their places, till their long-projected republic I am persuaded that
there are not many men in the other Colonies of any denomination, who have not
a general prevailing principle of affection, esteem and veneration for our
civil Constitution, however it may be darkened by the gross exhalations
occasioned by the heat of the present disputes. But in New England I conceive,
the real sentiments of the people are of a peculiar complexion. Many of the
first settlers imported with them an aversion to the regal part of our
Constitution, and were thorough-paced Republicans. To every species of monarchy
they were as inveterate enemies as any of their brethren, whom they left behind
them in England; some of whom could not bear to read the word King in their
Bibles, but wherever it occurred they substituted Civil Magistrate in its
place. It is well known that even good old father BAXTER was a remarkable
instance of this nature. In the time of CROMWELL'S usurpation, he published his
book of Saints everlasting Rest, in which he thought fit to use the phrase of
The PARLIAMENT OF HEAVEN, instead of saying The KINGDOM OF HEAVEN GREY's answer
to NEAL.
. Now those original settlers of New England stifily maintained, and zealously
endeavored to propagate their own antimonarchical principles; and those
principles have been handed down by an uninterrupted succession, from father to
son, and from generation to generation, to the present day.

Although many of their descendants have acquired liberal sentiments, and have
renounced the bigotry and prejudices of their well-meaning forefathers,
whether relating to matters of religion or government; yet this is by no means
the case with regard to the body of the people. They still retain an hereditary
aversion to the frame of the English Constitution, and to the control of
monarchy; and this aversion has been from time to time, occasionally animated
and inflamed by a set of Pulpit-Incendiaries, for which that part of the
country has been ever famous. By these and other instruments they have been
prepared whenever the word is given, to declare and exert themselves at all
hazards for an independent government of their own modelling.

The confusions of the present time have been thought to afford a favorable
opportunity, for putting their design in execution. The Colonies are
discontented, and it has been imagined that they might all be persuaded to
encourage the attempt. On this presumption, the decree has gone forth to erect
the Republic; the Rubicon has been passed, and there can be no thoughts of
retreating. They have drawn the sword, with an aim to plunge it into the bowels
of our ancient and venerable Constitution; and henceforward the scabbard must
become useless. The cry now is: We have no part in DAVID, neither have we
inheritance in the son of JESSE: Every man to his tent, O ISRAEL.


shall be settled, which is the glorious object. They have already if we may
believe credible information, marked out the inland town of Worcester for the
seat of this Republic; they are now collecting an artillery for its defense,
and some of them have nominated the man who is to be their PROTECTOR.

Whether this be so or not, it appears from authentic intelligence, dated
Boston September 27th, that they have done as bad See Mr. GAINE's Mercury of
October 10.
. For the SELECT MEN and the COMMITTEE of CORRESPONDENCE have proclaimed the
King's troops to be public ENEMIES, and declared to Mr. SCOT that he DESERVED
immediate DEATH, for selling warlike stores to them; and the people actually
did assemble to put THIS sentence in execution, but Mr. SCOT was so fortunate
as to make his escape. And besides this the King's General and Governor farther
complains of their continual acts of hostility. Orders, says he, are given to
prevent all supplies for English troops: Straw purchased for their use is daily
burnt, vessels with bricks sunk, carts with wood overturned, and thus even the
King's property is destroyed in every manner in which it can be effected. And
he justly observes that all this is not the effect of rash tumult, but of
evident system.

Now these rebellious Republicans, these hair-brained fanatics, as mad and
distracted as the ANABAPTISTS of MUNSTER, are the people whom the American
Colonies wish to support! It seems to be a mark of judicial infatuation
inflicted on us by the righteous judgment of Almighty God, that we of the other
Colonies can think of espousing such a cause, and of risquing every thing that
is dear, against such inexpressible odds -- in support of a scheme which all of
us, but a few Presbyterians and Independents, in our hours of reflection, if we
have any, must despise and abhor.

The hopes of all moderate and considerate persons among us, whose numbers I
believe are not small, were long fixed upon the general American Congress. They
imagined it to be the business and design of this grand COMMITTEE OF
COMMITTEES, to find out some way consistent with our claims for obtaining the
restoration of our common tranquillity, and a happy reconciliation of
Great Britain to her Colonies. The known character of some Gentlemen appointed
as Delegates, and the supposed character of most of the others, led us to
expect from them all that we wanted; and to believe that the united wisdom of
the Americans would shine in full splendour at the Congress, and that the
prudence and policy of the Counsels there taken would be such, as would have
done honor to an Assembly of the greatest sages of antiquity. But -- the poor
Americans are doomed to disappointment. The first discovery of the sentiments
of the Congress was shocking. Every thing was kept secret for some weeks, and
we flattered ourselves with hoping for the best. But when the news arrived at
Philadelphia, that the people of SUFFOLK had OPENLY REVOLTED FROM THEIR
ALLEGIANCE to the King and his government; in a sudden transport of joy, the
veil of the Congress was drawn back, and a mystery revealed that filled the
minds of many with surprise and astonishment; the mystery was, that the
Gentlemen of the Congress, in whom we consided as the faithful guardians of the
safety, as well as rights of America, were disposed to enter into a league
offensive and defensive, with its worst enemies the New England and other
Presbyterian Republicans. This fact is notorious to the world; it can neither
be denied nor palliated; for they hastily and eagerly published, (and it was
the first thing that they did publish) their cordial approbation of the Suffolk
Resolves for erecting an Independent Government in New England; and recommended
to the Americans the support of those measures with united efforts. From that
time every moderate man among us has despaired of seeing any good produced by
the Congress; and from that time every thing that was bad has been growing
worse.

Ex illo fluere, ac (...) sublapsa referri spes danaum.

Friends, Countrymen and Fellow Subjects! let me entreat you to rouse up at
last from your slumber, and to open your eyes to the danger that surrounds you
-- the danger of your being hurried into a state of rebellion before you are
aware of it, and of suffering all that resentment which a mighty nation can
discharge upon a defenseless people. Whether Great Britain did right or not, in
imposing the duty on tea, and whether we pay it or not, are matters of trifling
consequence: But whether we shall bring down upon our own heads the full weight
of her vengeance, and undergo all the horrors of a civil war, or not, are
matters of dreadful importance to us. If you persist in the steps which many of
you have taken; and especially if you go on to encourage the New England
fanatics to attack the King's troops, whenever they can meet them; the time
cannot be distant, in which both you and they will be legally proclaimed Rebels
and Traitors -- they as principals, and you as their abettors. You may still
protess yourselves to be his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, as you
did in your late RESOLVES, and as the leaders in the grand rebellion of 1641
did, in their messages to the King immediately after the battle of Edgehill,
where they had fought against him in person; but this will not skreen you from
vengeance. No: HAVOC will be the cry; and the dogs of war will be let loose to
tear out your vitals. Then, if not before then, the Demon of discord will rise
to distract you. Brother must fight against brother, and friend against the
friend of his bosom. In short, the country that is now "fair as Eden," will
become a field of blood, overspread with desolation and slaughter. I tremble,
and my blood retires to my heart at the prospect of such amazing anguish and
misery. The sun and the moon begin already to be darkened and the stars to
withdraw their shining. O all-pitying Heaven! Preserve me! Preserve my friends!
Preserve my country!

If we are now upon the brink of a horrid civil war, and there be no hopes of
relief from the wisdom, prudence and good temper of the Congress, there can be
but one day of safety left; which is, that we all endeavor to see with our own
eyes, and make use of our own understandings, and resume the liberty of
thinking, and speaking, and acting for ourselves. Let us then like men of
sense, sit down calmly and count the cost, in the first place, before we
undertake to finish the work proposed to us. Let us consider, before we proceed
farther and get more deeply embarrassed, whether we are able to go through with
our enterprise against Great Britain, or not: And, I am persuaded, it will soon
appear to be impossible.

What then remains to be done? Our blessed Savior, for our instruction,
supposes a case, in which the inequality of strength was not comparable with
ours, and tells us how common sense would determine. What King, says he, going
to make war against another King, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand? Or else, while the other is a great way off, he sends an
embassage, and desires conditions of peace Luke xiv. 31, 32.
. Here one Independent state is supposed to be at war with another; but, upon
conviction of the superior power of its antagonist, instead of rushing on to
destruction, it proposes a treaty of accommodation, upon such conditions as the
situation of affairs would admit of, and as speedily as possible. This divine
parable instructs us, that when it appears that we are not able, without the
utmost hazard, to go forward with any warlike design, the only way is to
retreat from it as soon as we can, and secure to ourselves such advantages as
may be still in our power. This would show our wisdom and discretion, were our
cause allowed to be ever so just, and had we no peculiar connection with the
power we were disposed to contend with. For it is an eternal maxim, which holds
in all cases, that a less evil is to be chosen, when it frees us from a
greater. But in our case, where the justice of our cause is at best but
doubtful; and when the power to be opposed is that, which has cherished us in
its bosom, and kindly protected us from our earliest infancy -- which we have
always heretofore acknowledged our obligations to obey -- to which many of us
have solemnly sworn allegiance -- and which has seldom thwarted our
inclinations at all, and never but in matters of comparatively trifling
consequence: -- In this case, I say, the necessity of such accomodating
measures strikes us with still more irresistible evidence.

If those who have been most active among us, in raising seditious tumults, and
in filling the country with distraction, will not be persuaded, by the
foregoing considerations, to recede, it is hoped that others will; and it would
be no small point gained, in favor of the Colonies, if those who are friends to
order and government, and enemies to the riots and disturbances of abusive
mobs, would assume the courage openly to declare their sentiments. All those
who are still loyal to their sovereign, should do the same. His Majesty's good
subjects of the town of Rye See Mr. RIVINGTON's Gazetteer of October 13.
, to their lasting honor, have set the example. Not only their names, but
their numbers, are very respectable; and, were the example to be followed,
through all the towns and districts of our several Colonies, I doubt not but it
would appear, to the confusion of some among us, that, in every province, there
are more than seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee, and who will not
bow it, to the Baal of independency. And I now congratulate all such on the
pleasure of finding, from the information of Gentlemen of unquestionable
veracity, that the Resolves from Georgia were far from expressing the sense of
the inhabitants of that grateful and loyal Province; but that they were framed
only by a company of hotheaded fellows, met together in a tavern RIVINGTON's
Gazetteer, ut sup:
.

I will only observe farther on this subject, that all who have the courage now
to declare themselves friends to Government, will undoubtedly think themselves
bound in honor, interest and conscience, to resort to the King's Standard,
when it comes to be erected in our different Colonies, should that melancholy
event happen; and these, of themselves, will compose a body, which, in a good
cause, will be formidable to its opposers. But many thousands of others, and
indeed the greater part of those who shall not have rendered their cases
desperate, when they see the danger thus nearly approaching, and the storm
ready to burst, will be glad to fly for shelter too to the Royal standard, if
human nature continues the same that it ever has been; and they will be zealous
to signalize themselves in the King's service, in order to render
unquestionable that loyalty which was formerly suspicious. It is morally
certain that, in the day of trial, a large majority of the Americans will
heartily unite with the King's troops, in reducing America to order. Our
violent republicans will then find themselves deserted by thousands and
thousands in whom they now confide; and inexpressibly dreadful must be their
disappointment. O! that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their LATTER END!

I shall say no more on the supposed case of our waging WAR AGAINST THE KING,
and entering into a STATE OF REBELLION; the thoughts of which, all sober men,
and all conscientious men, and all who prefer the good of their country to the
gratification of their own obstinate humors, must reject with horror.

But another scheme is proposed, at first view less shocking, which also
appears to be recommended by the Congress, and which many at present are
inclined to adopt; I mean, a general non-importation agreement throughout the
Colonies. Against a proposal of this nature I have two objections to offer:
Namely, that it will greatly distress a country which I love; and that it will
not answer the purpose.

In order (N. B.) to get rid of a duty of three pence a pound on tea, it is
proposed to stop all importation from Great Britain, and even from the
West India Islands, till the act imposing it shall be repealed. But a remedy of
this kind is ten thousand times worse than the disease. It is, for the wisdom
of it, like cutting off an arm, in order to get rid of a small sore in one of
the fingers.

On a late trial of non-importation from Great Britain only, as soon as the
stores of English goods began to be exhausted, every family among us
experienced such inconveniences and difficulties, as produced a general murmur
and complaint. For although the articles imported from England are not
absolutely necessary to support animal life; yet it was found that the
civilized life we had been used to, and which is necessary to the happiness of
all but savages, depended, in no small degree, upon our importations from
Great Britain. And had the non-importation continued much longer, it would have
excited insurrections in most parts of the country.

But a non-importation from the West Indies would still more tenderly affect
us. For to say nothing of Rum, or of Molasses for the use of our distilleries,
without which more than a hundred thousand American dram-drinkers would soon be
clamorous; the want of the single article Sugar would distress every family
upon this Continent. For this, in the quantity that is necessary, we could find
no sufficient substitute: the hardened juice of our Maple, where it could be
had, would be but a forty one; and as to Honey, we all know its use; and were
our stock of it ever so large, it would prove but a bad sweetner of the bitter
draught of a non-importation.

Here then it is proposed, that, to the non-importation which we have
experienced and could hardly bear, another should be added, that would affect
us still worse; and that a double weight should be fastened upon those
shoulders, which were ready to give way under a single one. But this is not the
worst of the case. It is generally believed, and intimations from England have
confirmed the opinion, that if the Colonies should resolve to import nothing
from Great Britain and the West Indies, they will not be suffered to import
from any other quarter -- not, even the salt that is necessary to cure their
winter's provisions, or to season their porridge: And besides this, that an
absolute non-exportation will be ordered, and not a single vessel suffered to
go out of our harbors. Such an order, we know, can effectually be executed,
with the greatest ease. It is but commanding the several Custom-Houses to grant
no clearances; and then every vessel that offered to sail, would be a lawful
seizure. A few of the King's frigates would be sufficient to do the business,
for all the Colonies on the Continent. Two or three of them stationed at the
Capes of Virginia, would command every vessel belonging to the Ports, and to
the fine navigable rivers, of Virginia and Maryland. As many stationed at the
Capes of Delaware, would secure Pennsylvania and West-Jersey -- and so of the
rest.

Now a total stagnation of all foreign commerce, would at once place us in a
glorious and blessed state. In the first place, all that live by this commerce
would be thrown out of employ. Our sailors would be turned ashore; our ships
would rot in our harbors; and our estates, which consist of wharfs or
warehouses, would become as worthless, as those of the same nature are at
present in the town of Boston. Our ship-builders, and their attendants, their
smiths, car men etc. with all that are employed in the business of cordage and
rigging, must be immediately discharged. The numerous body of pilots and
boatmen must be turned adrift. Nor would it fare much better with our
shopkeepers and merchants, whose families are supported by the profits arising
from their respective occupations. The expensive business of all our ironworks
must stop; and the many thousands which they provide for, must, unprincipled as
those wretches commonly are, be let loose upon the country, to get their living
as they can.

Now all these classes of people, and many others which I have not enumerated,
must have a support, and but few of them will be able to support themselves;
and if their poverty is not relieved to their satisfaction, they will soon
learn to carve for themselves. There are but few parishes and counties among
us, which have not complained of the burden of their own poor. But what will
they say, when the burden comes to be increased an hundredfold, as it
necessarily must, when a general non-importation and non-exportation take
place; and all their wanted resources fail them at the same time. The want of
the money, of which we have been lately drained, in order to pamper the Boston
fanatics, will then be severely felt: Nor can we expect any return of
assistance in our distress from that Province, as their sufferings will be much
greater than ours.

In the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, there is a large number of populous
seaport towns, which have no other support than their fishery. The town of
Gloucester has three hundred schooners employed in that service, with a
proportionable number of hands. In the town of Marblehead there are supposed to
be near four thousand men, and many of them with families, that know of no
other means of subsistence than the cod-fishery. I might mention Plymouth,
Salem, Beverly and a number of other towns, that are nearly in the same
situation. Now, when all these fishermen are turned ashore, and their vessels
become useless; they must, with their unprovided families, disperse themselves
amongst the inhabitants, and while the country affords any thing to eat, they
will not starve.

But to return to these Colonies. I have mentioned the distress that must
immediately overwhelm many orders of people, on a general stagnation of
commerce; but have said nothing of our Farmers, or those that live by the
cultivation of their lands. -- These may think themselves a kind of privileged
persons, and imagine that such a revolution of affairs will affect them but
little; yet a very short experience will open their eyes, and convince them of
the contrary. It is their farms, as all other resources will fail, that must
support all the abovementioned thousands of distressed people. Who must furnish
them with food? None can do it, but, THE FARMERS. Who must supply them with
clothing? THE FARMERS. Who must shelter many of them in their houses? THE
FARMERS. And can they expect pay for all this? Alas! those poor creatures will
have nothing to make payment with. And if they are employed as laborers, they
are all unacquainted with the business; and their labor will turn to but
little account. Indeed, were the markets abroad open, the farmer might somewhat
increase the quantity of his beef, his wheat and other produce, by their means,
so that his bargain would be less intolerable. But the foreign consumption, on
which he is now growing rich, will entirely cease; and there will be no demand
for his beef, and his wheat and other produce. All that he raises must perish
on his hands, except what he expends in his own family, and on the poor that
will be pressing upon him.

When all people are thus distressed; when every mind is uneasy and
discontented; it will be natural for them to fall to reproaching one another,
with being the authors of this general calamity. This will be productive of
eternal quarrels, and riots, and disturbances, and acts of violence, amongst
ourselves; and then our misery will be complete.

Yet after all, were it likely that these political agonies and convulsions
would produce a repeal of the act in dispute, it would be some alleviation of
our misfortunes to consider, that we should gain by them Three pence a pound,
on all the tea we should have occasion to purchase. But my second objection
against a general non-importation agreement is, that it will not answer the
purpose.

After what has been said and done by the Colonies, a general non-importation
agreement will be considered by Great Britain as an act of hostility, intended
to compel her to relinquish her claim; and she will not submit to be conquered
by such weapons, any more than by force of arms. It is not pretended that she
is altogether invulnerable in this part. The blow would reach her, and be felt
by her; but the wound would not be mortal. The strength and vigor of her
constitution would bear much more, than we are able to inflict. But -- the
shaft, ungraciously aimed at the vitals of our Mother, on the rebound may prove
fatal to ourselves.

A total stagnation of commerce would affect Great Britain, in much the same
manner, that it would affect her colonies, or any other commercial people; that
is, it would rob her of her subsistence. But a partial stagnation could not
affect her in the same manner that we should be affected by a total stagnation.
Now, the non-importation in question, while it would cause a total stagnation
of our commerce, would produce no more than a partial stagnation of hers; and
consequently would not place her in a situation so distressing, as it would
place us. Her trade is not confined to her American Colonies. She has ships and
factories in every quarter of the globe; and the treasures of the East and West
are perpetually flowing in upon her. She receives no necessary or useful
articles from these Colonies, but what she formerly received, and may at any
time be supplied with, from foreign nations. Her manufactures that are consumed
in the Colonies, she can shortly find ways to dispose of at other markets.

There is one branch of this hopeful project, that will contribute immediately
and directly to the advantage of Great Britain, almost in the same proportion
that it will distress ourselves. The Reader scarcely needs to be told, that
what is here meant, is the stopping all intercourse and communication between
the Colonies and the West Indies. As soon as this takes place, the markets of
Great Britain will be supplied, not only with the quantity of goods from the
West Indies which they have formerly received, but with the addition of all
that is now consumed in the American Colonies. The British merchants will
likewise have the advantage of supplying the Islands with many articles, which
at present are not scored in any of their invoices.

The West-Indians themselves indeed may be somewhat injured and disconcerted at
first, by the execution of this part of the plan; but far less, than seems to
be generally expected and intended by us. The Island of Jamaica can supply her
Planters with all kinds of provisions, but butter and flour; and with all the
lumber that may be required, for a hundred years to come, excepting staves and
heading for their Rum Puncheons. These she has often received from Hamburgh,
from whence she might receive them again. But there will be no occasion for
sending so far. Canada can supply her, and all the other islands, with these
articles, as well as with flour, in any quantity that may be ordered; to say
nothing of Georgia and the two Floridas, which abound in common lumber, at the
service of the Windward, Leeward, and Caribbee Islands. So that after the first
year, new channels may be opened, plans formed, and correspondences settled, in
such a manner, that the West Indies may be nearly as well supplied without our
assistance, as they now are with it; and with some articles, perhaps better.

But supposing the contrary; yet what should we gain by this curious bargain?
Why, the ill will and resentment of all the West-Indians. For some years past,
they have cultivated a peculiar friendship with the North-American Colonies,
and proposed to themselves much happiness from a closer alliance.

They have sent hither their children, in large numbers, for their education:
and many of them have brought over their families, and liberally spent the
incomes of their estates among us. But when they find that, we can so
ingeniously contrive schemes to distress them without benefiting ourselves; as
they are generally not wanting in spirit, they will be apt to resent such ill
usage, by withdrawing their sons and their families from among us, and perhaps
by breaking off all further connection with us in the way of commerce.

From what has been said, it will naturally be concluded, that by a general
non-importation agreement we shall carry on a very unequal warfare with Great
Britain; which will much sooner compel us to yield, than her to comply. The
want of her North-American trade may hurt her, but it will not reduce her to
extremity; and, if I may judge from my own feelings, nothing but the utmost
extremity will induce her, where she believes she has right of her side, and
where her honor is deeply at stake, to give up the point in dispute.

At the time of our former non-importation, the case was materially different.
The Stamp Act was so contrary to all our ideas of American rights, and so much
was offered against the policy of the act, both here and at home, that there
was no difficulty in repealing it. Afterward when we exclaimed against the
duties imposed upon paper, glass, etc. and agreed not to import the several
articles loaded with duties; our views were comparatively moderate, and we had
a large body of friends in England to support us. And were the proposition now
only not to import, or to consume, the tea that is charged with the duty; the
case would be the same that it was then -- we should have the same friends that
we then had -- and the duty would probably be removed, on the same principle
that those duties then were. But our conduct now is so wild and distracted --
our tumults and disorders are carried to so unreasonable and unwarrantable a
length -- nay, such a spirit of rebellion has broke forth among us, and such a
determined enmity against the supremacy of Great Britain now predominates in
the Colonies, that we have hardly a single friend remaining in England. Even
the Manufacturers join with all other orders of people, in condemning our
extravagance; and, which is still more, the Writers and Speakers against the
King's ministry allow that it is inexcusable.

It appears, therefore, that nothing will be likely to procure a repeal of the
Tea-act, or the removal of any other grievance of the like kind, but, the
restoration of peace and order amongst ourselves -- a candid acknowledgment of
our political errors and offenses -- a formal allowance of the rightful
supremacy in general, of Great Britain, over the American Colonies -- a
declaration of our aversion to a state of independency, with a corresponding
behavior -- a respectful remonstrance on the subject of taxation -- an
assurance of our willingness to contribute, in some equitable proportion,
toward defraying the public expenses -- and the proposal of a reasonable plan
for a general American constitution. This, it is humbly conceived, was to have
been the business of the Congress; and if they had acted upon these principles,
and with such views, not only the present, but all future generations, would
call them blessed.

Notwithstanding all unfavorable symptoms and appearances, I would not presume
to form a final judgment of the Congress, till their whole plan of proceedings
shall be known. It is possible, that all that has been wrong may be rectified
in the end; and that moderate and wise measures, tending to restore the
tranquillity, the happiness, the honor and safety of the Colonies, may at last
be concerted. Should this appear, in the general result of their councils, the
members will be entitled to the grateful respect of every American, and the
mistakes made in the former part of their proceedings ought never to be
mentioned to their disadvantage. But, on the other hand, should it appear, that
they mean to encourage acts of hostility against Great Britain, or to support
the madmen of New England in their scheme of an Independent Republic: in that
case, I affirm, that the Original Contract between them and the most
respectable part of their constituents will be dissolved -- that we shall be at
full liberty to consult our own safety, in the manner we shall think most
conducive to that end -- and that we shall owe them no greater respect and
obedience, than they themselves pay to the British Parliament.

The foregoing considerations are addressed -- not to those obstinate,
hotheaded Zealots, who are at the bottom of all our confusions; for arguments
would be as much wasted upon them, as upon men that are intoxicated with liquor
-- but to all reasonable Americans, to those who are still in the exercise of
their understandings, and whose minds are open to conviction. People of this
character, it is presumed, will see the necessity of giving up the present
system of American politics, as essentially wrong and destructive; and of
entering unanimously upon moderate and conciliating measures, as they regard
the restoration of peace and tranquillity in this, heretofore, happy country.

The great object in view, should be a general American Constitution, on a free
and generous Plan, worthy of Great Britain to give, and of the colonies to
receive. This is now become necessary to the mutual interest and honor, both
of the Parent Kingdom and its American offspring. Such an establishment is only
to be obtained by decent, candid and respectful application; and not by
compulsion or threatening. To think of succeeding by force of arms, or by
starving the nation into compliance, is a proof of shameful ignorance, pride
and stupidity. All such projects must operate ten times more forceably against
ourselves, than against Great Britain. They are, at best, but Penny wise, and
Pound foolish; and therefore inconsistent with every maxim of sound wisdom and
genuine Patriotism.

All violent opposition to lawful authority partakes of the nature of
rebellion; and a rebellion of the Colonies, whether it should prove successful
or unsuccessful, would necessarily terminate in ruin and destruction. We are
now in the utmost danger of being hurried, before we are sensible of it, into
this desperate and dreadful state Among the various denominations of Americans,
most men would be startled and shocked at the proposal of entering into an open
rebellion; but seditious principles, that directly lead to, and must finally
bring on, a rebellion, have been gradually instilled into many of them, without
alarming their apprehensions, under the cover of fair and specious pretenses.
Wrong principles are naturally productive of wrong conduct; and one wrong step
prepares the way to another, and that to another, till at last there can be no
retreating.

Nemo repent fit turpissimus, i: e. No one arrives at a gross and enormous
pitch of wickedness at once, is an old and just observation; and it is
particularly true with regard to rebellion. The grand English rebellion, in the
last century, was a remarkable proof of it. In the first place, men gave way to
unfavourable suspicions concerning the King and his Ministers, and thus lost
the reverence that is due to the regal authority. They then began to take
pleasure in blackening the King's character, and in giving an invidious turn to
all his actions. From this they proceeded to caballing against him; and, at
last, they took up arms, deluded with the pretense of liberty and property, and
religious rights. And when they had once taken up arms against their Sovereign,
they found it necessary to destroy him, for their own security. This soon
brought on a general destruction, of liberty and property, and the ruin of the
nation, as well as of themselves. Such is the common progress, and the effect,
of rebellions in general.


, when most of us think that we have grievances to complain of, in consequence
of the exercise of unconstitutional power; and when many are practicing every
wicked art to seduce us from our allegiance. It therefore highly concerns us to
be upon our guard, at such a critical season as this. A small degree of
reflection would convince us, that the grievances in question, supposing them
to be real, are, at most, no more than a just ground for decent remonstrance,
but not a sufficient reason for forcible resistance. These two things are
widely and essentially different; and if we mistake one for the other, the
consequence may be fatal.

It has been fully shown, that a rebellion of the colonies can have no
reasonable prospect of succeeding; and that it must prove the destruction of
all that are concerned in it. But supposing that it were likely to succeed, it
is of the utmost importance to consider, what we should gain by it; which would
be, after the desolation of our country, and the sacrifice of thousands of
lives, an exemption from the authority of the British Parliament, and
subjection to the authority of an American republic. A blessed exchange this!
especially if we take into the account the character of our future masters. The
principal conductors of the rebellion, would naturally have the principal
authority in the republic; and these are men, whose tyrannical usurpation would
be more oppressive, than the scorpion power of the most despotic Prince in
Europe. There would be no peace in the colonies, till we all submitted to the
republican zealots and bigots of New England; whose tender mercies, when they
had power in their hands, have been ever cruel, toward all that presumed to
differ from them in matters either of religion or government.

As soon therefore, as people of this stamp come to be in possession of an
established authority, which would be the case should the rebellion succeed,
the dire effects of their persecuting, and intolerant spirit will be dismally
felt by all that shall have courage to dissent; particularly, the members of
the Church of England, the Friends or people called Quakers, the Baptists,
those that belong to the German and Dutch Churches, and the moderate and candid
part of the Presbyterians themselves. All these classes of people then, by
promoting the present scheme for an independent government, are absurdly acting
against their own interest and honor, and contributing to prepare yokes for
their own necks.

O my infatuated Countrymen! My deluded Fellow Subjects, and Fellow Christians!
Open your eyes, I entreat you; awake from your dreams, and regard your own
safety!

As to you, who are members of the Church of England; it is amazing, that any
of you should be so blind to your own interests, and such apostates from common
sense, as to countenance and cooperate with a plan of procceedings, which, if
it succeeds, will at once distress and disgrace you. You are endeavoring to
provide arms for your enemies, and to put power into the hands of those who
will use it against you. You are setting up a sort of people for your masters,
whose principles you despise, and who were always fond of subduing by the iron
(...) or become victims of their intolerance. Indeed it must be confessed, and
I am sorry to say, that many of you appear already to have renounced one half
of your principles; or you could not proceed, as you do, in direct opposition
to the established rules and doctrines of the Church. The principles of
submission and obedience to lawful authority, are as inseparable from a sound,
genuine member of the Church of England, as any religious principles whatever.
This Church has always been famed and respected for its loyalty, and its regard
to order and government. Its annals have been never stained with the history of
plots and conspiracies, treasons and rebellions. Its members are instructed in
their duty to government, by Three Homilies on Obedience, and six against
Rebellion, which are so many standing lessons to secure their fidelity. They
are also taught to pray in the Litany, that the Almighty would preserve them,
"from all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion." And more than one solemn
office is provided, for the annual commemoration of former deliverances from
the power of those, whether Papists or Protestants, who turn religion into
rebellion, and faith into faction. But if you regard none of these things, you
are untoward, undutiful, and degenerate sons of the Church; and she will be
ashamed to own you for her children.

However, even those of you who are but half-principled in the doctrines of the
Church, will be looked upon with an evil eye, under the intended republic; and
they must give up the other moiety of their principles, before they can be
secure against harm or molestation. The Church of England has always been the
great obstacle in the way of those republican fanatics; and when once they are
established, no appearance of a Churchman will escape their resentment, or be
tolerated among them.

Nor will it fare better with the Friends, or people called Quakers; however
peaceable in their disposition, or however useful members of society. What they
formerly suffered in New England under the same sort of men that must and will
govern this country, if it should be withdrawn from the jurisdiction of the
British parliament, is too well known, and can never be forgotten. You, my
respected friends, have experienced the genuine spirit and temper of their
authority; and you can never wish to have your necks again encumbered with that
Presbyterian yoke of bondage, which neither you nor your fathers were able to
bear. On the other hand, you have the sense to see, and the gratitude to
confess, that you have been happy under the relief and protection afforded you
by the King and Parliament, in common with other good subjects. You will
therefore remember (to use your own expressive language) "that, as under divine
Providence, you are indebted to the King and his royal ancestors, for the
continued favor of enjoying your religious liberties, you are under deep
obligations (on this occasion) to manifest your loyalty and fidelity; and to
discourage every attempt which may be made by any, to excite disaffection, or
disrespect to him."

The Baptists have never had fair quarter allowed them by the demagogues of
New England; and they are perpetually complaining, from year to year, of the
acts of oppression and violence with which they are harassed by them. Now if
the people of New England have been thus intolerant, toward those that
differed from them only with regard to the case of baptism, while they
possessed an authority that was subordinate to the British Parliament; what
cruelty, toward all that dissent from them, may be expected, should they be
armed with absolute and incontrolable power?

As to the Germans and Dutch, to whose industry and good behavior the Colonies
are greatly indebted; if they should become subject to the jurisdiction
abovementioned, they will be considered as persons, not only of a different
religion, but of different nations and languages, from whom they have such an
aversion, that they have never admitted them to settle in New England; and
consequently all the Colonists who are of a foreign growth or extraction, must
expect to meet with a double portion of rancour and severity from their new
masters.

Nor can the moderate part of the Presbyterians, and Congregationalists
themselves, have any prospect of continuing free from molestation under their
government. Nothing can be more odious to bigots, than generosity and candor;
or more intolerable in the opinion of the furious, than moderation and
meekness. This assertion might be supported by the history of all ages and
nations; but we need not go far for a confirmation of it. For among the
Presbyterians and Independents in the Colonies, when the meek and the moderate,
the candid and generous have been brought before the tribunals of the bigoted
and furious, as has frequently happened; they have been treated with as much
unrelenting rancour and roughness, as if they had been Mahometans and Heathens.
So that there is no chance or probability, if the latter should come to the
possession of despotic power, which is the aim of the revolution they propose;
that their dispensations toward the former, would be less cruel than they
commonly have been.

In a word: no order or denomination of men amongst us would enjoy liberty or
safety, if subjected to the fiery genius of a New England Republican
Government; the little finger of which we should soon experience to be heavier
than the loins of Parliament. This has sometimes chastised us with whips, when
we deserved punishment; but that would torment us with scorpions, whether we
deserved it or not.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have said [see page 20.] that the Popish religion is not established in
Canada by the late act, but only tolerated; and that this was one of the
conditions on which the country surrendered to the crown of Great Britain.
Since the greatest part of this Address was printed off, the papers published
by the Congress have come to hand; in which they say, that the Roman Catholic
Religion, instead of being tolerated, as stipulated by the treaty of peace, is
established, by the act.

In order that the reader may see with his own eyes, and judge for himself of
this matter, I will present him with the following Extracts, from the Treaty of
Surrender, the Definitive Treaty of Peace, and the ACT for more effectual
provision, etc.

EXTRACT from the CAPITULATION of CANADA.
Art. XXVII. The free exercise of the catholic, apostolic, and Roman religion,
shall subsist entire; in such manner, that all the states and people of the
towns and countries, places, and distant posts, shall continue to assemble in
the churches, and to frequent the sacraments as heretofore, without being
molested in any manner directly or indirectly.

These people shall be obliged by the English government, to pay to the priests
the tithes, and all the taxes they were used to pay, under the government of
his most Christian Majesty.

GRANTED, as to the free exercise of their religion. The obligation of paying
the tithes to the priests, will depend on the King's pleasure.

Art. XXVIII. The Chapter, Priests, Curates, and Missionaries, shall continue
with an entire liberty, their exercise and function of their Cures in the
parishes of the towns and countries.

GRANTED.

EXTRACT from the TREATY of PARIS.
Art. IV. So far as relates to the matter in question. His Britannic Majesty on
his side, agrees to grant the liberty of the catholic religion to the
inhabitants of Canada. He will consequently give the most effectual orders,
that his new Roman catholic subjects may profess the worship of their religion,
according to the rites of the Romish church, as far as the laws of Great
Britain permit.

EXTRACT from the CANADA-ACT.
And for the more perfect security and ease of the minds of the inhabitants of
the said province, it is hereby declared, that his Majesty's subjects
professing the religion of the Church of Rome, of and in the province of
Quebec, may have, hold and enjoy the free exercise of the religion of the
Church of Rome, subject to the King's supremacy, declared and established by an
act made in the first year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, over all the
dominions and countries which then did, or thereafter should belong, to the
Imperial Crown of this realm; and that the clergy of the said Church may hold,
receive and enjoy, their accustomed dues and rights, with respect to such
persons only, as shall profess the said religion.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall be lawful for his Majesty, his heirs and
successors, to make such provision out of the rest of the said accustomed dues
and rights, for the encouragement of the Protestant Religion, and for the
maintenance and support of a Protestant Clergy within the said province, as he
or they shall, from time to time, think necessary and expedient.

The next clause of the act provides an oath of allegiance, to be taken by the
Canadian Papists, instead of the oath required by the 1st Elizabeth. The
succeeding clause enacts, that all his Majesty's Canadian subjects, within the
province of Quebec, the religious orders and communities only excepted, may
also hold and enjoy their property and possessions, etc. The last clause
provides, that the King shall have the power of creating, constituting, and
appointing such courts of -- ECCLESIASTICAL Jurisdiction, within and for the
said province of Quebec, and appointing from time to time, the judges and
officers thereof, as his Majesty, his heirs and successors, shall think
necessary and proper for the circumstances of the said province.

Thus we see in what manner the toleration of the Popish religion was secured
to the Canadians by treaty; and the act of Parliament allows them no more than,
the free exercise of their religion, without being molested, in the public use
of it, and that entire liberty in religious matters, for which they had
stipulated.

Indeed the parochial Clergy, are permitted to enjoy those tithes, by which
they had been always supported. This was proposed in the treaty; but in was
neither granted, nor rejected, by the British General, who left it to depend
upon the King's pleasure. After thirteen years experience of the dutiful,
peaceable and good behavior of his Canadian subjects, and at a time when his
other American subjects were become turbulent, licentious, and refractory, the
King, to whose goodness the matter had been referred, thought proper, with the
approbation and consent of Parliament, to comply with the reasonable
expectations and requests of the Canadians, in allowing the clergy to enjoy
their wonted support, under certain restrictions and limitations. But this
indulgence by no means converts the stipulated toleration into an
establishment, as the Gentlemen of the Congress are pleased to assert.

Tithes in Canada are the property of the Remish church; and permitting a
tolerated church to enjoy its own property, is far short of the idea of an
establishment. If the city of New York should be conquered by the Papists from
France, or the Independents from New England, (which I believe in my conscience
would be much the worst event of the two) and at the time of its surrender, the
corporation of Trinity-Church should contract for the free exercise of their
religion, etc. the confirmation of this liberty, with a permission still to
enjoy the estate that belongs to them, (upon which some people have long cast
an envious and wishful eye) would not amount to what is commonly understood by
a religious establishment. An established religion, is a religion which the
civil authority engages, not only to protect, but to support; and a religion
that is not provided for by the civil authority, but which is left to provide
for itself, or to subsist on the provision it has already made, can be no more
than a tolerated religion.

Now the Popish religion in Canada the Government is under no engagement to
provide for; it is only allowed to enjoy such provision as it has made for
itself, in a general way; and when this proposition is curtailed, whenever a
Papist embraces the Protestant religion; and the various religious orders and
communities are entirely dispossessed of their respective effects. But it
evidently appears from the act, that it is the object of Government to make
provision, as fast as the state of the country will admit of it, for the
encouragement of the Protestant religion, and for the maintenance and support
of a Prostestant Clergy.

From what has been offered, the inference is clear, that the Popish religion
is only tolerated in Canada; and that it is meant to establish the Protestant
religion in that colony. If, after all, men will confound the meaning of words,
and make no distinction between toleration and establishment, they degrade
themselves into the rank of quibblers and praters, and it is loss of time to
dispute with them.

The Reader is desired to correct with his Pen the following Errata.
Page 4 line 11 for exite read excite,

line 14 for could, read can,

p. 7 l. 21 for suppose, read suspect.

p. 10 l. 30 for relinguish, read relinquish.

p. 14 l. 28 for consigning, read confining.

p. 18 l. 33 after express, add that.

p. 23 l. 6 for ascribe, read describe.

p. 33 l. 5 for rero, read retro.

p. 34 l. 1^ for day, read way.

p. 40 l. 14 for (...), read (...).


