The Harmony between the Old and (...) Testaments respecting the Messiah: BEING
THE SUBSTANCE OF TWO SERMONS PREACHED before the United Congregations of
CHRIST-CHURCH and ST. PETER's, PHILADELPHIA, ON CHRISTMAS DAY, 1773; AND On the
SUNDAY when a Collection was made for the relief of the Poor of those
Congregations.

BY T. COOMBE, M. A. Chaplain to the Most Noble the MARQUIS of ROCKINGHAM, and
one of the Assistant Ministers of CHRIST-CHURCH and ST. PETER'S.

Religion must arise from an inward conviction, and there can be no conviction
without examination. RELIGIO PHILOSOPHI. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP,
in MARKET-STREET. M,DCC,LXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Discourse is made public, in compliance with the partiality of
some who heard it delivered. The author hopes the plain Christian may read it
with improvement, and that better judges will excuse a well-meant endeavor in
the cause of Religion and Humanity.

TO CHARLES LORD MARQUIS OF ROCKINGHAM, KNIGHT OF THE GARTER; AN INDEPENDENT
ENGLISH NOBLEMAN, DESCENDED FROM AN ANCIENT RACE OF WORTHIES, HIMSELF MOST
WORTHY: THIS DISCOURSE IS MOST HUMBLY AND AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED, AS A SMALL
OFFERING OF GRATITUDE, FOR THE OBLIGING COUNTENANCE WHEREWITH HIS LORDSHIP
CONDESCENDED TO HONOR HIS DEVOTED SERVANT THE AUTHOR.

ST. LUKE, xxiv. 44. All things must be fulfilled which were written in the law
of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me.
AS the Christian Religion comes addressed to the reason and understanding of
men, so the more we examine and consider it, we shall find it to be one vast
consistent scheme, commencing almost as early as the creation of the world, and
terminating only in the redemption of all mankind. INFIDELS who have neither
temper nor abilities for investigating the merits of Christianity, may cavil at
particular passages in sacred history, and bring the charge of absurdity
against the whole. -- RELIGIONISTS may urge the various tenets they have
adopted, with an unhallowed and illiberal zeal; adducing each in support of his
opinion some texts of scripture -- But men who have taken up their religion
from the conviction of their minds -- from calmly revolving the evidence by
which it is supported -- as well as its conformity to the reason and fitness of
things -- are not to be shaken in their principles by the scoffs of
unbelievers, or the bigotry of professing christians.

As this therefore is the day on which the great founder of our religion
deigned to become flesh and dwell among us, I cannot more usefully employ your
time and my own than, in pointing out the harmony which subsists between the
Old and New Testaments in relation to the promised MESSIAH. And let me be
permitted to hope that, as every in-individual is concerned to "know the
certainty of those things wherein he has been instructed," St. Luke, i. 4.
you will favor me with a serious attention, whilst I endeavor, in as summary
a way as the subject will admit of, to prove, that all things which were
written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning
the Messiah, have had their literal completion in the person of Jesus Christ.

One of the brightest ornaments of this or of any other age, Lord Lyttleton.
after having himself written very excellently upon the character of St. Paul,
has taken upon him to affirm, that if every part of the scriptures was lost,
save what related to this Apostle's conversion, he would undertake to prove the
truth of the Christian Religion from it alone. If then it shall appear that a
series of prophecies, the last of them written near four hundred years before
the events they pretend to foretell, at this time preserved entire in the
original Chaldee and Hebrew languages, and translated into Greek by seventy
interpreters two hundred and sixty years before the birth of Christ, have all
had their critical fulfillment in HIM; surely, such demonstrable evidence must
operate with all its force upon every sincere and candid enquirer. And when we
further consider that profane history, from its earliest dates, all along
concurs with the accounts left us by the sacred writers, we are compelled to
exclaim with the Jewish High Priest, though with a very different meaning,
"what need have we of further witnesses!" Many of the ancient prophecies indeed
are so strong and pointed, that they seem rather to be an history of facts
transacted during the lives of their authors, than the predictions of men
inspired with the knowledge of future events. Of this sort is the prophecy of
JACOB -- who, at least a thousand years before the last destruction of
Jerusalem, so exactly foretold the era of the Messiah's birth, that we may
venture to say of it what the noble author already quoted said of St. Paul's
conversion, and rest the proof of Christianity upon this prophecy alone.

But this will be considered in its proper order. Previous to it, let us take
notice of the promise made by the Almighty, immediately after the disobedience
of our first progenitors -- "I will put enmity, says God, between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruize thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel" Genesis iii. 15.
-- Here opens the first scene of that grand drama, which was to be
accomplished at Jerusalem. No sooner had Adam fallen, than a deliverer was
proclaimed -- a deliverer, whose entrance into the world should denote him to
be the SEED OF THE WOMAN in a sense in which no other ever was; metaphorically,
"a root out of a dry ground." Isaiah liii. 2.
And such was Jesus. The son of a spotless virgin, his errand into the world
was to overthrow the combined powers of Sin and Satan, and to erect a pure
kingdom of his own upon their ruins.

FOR more than two thousand years after the date of this promise, no further
intimation was given of the Messiah, idolatry had spread itself almost
universally throughout the world, and even the memory of the creation seemed to
be gradually wearing away. Amidst this universal depravity, it pleased God,
"whose promises are yea and amen," to ratify the covenant made with our first
parents, and to declare that in the family and line of ABRAHAM, "all the
nations of the earth should be blessed." Genesis xviii. 18. xxii. 18. xxvi. 4.
And surely -- if a deliverance from the curse of a violated command, a
restoration to the favor of an offended God, and the extension of a kingdom
founded in peace and righteousness are to be esteemed blessings -- these are
what all the nations of the earth have enjoyed in the advent of that Jesus,
whose extraction from Abraham has never yet been questioned.

JACOB, the grandson of this illustrious Patriarch, seems to have been favored
with a more than ordinary portion of the prophetic spirit, by which he was
enabled to foretell from what particular tribe of his family the Messiah should
derive his pedigree. For on his deathbed, when he was drawing to the
conclusion of a long and honorable pilgrimage, and his children were anxiously
soliciting his blessing, he thus addresses himself to Judah -- "Judah, thou art
he whom thy brethren shall praise thy hand shall be in the neck of thine
enemies, thy father's children shall bow down before thee. The scepter shall
not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until SHILOH come,
and unto him shall the gathering of the people be." Genesis xlix. 8. 10.
In this most remarkable prophecy, we behold, as at one view, the history of
the whole Jewish nation. The privilege of primogeniture is dispensed with, and
Judah, the fourth son of Jacob, declared to be Lord over all his brethren --
his enemies are to lick the dust before him -- and his scepter, or pre-eminence
over the other tribes, is to remain, until that great personage, emphatically
styled SHILOH, shall appear -- And appear he certainly did, in the reign of
Augustus Caesar, as will be seen in the application of this grand prophecy to
JESUS who was born at Bethlehem. --

THE first particular predicted of Judah is, that he is the person whom his
brethren should praise -- And it is one of the most singular circumstances in
history, that, whilst the several tribes were dispersed by contending Monarchs,
through various and distant kingdoms, and no longer subsisted in their national
capacity, the tribe of Judah alone preserved, even in captivity, the liberty of
being governed by its own laws and ordinances. To account for this stupendous
occurrence from the combination of what are called natural causes, would be as
weak as impious. We must look up to an higher source, to to the great FIRST
CAUSE of all, whose wisdom and goodness were concerned for the preservation of
the true religion, and whose omnipotence effected so wonderful an event.

AND, that the hand of the descendant of Judah was in the neck of his enemies,
let the miraculous establishment of Christ's religion declare. So rapid was its
progress, that, within a single century after the resurrection, the sound of
the gospel had literally gone forth into all lands, and there was not a nation
in the then known world, in which it was not embraced by many. Philosophy had
previously exerted its whole force for the reformation of mankind, and was
proved to be insufficient. But no sooner did the great Legislator of the
Christians enter upon his office, than the establishments which men had
combined and set up, fell prostrate before him -- superstition retired to her
cell -- and the kingdom of Satan trembled to its center. Idolatry, which had so
long maintained its empire, began gradually to decline -- the boasted Delphic
oracles forbore to give responses -- and thousands and ten thousands were daily
brought home to Jesus.

BUT enquire now, what is become of the tribe of Judah, and history will inform
you that, not long after the birth of Christ, it was stripped of all its
privileges, and reduced to a state of the most abject vassalage. Its scepter,
and whatever else distinguished this once famous tribe, were forcibly taken
away, and vested in a foreign power -- the Temple and Altar were no more -- the
holy city was levelled with its proud foundations -- and the land, which was
once "the joy of the whole earth," became the bloody theater of wars and
desolations. WHAT city (says Bossuet) has ever lost eleven hundred thousand
men in seven months time, and that in one single siege! So many Jews fell in
the last siege of Jerusalem. They had suffered nothing like it from the
Chaldeans. Under them their captivity lasted but seventy years. These seventeen
hundred years have they been slaves all over the world, nor do they yet find
any mitigation of their slavery.
Thus faithfully accomplished was this prophecy of Jacob; which so exactly
foretold the time of the Messiah's coming, that when the man of Nazareth was
born, all the eastern world was "looking for the consolation of Israel" -- And
the Jews, in excuse for their rejecting Jesus, were driven to assert, either
that the true Messiah was indeed born, but lay concealed, or that his coming
was deferred on account of the sins of the people. Strange! to make sin the
hindrance of his coming, when he himself made the atonement of sin the very
reason why he did come.

MUCH depends upon ascertaining the precise period of the Messiah's appearance;
and it has therefore been unanswerably shown by the labors of the learned, to
have been immediately after the expiration of the Prophet Daniel's weeks, [or
years,] and at the time predicted by Haggai and Malachi. Daniel had been
meditating on the Babylonish captivity, and the seventy weeks fixed upon by
Jeremiah as the term of his people's servitude -- when his thoughts are
instantaneously hurried forward to a more exalted subject -- to behold, in
strong prophetic vision, the deliverance of all mankind from the servitude of
heathenism and idolatry, "the reconciliation for iniquity, the everlasting
reign of righteousness, the full accomplishment of the prophecies, and the
anointing of the most holy." DANIEL, ix. 24. "This prophecy determines the time
from the rebuilding of the city after the captivity to the coming of the
Messiah, to be seven times seventy, viz. four hundred and ninety years: Exactly
after which period of time (the different computations of chronologers in this
point being but small niceties) exactly after this period of time, the history
of our Savior shows us that he appeared in the world." Dr. Clarke. Let the
reader for critical information on this head, consult the second volume of Dean
Prideaux's connection, etc.
The two prophets Haggai and Malachi give us to know, that the second temple
should continue till the Messiah should appear, and that after his coming it
should be destroyed; which it undoubtedly was, soon after the crucifixion,
having been reduced to ashes by the Romans. As certainly therefore as the
second temple is destroyed, so certainly is the Messiah come.

AND here we are surrounded with the full blaze of prophecies. Moses, David,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Micah, Zechariah, with those already mentioned, all,
under different figures and expressions, prophesy of Jesus --

"A PROPHET will the Lord your God raise up from the midst of thee, like unto
me; unto him shall ye hearken. Deuteronomy. xviii. 15.
"These be the last words of the Anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet
Psalmist of Israel -- He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear
of God -- And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun arises,
even a morning without clouds; as tender grass springing out of the earth by
clear shining after rain. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an EVERLASTING COVENANT; ordered in all things and sure -- For
this is all my SALVATION, and all my desire." 2d Sam. xxiii. 1. 3. 4. 5.
"Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the Skies pour down righteousness;
let the earth open, and let them bring forth the SAVIOR, and let righteousness
spring up together." Isa. xlv. 8.
"Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous BRANCH, and a KING shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth -- And this is his name whereby he shall be
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jer. xxiii. 5. 6.
"All my people shall have one SHEPHERD, and my servant David shall be their
Prince forever; and I will make a Covenant of peace with him, it shall be an
everlasting Covenant." Ezekiel. xxxvii. 24. 25. 26.
"I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the SON OF MAN came with the
clouds of Heaven, and he came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near
before him; and there were given dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations and languages should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting
dominion, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." Dan. vii. 13. 14.
"But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall come a GOVERNOR, that shall rule my people
Israel." Mic. v. 2.
"Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth,
and the sea and the dry land, and I will shake all nations, AND THE DESIRE OF
ALL NATIONS shall come." Hag. ii. 6. 7.
"Hear now O Joshua the High Priest, thou and thy Fellows that sit before thee;
behold I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH -- And in that day, ye shall
call every man his neighbor under the vine and the fig tree. He shall speak
peace unto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea even unto sea, and
from the river even unto the ends of the earth. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye
prisoners of hope." Zec. iii. 8. ix. 10. 12.
From the rising of the sun to the going down of the same, my name shall be
great among the Gentiles, and in every place, incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering -- For my name shall be great among the Heathen,
says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. i. 11.


BUT, above all the prophets, David and Isaiah so minutely describe the birth,
the sufferings, and death of the promised DELIVERER, that we are lost in holy
wonder, whilst we are comparing their predictions with the accounts related of
their exact fulfillment by the evangelists. From the former of these prophets,
the Messiah was to be lineally descended; and to this he makes very distinct
allusions throughout his Psalms -- "once I have sworn by my holiness, that I
will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the
sun before me." Psalm, lxxxix. 35.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee; ask of me, and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession." 11. 7. 8.
"The Kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents, the Kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts." lxxil. 10.
"All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake
the head, saying, he trusted in God that he would deliver him, let him deliver
him, seeing he delighted in him. I am poured out like water, the assembly of
the wicked have enclosed me. They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all
my bones, they stare and look upon me." xxiii. Psalm.
-- In the sublime language of Isaiah, "a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and shall call his name IMMANUEL." Is. vii. 14.
Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, the
MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING FATHER, the PRINCE OF PEACE: -- of the increase of
his government and peace there shall be no end on the throne of David: -- The
zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this." ix. 6. 7.
-- And again -- "he is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before its shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. He was taken from
prison and from judgment, and was cut off out of the land of the living."
Isaiah liii. 3. 5. 7. 8.


COMPARE now these prophecies with the records of the Evangelists, and you will
find them most critically fulfilled in the person of the SON OF MARY, and in
the revolutions which his gospel has caused throughout the globe. Not only the
facts foretold are established, but even the very expressions of the Old
Testament writers often adopted, with little variation, by the authors of the
New. Had he been a impostor, he would no doubt have fallen in with the
prejudices of the whole body of the Jews, would have affected great temporal
magnificence, and labored to have ascended a throne. But, though descended from
a long line of royal ancestors, he disclaimed every appearance of grandeur, and
was born of an humble virgin. Nothing could have been more fortuitous than the
circumstance which determined the place of his nativity. Judging by human
probability, NAZARETH was necessitated to be the spot. Yet in the providential
course of things, it happened that, about that time, an edict was issued by
Augustus Caesar, enjoining all persons within the Roman empire, and all the
other empires subject to his dominion, to repair to certain appointed places,
in order to be enrolled according to the respective families and districts to
which they belonged. And as Mary as well as Joseph was of the stock and lineage
of David, she was compelled, by the necessity of the case, to accompany her
espoused husband in a long and fatiguing journey from Nazareth to Bethlehem.

And whilst they were there -- there as it should seem by accident, but led
however by the same SPIRIT which enlightened the soul of Micah seven hundred
years before -- the days were accomplished that she should be delivered; and
she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling-clothes, and
laid him in a manger. Luke. ii 7.
--

As his entrance into the world was miraculous, so an unusual star shone out in
the firmament, and hovered over the humble village (...) MH, Bethlehem, so
termed by Josephus.
which had the honor of his birth. Conducted by the splendour of its appearance,
some pious sages had traveled from the east to Jerusalem, with a view, it may
be, to some new discovery in the planetary system, as well as to satisfy, a
curiosity, which about that time universally prevailed, respecting the coming
of CHRIST. The fame of their arrival very early reached the ears of Herod, who,
having given into the vulgar belief that the Messiah was to be a temporal
Prince, became jealous for the safety of his own Crown -- and accordingly
having summoned the whole body of his Sanhedrim and demanded their opinion
where Christ should be born -- and having also privily enquired of the wisemen
the particular time of the star's appearance -- he dispatched them to
Bethlehem, with orders to search diligently for the young child, and to return
with the earliest tidings -- for the King wishes to lay his scepter at the feet
of the illustrious babe, and to join in the adorations which are paid him! --
"When lo, continues the Evangelist, the star which they had seen in the east
went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was. -- And
when they were come* into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother,
and fell down and worshipped him -- And when they had opened their treasures,
they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. And being
warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod, they departed
into their own country another way. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked
of the wisemen, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children
that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under; -- according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
wisemen." Mat. ii. 9. 11. 12. 16.
-- The truth of this most barbarous deed remains as incontrovertible to this
day, as that there was once such a King as Herod -- And as he is always
represented to have been a man fond of popularity, and was moreover answerable
for his conduct to an Emperor ambitious of the same character, nothing could
have driven him to cover his Kingdom with the blood of infants, but the cause
already assigned -- Jealousy the foulest of human passions.

YET had thou, bloody King! been contented to have become tributary to the
PRINCE OF PEACE, thou would have been under an infinitely milder authority
than that of thy Augustus -- the diadem would have encircled thy brow securely
to the last hour of thy life -- and so many weeping mothers had not been seen
in Palestine!

But whilst humanity shudders at the recital of this execrable tale, a very
powerful argument hence arises, in confirmation of our holy religion. The
massacre of the Bethlehemitish children by Herod, will be mentioned whilst any
trace of history remains -- and the motive which alone could have instigated to
such savage cruelty, must have great weight in establishing the truth of
Christianity.

WITHOUT wishing however to lay too much stress on any single circumstantial
proof, the positive evidences for the divinity of our religion crowd so fast
upon us in almost every page of the Sacred Writings, that, to a candid mind it
seems unaccountable, how it should ever have entered into the heads of any to
set up themselves for Infidels by profession. All the proofs of which the
subject is capable have been afforded us; for it would be a reflection upon the
Supreme Being, even to suppose that he should give a religion to the world,
unsupported by proper evidence. No, my brethren -- God exacts not
impossibilities from his creatures. -- He calls upon us to reason with him. --
Before he requires us to believe that Jesus is the SENT of Heaven, he shows us
signs and wonders, suspends the laws of nature at his word, and makes every
thing above and around him subject to his control. Well therefore might the
trembling mariners exclaim, "What manner of man is this, that even the winds
and the seas obey him?" Confidently may we affirm, that the lawless surge would
never have grown calm, nor the furious wind have abated at the command of a
voice merely human, nor is it reasonable to believe that any one less divinely
commissioned than Jesus would have been mad enough to have made the experiment.

BUT my subject is PROPHECY, and I find I am insensibly entering upon a new
field of argument. Here then -- but that the time would fail me -- I should
speak at large of ancient types and symbols -- of the Paschal Lamb slain at six
in the evening, the hour when Jesus gave up the Ghost -- of the sprinkling of
the door-posts with blood -- of the brazen serpent erected in the wilderness --
of Moses, Isaac, and Jonah -- with many others strongly figurative of Chirst.
His name, his nation and his family -- the minute circumstance of his riding
into Jerusalem on an ass and a colt the foal of an ass -- his being betrayed by
the man in whom he trusted, and sold for thirty pieces of silver -- his having
vinegar given him to drink -- a bone of him not being broken -- the soldiers
parting his raiment, and casting lots upon his vesture -- his making his grave
with the wicked, and with the rich in his death -- all these were minutely
foretold, and tend not more to prove that Jesus is the true Messiah, than to
show the goodness of God, in thus leading us, through an awful series of
prophecies, to a mystery which Angels behold with adoration, but cannot fully
comprehend.

THE most important predictions, which refer to the time of the Messiah's
Advent and the circumstances of his nativity, have been spoken to: and so
clearly were these pointed out by a succession of prophets, that, as the
ancient Jews expected him at the time when he was really born; so our modern
infidels, overpowered by a blaze of evidence, have thought proper to
acknowledge his birth, whilst they deny him to have been, what his miraculous
works abundantly proclaimed him, the SON OF THE MOST HIGH GOD. Alas! was it
ever well attested, that any one but Jesus, and the few Apostles whom he
delegated to act in his name, unstopped the deaf ear -- restored the sightless
eye -- unloosed the speechless tongue -- and roused the dead from their eternal
slumbers -- no -- and the attempt to prove it tacitly implies, that the God of
truth once gave his sanction to an impostor.

Look into the world immediately before the Christian era, and see it every
where overrun with the most idolatrous and immoral practices, polytheism
openly countenanced, and revenge deified as a manly virtue. Eternity lay hid in
impenetrable darkness, nor could the most enlightened philosophers say, but
that when they resigned their being, they were never to resume it more. Look
into it, shortly after our SAVIOR's entrance upon his public ministry, and
behold idolatry almost every where abolished, men no longer disgracing their
maker's image, by bowing to stocks and stones -- the inanimate work of their
own hands -- but calling upon the one true God, in places dedicated to his
name, and forming their conduct upon a better system than that of SOLON and
LYCURGUS, or even of MOSES -- a system which, instead of requiring an eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, instructs us, "if our enemy hunger, to feed
him; if he thirst, to give him drink." By the preaching of Jesus the future
world became unfolded -- life and immortality, judgment, heaven and hell --
were brought to light, and the terms of our final happiness and misery fully
made known. By his stripes we were healed -- by his crucifixion, death lost his
sting -- by his resurrection from the grave, he has assured us of our
resurrection -- by his ascension into heaven, he has opened unto us the gate
of everlasting life -- and by the effusion of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, he
has shown us that he will be with all who call upon him in sincerity to the
end of the world.

NUMBERLESS were the converts to this new religion, within a very short space
after its promulgation -- wherever it was preached, it was believed -- and so
rapid was its progress, that it is said to have subdued the vast Roman empire
before Constantine possessed the throne. Thus faithfully was Christ's own
prophecy, in conjunction with those which went before concerning him,
fulfilled, "the gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations." Mat. xxiv. 14.
The law and the sacrifice, which were to last till the coming of the Messiah,
were abolished at the manifestation of Jesus, -- Within forty years after his
prediction Jerusalem was compassed about with armies, and torn with intestine
broils -- the kingdom itself, previously weakened under the base administration
of Herod and that of his successor, became a neglected province, During the
infancy of Christ, Archelaus held the reigns of government in Judea about ten
years; but his ill conduct obliging the Romans to depose him, he was banished
to Vienne. It was then the prophecy was accomplished which said, the scepter
should depart from Judah, Gen: xix. 10. In effect, Judea was reduced to a kind
of PROVINCE; and being annexed to Syria, she has since obeyed the Governors of
Syria, and the Magistrates who came from Rome to Jerusalem, with the title of
Procurators.

Mons. FORMEY'S Ecc. History.
and its once-favored inhabitants were scattered as sheep without a shepherd.
The cause of this sudden declension of Jewish grandeur was, their crucifying
the Lord of Glory. And it is a little remarkable that as they put our Savior to
death on a charge of treason against Caesar; so their national ruin was
completed by their refusing to own allegiance to a Roman Monarch.

To what new subterfuge then, will the cavillers against the Christian system
betake themselves, in excuse for their unnatural skepticism. Still to urge the
same dull round of objections, which have been exploded as fast as they have
arisen, argues as great a want of genius as of grace. The prophecies have all
been proved over and over, by learned men, to be really of the dates they
assume. They all point to a determinate period when a REDEEMER should be born.
They describe his birth, his person, his character, his sufferings, his death,
his resurrection, in language too plain to be mistaken. The three Evangelists,
who give us the account of the accomplishment of these prophecies, were dead
before the last destruction of Jerusalem -- so that their relation stands clear
of the suspicion of being the work of later ages Whoever wishes to see this
matter fairly proved, will have his curiosity well repaid by consulting the
second volume of Dr. Jortin's Remarks on Ecclesiastical History. See also Dr.
Lardner's History of the Evangelists.
--

THEY declare that, exactly at the time foretold, a BABE was born, in whom all
the seemingly jarring prophecies were reconciled -- poor, and laid in a manger;
and yet his nativity proclaimed by an host of Angels. The next account we have
of him, after his return out of Egypt, which was also foretold, is his
reasoning with the Jewish doctors; where the Divinity of his youth discovered
itself in "both hearing them and asking them questions," and astonishing them
with the wisdom of his answers, and the penetration of his enquiries. When he
comes to be baptized, the spirit of his Father descended upon him, in an
embodied form, and at the same instant a voice was heard out of Heaven -- "This
is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased." And when he expired on the
cross, the rocks were rent -- the graves were opened -- the dead stalked forth
-- the earth shook -- and the sun veiled his orb in a preternatural eclipse.
His life was one continued series of benevolent miracles -- his doctrines
breathed nothing but the most pure and exalted morality -- and whilst his death
evinced him to be the Son of Man, his resurection loudly declared him to be the
Son of God. More than seventeen hundred years have elapsed since the Holy City
with its Temple was in ruins; and the vain attempt to rebuild them, in the
fourth century, served only to establish more fully the credibility of Gospel
History. The Jews still continue dispersed -- the Messiah's banner is erected
in almost every clime and nation -- and, notwithstanding that the conversion of
countries is a slow and progressive work, the FULLNESS of the GENTILES is
evidently approaching. It is scarcely two hundred years, since the oldest of
our COLONIES, now flourishing in commercial opulence, in arts and sciences,
emerged from the night of heathenism. The sun of righteousness, in his course,
will next rise upon the immense regions beyond us, with healing under his
wings; and will dispel that gloom of ignorance and barbarity, under which they
have lain through a long succession of ages. And in the end, the NEW-WORLD
shall reach the limits of the OLD Earth's distant ends God's glory shall behold,
And the New-Word launch forth to seek the Old.
POPE.
-- God's ancient people shall be restored -- and the knowledge of the Great
Creator and his laws shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea. Nation
shall no more fiercely rise against nation, but men shall beat their spears
into pruning hooks, and their swords into ploughshares -- having no further use
for them. And then shall commence the GRAND THEOCRACY, when we shall ALL be one
flock under one shepherd, even Christ Jesus the Lord.

And here I should conclude, but that the CHARITABLE OCCASION of the day,
demands a particular application --

THROUGH the whole of this discourse, in order to give the subject a
consistency, I have been obliged to suppose myself addressing a people yet
unsettled in the fundamental article of our faith, that Jesus is the true
Messiah. If there be any such persons in reality among us, let them seriously
consider the consequences of rejecting a religion, supported by such
demonstrable evidence as the Christian -- which an omniscient God saw necessary
to communicate -- and which is so well adapted to all the exigencies of
mankind. Does it inculcate one sentiment, in the least incompatible with either
the natural or moral attributes of the great Being we adore? -- Does it
prescribe one doctrine or precept, in the smallest degree unfriendly to human
nature? So far otherwise, that it is a faith in which we may innocently live;
and in which, should it at last even prove an erroneous one, we need not be
afraid to die. For the great design of it is, to give us the most rational and
exalted ideas of God -- to amend our hearts -- to soften our dispositions -- to
make us better parents, brothers, neighbors -- to give a sweetness and relish
to life -- and, in a word, to enlarge the circle of our good offices as wide as
that of humanity itself.

As to you, my brethren, who have assumed the sacred name of Christians, let me
exhort you, to be studious not to bring a reproach upon your most excellent
religion, by the immorality and inhumanity of your lives. Let it never be in
the power of an enemy to say, that you profess a religion full of goodnature
and civility, and that, dead to the spirit of it, your hearts are estranged to
every tender sentiment, and utterly insensible of the wants and miseries of
your poor fellow-mortals, in these cold and pinching times. -- Charity is the
sweetest flower in the garland of Christian virtues, and the man who has never
worn it at his breast, may blush to want the best characteristic of a disciple
of the merciful Jesus -- A disciple of Jesus! -- alas! he is unworthy the image
of humanity, who can reflect upon the calamities which this season never fails
to introduce, without indulging a wish to remove them. --

I WOULD not be thought an advocate for the wandering beggar -- and yet of that
sort too, there must no doubt be some objects deserving much charitable pity --
But I would remind you, whilst "your houses are wainscoted with cedar," and
your boards groan with plenty, that there are many POOR FAMILIES -- some of
which have once seen happier days -- now drooping beneath the complicated load
of penury and disease, in the obscure streets of your city -- having no
shelter, but in your bounty, against the inclemencies which surround them --
and who would receive with gratitude, even the crumbs of your luxurious tables
--

O YE who know what it is to make generous allowances for the infirmities of
men like yourselves, forgive these the pride -- the modest pride -- which
forbids them to unveil their necessities to every eye, and to solicit that
mercy which they so much stand in need of -- Spare a venerable FATHER of a
FAMILY, the pain of relating the circumstantial story of his woe; how --
crossed in every virtuous endeavor to secure a subsistence in the world -- torn
down by sickness -- melancholy with disappointment -- and shunned by the
faithful friend in whom he trusted -- Nature is at length giving way, and
nothing now remains to him but to steal behind the scene, and leave the stage
to more successful characters. -- O spare his blushes and his tears, and save a
whole family from destruction, by staying the single prop on which all its
hopes depend. Approach him with the delicacy which his situation requires --
cherish his dejected spirit -- prevent even the asking eye -- and, if heaven
has allowed the means, enable him by your liberality, to rise superior to his
misfortunes. The blessings of an ingenuous heart, thus ready to perish, shall
follow you through life; and your own reflections, at the close of it, afford
you a better consolation, than if you had spent whole years in attempts to
unravel the mysteries of godliness, and in adjusting those modes and doctrines
of faith, about which the sentiments of men will differ so long as they are men.

BUT would you see the reverse of the medal, enter for a moment yon lowly
habitation! -- Behold there a WIDOW, upon whom the creditor has come, weeping
over her helpless offspring, and bemoaning the day when she first became a
mother! -- The cries of her famishing little ones plant daggers in her soul --
See, in that disfigured countenance, the struggle between despair, and the
principles of a religious education -- Hark! she is just making her appeal to
Heaven for integrity of her heart --

O my God, look down in pity upon ME, the unhappy work of thine hands! -- Thou
gave me children, and behold they cry for bread, which I have not in my power
to bestow -- I have been visited with sickness; yet have I not murmured at thy
will. I have been poor; yet have these hands ministered to our necessities, and
thou saw me resigned under all the changes of thy providence -- But my
orphans -- my orphans -- their innocent sufferings wring my spirit -- Alas! my
Almighty Creator, the bruised reed is almost broken -- the partner of my cares
thou has taken from me -- and all the miseries of widowhood and famine have
spread themselves in array against me --

GOD, in mercy, visit the hard heart which cannot melt at distress like this.
-- Fly to its relief, YE OPULENT and HAPPY ONES; and bear to be reminded,
whilst you are rioting upon the bounties of Heaven, that many such scenes, with
others equally calamitous, present themselves at this time, even in your
hospitable city --

THE miseries which inhabit yonder Jail, wherein upwards of an hundred persons
are confined, and many of these for inconsiderable debts, can only be known to
those, whose office occasionally leads them to visit such melancholy abodes --
They are miseries however which call for pity even from the INJURED, and for
redress from every good Member of Society. Undoubtedly the VIRTUOUS POOR have
the first claim to our favor; but, when a fellow creature is struggling with
every species of wretchedness, it is not a time to enquire, whether his
dis-tresses are the fruit of his own vices and indiscretions, or whether they
have been inflicted by the tyranny of others -- it is enough that he is a MAN,
and that he needs our assistance.

IT is my duty however to acquaint you, that it has been judged necessary to
restrict our CHARITABLE FUND this year, solely to the uses of the Poor of these
congregations -- a people daily increasing in proportion with your own growth
and that of the expenses of life, and whose number upon your Communion list is
at this time more than double what it was seven years ago. -- This being the
case, I trust no one will be offended at the hint, that, as a society, we have
yet to learn the art of regulating and providing for our Poor from the example
of our neighbors. -- Their good police, in this respect, has attracted the
notice of foreigners, is quoted among ourselves as a proverb, and certainly
deserves a general imitation.

WOULD you then convince the world, O Christians, that you have embraced the
religion of your Savior upon principle, produce your sign -- evidence the same
compassionate spirit which he evidenced -- and by this shall all men know that
you are his disciples, "because ye have love one to another." Perhaps too the
DEIST -- beholding the benevolent influence of your religion upon your conduct
-- may be won by it to acknowledge Jesus as his Redeemer, after every argument
had proved vain for his conversion. -- But whether, or not, you will hereby
discover the sincerity of your professions; and if men, by feeing your good
works, will not be led to glorify your heavenly father -- You will always have
the conscious approbation of your own hearts -- peace will be your portion
through this vale of vanity -- and, when the curtain drops -- you will behold
face to face that JESUS, whose doctrines and precepts you had thus studied to
adorn.

FINIS.

