Dr. COOPER's SERMON, PREACHED AT THE DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1773.

A DISCOURSE ON THE MAN OF SIN; DELIVERED IN THE CHAPEL OF HARVARD COLLEGE, IN
CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND, SEPTEMBER 1, 1773. At the LECTURE FOUNDED by the Hon.
PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire

By SAMUEL COOPER, D. D. Pastor of the Church in Brattle-street, BOSTON.

THE SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by MILLS and HICKS, at their Printing-Office in
School-street, 1774.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
II. THESSALONIANS ii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10. Now we beseech you brethren by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that
ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come except there
come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition: Who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped; so that He as God, sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that He is God.

And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. Even
him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved.


THE Romish superstition, considered in its structure, and the progress it has
made in the world, is at once a surprising monument of human sagacity and
weakness.

ADVANCING by slow degrees to that fatal maturity it acquired before the
reformation, it was nurtured by the observation and experience of ages, and the
abilities of a long succession of as deep politicians as perhaps the world ever
produced. It discovers a thorough acquaintance with the frailty of the human
mind: Its pomp and pageantry strike the senses: It manages with uncommon art
and address, every object that can touch the passions; and while it flatters
the corrupt inclinations of the heart, it is at the same time covered with a
glare of devotion and austerity, and supported with a sophistry, extremly
adapted to dazzle and mislead the understanding.

LONG before Luther appeared, it had extended itself over the whole face of the
Christian world: It had grown venerable by age: It had acquired astonishing
strength by its long prepossession of the minds of men: It had broken and
nearly extinguished, what it had most to dread, a liberal spirit of enquiry: To
conceal its own opposition to the model upon which it professed to form itself,
it had artfully withdrawn the sacred scriptures from common view: It had
closely interwoven itself with the constitution of states and kingdoms; and
under a pretense of aiding, had strangely gained an ascendancy over the civil
power, for which it soon pleaded a divine authority. While therefore we may
justly wonder that so much of it remains in this enlightened age, we are at the
same time obliged to acknowledge and adore a particular interposition of divine
providence, in the rescue of so many countries, from a species of false
religion, remarkable for the deep possession it takes of the minds of those who
have once been devoted to it.

POPERY, like other oppressive powers, grew too confident of its own strength,
and presumed too much upon the ignorance and submissive temper of those whom it
had subjected. Having long practiced, with amazing success, upon the credulity
and weakness of mankind, it at length pushed the experiment too far. Contrary
to that spirit of dissimulation and subtilty by which it had been generally
guided, it neglected to varnish its avarice, and venal dispensations for
licentiousness, with the color of prudence and sobriety. The sale of
indulgences at the beginning of the sixteenth century, was conducted in a
manner that shocked the grossest understanding, and offended the consciences
even of those who had implicitly resigned them to the direction of the church,
and had never entertained very rigid sentiments of morality.

THIS roused the great spirit of Luther, and prepared the minds of men to
listen to his discourses, and adopt his free and noble sentiments, as they
gradually opened and enlarged themselves.

HAPPILY for the cause of truth and righteousness, the tenth Leo, though
careless of the reputation of the church for sanctity and morals, was a friend
and patron of the liberal arts. Protected and sostered by him, they were
eagerly seized by the reformers, and employed by them with happy advantage in
effecting one of the most important and glorious revolutions the Christian
church ever saw. The human mind, awakened from its lethargy, and engaged in the
pursuit of religious truth, felt an unusual pleasure in the free exertion of
its own faculties, and pushed its enquiries from one subject to another with
surprising avidity and success. The scriptures being laid open, and the
explanation of them greatly aided by the revival of the Greek and Roman
learning, it soon appeared how contrary the distinguishing doctrines of Popery
were, to those delivered by Christ and his apostles; and how exactly the church
of Rome, that had so long been revered as the pillar and ground of truth,
resembled that apostate and idolatrous, that subtle and fraudful, that
tyrannical and persecuting power, predicted in our text, and in other passages
of the new testament.

WITH this resemblance, the reformers and their followers were greatly struck,
and finding the event so plainly corresponding to the prophecy, not only their
faith was hereby confirmed in the sacred writings, as a revelation from him who
alone declares the end from the beginning and from ancient times the things
that are not yet done; but their confidence in the truth and goodness of their
cause was strengthened, and their honest zeal and ambition enlivened, to
separate themselves from a religious community that had so grossly departed
from the doctrine and precepts of Jesus; to oppose its corruptions with the
armor of light; and to be honored as instruments in the hand of divine
providence, of delivering mankind from a system of false religion, which the
prophetic spirit itself had described and execrated as a child of perdition.

UPON this ground they boldly withstood the exorbitant and impious demands of
the chair of St. Peter, which had long been regarded as the center of unity,
and infallible in its dictates: Upon this ground they supported themselves
against the charge of scism, a charge which in that day carried a dreadful
sound to the ears of men, and which the papal power had employed every
artifice, every species of persecution and cruelty, to render formidable.

THE argument was indeed popular, and had great effect: The sound of
antichrist, and the Man of Sin, must have heightened an abhorrence of the
Bishop of Rome. But the reformers did not invent it; they found it prepared for
them by the spirit of truth; and they urged it with a manly boldness and
energy, for which they will long be honored in the church of God. That it was
not the extravagance of enthusiasm, not the artifice of a party heated by
controversy, and exasperated by injuries, to support its own cause, but the
result of a sober, though free enquiry into the sacred writings, has been
confirmed by the judgment of the most learned and temperate expositors from
that day to the present; and must be evident to every one who impartially
considers what these writings have delivered to us upon this point, and
especially the passage of St. Paul, which I have now read. A subject that very
properly comes under our present consideration, as it has been particularly
pointed out by the honorable founder of this Lecture; who, in an institution
that will transmit his name to posterity as a warm and generous friend to
protestant piety, and the rights of conscience, has expressed his will, that
the business of the third discourse upon this occasion should be for the
detecting and exposing the idolatry of the Romish church; their tyranny,
usurpation, fatal errors, abominable superstitions, and other crying
wickednesses in their high places; and finally, to prove that the church of
Rome is that mystical Babylon, that MAN OF SIN, that aposstate church, spoken
of in the New Testament.

No one will assert that prophesy, or a prediction of things to come, which
depend upon what are to us contingencies, is impossible. To man indeed,
futurity is veiled, or at best, the object of uncertain conjecture; but to the
eye of God all things are naked and open. He may then, in what manner, and to
what degree he pleases, foretell future events. Nor is there in reason, any
presumption against his doing this, upon special occasions, and for some
important purpose. And when he does it, in a manner plainly beyond all human
foresight, and in a great compass and variety of connected instances, such a
scheme of prophecy, accomplished, authenticates itself, and carries, in the
very face of it, the most genuine and convincing mark of its divine original
and authority.

BE it allowed, that a bold conjecture may be fortunate, and the event
sometimes surprisingly answer what was foretold at random, or upon the
principles of human probability, or some pretended occult art. Let the
prediction of Vettius Valens, the augur, From the twelve vultures that appeared
to Romulus, Valens foretold that the sovereignty of Rome would last twelve
hundred years.

Dr. Hurd cites another prediction, respecting what he calls a still more
important subject, in which every American is particularly interested. "A Poet,
says he, in the idea of paganism, was a Prophet too. And Seneca has left us in
proof of the inspiration to which, in his double capacity, he might pretend,
the following Oracle,

-- Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Occanus
Vincula Rerum laxet, et ingens
Pateat Tellus, Typhisque novos
Detegat Orbs; nec sit Terris
Ultima Thule.
This prediction was made in the reign of Nero; and for more than fourteen
hundred years, might only pass for one of those sallies of imagination, in
which poetry so much delights. But when at length, in the close of the
fifteenth century, the discoveries of Columbus had realized this vision; when
that enterprizing navigator had forced the barriers of the vast atlantic ocean;
had loosened what the Poet calls the chain of things; and in these later ages,
as was expressly signified, had set at liberty an immense continent, shut up
before in surrounding seas from the commerce and acquaintance of our world:
When this event I say, so important and so unexpected came to pass, it might
almost surprise one into a belief, that the prediction was something more than
a poetical fancy; and that heaven had indeed revealed to one favored Spaniard,
what it had decreed, in due time, to accomplish by another.

The Dr. adds, These two instances of casual conjecture, converted by time and
accident into prophesies, I take for granted, are as remarkable as any other
that can be alleged. Hurd's Sermons at the Lecture of the Bishop of
Gloucester, p. 101.

The last is quoted by Dr. Samuel Mather, in his attempt to show that America
must be known to the Ancients. His remark upon it is, We need not be so
unreasonably credulous as to believe, that when Seneca wrote in this manner, he
was inspired with the spirit of prophesy; no; for nothing of this sort appears.
It is much more likely that either from some faint apprehension of the
structure of the terraqueous globe, or from some traditional accounts of the
greatness of the earth, and of another world besides their old one; he might
write after this seemingly prophetic manner.


, respecting the duration of the Roman empire, be cited as an example. Should
we grant that this was as remarkable in its accomplishment as it is said to
have been, and that more of the like kind might be produced; yet, what sober
man can suppose, that a few such unconnected instances, respecting separate and
unrelated events, in distant ages, can vie with or diminish the credit and
authoirty of the scripture system of prophecy? A system vastly extensive, and
consisting of a great variety of parts, all closely combined in tendency and
design; surprisingly various, and yet minutely particular in the events it
foretells, which do all gravitate, so to speak, to one common center: A
prophetic system, that has been gradually accomplishing from the infancy of the
world; that is fulsilling more and more every day, and increasing the evidence
of its own divine original, and will do so, till the mystery of God shall be
finished.

IT has been insinuated, not only without proof, but in direct opposition to
the testimony of all history, that some scripture predictions were framed after
the events had happened, and are only histories, antedated and transmuted by
pious fraud into the shape of prophecies. But this cannot be pretended in the
instance we are now considering. For as the ancient predictions respecting
Jesus Christ were in the hands of the Jews, his greatest enemies, who preserved
with religious care and veneration, what has long since become the monument of
their own blindness, and obstinate infidelity; so the prophecies of the
new testament, concerning the apostasy of the church of Rome, have been for
many ages in the custody of that church (a very strict custody indeed) and with
all their policy, so infatuated have they been, as that with these predictions
in their hands, the divine authority of which they zealously maintain, they
have yet been gradually fulfilling them, and proving their own ecclesiastical
polity, to be that very mystery of iniquity there described, and devoted to
destruction.

LET it be further observed, that though we esteem the argument from prophecy,
to be solid and convincing, and a good additional one, against the church of
Rome; yet it is only one, among many; and not so essential to the Protestant
cause, as that upon supposition it should fail, and be given up, that cause
must fall with it. The main arguments against the corruptions of Popery, arise
from their own intrinsic absurdity, and direct opposition to the first notices
of the human mind in a religious enquiry; from the unprophetic and didactic
part of holy writ; from the plain doctrines and precepts of Jesus Christ; and
from the genius and spirit with which the whole gospel is animated and
distinguished. Not only does scripture condemn, but reason and common sense
reclaim, against the distinguishing tenets and practices of the church of Rome;
and against that arrogant and lordly, that intolerant and cruel, that delusive
and worldly spirit, that guides her decisions, directs her conduct, and
breathes through the whole pompous exterior of her religious offices and rites.
So that we have enough to satisfy us, without recurring to prophecy, that
Popery is in the true and proper sense, antichristian.

YET, when we behold with wonder this system of falsehood and iniquity, and that
divine providence should permit it to lift its head so high, and to obtain so
wide and lasting an establishment, in the visible kingdom of God; does it not
relieve our minds, and support our constancy to the truth, to consider, that
all this was not unforeseen by the true head of the church; that it was
permitted by him for wise and holy purposes; that it was foretold, and the
church early warned of it by the spirit of truth; and that the same spirit has
assured us, this grand delusion shall in due time pass away, and like the
"baseless fabric of a vision, leave not a wreck behind."

I AM aware indeed, that in the catalogue of learned authors, who consider the
papal power as antichrist Among these who are in favor of this opinion, we
find a Newton and a Clarke.
, and pictured by St. Paul in our text, some distinguished Protestant names are
not to be found. A particular account of the ground of this dissent, on the one
side, and what has been offered on the other, by the much larger number of
equally great and unbiassed men, cannot be expected in a single discourse See,
Mede, Poole, Whithy, Benson, Bishop, Newton, Hurd, etc.
.

GROTIUS, supposes this prophecy to refer to the time preceding the destruction
of the temple at Jerusalem, and that the Man of Sin, was the Roman Emperor
Caligula: And not being able to make out the resemblance, between this Emperor
and the subsequent part of the description, he is obliged to introduce Simon
Magus, as that wicked one who was to come with signs and lying wonders. But
Grotius, whose parts and learning are every where confessed, carried his candor
to an excess. He was deeply engaged in a plan, which almost every one but
himself considered as vain and impracticable, for accommodating the difference
between the Protestant and Popish communion: His hopes, however, upon this
point, were for a good reason, flattered by some of the most respectable
personages on the papal side. This might give a biass even to the mind of so
great a man; and knowing that nothing was more offensive to the Pope and his
adherents, than the application of the propheices concerning Antichrist, and
the Man of Sin to the papal chair, he might be led to employ his abilities to
find out another meaning. However this may be, it shows the soundness of the
common interpretation of this passage, that even such abilities could oppose it
with no greater advantage. For it is confessed on all hands, that Grotius never
fell so much below himself as upon this argument. The Romanists themselves have
tacitly acknowledged this, of whom it has been observed, that while they have
been fond of his name in this dispute, they have never boasted of the strength
or success of his arguments. In the opinion of the best chronologists, the
accomplishment he contends for, was prior to the prophecy; for Caligula died
before St. Paul wrote this epistle.

DR. Hammond, supposes Simon Magus and the Gnostics to be here described. Among
the learned refuters of this supposition, Grotius himself is one; and Le'Clerc,
another; whose opinion is, that the apostasy predicted in this passage of St.
Paul, was the revolt of the Jews from the Romans; and that Simon the son of
Gioras, who headed the revolt, in conjunction with his rebellious followers,
was the Man of Sin.

THE defenders of the Bishop of Rome are divided in their opinion upon this
subject. Some interpret it of Rome Pagan, or particular Emperors. Some plainly
discern the grand impostor Mahomet in this prophetic passage, and assert it
refers to him alone; of which opinion there are writers, not of their own
communion. Others, return the weapons of the Protestants upon themselves, and
affirm with much resentment and considence, though little plausibility, and
less truth, that the northern heresy, as they call the reformation, is the
apostasy foretold by St. Paul; and the chief promoters of it, the Man of Sin
Vid. on this subject the authors before referred to, and particularly the
Bishop Newton, and Dr. Benson.
But the greater part of the Romish writers, sensible of the weakness and
inconsistency of other interpretations in favor of their cause, do frankly
acknowledge that Antichrist is here described, the grand opposer of Christ and
his religion. But Antichrist, say they, is a single person, not a combination
or succession of persons; his continuance upon earth will be very short:
Adopting upon this occasion the prophetic period, a time, and times, and half a
time, and taking it literally, they limit the duration of Antichrist to three
years and an half. He will be revealed, they affirm, some time before the
coming of our Lord at the last day; when the church will seed the sad effects
of his subtilty and power; but, in their opinion, he has never yet made his
appearance in the world.

This deserves particular attention. It is an important confession from an
adversary; not from a single writer upon this subject, but the best popish
Doctors. Calmet himself, in his dissertation upon Antichrist, authorizes us to
assert this. They own then, that Antichrist and the Man of Sin, are one and the
same; they own that nothing has yet appeared in the world to fulfill the
prophecies concerning this iniquitous power. Is not this to confess, that all
the expositors we have now mentioned, and others who have endeavored to prove,
that Simon Magus, the Gnostics, the revolting Jews, the Roman Emperors, or
Mahomet, were solely intended by these predictions, are quite mistaken, since
Antichrist has never yet been seen? Strange indeed, that so remarkable a power
as the mystery of of iniquity is represented to be in the sacred writings, and
which the Apostle expressly tells us began to work in his own day, should not
in the course of seventeen hundred years, have grown to such a size as to be
visible somewhere! Yet so it is, according to the best interpreters on the
papal side; and if Antichrist is not to be found in the chair of St. Peter, he
is no where to be found; but, like the imaginary Messiah of the modern Jews, is
still to come.

How then, you may perhaps say, shall we distinguish truth from error upon such
a subject, and amidst so many various and contradictory opinions of those who
have employed much time, and no small abilities, in these researches? But let
us not be discouraged: Difficulties excite attention, and call forth the
exertion of the human mind; and attention to so noble a subject as the sacred
writings will ever be well repaid. There is a portion of obscurity intermingled
with the light of scripture prophecies, before their accomplishment, and even
after this is considerably advanced. We ourselves are able to assign some good
reasons for this; and there may be more, with which we are not acquainted. Even
the doctrinal part of scripture is not, in all its branches, so plain, but that
wise and good men have differed in their explanations of it; and can we wonder
that this should take place with respect to the prophetic! If we do not drop
our attention to the former upon this account, why should we to the latter.
Are not the decisions of mere reason, in different persons, various and often
opposite upon the same subject? Must we therefore turn skeptics? Time matures
our observations and reasoning upon common subjects, and give us an increase of
natural knowledge: Time rewards our religious enquiries with a knowledge more
important: Time illuminates what was dark, and explains what was mysterious in
the prophecies of holy writ. The successive labors of the learned and
inquisitive, upon this, as upon all other subjects, however they may differ in
their process and conclusions, have jointly contributed to enlarge the human
understanding.

DR. Whitby, whom I have not yet mentioned, so far agrees with Le'Clerc, as to
suppose this apostasy, or falling away, to intend the rebellion of the Jews
against the Roman government; but then he includes in it also, the apostasy of
many Jewish converts, from the christian faith; and the Man of Sin, according
to his explanation, is the body of the Jewish nation, the man of disobedience,
who will not submit to law and government. He allows, however, this and other
characters here given, to refer in part to the papal apostasy and usurpation.
"I grant, says he, it may in a secondary sense, be attributed to the papal
Antichrist or Man of Sin, and may be signally fulfilled in him, he being the
successor to the apostate Jewish church, to whom these characters agree as well
as to her."

THIS leads me to observe, that there is doubtless, a double sense in many
scripture prophecies. By this double sense, I do not mean a studied and
deceitful uncertainty in the expression, on purpose to secure the credit of the
prediction, on which side so ever the event may fall.

OF this kind was the answer of the oracle at Delphos to Craesus: To Pyrrhus it
was the same: So complete was the ambiguity, that one would hesitate in
determining which was the most natural construction of the words, whether the
Romans should vanquish him, or he should vanquish the Romans.

SUCH was the base duplicity of the ancient Pagan oracles, which some, even of
their own writers have not failed to complain of, and expose. But not an
instance of this kind is to be found in the prophecies of scripture. They do
not indeed speak of single and unrelated events; they are a regular system,
whose parts relate to one another, and to one grand object; and when they
predict an event, they often do it in language that plainly rises above it, and
looks further, and is afterward found to be more fully accomplished in a
subsequent one, similar indeed to the first, but perhaps much more important.
This is what I intend by a double sense: More events than one may correspond
to, and be intended by, the same prediction; events that have some general
resemblance to each other, and refer to one grand design, though they may
differ in some circumstances, and happen in distant ages.

THIS is undoubtedly true of the prophecies of holy writ; and so far is it from
diminishing, that it rather increases their luster and authority. They appear
more plainly from this circumstance to be a plan of prophecy not to be
counterfeited; and to proceed from that divine foresight, to which all events
in all ages, are at once open. This was the opinion of Lord Bacon. "In sorting
the prophecies of scripture with their events, we must allow for that latitude
which is agreeable and familiar to divine prophecies, being of the nature of
their author, with whom a thousand years are but as one day: And therefore they
are not fulfilled punctually at once, but have springing and germinant
accomplishment throughout many ages, though the height or fullness of them may
refer to some one age." Thus speaks, that great man.

THERE is a general analogy that runs through the whole providence and moral
government of God. One thing is often by its very nature the figure and type of
another. The dispensation of Moses was a ruder draught of that which the gospel
has established; and the state of the Jewish, preluded in many circumstances
that of the Christian church. And though the ancient prophecies might be partly
fulfilled in that age, yet we cannot doubt that they looked further, and have
been more fully accomplished under the gospel. In like manner, there is an
analogy between the first and succeeding ages of the christian church; and
though the predictions of our Savior and his apostles might have a first
respect to events, in their own day, or not very distant from it, yet we have
the best reason to conclude, that in many parts of them, they regarded distant
ages, and will not have their full and absolute completion till the time of the
restitution of all things.

UPON this principle, may we not in some measure, reconcile the opinions of the
learned Protestant authors before mentioned, and even some of the Romish, with
the truth of scripture prophecy, and at the same time maintain the conclusion
of by far the greater part of our own writers, that the papal Antichrist is
ultimately intended by the Man of Sin, and that no other power fully answers to
all the characters in this prophetic description.

THE Apostle John expressly tells us, that there are many Antichrists. These
are of different forms and sizes, and may appear in different ages, though all
agreeing in their opposition to Jesus Christ and his kingdom. A number of them
then may be so considerable, as to be the subject of scripture prophecy, and
pointed out before hand by the spirit of truth in this and other predictions,
for the warning and support of the faithful in different periods, though there
may be one principal Antichrist, chiefly and ultimately intended by these
predictions, in which they do all evidently center and unite.

WE may grant then, that the Man of Sin, he that opposes himself, and was in
due time to be consumed and destroyed, does not exclusively intend the papal
power, but also other enemies to christianity, "There is, says a late learned
and judicious writer, a complex kind of prophecy, viz. when future persons and
things in their natural characters and actions, are made emblems of persons and
things more remote than themselves, and are predicted with this very view, that
they may represent them. In this certainly there is nothing incongruous. Known
unto God are all the actions of men from the beginning. Every event that comes
to pass is the effect of his providence. From the characters and actions
therefore of persons, who he knew would come upon the stage, he might easily
choose those which in their nature and circumstances, were best adapted to be
emblematical representations of the future persons and events to be introduced
in more distant periods: And having fixed upon such as he saw to be proper for
that end, it was every way agreeable to his wisdom to foretell them, in order
that he might raise and keep up among mankind, an expectation of the more
distant greater events. Indeed this method of prophecy is so far from being
absurd, that nothing can be conceived better adapted to display the perfections
of God. For it gives us the grandest, most magnificent, and most affecting idea
of the power and foreknowledge of God, and of the extent of his providence,
whereby the world is governed."

"Of this kind of prophecy we have an example 2 Samuel vii. 12. In its first
meaning, this prophecy evidently refers to Solomon. Nevertheless, that it had a
second meaning, referring to more distant persons, is equally plain. The
different passages of the prophecy must be applied, in their highest senses, to
the different persons spoken of, according to the peculiar nature of each.
Some, of Solomon, and his ordinary descendents; others, of the Messiah only;
and of Solomon, as his type."

MACKNIGHT'S Truth of Gospel History. Page 186.


in or near to the apostles time; and some that are cotemporary with this
power. All of these are certainly not too small and inconsiderable to be
noticed in the predictions of holy writ, and ranked among the grand opposers of
the gospel. Nor would our concession injure the unity of design in these
predictions; or weaken the evidence, that in our text, the Romish Antichrist is
chiefly intended.

THE Jewish nation as a body were adversaries to Christ, and persecutors of his
followers: Those of them that apostatised from the christian faith were perhaps
as fierce in this opposition as any: Their Sanhedrim and High Priest, who sat
in the temple of God, were the leaders in this persecution: They were for
exalting themselves above the Roman Emperors, called Gods in the sense that
civil rulers are so called in the sacred writings. But the power and polity of
this nation were soon after, according to scripture predictions, signally
broken, by the coming of the Lord Jesus, to execute his judgments upon them.

SIMON MAGUS was a Man of Sin; he came with signs and lying wonders; but with
other seducers, and opposers of the gospel, who accompanied, or soon followed
him, he has long since passed away.

THE Pagan Emperors employed their power to destroy the religion of Jesus in
its infancy, and severely oppressed and persecuted his followers: But the
gospel, as had been foretold, prevailed; and at length the Empire, with
Constantine at its head, assumed the profession of christianity. This was one
remarkable coming of the son of man, though clouded by the internal corruptions
of the church.

MAHOMET, was a Man of Sin, a false prophet; who came with deceiveableness of
unrighteousness, and induced many to believe a lie; a great and successful
opposer of the gospel by the sword. His seat the Turkish Empire, has for a long
time, according to scripture predictions, been upon the decline. It was once
the terror of all Europe; it can now scarcely support itself against the attack
of a single Christian power.

HOW far we may allow this prophetic description of St. Paul to refer to these
persons, and events, I leave, after what has been said, to the decision of
others: My principal design being to show, that none of them do fully answer
and absolve this prophecy; while in the Papal Antichrist, all the characters
surprisingly center and unite.

THESE characters are, apostasy; a Man of Sin who sits in the temple of God;
or in the church; who at the same time opposes himself to Christ and his
kingdom; who exalts himself above all that is called God, all civil rulers;
who shows himself that he is God, impiously assuming the power and authoriry
of the Almighty: whose coming is after the working of Satan; with cruelty,
subtilty, and unrighteous deceivings; with lying wonders and false miracles.
The time also of his appearance, though not particularly ascertained, is in
general pointed out by several circumstances.

SOME of these characters do not agree to the body of the Jewish nation. They
did not apostatize from christianity, for they never assumed that profession:
Those who fell away from the gospel, had no leader, and were absorbed in the
much greater part of the nation, to which they returned. Simon the son of
Gioras was never exalted above the Emperor, but became his captive. Neither he,
nor the High Priest, nor the Sanhedrim, much less the body of the nation, ever
sat in the temple, and received homage as God; for the Jews in that age, with
all their impieties and vices, had the greatest abhorrence of idolatry, and
could not endure any approaches to it. These important circumstances evidence,
that the Jewish nation does not afford a complete fulfillment of this prophecy.

NEITHER do Simon Magus, and the Gnostics, as Dr. Whithy has largely and fully
proved. The Apostle declares, in the beginning of this chapter, that the day of
Christ was not at hand: But if by this day be principally meant, the day in
which he was to come for the destruction of Simon Magus, as Dr. Hammond's
hypothesis supposes, it was, contrary to the declaration of the Apostle, near
at hand; for Simon perished within four years after the writing of this
epistle; and sixteen years before the destruction of Jerusalem. He never sat,
showing himself as God, either in the Jewish temple, or the Christian church.
Nor did the sect of the Gnostics fall with this their supposed leader; nor
indeed with the Jews, at the ruin of their temple and City; for it prevailed
most after both these events.

THE Roman Emperors, though inimical to Jesus and his religion, do not fully
answer to this description of the Man of Sin. They never apostatized either
from the Jewish or Christian faith: They were revealed before the writing of
this epistle: Their power and authority, and their enmity to the gospel, was
open and known to all the world; whereas the Apostle informs us, that the Man
of Sin, though he already began to work, yet did not appear, but was to be
revealed in some future time. They did not pretend to the power of working
miracles; nor was their chair or seat in the temple of God.

MAHOMET was no apostate; for he never professed either the religion of Moses,
or of Jesus. He never sat in the temple of God; for though he changed many
Christian churches into Mosques; yet certainly these edifices, filled with
Mohammedan zealots, could not be called after such a change, in the sense of the
Apostle, the temple or the church of God: Nor did this deceiver ever pretend to
establish his authority by miracles. This is acknowledged, as Dr. Prideaux
assures us, in the Alcoran itself, and by the best interpreters of it.

As to the recrimination of the Papal writers against the Protestants upon this
point; in order to show the justice of it, they must first prove that the
reformed churches have a Man of Sin at their head, to whose supremacy they pay
an unlimited submission; that he sits in some capital temple as God; and
that his cause has been promoted by pretended miracles: And finally, to prove
the reformation an apostasy, they must overthrow all the arguments brought by
the reformed against the distinguishing dogmas and rites of their own church;
and evidence, that these are supported by the authority of the new testament.
But this would be a much greater miracle, than with all their pretensions, they
have ever yet been able to perform.

HAVING thus shown, that none of these persons and events do fully answer to
this prophecy; though in several of them there is some general and strong
resemblance of it; if now we can prove that all its characters are to be found
in the Papal power, it must satisfy us, that this power was ultimately, and
principally intended by it.

IN the first place, let it be observed, that the Apostle's design in the
beginning of this epistle, is to show, that the day of Christ, by which he
plainly means, as has been abundantly proved by expositors, the final judgment,
was not at hand, and should not come, except there come a falling away first;
and that Man of Sin be revealed. By which he strongly intimates, that the
apostasy he principally meant should be extended to a distant time, and far
beyond the destruction of Jerusalem.

THIS apostasy is evidently a religious one; not a falling away from
government, but from the purity of faith and worship: It was to be effected by
strong delusions, and the deceiveableness of unrighteousness; through which
those who had not the love of the truth, should be induced to believe a lie
that they might be damned; having had pleasure in unrighteousness, and been
fond of the deception.

THE principal character in it; the leader, to whom the prophecy chiefly
refers, is the Man of Sin: A strong expression, indicating not only one who is
very wicked himself, but eminently induces others to act wickedly. By this Man,
in the singular number, the absolute monarchy in the church of Rome is well
described; though we do not suppose any particular Pope is intended, but the
Bishops of Rome in succession. It gives us a general character of that order of
men, and of those who have had the principal share in their ecclesiastical
administration; the chief promoters and defenders of the Romish apostasy.

THAT this application, severe as it may seem to be, is not unjust, all history
attests. No man can read Platina's lives of the Popes, and Bowers's larger and
more modern history, without being shocked at the impieties, the perfidy, and
unbounded debaucheries of those who have sat in St. Peter's chair; and without
acknowledging, that these, if any upon earth, were Men of Sin. Nor can we take
even a cursory view of the Papal system of religion; its direct opposition to
the honor of God and the one mediator; its gross superstition and idolatries;
its tendency to debase and enslave the human mind; the indulgence it grants to
vice in every form; and the pleas it allows for crimes, at which the untutored
breast immediately revolts; without acknowledging, that the contrivers of such
a system, with the gospel in their hands, must have had an heart, to an
uncommon degree insensible and depraved.

ANOTHER character is, he opposes: He is an adversary to Jesus Christ and his
Kingdom. This directly answers to the name Antichrist, and indicates the head
of the Romish church to be the principal Antichrist, spoken of by St. John;
which may signify, both one who places himself in the room of Christ, and acts
in opposition to him. The Pope calls himself the vicar of Christ; the only
visible head of the church; and blasphemously arrogates to himself the
infallibility and supremacy of our ascended Lord. Under the pretense of serving
him, he steps into his place; and there corrupts the simplicity, defiles the
purity, and opposes the true power and spirit of his religion. This Son of
perdition, the very phrase by which our Lord describes Judas, betrays his
master with a kiss, and sells him for silver; debasing his doctrine and worship
for the gain of unrighteousness.

HE opposes with fierceness, as well as subtilty and deceit. He makes war with
Saints, and proves himself to be that cruel and oppressive power, predicted by
Daniel, and afterward in the revelations of St. John, which has horns like a
Lamb, but at the same time, speaks like a Dragon.

How mild his appearance, how gentle his language, upon some occasions! But how
dreadful his power! How relentless his cruelty! Speak, ye holy souls, for you
can tell! Ye martyrs, and confessors! Who, because you would not violate your
consciences by submitting to his unrighteous impositions, and renouncing the
truth as it is in Jesus, have lost your estates; been torn from your tenderest
connections; have languished in dungeons, have groaned upon the wreck, and
expired in flames. Speak, ye who suffered in England in the Marian days! Speak,
ye thousands, ye many thousands, that fell at once in the massacres of Paris
and Ireland! Speak, ye Waldenses, and Albigenses, who fell in still greater
numbers, and more varied forms of torture! Your blood indeed is vocal, it
cries from the ground: Though art and falsehood have been employed, to disguise
the facts, and to stifle the voice; it pierces through all, and rings in the
ears of men, the unparalleled cruelty of that mystical woman, that mother of
abominations, the church of Rome; drunken with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.

IN vain does she attempt to conceal, or palliate this part of her odious
character: The stain is indelible. To her we may apply the words of the
prophet; though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet is
thine iniquity marked before me, says the Lord God Jerm. ii. 22.
.

IT can be demonstrated from history that she has shed ten times more christian
blood, by her holy wars, her cruzades, her assassinations, and numberless
persecutions, than all the pagan Emperors united. The inhumanity of her court
of inquisition is not to be equalled, among the most barbarous nations, nor by
any other court, ever erected by the greatest tyrant.

WHAT an idea does it give us of the detestable cruelty of the sons of Rome, to
be told, that an American savage, ready to expire under the hands of the
Spaniards, asked a priest, who offered to prepare him for Heaven, whether the
Spaniards would dwell there: Being assured they would; then, said he, "let me
go to another place." It was the language of nature: He knew he could not be
happy with such associates. Much the same idea of christianity was given to the
pagan Saxons. Charles the great, under the influence of the court of Rome,
Monsieur St. Faux says, having conquered them, commanded them to abstain from
meat in Lent, and to be baptized, under pain of death. In this manner was the
Prince of peace first revealed to them; and the poor Saxons were driven to
christian baptism, from the terror of being baptized in their own blood Popish
writers assure us, that they are now grown much more mild and moderate, and
have none of the ferocity and cruelty which was the temper of former times, and
that they condemn persecution for a mere diversity of religious sentiments.
They may be so, and they must be fools who believe them. It is probable enough,
that amongst their Laity there are several who dislike all sanguinary methods
of supporting their religion; but it is because they do not fully understand
their own ecclesiastical system, into the very nature of which persecution is
so closely woven, that nothing can separate it. Upon blood it was built, and by
blood it must be supported. Toleration and liberty of conscience would
infallibly undermine and destroy it. In this present century, and in our own
times, there have been cruel examples of Popish intoleration and persecution;
sufficient to warn us what we are to expect from them. JORTIN'S Sermons. V. 7.
P. 449.
.

THE next character of the Man of Sin, is, he exalts himself above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped. Who does not immediately confess the
Bishop of Rome in this description? He exalts himself, not only above all
pastors, all ecclesiastical officers and dignitaries, but above all civil
rulers, who are called Gods; above all Kings and Emperors. The Emperor
Frederick the first, held the styrup of his horse, and was chid for holding it
on the wrong side. Another Emperor, Henry IVth, waited three days at the gates
of Pope Gregory VIIth, to obtain an audience. Frederick, fell prostrate in St.
Mark's church at Venice, before Alexander III, in presence of the people; while
the humble Bishop, placing his foot upon his neck, uttered that passage of the
Psalmist; thou shald tread upon the lion and the adder; the young lion and the
dragon shall thou trample under foot. The Prelate of Rome has deposed Kings and
Emperors; absolved their subjects from all allegiance to them; and
authoritatively required their taking arms against them.

This has not only been done by some who have filled the pontifical chair, but
is agreeable to one of the professed principles of the Romish church. It is to
be seen in their decrees, of at least equal veneration and authority among
them, with the Bible itself; That all Kings and Emperors ought to be subject to
the Pope; that he is placed by the Lord over nations and kingdoms; not some
only, but all: That whatsoever the Roman church ordains, must be observed by
all, without control, and everlastingly; and that it is of absolute necessity
to salvation, that every human creature should be subject to the holy father.
Accordingly, Clement the fifth declared, that by his undoubted superiority to
the Emperor, and by the fullness of power Christ had given him in the person of
St. Peter, he did annul all his proceedings.

THE Apostle adds, So that he as God, sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. The temple of God, signifies, in prophetic language,
the church of God; and as the Man of Sin was to appear after the abrogation of
the Jewish law, it is plainly intimated here, that he was to be found in the
christian church; that by means of his rank and influence in this church, he
was to rise to his exorbitant power; and that it would be held and administered
in an ecclesiastical form. He is then a professed christian: The authority he
claims is spiritual; and in the church he receives the homage of a God.

WHAT can give us a more exact idea of the sovereign Pontiff at Rome? When he
is elected, he is seated on the high altar of St. Peter's church, the very
place of the idolized host, which the Papists say, is Christ himself: The
people prostrate themselves before him, and implore his favor and blessing.
They address him, "Our Lord God the Pope." He extends his singer, and makes a
motion with his hand, and their sins are all forgiven. Is not this like the
feigned Jupiter, on old Olympus? Is not this to sit in the temple as God?

AFTERWARD he sovereignly controls every thing in religion. He exalts himself
above God himself; he makes void the law of God by vain traditions, and impious
establishments of his own. He holds back from the people the scriptures of God,
and places in their room his own decrees. He forgives sins upon terms directly
opposite to those upon which God has declared them to be forgiven; and allows
vice to be justified by a casuistry, of which even a pagan would be ashamed.

THE coming of the Man of Sin is said by the Apostle to be after the working of
Satan. This I know is generally taken to refer to the signs and lying wonders,
mentioned immediately after. But does it not appear natural to suppose, that
this coming after the working of Satan, may intend, more generally, after the
model of Satan, the God of this world, in his own kingdom; or among the pagans,
where he had so great an influence; and that it contains a strong intimation
that the corrupt religion introduced and established by the Man of Sin, should
bear a strong resemblance to that which was formerly found in the kingdom of
darkness? That this is true, no one who takes a fair and impartial view of
both, can doubt. So that however really christian Rome once was, it has for
many ages so far returned to an imitation of its former pagan idolatries and
superstitions, that christianity seems to be almost covered and buried under
them.

IN place of the worship of the one God and Father of all, their prayers and
vows are chiefly directed to the Virgin Mary, and other saints. The canonizaton
of these saints strongly resembles the apotheosis of the ancient pagans.

THE custom of leaving legacies to their gods, which grew to such excess, as to
require being bounded by the Roman law, as we learn from Ulpian, has in no
small degree been followed by the church of Rome. In imitation of the pagan
festivals, the Popish calendar has marked at least an equal number of christian
holidays. The writers of their legends, and lives of the Saints, have evidently
borrowed the substance of many mavelous tales from Ovid, and other pagan
authors, leaving out at the same time, the beauty and elegance of the classic
originals Vid. Jortin, and Middleton's Letter from Rome.
.

Go into the churches of modern Rome, and according to the account of the most
judicious and faithful travelers, you will see almost every thing, after the
working of Satan, and the model of paganism. You will see many altars, called
christian, smoking at once in the same church, with incense; though the
primitive professors of the gospel, would endure any thing, rather than offer
incense before an idol. You will there see, as in ancient Rome, innumerable
tapers and candles, burning before the shrines and images of their Saints: You
will see offerings and votive gifts of various kinds, hanging round their
altars as in a pagan temple; and innumerable devotees, bowing and prostrating
themselves before images of wood and stone; and some of these the very images
that were adored by pagans, having undergone no other change than the ceremony
of baptism Go into their roads, and you will meet with many such images, like
those of the guardians of the highways among the Heathen, and travelers in
various forms paying their devotions to them. Enter their cities, you will find
the same kind of idols, and receiving the same homage, at the corners of the
streets, in the baths, in the markets, and in almost every place of public
resort. All this, which is certainly according to the model, formerly produced
by the working of Satan, in the darkness of heathenism, you will now find in
the patrimony of St. Peter, and in the very city where his pretended successor
sits enthroned.

THE Man of Sin, comes, says the Apostle, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders: And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness. This part of the
description, as exactly corresponds to the papal Antichrist, as any we have
considered. Every one knows the pious frauds that have been sanctified and
practiced by the Romish church; and that it has all along been fond of
supporting its credit and authority by pretended miracles.

BELLARMINE mentions miracles as one mark of the true church; and it would fill
volumes, to give a particular account of all these lying wonders. How many
ghosts have appeared, to establish the doctrine of purgatory, and support the
revenue which the church draws from it? All the images of their Saints, have
wrought miracles. They have sweat; they have groaned; they have shed tears;
they have bled; they have spoken; they have changed their posture; they have
walked; they have flown through the air; they have disappeared in one place,
and been visible again in another; they have given sight to the blind; hearing
to the deaf; health to the sick; and even life to the dead. Almost every votive
gift, is produced as an evidence of some miracle performed by the saint at
whose shrine it stands; and these miracles are related to encourage such
donations, by which the wealth of the church has become immense. The holy house
of Loretto, which they tell us, was brought many miles through the air, to the
place where it now stands, has upon this account been amazingly enriched by
such offerings.

THE legends of the Romish church are full of these ridiculous miracles: And
though since knowledge has increased in the world, they have grown more modest
in their accounts; yet the same fondness for these lying wonders continues
among them; as appears from the pompous account, published not many years ago,
of the miracles performed at the tomb of the Abbe' de Paris.

IT would be endless to reckon up all the unrighteous deceivings practiced by
the papal Antichrist; and to trace the art and subtilty employed to cover the
falsehood and deformity of his religious system. The Pope pretends to nothing
but a spiritual power, and holds his territories and wealth in right of St.
Peter. He is a tender father, and makes no use of the sword; he only gives up
obstinate heretics and incorrigible offenders to the civil magistrate, and
admonishes him to do his duty. Though the idolatry and superstition he
authorizes are gross in many instances as the pagan; and though the people are
known to address the image, and to believe that the Saint some how dwells in
it; yet the plea is, that the highest worship is not given to the latter, and
that the former is designed only to bring to remembrance some eminently holy
person.

WITH what specious pretenses does he varnish some of the blackest crimes, and
even sanctify perfidy, treasons, murders and massacres, while he throws the
most frightful colors upon every manly assertion of the rights of human
nature, and the freedom of conscience? Those who have disputed his usurped
authority, and nobly resisted his unrighteous impositions, if it was without
the reach of his power to torment their bodies, have at least been blackened by
every artifice of calumny, and represented in the most odious characters.
Luther, among many others, experienced this. His motives for opposing the papal
power, his whole life, and the manner of his dying, have been basely
misrepresented by the Romish writers. But the faithful pen of history has
refuted these malicious calumnies, and vindicated his integrity; and without
raising him above the frailties of a man, has preserved his name in all the
luster, that undaunted fortitude, and uncommonly great and successful efforts,
in a cause importantly good, never fail to impart.

To those who have a respect for rigid morals, and a life of mortification and
self-denial, the Romanists hold up the severity of their pennances, and the
rigor and austerity of some of their religious orders. At the same time, they
who choose to live like men of the world, need not, upon this account, go out
of their church, nor resign one of its privileges. The pontiff has the merits
of all the Saints, as well as of Christ, in a common fund at his own disposal,
and from thence for a good price he draws dispensations, indulgences and
pardons, adequate to the most licentious inclinations. Under this pretext he
vacates every obligation to a religious life, and leads those to destruction,
who have pleasure in unrighteousness; whose condemnation is just; inasmuch as
such a deception, so contrary to the prompt decisions of conscience, must be
chosen and affected. By these and such like arts, an incredible share of the
lands and wealth in England, and in other kingdoms and states in Europe, was,
before the reformation, the property of the church.

THE terms in which the benefit of indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing
them, were recommended by Tetzel and his associates in Germany, are too
extravagant to gain belief had we not the most authentic testimony for them. If
any man, said they, purchases letters of indulgence, his soul may rest secure
of its salvation Robertson's History of Charles v. vol. ii. page 41. Am. Ed.
. The souls confined in purgatory, for whom they are bought, as soon as the
money tinkles in the chest, immediately ascend from their torments to Heaven:
Through them, the most heinous sins, though one should violate the mother of
God, would be remitted! The cross erected by the catholic preachers of the
gospel is as efficacious as the cross of Christ himself. Lo! the Heavens are
opened; you may enter now. For twelve pence, you may redeem the soul of your
father from purgatory: And are you so ungrateful that you will not redeem the
soul of your father from torment? If you had but one coat, you ought to strip
yourself instantly and sell it, to purchase such benefits.

To all this we might add the unrighteous deceivings by which the Romanists
have corrupted christian morals; their detestable principle, that faith is not
to be kept with heretics; the perfidy and inhumanity with which, according to
this principle, Huss was treated at the council of Constance: Their allowance
of equivocation and mental reservation; and that the blackest crimes may become
innocent and even meritorious, if they be done from a good intention, and for
the service of the church. All this is well known to the world, and may at once
be discerned to be part of the character of that wicked one described in our
text.

BUT high as he may exalt himself; confident as he may be in his own policy and
power, and in the support given him by the kings of the earth, he is after all
the son of perdition, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth,
and destroy by the brightness of his coming. This prediction, we have before
observed, does not respect any particular person, but an order of men in
succession, contriving and advancing a system of falsehood and iniquity. This is
the object to be consumed. The breath of Christ's mouth is his word, and a
brightness ever attends it. Error is destroyed by the light of truth, as
darkness ceases when the sun appears.

WHILE the Man of Sin rose, the gospel was obscured, and gradually withdrawn
from the view of men; the truth was held, or imprisoned, in unrighteousness:
But when this was set at liberty, and the sacred volumes opened, the papal
system felt the shock, and was evidently blasted, though not destroyed, as by
the fire of Heaven; blasted by the stroke of that gospel, which our Savior
compares to the lightning which comes out of the East, and shines even to the
West. So fire proceeds out of the mouth of the two witnesses in the
Revelations, and devoureth their enemies. The simplicity of the gospel, carries
with it a wonderful light and energy: It is great, and will finally prevail.
Like a flame, it goes through the briars and thorns that oppose it, and burns
them together. In its progress, it punishes and torments the obstinately
erroneous and wicked: They gnaw their tongues for pain, at the detection of
those errors they will not renounce, and at the pungent reproof of those vices
which they cannot forsake. They have often other punishments from the judicial
dispensations of Heaven, even in this life; which are a prelude of what shall
be awarded them, in proportion to their guilt, at the bar of the Son of Man.

THE second coming of Christ extends in some sense from his ascension to the
final judgment. In this period Antichrist will be consumed. We have seen
already this part of the prediction in a considerable degree fulfilled. He has
surprisingly wasted away. He no longer appears what he once was; the disposer
of crowns, the arbiter of kingdoms, and the dread of the world. His strength is
abated, and the reverence that was once paid him by Princes greatly diminished.
He now palliates and seems half ashamed of what he once openly professed, and
boasted in. This is owing to the increasing light springing from the
reformation.

NOR ought we to overlook a late event, that deserves particular attention. One
of his religious orders, I mean the Jesuits, remarkable for a mixture of
subtilty and enthusiasm, which rendered them singularly active and successful
in his cause, has not long since been suppressed by Princes, that once were
most zealously devoted to him, and particularly friendly to this very order.
Even the Pope himself, according to some recent accounts, has at length been
compelled, sorely against his will, to imitate their example, and to concur
with them in this signal, but very humiliating act of reformation. These
things, among others, plainly show, how far this Lucifer, son of the morning,
this pretended ^^^ntain of light, and dispenser of infallible knowledge, has
declined from his zenith, and may be one means of accelerating his descent.
However this may be, we are assured, that at furthest, he will be totally and
absolutely destroyed by the brightness of our Lord's second coming.

UPON the whole, whoever compares the predictions of Daniel and John, with that
of Paul in our text, will find in them a surprising agreement; and that all
these distinguished servants of God, spoke of the same iniquitous and
oppressive power that was to rise in his kingdom, in latter ages, and oppose
himself to it: A power that speaks great things, even great things against
the most High, and is full of the names of blasphemy: A power that prevails
against, and wears out the Saints; that changes times and laws, and assumeth
an authority, over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations: A power that casts
down the host of Heaven, all civil rulers, and magnifieth himself against the
Prince of the host; to whom notwithstanding, the Kings of the earth do give
their strength: A power that deceives, by false miracles, done in the sight of
the beast, them that dwell upon the earth; and upon whom the judgment should
finally sit, to take away his dominion, and to consume and destroy it to the
end.

"THE predictions of the three servants of God abovenamed, concerning the
corruptions of christianity in the Romish church, and concerning the political
state of the world from first to last, but especially as the revolutions of
empire had a relation to our religion, these, I say, when united, form a
prophetic picture, which in respect of the grandeur and importance of the
events delineated therein, the variety and singularity of the particulars
whereof these events consist, the clearness and precision with which they are
delineated, the exactness of their accomplishment, and the length of time taken
up in the accomplishment, is one of the most astonishing objects which it is
possible for the human mind to contemplate. And therefore the due examination
of this picture, cannot fail to strike all wise men with the highest
conceptions of the prescience and power of God, and with the deepest veneration
for the christian religion, in the records of which this astonishing picture is
found. For common sense dictates, that the Ruler of the universe never would
give the knowledge of future events to impostors; especially as upon the credit
of that knowledge, they have required mankind to believe the history of Jesus.
Wherefore, the corruptions of christianity, instead of being any objection
against the divinity of our religion, by having been so particularly predicted,
are in reality the foundation of one of the strongest arguments in its favor
Macknight's Truth of Gospel History. Page 602.
."

TIME will not allow me to enlarge on the reflections which naturally arise
from our subject.

WHAT a blessing to mankind was the reformation? What a yoke of bondage did it
break? Even the papal power, where it still prevails, has been tempered by it.
It was at once favorable to civil liberty, and to the rights of conscience.
Religion and learning revived together. The Bible, the fountain of divine
knowledge being uncovered, the thirsty came and drank of the water of life
freely. At the same time the best human models of writing, and the noblest
sentiments on civility and government, were read with avidity in the ancient
classics. The church emerged from darkness; human society was polished; the
arts cultivated, and commerce enlarged.

THE happy fruits of the reformation have been transplanted to America; and
what a change have they made already in the face of this continent? Here may
they all flourish to the second coming of the Son of Man! And may this literary
Society, according to the generous design of its founders, be eminently
conducive to so happy a purpose! We have a Romish Bishop, and a Popish colony,
not far from us; where, I am well informed, instead of the advancement of
protestant truth, since its subjection to the British government, numbers have
been perverted from our own profession. And if popery, deceitfully assuming a
milder form, seems to be less dreaded and abhored than it once was; let us be
upon our guard, and remembering it is popery still, be prepared to oppose it in
every form. At best it is the extremest despotism. It decides all things at
once, and by mere authority, and allows no examination of its own mandates and
decrees. It is a direct, an everlasting enemy to freedom of enquiry, and
consequently to knowledge, and good literature. There are indeed many learned
catholics; but the learning among them is, in one way or another, greatly owing
to the reformation: For when popery reigned without opposition, ignorance every
where prevailed. And even at this day, the body of the people in the Romish,
are not near so enlightened as in the protestant communion.

POPERY is incompatible with the safety of a free government. It sets up a
foreign head, superior to all civil rulers; a spiritual power that reaches to
every thing upon earth, and can brook no control. Trampling upon the rights of
conscience, and assuming an authority to dissolve every sacred obligation, what
pledge can it possibly leave us for the security of civil freedom?

COMPARE the present state of Italy with what it once was. Where are the poets,
the orators, the philosophers, the statesmen and heroes, that once guided,
defended, and adorned that distinguished country? Where are the numbers it
supported, and the spirit and vigor of its inhabitants? Nature is the same; it
is tyranny, and most of all the papal tyranny, that has made the change. We
have indeed, may a Popish bigot say, we have happily no more the fierce
contentions of ancient Rome: All things are now settled by an indisputable
authority; and we are at peace. But have there been no bloody contests in papal
Rome? And what kind of tranquillity does it ever enjoy? Is it the ease and
happiness of a vigorous well governed state? Far from it: It is the silence of
death; it is the peace of a church yard.

LET us therefore, stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and allow no unscriptural imposition, no trace of the papal bondage, to be
found among us! May a liberal inquiry, a free and temperate discussion,
dissipate error of every kind, and by advancing truth, secure the true order
and felicity both of church and state! May the honor of the inspired writings,
as the only infallible rule of faith and practice, and the right of private
judgment, the basis of the reformation, ever be sacredly preserved among us!
And may serious piety, and christian morals, the end of all, adorn our
profession as protestants, and ever keep pace with our improvements in
speculative knowledge!

THE END.

