A LETTER TO A FRIEND. GIVING a concise, but just, representation of the
hardships and sufferings the town of BOSTON is exposed to, and must undergo in
consequence of the late ACT of the BRITISH-PARLIAMENT; which, by shutting up
it is port, has put a fatal bar in the way of that commercial business on which
it depended for it is support. SHOWING, at the same time, wherein this EDICT,
however unintended, is powerfully adapted to promote the interest of all the
AMERICAN COLONIES, and even of BOSTON itself in the end.

BY T. W. A BOSTONIAN.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and Sold at GREENLEAF's Printing-Office, in
HANOVER-STREET, M,DCC,LXXIV.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
BOSTON, May 30, 1774. SIR,
I THANK you for your kind letter, wherein you express a tender concern for the
people of Boston, and sympathize with them, under the hard trial they must pass
through, in consequence of the late parliamentary act, commonly spoken of under
the name of the Boston port-bill. It is a general idea only of the sufferings
we must endure that has excited in you those motions of grief and pity, of
which you have the perceptions; for, being at a distance, and not being
distinctly acquainted with that multiplicity of ways in which this barbarous
act will operate to distress us, your conception of our sufferings, by means of
it, must fall vastly below the greatness of them. It will not therefore be
displeasing, though it should add some degree of impetuosity to your passions,
which already give you uneasiness, if I am particular in pointing out to you
those avenues this horred decree has opened to let in misery upon us.

BE pleased then to consider, not the well-being only, but the support of this
town is almost wholly dependent upon trade, the carrying on of which makes way
for employment, and employment procures daily bread for at least eight tenths
of its inhabitants. Extensive trade, you will be sensible, if you only allow
yourself to think a while, naturally gives rise to a great variety of
occupations, which occupations give a livelihood to hundreds and thousands. It
must therefore amazingly spread distress in so large a commercial place as this
metropolis of the Massachusetts-Province, to have its inhabitants in an
instant, as it were, put out of all capacity of employing themselves in any of
those vastly various callings, on which alone, under God, they had their
dependence for a supply with even the necessaries of life. Few, comparatively
very few in Boston, are men of independent fortunes. The people here are almost
universally laborers or artificers of this or the other denomination, who, by
this act which has stopped the course of trade, are totally deprived of the
only means of their subsistence. This is the case of our ship-builders,
ship-joiners, mast-makers, riggers, caulkers, rope and sail-makers; whose
occupations gave them and their dependents a comfortable maintenance: This is
the case of our house-carpenters and masons, who have now little to do, either
in the way of building or repairing houses; as timber, boards, shingles, brick
and lime are not permitted to be brought into the town in any vessel whatever,
from any part of the province or elsewhere: This is the case of our distillers
and sugar boilers; who are at once incapacitated for carrying on that business
which was their support; as neither molasses nor sugar are suffered to come
into Boston-harbor: This is the case with our coopers; who, if they could
procure staves and hoops could make little or no use of them, as the work of
trimming imported casks and making others for exportation, has, at present, an
unhappy period put to it: This is the case also of our truckmen, porters, and a
numerous train of day-laborers, who will now be necessitated to become idlers,
and must suffer hunger, and be clothed with rags.

BY this enumeration of our tribes of workmen, you will readily perceive, that
vast numbers, not less, I suppose (taking in their wives, children and
servants, who are dependent upon them) than fifteen thousand at the lowest
computation, are reduced to a starving condition; none of which, so far as is
known, had any more an hand in the destruction of the East India company's tea,
then Lord North himself; and but a few of them comparatively were among those
who constituted the assemblies who have been complained of as riotous. Nor are
the sufferings occasioned by this act confined to the inhabitants of Boston;
but extend to all in our towns on the sea shore, for hundreds of miles, whose
business is that of coasting, as they are forcibly restrained from bringing to
this port any merchandise from the places where they live, or from carrying any
out of it, to the towns to which they belong, though their necessity should
ever so loudly call for it: Yea, such is the cruelty of this act, that none of
the people in our inland towns can so much as cross the ferry from Charlestown
to Boston with any of their goods for sale, but by exposing both their goods,
and the boat that brings them, to a seizure by those whose tender mercies are
cruelties: Yea further, no merchandise of any sort is permitted to be brought
from either Marblehead or Salem, the port substituted in the room of Boston,
but by land carriage, which, though greatly expensive, is made almost doubly
so; as instead of fifteen miles only, by going over a ferry, the necessary
carriage is now no less than twenty eight; which is as distressing to the
merchants in their towns, as to those in Boston, and as much complained of. In
an address from an hundred and twenty-five merchants and freeholders at Salem,
to his Excellency Governor Gage, in which they have done themselves great
honor, are these words; "In shutting up the port of Boston, some imagine that
the course of trade might be turned hither, and to our benefit. But nature, in
the formation of our harbor, forbids our becoming rivals in commerce with that
convenient mart. And were it otherwise, we must be dead to every idea of
justice, and to all feelings of humanity, could we indulge one thought to seize
on wealth, and raise our fortunes on the ruin of our suffering neighbors. But
so far from receiving benefit, we are greatly injured by the shutting up the
harbor of Boston, as it deprives us of a market for much the largest part of
our West India imports; and there is not a town in the province but will feel
the ill effects of it. Permit us then, sir, to apply to your clemency and
justice to afford us every alleviation in your power, and to procure for us
every possible relief from this extensive mischief." To what can this
multiplication of trouble and charge be ascribed but to the want of knowledge
of the country, or a design wantonly to enlarge our distress by the exercise of
sovereign power? Who could have imagined, that a decree thus mixed with
contrived severity, and thus big with distress and ruin to thousands of poor
innocents, could have had existence given it by an English parliament! Is it
possible filial affection to the parent-state should hereby be promoted? What,
in the natural course of things, can be the effect of so cruel an edict, but
the stirring up a spirit of resentment? And if multitudes, by being reduced to
a starving desperate condition, should act a wild and mad part, who would be so
much to blame as those who were the occasional cause of it?

BUT it will be said, provision is made in the act that shuts up the harbor of
Boston, for its being opened again; insomuch that it will be our own fault, if
the difficulties we complain of are not removed. It is a proper question here,
why were these difficulties brought upon us at all in an absolute and
unconditional way? Had terms of submission been connected with punishment as
threatened only, so as that it might have been at our own option, whether we
would submit* or suffer; the reason for complaint would have been far less than
it now is. But without previous warning, in the proposal of any terms that
might have prevented the coming of evil on us, it is inflicted with inessable
vengeance, and under such circumstances, that should we, in the most servile
manner, submit to all that is required, we must notwithstanding inevitably
suffer almost total ruin. For the act will be in full force the first day of
June, and will remain so till a certificate from the Governor, setting forth
our entire submission and obedience, is transmitted to the King, and relief, in
consequence of it, is granted to us by him in privy council; which every one
knows is impossible to be done, till hundreds are starved to death, if not
provided for by heaven in some unknown way or other.

AND not only are we laid under a necessity of suffering by this act to an
extreme degree, though we should be ever so obedient to its requirements; but
(truly melancholy to consider) the terms specified in it, upon which alone our
sufferings are to be removed, far from being fixed with precision, are so loose
and indeterminate, that a Governor may, should he so please, perpetuate them
during his political existence; as, without a certificate from him, declaring
our compliance with the parliamentary demands, the King himself in privy
council is not enabled to open the port of Boston; nor is any other way
provided for its being done.

A FURTHER aggravation of our sufferings, and what gives the keenest edge to
them is, that the wharfs and landing-places in the town of Boston, which are
the property of numerous individuals, and of a much greater value than all the
teas the East India company have sent to this whole continent, are, as to the
use of them, wherein only their value consists, wrested out of their hands, and
put into the King's, to be disposed of at his pleasure. The city of London, we
imagine, however highly and justly they may think of the King's wisdom and
benevolence, would, with one united voice complain of tyranny, a barefaced
invasion of their rights, if they were thus restrained from the use of this or
the other valuable part of their property, unless by a granted license at the
pleasure of his Majesty. The inhabitants of Boston are English subjects, as
well as the citizens of London and may with equal justice utter their cries
against that arbitrary exercise of power, which indiscriminately makes the use
of their rightful property dependent on pleasure at three thousand miles
distance: Nor may it be thought strange, if their groans should be loud and
bitter: Especially, as this instance of despotism is added to complete
hardships in other respects cruel in their nature, and extreme in degree,
beyond what might have been expected, in like circumstances, from either France
or Spain.

WHAT now could be the excitement to this extraordinary vengeance? The preamble
to the act of parliament will inform us.

IT begins with mentioning "Dangerous commotions and insurrections fomented and
raised in the town of Boston, by diverse ill-affected persons." But was Boston
the only place in America, where there had been such commotions? Might it not,
with equal truth, have been said, that like "commotions and insurrections had
been fomented and raised" in New York, Philadelphia, and other American
colonies? And yet, Boston only is the selected object of resentment, and to a
degree not easily to be paralleled! Does this carry the face of impartial
justice? Some Bostonians who have been in England, and some who were born
there, have assured us, and upon their own knowledge, that "commotions and
insurrections," in the late times of public grievance, have frequently been
"fomented and raised" in the city of London, and to a much greater and more
dangerous height than they ever were at Boston: But that city, as such, we have
not been told, was ever punished at all for these riotous disorders, much less
with a severity portending it is destruction. Would Boston have been thus
cruelly dealt with, had not it is distance from Great Britain been so great,
that it is groans, under the weight of oppression, could not be heard there, so
as to move either indignation or compassion, in our brethren of the mother
country?

BUT it is said of these commotions, that they were "fomented and raised to the
subversion of his Majesty's government, and to the utter destruction of the
public peace and good order of the said town." It may with exact truth be
affirmed, that "ill-affected persons" did not foment these commotions with the
least view to manifest disloyalty to his Majesty, or to "subvert his
government" as constitutionally exercised; but to endeavor, in the only way
they had left, to frustrate the designs of those, who, by false and injurious
representations, would deceive his Majesty, so as to be permitted to bring this
country into bondage. It is well known, both at home and here, that we have
often made our humble complaints of grievances two great to be easy under. And
what has been the effect, but a contemptuous deafness to our cries for relief?
To this it is owing, and this only, that there have been any undesirable
commotions among us. And shall we be forcibly reduced to the last extremity of
misery, because we cannot any longer patiently bear that which is intolerable?
Had we not been oppressed, and to an high degree, there would not have been the
least disturbance in the town, or province. And should it be true, that
oppression has made "diverse persons ill-affected," and excited them to raise
unwarrantable commotions, must thousands of innocents be punished herefor with
the utmost severity? Is this reasonable? Can it be made to consist with equity?
Could it have been, had the common feelings of humanity operated without
obstructions? The Bostonians have always been as much disposed to honor and
support constitutional government, as any of the people in England; and it is
one of their greatest burdens that they should be brought into such
circumstances, as to be even forced into that which is highly disagreeable to
them; and if "the good order of Boston" has in any measure, been disturbed, the
way to restore peace is to hear our cries, and redress our grievances. This,
and this only, will do it effectually, and lastingly. Force may for a while
keep the people under restraint; but this very restraint may, in time, be the
occasion of the out-breaking of their passions with the greater violence; and
what the consequence, in that case, will be, God only knows.

A FURTHER reason given for the passing this act is, that in these commotions,
"certain valuable cargoes of teas, being the property of the East India
company, and on board certain vessels lying within the bay or harbor of Boston,
were seized and destroyed." Some, even in England, have wrote with great
strength and spirit in defense of the destruction of those teas, under the
special circumstances in which they were sent here. But should it be admitted,
that this destruction was unwarrantable, both in the view of reason and law,
will it follow from hence that the town of Boston ought to be put into a state
of suffering, which it is impossible they should live under, unless supplies
are sent to them from the other towns, in this, or the neighboring colonies?
It should always be remembered, the tea-destruction was effected by persons in
disguise, and unknown even to this day. Boston, as a town, neither advised to
it, nor did any thing to bring it into event: Nay, even those very people,
whose assembling together two or three times in Boston, has been called
unlawful and riotous, were so far from designing, or so much as desiring, this
destruction, that they did all that lay in their power to prevent it: Nor would
the tea have been destroyed, had it not been for Governor Hutchinson, the
collector (under the eye of the commissioners) and the consignees, to whom
alone it must be ascribed, that it came to this end: Nor were the people, whose
assembling together has been so bitterly complained of, the inhabitants of
Boston only, but of many other towns in the province. These are all known,
certain truths. And yet, Boston, as a town, is considered as chargeable with
this destruction, and punished for it in an awfully severe manner; and this
too, without giving them notice of their crime, or opportunity of saying a word
in defense of themselves. If this is not unconstitutional, arbitrary conduct,
mankind in common, will, I am sure, call it rigorously hard and cruel.

THE last thing said, in order to promote the giving life to this act, is, that
"in the present condition of the said town and harbor, the commerce of his
Majesty's subjects cannot be safely carried on, nor the customs payable to his
Majesty, collected." There is not a more known truth, than that the commerce of
his Majesty's subjects has not been by this town, in it is "present condition,"
or by any "ill-affected persons" in it, in the least measure obstructed, unless
in the single article of the East India company's teas; nor have his Majesty's
officers been at all hindered from collecting the payable customs, excepting
only in this same article; nor was there ever any difficulty even as to this,
till in a late instance or two. And so far was "the commerce of his Majesty's
subjects" from being obstructed in other articles by what was done in this,
that the utmost care was taken to prevent it: Nor is there a person in Boston
who will say, unless he knowingly wrongs the truth, that the destruction of the
teas was the occasion of his suffering as to any other kind of merchandise,
though sent in the same ships that brought the teas. The ministry well knew, that
not Boston, or the Massachusetts-province only, but all the American colonies
were united as one in thinking it unconstitutional to be taxed by the
parliament, as they are not represented there, nor can be, by reason of their
local distance; and they have been justified in this sentiment by some of the
greatest men at home, who have said that in defense of it, which the colonies
are fully satisfied cannot be contradicted inconsistency with the acknowledged
right of English subjects. It is strange therefore, that what was done, with
respect to the article of the teas only should be the occasion of exciting
ministerial wrath to such an amazing height: Especially, as it was owing, if
faulty, to an error in judgment, not perverseness of disposition: It is more
strange that this conduct should be considered as a general obstruction to
commerce, and to the collection of payable customs, when neither the one nor
the other, as to other articles, were in the least affected thereby: It is more
strange still, that Boston only should be the object of resentment, when
New York, and Philadelphia, were chargeable with the like, but greater fault,
proceeding from one and the same principle: It is most of all strange, that
Boston, had it been the only faulty town, and deserving of punishment, should
have it inflicted with cruelty unmixed with mercy, and so as to make no
distinction between one and another; but involving all in one common state of
distress, greater in degree and extent than Scotland, or any of it is towns,
were obliged to suffer, though commotions were fomented and raised there,
within the memory of thousands now living, and with a professed design to
dethrone King George the second, and to place the crown of England on the head
of a Popish Pretender. Does this look like justice impartially executed? May it
not be reasonably thought, that other ends might be in view besides that of
punishment, upon the foot of just desert? Nor would it exceed the view even of
an American understanding to conceive what these other ends might be.

I BELIEVE, sir, a sufficiency has been said, if not to give you an adequately
full idea of the sufferings of poor Boston, yet such a conception of them as
will excite your wonder, and heighten your feelings of compassion toward us.
Since penning the above, there has been bro't into event, of which we had not
the least imagination, and which I cannot restrain myself from mentioning to
you. It is this. Our vessels with wood, which, by the Boston port-bill, are
obliged to put in at Marblehead, to be enabled by the custom-house at Salem to
proceed to Boston harbor, are denied this privilege, till the wood that is in
them has been taken out, and then put in again, which occasions not only
expensive labor, but tedious delay; as there are few landing places in
Marblehead, and considerable number of vessels in the harbor there at the same
time, which must wait till they have opportunity to unload, and then load
again. The passage of these vessels to Boston is hereby always lengthened, and
they are sometimes detained longer than they need have been, by being exposed
to contrary winds. Besides all which, these same vessels, when they are come to
Boston, are not suffered to depart from thence, till the owner's of them, or
others in their behalf, have traveled to Plymouth, which is more than forty
miles, and have visited the Boston custom-house, which is now removed there.
These obstructions have increased the price of fuel nearly one third part,
which must be cruelly destressing to the people here, in their present
circumstances. The same may be said of our provision-vessels. They must all go
to Marblehead; and then they are obliged to be unloaded and then loaded, before
they can be permitted to come to Boston; nor can they go out of that harbor,
without a permission from Plymouth, more then forty miles distant. Whether this
extraordinary burden, upon articles without which we cannot live, is to be
ascribed to the late parliamentary act, or the commissioners, who now reside at
Salem, you may easily satisfy yourself by only reading the act itself. It is
the general opinion, that these commissioners, had they the feelings of
humanity, would not have put a construction upon the port bill, so far
exceeding in rigor what it will bear in consistency with common sense. But what
may not be expected from men, who, ever since they have been in office, have
done all in their power to render themselves odious to the people, and less
serviceable to his Majesty, than they might otherwise have been.
But I will not enlarge, least your wrath should be provoked, and such
resentment enkindled in you, as could not easily be kept under due restraint.

INSTEAD, of this, I will endeavor to calm your passions, and mitigate your
sensations of pain on our account, by showing you, wherein this parliamentary
act, however unintended by the contrivers of it, is powerfully adapted to
promote the interest of all the American colonies, and of even Boston itself in
the end.

THE design of the British administration, with respect, not only to this town
and province, but all the colonies on the continent, is so obviously visible by
this act of parliament, that no one can easily be at a loss to know, that it is
to oblige America, by the iron hand of power, to submit to sovereign pleasure.
This is accordingly the universal sentiment of all ranks, orders, and
conditions of men from one end of the continent to the other. Even those who
have been distinguished by being called the friends of government, are now
fully satisfied, that the plan to be carried into execution, and by forcible
measures, is, entire obedience to the demands of despotism, instead of those
constitutional laws we are perfectly willing to be governed by. It may
reasonably be esteemed an advantage, and a very important one, to be thus
indisputably let into the knowledge of this; as, by knowing that forcing from
us our rights and privileges as English subjects, is the grand point in view,
we shall naturally be urged on to contrive expedients to prevent, if possible,
our being in this way, brought into bondage: Or, should no expedients be
effectual to this end, power being on the side of oppression, we may solace
ourselves with the thought, that we acted like men, and will resolutely
endeavor, under the influence of this consideration, to prepare our minds to
bear, in the easiest manner, the greatest of all outward evils, subjection to
arbitrary pleasure.

THIS act, though more immediately relative to Boston, and the
Massachusett's-province, is an alarm to all the North American colonies; loudly
sounding it in their ears, that they may surely expect, each one in their turn,
as occasion offers, like treatment with that we have met with. For the design
intended to be carried into effect, is not confined to a single town, or
province, but extends to the whole American continent. What has been done, with
respect to Boston, and the province to which it belongs, is the beginning only
of sorrow, unless prevented in one prudent way or another, and an example held
out, in terrorem, to the other colonies. And should Boston, and the
Massachusetts's-province, be brought into a state of slavery by the hand of
power, every other town and colony on the continent would unavoidably, in a
little time, be placed in like circumstances. This is the voice of the late
parliamentary proceedure, and as evidently so as if promulged in the most
plainly articulated words. And this, according to the accounts we have
received, is the interpretation the colonies put upon it. They esteem
themselves as truly, though not so immediately, struck at, as either Boston, or
the Massachusett's-province. For, as they justly observe, the cause in which we
suffer is a common one, their's as well as our's; and whatever our fate is, the
same will be their's also. If now the American colonies should be influenced,
by this amazingly cruel act, to unite as one is projecting, and carrying into
execution, expedients reasonable in themselves, and wisely adapted to secure
the enjoyments of their rights and privileges, and to promote, at the same
time, harmony and love between Great Britain and America, it would most
certainly be for the common interest of all, yea, even of Boston, that this
shocking decree has been issued forth, though their sufferings, by reason of
it, will be awfully severe. And it is, I may add here, unquestionably true,
that the colonies will, by means of this parliamentary conduct, be more firmly
united than ever; yea, that they will all act in concert, as if they were one,
in exerting themselves in all wise and possible ways to frustrate the designs
of those who would rule them with a rod of iron, instead of the laws of
constitutional government. Many here, as well as at home, would not suppose it
possible there should be such an union of the colonies; but this is now made to
appear by their choice of deputies to meet in congress to consult measures for
the common good of them all, and particularly for the relief of Boston, as it
is now suffering, not for it is own sake only, but for their's also.

AS the port of Boston has been the principal inlet in this part of America, to
that inundation of British goods, which have occasioned the spreading of
extravagances, beyond description in every kind, not only through this town,
but the whole province, it might be the design of Heaven, though not thought of
by men, to testify against the ineffable folly of all sorts of persons, whether
of higher or lower rank, in parting with the fruits of their labor, or the
income of their estates, for imported articles, which are of no service unless
to gratify pride, and sooth a vain mind; and to give, at the same time, this
folly of their's a solemn check. which, if not restrained, will be the ruin of
the country. It would argue wisdom in people, and powerfully tend to promote
their INTEREST, if they would look upon themselves as NOW taught in providence,
and loudly called upon, to refrain from purchasing that merchandise, which
swallows up their substance for the paultry consideration only of appearing in
finery of dress which ill becomes them. A non-consumption of English goods, in
those articles wherein they may do as well without, as with them, to every
purpose excepting that of ornamental vanity, would without controversy, be
highly beneficial, not only to this town and province, but to all the towns in
all the colonies; and it might happily tend to bring us relief in this day of
darkness and distress. It would be no wonder, if some importers from England,
whose views are solely confined to self, should exclaim against such a measure,
and exert themselves to the utmost to prevent it is taking place; as their gain
might hereby be lessened. This is no other than may be expected of those in
trade; whose contracted minds restrains them from all public generosity. But is
it not better that these individuals should suffer, than that this should be
the case of the whole country, who, by means of what they import, are
influenced, by a kind of fascination, to part with their earnings to their
great hurt, instead of profit. It is readily acknowledged, that trade, wisely
conducted, is the surest method to enrich and aggrandize a people; but it is a
great mistake to imagine, that it will, carried on in any way, be productive of
this effect. And it may be laid down as an indubitable truth, that trade,
instead of promoting this good, will powerfully tend to do mischief to a
people, considered as such, however it may serve some individuals, if it is so
managed, as that, upon the whole, they are impoverished by means of it. This,
for a course of years, has been the result of our trade as carried on with
Great Britain. Such have been the needless imports from thence, and such the
folly of people in their extravagant use of them, that a very great part of the
fruit of our labor and toil, and of our trade to foreign parts, has been
remitted home for that which has been rather ruinous, than profitable to us! It
may, without exaggeration, be said, that some millions a year sterling have
been sent from the colonies to England, in return for goods imported from
thence, which we did not want, and which could not, in any wise view, be
considered as promotive of benefit to us. Need the people now be told, that it
would be for their interest, unspeakably so, to put these millions sterling
into their own pockets which are annually sent home in payment for what they
might as well, yea much better, have done without? They must be under a degree
of infatuation not to see this to be the height of folly, even to madness. Let
the importers of a monstrous superfluity of English goods turn the course of
their trade, at least so manage it as may serve the public, and not themselves
only, and they will then merit both honor and encouragement: But they will have
no just reason for complaint, if they are esteemed poor mercenary wretches,
while, for their own private gain, they are vehemently clamorous in opposing
all reasonable methods so far to put a stop to English imports, as they are
certainly hurtful to the country, and in an high degree. Our present
circumstances loudly call for this, and that which will naturally follow upon
it, a retrenchment of our unparralleled extravagance. And should the colonies
take occasion from what has been done to Boston (a striking specimen of what
they may expect will be done to them, at one time or other) to live more within
themselves, and to consume no English goods, but what their convenience, I will
not say necessity, calls for, we should probably soon find an end put to the
grievances we have long complained of, but still lie groaning under. Perhaps,
the people in England would feel it disadvantageous to them, should the people
in America agree upon a non-consumption of British goods, within such limits as
a due regard to their own interest makes necessary; but they could not
reasonably find fault with such a measure, and, instead if doing so, they might
cooperate with us, in endeavoring the restoration, and future secure
enjoyment, of those civil rights and privileges we have been deprived of, by
the hand of power. And should we, by their interposed assistance, be placed in
these happy circumstances, such would be our affection toward them, as that we
should cheerfully forego our own advantage in trade, so far as might in reason
be expected, in order to promote their's. Be this as it may, by such a measure,
carried into execution, we should naturally be put upon greater frugality than
we have commonly been used to, a more enlarged cultivation of our lands and the
setting up manufactures among ourselves in every kind, wherein they may be
serviceable to us; the effect whereof would be the retaining moneys in our own
purses, which would be more than an hundredfold compensation for what is
unconstitutionally wrested from us; at least we should have that within
ourselves, which would enable us to wait without strife and contention, till
the almighty righteous ruler of the world shall work out salvation for us;
which we firmly believe he will, in one way or another, sooner or later.

I COULD easily have enlarged on every article I have mentioned, and should
have mentioned some other; but I was not willing to give your patience too
tedious a trial.

I am, Dear Sir, with Great Respect, your Affectionate Friend, and Humble
Servant. T. W.


