AN ESSAY ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL POWER OF GREAT BRITAIN OVER THE COLONIES IN
AMERICA; WITH THE RESOLVES OF THE COMMITTEE FOR THE PROVINCE OF PENNSYLVANIA,
AND THEIR INSTRUCTIONS To their REPRESENTATIVES IN ASSEMBLY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London
Coffee-House. M.DCC.LXXIV.

EXTRACT from the MINUTES of the COMMITTEE.
SATURDAY, JULY 16, [1774.]
THE committee for the [province of Pennsylvania] met according to adjournment.

JOHN DICKINSON, Doctor WILLIAM SMITH, JOSEPH READ, JOHN KIDD, ELISHA PRICE,
WILLIAM ATLEE, JAMES SMITH. JAMES WILSON, DANIEL BROADHEAD, JOHN OKELY, and
WILLIAM SCUIL, are appointed to prepare and bring in a draught of instructions.

Monday, July 18. THE committees of the counties having been invited, by the
committee for the city and county of Philadelphia, to meet them at Philadelphia
on the 15th of July; this committee thought it their duty, to make some
preparation in the business, that was to be laid before the provincial
committee by them. On the 4th of July they appointed a committee for this
purpose; and this measure enabled those appointed by the provincial committee
to bring in a draught so soon.
The committee appointed to bring in instructions, reported, that they had made
a draught, which they laid upon the table.

Moved. That they be read. -- which was done.

Tuesday, July 19. Upon a motion made and seconded, agree, that the draught of
instructions brought in by the committee, and which were read, be re-committed
to the same committee.

Wednesday, July 20. The committee having brought in a draught of instructions,
the same were debated, amended and agreed to.

Thursday, July 21. The instructions were signed by the chairman. -- The
committee in a body, waited on the Assembly then sitting, and presented the
same.

IT having been moved, that the essay of the instructions first proposed to be
given to the honorable Assembly of Pennsylvania, by the provincial committee
assembled at Philadelphia the 18th instant might be abridged, leaving out the
argumentative part, so as to be more proper for instructions, the same was
agreed to, but resolved at the same time, that the whole work ought to be
published, as highly deserving the perusal and serious consideration of every
friend of liberty within these colonies.

Agreed unanimously, That the thanks MR. DICKINSON being absent this day, on
account of the funeral of a relation, the next day the chairman, in a very
obliging manner, delivered to him from the chair the thanks of the committee;
to which he replied:

Mr. CHAIRMAN,

I heartily thank this respectable Assembly for the honor they have conferred
upon me, but want words to express the sense I feel of their kindness. The mere
accidents of meeting with particular books, and conversing with particular men,
led me into the train of sentiments, which the committee are pleased to think
just; and others, with the like opportunities of information would much better
have deserved to receive the thanks, they now generously give. I consider the
approbation of this company as an evidence, that they entertain a favorable
opinion of my good intentions, and as an encouragement for all to apply
themselves, in these unhappy times, to the service of the public, since even
small endeavors to promote that service, can find a very valuable reward. I
will try, during the remainder of my life, to remember my duty to our common
country, and, if it be possible, to render myself worthy of the honor for
which I now stand so deeply indebted.

I thank you, Sir, for the polite and affectionate manner, in which you have
communicated the sense of the committee to me.


of this committee be given from the chair to JOHN DICKINSON, Esquire for the great
assistance they have derived from the laudable application of his eminent
abilities to the service of his country in the above performance.

Extract from the Minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Clerk of the Committee.

PREFACE.
WHEN the committee for preparing a draught of instructions was appointed, it
was considered, whether it would not be proper, to form some kind of a sketch,
however imperfect it might be, of all the grievances of the colonies, and of
course of their constitutional rights.

SUCH an attempt, though very rude, might be improved by better hands; and it
seemed absolutely necessary, no longer to consine ourselves to occasional
complaints and partial remedies, but, if possible, to attain some degree of
certainty concerning our lives, liberties and properties.

IT was perceived, that if the instructions should be formed on this plan, they
would comprehend many and very important positions, which it would be proper to
introduce, by previously assigning the reasons, on which they were founded.
Otherwise, the positions might not appear to the committee to be just. From
this consideration it became necessary, to render the instructions long and
argumentative; and whoever heartily reflects on the importance of the occasion,
will think such a method very justifiable.

THE draught of instructions being brought into the provincial committee and
read, and no objection being made to any of the principles asserted in them, it
was not thought necessary, that the argumentative part should continue any
longer in them. The committee, that brought in the draught, therefore moved,
that this part of the instructions might be separated from the rest. Whereupon
the draught was re committed, for this purpose, to the committee, that brought
it in. This was done.

SEVERAL additions have been made to the other part, now called "An Essay,"
etc. since the vote for publishing. The additions are distinguished by
crotchets, thus [ ] and in these it was not thought necessary to observe the
style of instructions. The notes have been almost entirely added since the vote.

AUGUST 1, 1774
RESOLUTIONS, etc. At a provincial meeting of deputies chosen by the several
counties, in Pennsylvania, held at Philadelphia, July 15, 1774, and continued
by adjournments from day to day.
PRESENT.
For the city and county of Philadelphia. THOMAS WILLING, JOHN DICKINSON, PETER
CHEVALIER, EDW. PENNINGTON, THOMAS WHARTON, JOHN COX, JOSEPH REED, THO.
WHARTON, jun. SAMUEL ERWIN, THOMAS FITZSIMONS, Dr. WILLIAM SMITH, ISAAC HOWELL,
ADAM HUBLEY, GEORGE SCHLOSSER, SAMUEL MILES, THOMAS MIFFLIN, CHRISTOPH. LUDWIC,
JOSEPH MOULDER, ANTH. MORRIS, jun. GEORGE GRAY, JOHN NIXON, JACOB BARGE, THOMAS
PENROSE, JOHN M. NESBIT, JONATHAN B. SMITH, JAMES MEASE, THOMAS BARCLAY,
BENJAMIN MARSHALL, SAMUEL HOWELL, WILLIAM MOULDER, JOHN ROBERTS, JOHN BAYARD,
WILLIAM RUSH, CHARLES THOMSON.

Bucks. JOHN KIDD, HENRY WYNKOOP, JOSEPH KIRKBRIDE, JOHN WILKINSON, JAMES
WALLACE.

Chester. FRAN. RICHARDSON, ELISHA PRICE, JOHN HA^T, ANTHONY WAINE, HUGH LLOYD,
JOHN SELLERS, FRANCIS JOHNSON, RICHARD REILEY.

Lancaster. GEORGE ROSS, JAMES WEBB, JOSEPH F^^REE, MATTHIA^ SLOUGH EMANUEL
CARPENTER, WILLIAM ATLEE, ALEXANDER LOWRY, MOSES ERWIN.

York. JAMES SMITH, JOSEPH DONALDSON, THOMAS HARTLEY.

Cumberland. JAMES WILSON, ROBERT MAGAW, WILLIAM IRVINE.

Berks. EDWARD BIDDLE, DANIEL BROADHEAD, JONATHAN POTTS, THOMAS DUNDAS,
CHRISTOPH* SCHULTZ.

Northampton. WILLIAM EDMUNDS, PETER KEC^LEIN, JOHN OKELEY, JACOB ARNDT.

Northumberland. WILLIAM SCULL, SAMUEL HUNTER,

Bedford. GEORGE WOODS.
Westmoreland. ROBERT HANNAH, JAMES CAVETT.

THOMAS WILLING, Chairman.

CHARLES THOMSON, Clerk.

AGREED that, in case of any difference in sentiment, the question be
determined by the deputies voting by counties.

THE letters from Boston of the 13th of May were then read, and a short account
given of the steps taken in consequence thereof, and the measures now pursuing
in this and the neighboring provinces; after which the following. RESOLVES
were passed.

UNAN. 1. THAT we acknowledge ourselves, and the inhabitants of this province,
liege subjects of his majesty king George the third, to whom they and we ow^
and will bear true and faithful allegiance.

UNAN. II. That as the idea of an unconstitutional independence on the parent
state is, utterly abhorrent to our principles, we view the unhappy differences
between Great Britain and the Colonies with the deepest distress and anxiety of
mind, as fruitless to her, grievous to us, and destructive of the best
interests of both.

UNAN. III, That it is therefore our ardent desire, that our ancient harmony
with the mother there country should be restored, and a perpetual love and union
subsist between us, on the principles of the constitution, and an interchange
of good offices, without the least infraction of our mutual rights.

UNAN. IV. That the inhabitants of these colonies are entitled to the same
rights and liberties WITHIN these colonies, that the subjects born in England
are entitled to WITHIN that realm.

UNAN. V. That the power assumed by the parliament of Great Britain to bind the
people of these colonies, "by statutes IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER," is
unconstitutional; and therefore the source of these unhappy differences.

UNAN. VI. That the act of parliament, for shutting up the port of Boston, is
unconstitutional; oppressive to the inhabitants of that town; dangerous to the
liberties of the British colonies; and therefore, that we consider our brethren
at Boston as suffering in the common cause of these colonies.

UNAN. VII. That the bill for altering the administration of justice in certain
criminal cases within the province of Massachusetts Bay, if passed into an act
of parliament, will be as unconstitutional, oppressive and dangerous, a^ the
act abovementioned.

UNAN. VIII. That the bill for changing the constitution of the province of
Massachusetts Bay, established by charter, and enjoyed since the grant of that
charter, if passed into an act of parliament, will be unconstitutional and
dangerous in its consequences to the American colonies.

UNAN. IX. That there is an absolute necessity, that a congress of deputies
from the several colonies be immediately assembled, to consult together, and
form a general plan of conduct to be observed by all the colonies, for the
purposes of procuring relief for our suffering brethren, obtaining redress of
our grievances, preventing future dissensions, firmly establishing our right,
and restoring ^armony between Great Britain and her colonies on a
constitutional foundation.

UNAN. X. That, although a suspension of the commerce of this large tra^ing
province, with Great Britain, would greatly distress multitudes of our
industrious inhabitants, yet that sacrifice and a much greater we are ready to
offer for the preservation of our liberties; but, in tenderness to the people
of Great Britain, as well as of this country, and in hopes that our just
remonstrances will* at length, reach the ears of our gracious sovereign and be
no longer treated with contempt by any of our fellow subjects in England, it is
our earnest desire, that the congress should first try the gentler mode of
stating our grievances, and making a firm and decent claim of redress.

XI. RESOLVED, by a great majority, That yet nothwithstanding, as an unanimity
of counsels and measures is indispensably necessary for the common welfare, if
the congress shall judge agreements of non-importation and non exportation
expedient, the people of this province will join with the other principal and
neighboring colonies, in such an association of non-importation from and
non-exportation to Great Britain as shall be agreed on, at the congress.

XII. RESOLVED, by a majority, That if any proceedings of the parliament, of
which notice shall be received, on this continent, before or at the general
congress, shall render it necessary in the opinion of that congress, for the
colonies to take farther steps than are mentioned in the eleventh resolve; in
such case, the inhabitants of this province shall adopt such farther steps, and
do all in their power to carry them into execution.

UNAN. XIII. That the venders of merchandise of every kind; within this
province, ought not to take advantage of the resolves relating to
non-importation in this province or else where; but that they ought to sell
their merchandise, which they now have, or may hereafter import, at the same
rates they have been accustomed to do within three months last past.

UNAN. XIV. That the people of this province will break off all trade,
commerce, and dealing, and will have no trade, commerce, or dealing of any kind
with any colony on this continent, or with any city or town in such colony, or
with any individual in any such colony, city, or town, which shall refuse,
decline, or neglect to adopt, and carry into execution such general plan as
shall be agreed to in congress.

UNAN. XV. That it is the duty of every member of this committee to promote, as
much as he can, the subscription set on foot, in the several counties of this
province, for the relief of the distressed inhabitants of Boston.

UNAN. XVI. That this committee give instructions on the present situation of
public affairs to their representatives, who are to meet next week in Assembly,
and request them to appoint a proper number of persons to attend a congress of
deputies from the several colonies, at such time and place as may be agreed on,
to effect one general plan of conduct, for attaining the great and important
ends mentioned in the ninth resolve.

INSTRUCTIONS From the COMMITTEE to the REPRESENTATIVES in ASSEMBLY met.
GENTLEMEN,
THE dissensions between Great Britain and her colonies, on this continent,
commencing about ten years ago, since continually increasing, and at length
grown to such an excess as to involve the latter in deep distress and danger,
have excited the good people of this province to take into their serious
consideration the present situation of public affairs.

THE inhabitants of the several counties qualified to vote at elections, being
assembled on due notice, have appointed us their deputies; and in consequence
thereof, we being in provincial committee met, esteem it our indispensible
duty, in pursuance of the trust reposed in us, to give you such instructions,
as, at this important period, appear to us to be proper.

WE, speaking in their names and our own, acknowledge ourselves liege subjects
of his majesty king George the third, to whom "we will be faithful and bear
true allegiance."

OUR judgments and affections attach us, with inviolable loyalty, to his
majesty's person, family and government.

WE acknowledge the prerogatives of ^he sovereign, among which are included the
great powers of making peace and war, treaties, leagues an alliances binding us
-- of appointing all officers, except in cases where other provision is made,
by grants from the crown, or laws approved by the crown -- of confirming or
annulling every act of our assembly within the allowed time -- and of hearing
and determining finally, in council, appeals from our courts of justice. "The
prerogatives are limited," 1 Blackstone 237
as a learned judge observes, "by bounds so certain and notorious, that it is
impossible to exceed them, without the consent of the people on the one hand,
or without, on the other, a violation of that original contract, And though we
are strangers to the original of most states, yet we must not imagine that what
has been here said, concerning the manner in which civil societies are formed,
is an arbitrary fiction. For since it is certain, that all civil societies had
a beginning, it is impossible to conceive, how the members, of which they are
composed, could unite to live together dependent on a supreme authority,
without supposing the covenants abovementioned. BURLEMAQUI'S Princ. of pol.
law, vol. 2. p. 29.

And in fact, upon considering the primitive state of man, it appears most
certain, that the appellations of sovereigns and subjects, masters and slaves,
are unknown to nature. Nature has made us all of the same species, all equal,
all free and independent of each other; and was willing that those, on whom she
has bestowed the same faculties, should have all the same rights. It is
therefore beyond all doubt (...) this primitive state of nature, no man has of
himself an original right of commanding others, or any title to sovereignty.

There is none but God alone that has of himself, and in consequence of his
nature and perfections, a natural, essential, and inherent right of giving laws
to mankind, and of exercising an absolute sovereignty over them. The case is
otherwise between man and man, they (...) of their own nature as independent of
one another, as they are dependent on God. This liberty and independence is
therefore a right naturally belonging to man, of which it would be unjust to
deprive him against his will. Id. p. 38.

There is a beautiful passage of Cicero's to this purpose. Nihil ^st illi
principi Deo, qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod quidem in terris f^at
acceptius, quam consilia coetusque hominum jure sociati, quae civitates
appellantur. Somn. S^ip (...) 3.
Nothing is more agreeable to the supreme Deity, that governs this universe,
than civil societies lawfully established.

When therefore we give to sovereigns the title of God's vicegerents upon
earth, this does not imply that they derive their authority immediately from
God, but it signifies only, that by means of the power lodged in their hands,
and with which the people have i^vested them, they maintain, agreeable to the
views of the Deity, both order and peace, and thus procure the happiness of
mankind. Id. p. 40.

But it will be here objected, that the scripture itself says, that every man
ought to be subject to the supreme powers, because they are established by God
Romans xiii.
. I answer, with Grotius, that men have established civil societies, not in
consequence of a divine ordinance, but of their voluntary motion, induced to it
by the experience they had had of the incapacity which separate families were
under, of defending themselves against the insults and attacks of human
violence. From thence (he adds) arises the civil power, which St. Peter, for
this reason, calls a human power, i. Ep. c. 2. v. 13.
though in other parts of scripture it bears the name of a divine institution
Romans xiii. ^.
, because God has approved of it as an establishment useful to mankind Grotius
of the right of war and peace, b. I. c. 4 7, 12. No. (...)
.

All the other arguments, in favor of the opinion we have been here refuting,
do not even deserve our notice. In general, it may be observed, that never were
more wretched reasons produced than upon this subject, as the reader may be
easily convinced by reading Pu^^endorf on the law of nature and nations, who,
in the chapter corresponding to this, gives these arguments at length, and
completely refute^ them See the law of nature and nations, book VII. c. 3.
. Id. p. 42, 43.


which, in all states impliedly, and in ours most expressly, subsists between
the prince and subject. -- For these prerogatives are vested in the crown for
the support of society, and do not entrench any farther on our natural
liberties, than is expedient for the maintenance of our civil."

BUT it is our misfortune, that we are compelled loudly to call your attention
to the consideration of another power, totally different in kind -- limited, as
it is alleged, by no "bounds," and 1 Blackstone 270.
"wearing a most dreadful aspect," with regard to America. We mean the power
claimed by parliament, of right, to bind the people of these colonies by
statutes,

"IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER" -- a power, as we are not, and, from local
circumstances, cannot be represented there, utterly subversive of our natural
and civil liberties -- past events and reason convincing us, that there never
existed, and never can exist, a state thus subordinate to another, and yet
retaining the slightest portion of freedom or happiness.

THE import of the words above quoted needs no descant; for the wit of man, as
we apprehend, cannot possibly form a more clear, concise, and comprehensive
definition and sentence of slavery, than these expressions contain.

THIS power claimed by Great Britain, and the late attempts to exercise it over
these colonies, present to our view two events, one of which must inevitably
take place, if she shall continue to insist on her pretensions. Either, the
colonists will sink from the rank of freemen into the class of slaves,
overwhelmed with all the miseries and vices, proved by the history of mankind
to be inseparably annexed to that deplorable condition: Or, if they have sense
and virtue enough to exert themselves in striving to avoid this perdition, they
must be involved in an opposition dreadful even in contemplation.

Honor, justice, and humanity call upon us to hold, and to transmit to our
posterity, that liberty, which we received from our ancestors. It is not our
duty to leave wealth to our children: But it is our duty, to leave liberty to
them. No infamy, iniquity, or cruelty, can exceed our own, if we, born and
educated in a country of freedom, entitled to its blessings, and knowing their
value, pusillanimously deserting the post assigned us by divine Providence,
surrender succeeding generations to a condition of wretchedness, from which no
human efforts, in all probability, will be sufficient to extricate them; the
experience of all states mournfully demonstrating to us, that when arbitrary
power has been established over them, even the wisest and bravest nations, that
ever flourished, have, in a few years, degenerated into abject and wretched
vassals.

So alarming are the measures already taken for laying the foundations of a
despotic authority of Great Britain over us, and with such artful and incessant
vigilence is the plan prosecuted, that unless the present generation can
interrupt the work, while it is going forward, can it be imagined, that our
children, debilitated by our imprudence and supineness, will be able to
overthrow, (...), when completed? Populous and powerful as these Colonies may
grow, they will still find arbitrary domination not only strengthening with
their strength, but exceeding, in the swiftness of its progression, as it ever
has done, all the artless advantages, that can acrue to the governed. These
advance with a regularity, which the divine author of our existence has
impressed on the laudable pursuits of his creatures: But despotism, As virtue
is necessary in a republic, and in a monarchy honor, so fear is necessary in a
despotic government: with regard to virtue, there is no occasion for it, and
honor would be extremely dangerous.

Here the immense power of the prince is devolved entirely upon th^se to whom
he is pleased to entrust it. Persons capable of setting a value upon themselves
would be likely to create revolutions. Fear must therefore depress their
spirits, and extinguish even the least sense of ambition.

MONT. Spir. of Laws, vol. 1. b. III. chapter 9. An idea of despotic power. When
the savages of Louisiana are desirous of fruit, they cut the tree to the root,
and gather the fruit Edifying letters, 11 coll p. 315.
This is an emblem of despotic government. Id. book V. c. 13.

The principle of despotic government is fear; but a timid, ignorant, and faint
spirited people have no occasion for a great number of laws.

Every thing ought to depend here on TWO or THREE ideas; therefore there is no
necessity that any new notions should be added. When we want to break a horse,
we take care not to let him change his master, his lesson, or his pace. Thus an
impression is made on his brain by two or three motions and no more. Id. book.
V. chapter 14.


unchecked and unbounded by any laws -- never satisfied with what has been
done, while any thing remains to be done, for the accomplishment of its
purposes -- confiding, and capable of confiding, only in the annihilation of
all opposition, -- holds its course with such unabating and destructive
rapidity, that the world has become its prey, and at this day, Great Britain
and her dominions excepted, there is scarce a spot on the globe inhabited by
civilized nations, where the vestiges of freedom are to be observed.

To us therefore it appears, at this alarming period, our duty to God, to our
country, to ourselves, and to our posterity, to exert our utmost ability, in
promoting and establishing harmony between Great Britain and these colonies, ON
A CONSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATION.

FOR attaining this great and desirable end, we request you to appoint a proper
number of persons to attend a congress of deputies from the several colonies,
appointed, or to be appointed, by the representatives of the people of the
colonies respectively in assembly, or convention, or by delegates chosen by the
counties generally in the respective colonies, and met in provincial committee,
at such time and place as shall be generally agreed on: And that the deputies
from this province may be induced and encouraged to concur in such measures, as
may be devised for the common welfare, we think it proper, particularly to
inform you, how far, we apprehend, they will be supported in their conduct by
their constituents.

[ In this place was inserted the argumentative part, which in this publication
is called "An Essay."]

THE assumed parliamentary power of internal legislation, and the power of
regulating trade, as of late exercised, and designed to be exercised, we are
thoroughly convinced, will prove unfailing and plentiful sources of dissentions
to our mother country and these colonies, unless some expedients can be adopted
to render her secure of receiving from us every emolument, that can in justice
and reason be expected, and us secure in our lives, properties, and an
equitable share of commerce.

MOURNFULLY revolving in our minds the calamities, that, arising from these
dissentions, will most probably fall on us and our children, we will now lay
before you the particular points we request of you to procure, if possible, to
be finally decided; and the measures that appear to us most likely to produce
such a desirable period of our distresses and dangers. We therefore desire of
you --

FIRST. That the Deputies you appoint, may be instructed by you strenuously to
exert themselves, at the ensuing Congress, to obtain a renunciation, on the
part of Great Britain, of all powers under the statute of the 35 of Henry the
eighth, chapter the 2d -- of all powers of internal legislation -- of imposing
taxes or duties internal or external -- and of regulating trade, except with
respect to any new articles of commerce, which the Colonies may hereafter
raise, as silk, wine, etc. reserving a right to carry these from one colony to
another -- a repeal of all statutes for quartering troops in the Colonies, or
subjecting them to any expense on account of such troops -- of all statutes
imposing duties to be paid in the Colonies, that were passed at the accession
of his present Majesty, or before this time; which ever period shall be judged
most advisable -- of the statutes giving the courts of admiralty in the
colonies greater power than courts of admiralty have in England -- of the
statutes of the 5th of George the second, chapter the 22d, and of the 23d of
George the second, chapter the 29th -- of the statute for shutting up the port
of Boston -- and of every other statute particularly affecting the province of
Massachusetts Bay, passed in the last session of Parliament.

IN case of obtaining these terms, it is our opinion, that it will be
reasonable for the colonies to engage their obedience to the acts of
parliament, commonly called the acts of navigation, and to every other act of
parliament declared to have force, at this time, in these colonies, other than
those above mentioned, and to confirm such statutes by acts of the several
assemblies. It is also our opinion, that taking example from our mother
country, in abolishing the "courts of wards and liveries, tenures in capite,
and by knight's service, and purveyance," it will be reasonable for the
colonies, in case of obtaining the terms before mentioned, to settle a certain
annual revenue on his majesty, his heirs and successors, subject to the
control of parliament, and to satisfy all damages done to the East India
company.

THIS our idea of settling a revenue, arises from a sense of duty to our
sovereign, and of esteem for our mother country. We know and have felt the
benefits of a subordinate connection with her. We neither are so stupid as to be
ignorant of them; nor so unjust as to deny them. We have also experienced the
pleasures of gratitude and love, as well as advantages from that connection. The
impressions are not yet erased. We consider her circumstances with tender
concern. We have not been wanting, when constitutionally called upon, to assist
her to the utmost of our abilities; insomuch that she has judged it reasonable
to make us recompenses for our overstrained exertions: And we now think we
ought to contribute more than we do, to the alleviation of her burdens.

WHATEVER may be said of these proposals on either side of the Atlantic, this
is not a time, either for timidity or rashness. We perfectly know, that the
great cause now agitated, is to be conducted to a happy conclusion, only by
that well tempered composition of counsels, which firmness, prudence, loyalty
to our Sovereign, respect to our parent State, and affection to our native
country, united must form.

By such a compact, Great Britain will secure every benefit, that the
parliamentary wisdom of ages has thought proper to attach to her. From her
alone we shall continue to receive manufactures. To her alone we shall continue
to carry the vast multitude of enumerated articles of commerce, the exportation
of which her policy has thought fit to confine to herself. With such parts of
the world only, as she has appointed us to deal, we shall continue to deal; and
such commodities only, as she has permitted us to bring from them, we shall
continue to bring. The executive and controuling powers of the crown will
retain their present full force and operation. We shall contentedly labor for
her as affectionate friends, in time of tranquillity; and cheerfully spend for
her, as dutiful children, our treasure and our blood, in time of war. She will
receive a certain income The train of Officers, employed by Great Britain,
consume a very large part of what she takes from us. She therefore increases
our distresses to make up for that consumption. They will hereafter grow more
and more oppressive, we more and more uneasy, she more and more disturbed. We
could raise an equal sum in a much more easy, equal, and cheap manner, than she
can do. The attention of small states extends much more efficaciously and
beneficially to every part of the territories, than that of the administration
of a vast empire. The representatives in assembly, WHO ARE TAXED, WHEN THE
PEOPLE ARE TAXED, AND ACCOUNTABLE TO THEM, will have double motives to take
care, that the raising money is managed in the best way. The House of Commons
would not bear to examine every particular relating to the just taxation of
every county on this continent, and to settle all the accounts fairly. If they
could go through the immense labor, it would be impossible for them to do any
other business* In short, by not doing it, they would be unjust; by doing it
they would be useless. Equity and reason demonstrate that such a power belongs
not to them. The same reasoning holds as to the application of money. We have
had some remarkable instances on this continent some few years ago, of the
crown being according to all the forms of business charged with articles, that
never went to the use of the crown. These were perquisites, and who could be so
puritanical as to blame the civil word. It is said, our barracks cost about L.
8000 of this money -- and that the barracks at another place, not deserving a
comparison with ours, cost L. 40,000 sterling. We built our own, ourselves, and
were as saving and careful as we could be, it may be supposed. If money is
raised upon us by parliament; of one thousand pounds, taken out of our pockets,
not one hundred, in all probability, will be usefully applied to the service of
the crown. Deficiencies will ensue -- they must be supplied -- other acts are
made -- still others -- till ^ur Speech of Lord Camden. (...) 78
" unrepresented blades of grass," too frequently and closely cut down and
exposed to the burning heat of an unsetting Sun, ever " in its meridian,"
perish to their deepest roots.

There is not upon earth (says the excellent Gordon) a nation, which having had
unaccountable magistrates, has not felt them to be crying and consuming
mischiefs. In truth, where they are most limited, it has been often as much as
a whole people could do to restrain them to their trust, and to keep them from
violence; and such frequently has been their propensity to be lawless, that
nothing but a violent death could cure them of their violence. This evil has
its root in human nature; men will never think they have enough, whilst they
can take more; nor be content with a part, when they can seize the whole
Blackstone 270.


That the business of most kingdoms has been ill managed, proceeds from this;
it imports the lower rank of men only, and the people (whose cries seldom reach
the prince, till it is too late, and till all is past remedy) that matters
should be frugally ordered, because taxes must arise from their sweat and
labor. But the great ones, who heretofore have had the prince's ear and
favor, or who hoped to have him in their possession, were swayed by another
sort of interest; they like profusion, as having had a prospect to be gainers
by it, they can easily set their account even with the state; a small charge
upon their land is more than balanced by a great place, or a large pension.
Daven. 11. 262.


See the lord keeper North's account of abuses in the conduct and disposal of
the public money in the time of king Chapter 11. Dalrymp, MEM 11. 84.
Those who, in our times, are the conductors of the same kind of dirty work,
may compare the modern ingenious ways and means with those of their worthy
predecessors.

Among others, pretended want of money in the treasury, in order to have a
pretense for giving an exorbitant price for necessaries. Lending the crown at 8
per cent. money which was raised at 5 and 6. Paying with the public money,
pretending it to be private, and taking interest. Depreciating the public debts
and funds, buying them of the holders at half their worth, and afterward by
interest getting them paid in full. Pretending to give up all power in
recommending to places for a consideration, and then insisting on recommending
still, and so getting both ways. Rolling over losses upon the crown, or public,
while the gain was to sink into private pockets. A father stopping a large sum
in his own hand, which was to have been paid the public creditors. Before he
can be brought to account, he dies. The money sinks into the pocket of his
heir. He obtains a pardon of all his father's debts. Gross frauds in office
found out. Then new officers and salaries set up as checks. The new prove as
great knaves as the old, and form a scheme of collusion and mutual
understanding. But the public pays for all, and the power of the court is
strengthened. An old placeman begs leave to sell. Pockets the money, and by and
by, through interest, gets a new place gratis Extravagant men squander their
own money in their public employments of ambassadors, governors, etc. and
charge the public with more than they have really spent, while what they really
spent was ten times more than necessary. The business of old offices
transferred to new: but the profits of the old still kept up, though become
sinecures* An old servant of the public retires upon a penson. He who succeeds
him, by interest gets it continued to him. Another gets an addition to his
salary, and then sells his place for a great deal more than it cost him, and so
an additional load is laid on the public: for the addition must be continued,
because the place was bought. An annual sum is granted by the public for a
public use, as keeping up a harbor, or the like. A private man, by interest,
gets a grant of the jobb; the public concern is neglected, and the public
pocket picked. Crown lands perpetually begged and given away to strengthen the
court interest. The crown constantly kept in debt, and parliament solicited to
pay those debts occasioned merely by the voracity of the court. Commanders of
fleets order a superfluous quantity of stores. By collusion between them and
the store-masters, this supersluous quantity is sold again to the king, and the
money sunk in their pockets. Sometimes the store-masters gave receipts for more
than was received into the king's stores, and the money was divided among the
plunderers. The King's works done by the day, whereas it would have been
cheaper by the great. Money pretended to be coined grati^. Lists of large sums
newly coined produced. But the contrivance was to make the pieces unequal, and
then the too heavy pieces were carried back to the mint, and the profit sunk in
private pockets, etc.

Secret service is a huge cloak thrown over an immense scene of corruption; and
under this cloak we must not peep. Our court-men tell us, there must be large
sums expended in this way, and those sums cannot be accounted for; because the
services done for them must never be known. But we find, that the commons. A.
D. 1708 addressed queen Anne for accounts of pensions paid for secre^ service
to members of parliament, or to any persons in trust for them; and that the
queen ordered said account to be laid before the house. (...).


Contracts are a great fund of ministerial influence. It is well known, that
our ministry do not accept the most reasonable offer; but the offer which is
made by those, who have the greatest parliamentary interest; and that in war
time, every man, who furnishes for the government, is enriched; in France the
contrary; which shows, that we manage our public money much worse than the
French ministry do theirs. In the late war it is notorious, that several of our
purveyors and commissaries got estates sufficient to set them up for earls and
dukes. But as Burnet (...)* OWN TIMES, III. 279
says, the regard, that is shown to members of parliament among us, causes that
few abuses can be inquired into, or discovered. POL. DISQU. b. v. p. 274-277.

What redress could a poor plundered, unrepresented colony obtain against a
Verres, supported by a strong parliamentary influence. We know what several
governors of Mino^ca have dared to do. A governor of Gibraltar has ventured to
oppress even the garrison of that important place. The very drudgery of
examining accounts, would probably secure him. If cast, the injuries could not
be recompensed. A successor might prove as bad -- "Vict^ix provin^ia plorat."


from us, without the trouble or expense of collecting it -- without being
constantly disturbed by complaints of grievances, which she cannot justify, and
will not redress. In case of war, or in any emergency of distress to her, we
shall also be ready and willing to contribute all aids within our power: And we
solemnly declare, that on such occasions, if we or our posterity shall refuse,
neglect or decline thus to contribute, it will be a mean and manifest violation
of a plain duty, and a weak and wicked desertion of the true interests of this
province, which ever have been and must be bound up in the prosperity of our
mother country. Our union, founded on mutual compacts and mutual benefits, will
be indissoluble, at least more firm, than an union perpetually disturbed by
disputed rights and retorted injuries.

SECONDLY. If all the terms abovementioned cannot be obtained, it is our
opinion, that the measures adopted by the congress for our relief should never
be relinquished or intermitted, until those relating to the troops, -- internal
legislation, -- imposition of taxes or duties hereafter, -- the 35th of Henry
the 8th, chapter the 2d, -- the extension of admiralty courts, -- the port of
Boston and the province of Massachusetts Bay are obtained. Every modification
or qualification of these points, in our judgment should be inadmissible. To
obtain them, we think it may be prudent to settle some revenue as
abovementioned, and to satisfy the East India company.

THIRDLY. If neither of these plans should be agreed to, in congress, but some
other of a similar nature shall be framed, though on the terms of a revenue,
and satisfaction to the East India company, and though it shall be agreed by
the congress to admit no modification or qualification in the terms they shall
insist on, we desire your deputies may be instructed to concur with the other
deputies in it; and we will accede to, and carry it into execution as far as we
can.

FOURTHLY. As to the regulation of trade -- we are of opinion, that by making
some few amendments, the commerce of the colonies might be settled on a firm
establishment, advantageous to Great Britain and them, requiring and subject to
no future alterations, without mutual consent. We desire to have this point
considered by the congress; and such measures taken, as they may judge proper.

IN order to obtain redress of our common grievances, we observe a general
inclination among the colonies of entering into agreements of non-importation
and non-exportation. We are fully convinced, that such agreements would
withhold very large supplies from Great Britain and no words can describe our
contempt and abhorrence of those colonists, if any such there are, who, from a
fordid and ill-judged attachment to their own immediate profit, would pursue
that, to the injury of their country, in this great struggle for all the
blessings of liberty. It would appear to us a most wasteful frugality, that
would lose every important possession by too strict, an attention to small
things, and lose also even these at the last. For our part, we will cheerfully
make any sacrifice, when necessary, to preserve the freedom of our country. But
other considerations have weight with us. We wish every mark of respect to be
paid to his majesty's administration. We have been taught from our youth to
entertain tender and brotherly affections for our fellow subjects at home. The
interruption of our commerce must distress great numbers of them. This we
earnestly desire to avoid. We therefore request, that the deputies you shall
appoint may be instructed to exert themselves, at the congress, to induce the
members of it, to consent to make a full and precise state of grievances and a
decent yet firm claim redress, and to wait the event, before any other step is
taken. It is our opinion, that persons should be appointed and sent home to
present this state and claim, at the court of Great Britain.

IF the congress shall choose to form agreements of non-importation and
non-exportation immediately, we desire the deputies from this province will
endeavor to have them so formed as to be binding upon all, and that they may
be PERMANENT, should the public interest require it. They cannot be
efficacious, unless they can be permanent; and it appears to us that there will
be a danger of their being infringed, if they are not formed with great caution
and deliberation. We have determined in the present situation of public affairs
to consent to a stoppage of our commerce with Great Britain only; but in case
any proceedings of the parliament, of which notice shall be received on this
continent, before or at the congress, shall render it necessary, in the opinion
of the congress to take further steps, the inhabitants of this province will
adopt such steps, and do all in their power to carry them into execution.

THIS extensive power we commit to the congress, for the sake of preserving
that unanimity of counsel and conduct, that alone can work out the salvation of
these colonies, with a strong hope and trust, that they will not draw this
province into any measure judged by us, who must be better acquainted with its
state than strangers, highly inexpedient. Of this kind, we know any other
stoppage of trade, but of that with Great Britain, will be. Even this step we
should be extremely afflicted to see taken by the congress, before the other
mode above pointed out is tried. But should it be taken, we apprehend, that a
plan of restrictions may be so framed, agreeable to the respective
circumstances of the several colonies, as to render Great Britain sensible of
the imprudence of her counsels, and yet leave them a necessary commerce. And
here it may not be improper to take notice, that if redress of our grievances
cannot be wholly obtained, the extent or continuance of our restrictions may,
in some sort, be proportioned to the rights we are contending for, and the
degree of relief afforded us. This mode will render our opposition as perpetual
as our oppression, and will be A CONTINUAL CLAIM AND ASSERTION OF OUR RIGHTS.
We cannot express the anxiety, with which we wish the consideration of these
points to be recommended to you. We are persuaded, that if these colonies fail
of unanimity or prudence in forming their resolutions, or of fidelity in
observing them, the opposition by non-importation and non-exportation
agreements will be ineffectual; and then we shall have only the alternative of
a more dangerous contention, or of a tame submission.

UPON the whole, we shall repose the highest confidence in the wisdom and
integrity of the ensuing congress: And though we have, for the satisfaction of
the good people of this province, who have chosen us for this express purpose,
offered to you such instructions, as have appeared expedient to us, yet it is
not our meaning, that by these or by any you may think proper to give them, the
deputies appointed by you should be restrained from agreeing to any measures,
that shall be approved by the congress. We should be glad the deputies chosen
by you could, by their influence, procure our opinions hereby communicated to
you to be as nearly adhered to, as may be possible: But to avoid difficulties,
we desire that they may be instructed by you, to agree to any measures that
shall be approved by the congress, the inhabitants of this province having
resolved to adopt and carry them into execution -- Lastly -- We desire the
deputies from this province, may endeavor to procure an adjournment of the
congress, to such a day as they shall judge proper, and the appointment of a
standing committee.

AGREED, that John Dickinson, Joseph Read, and Charles Thomson, be a committee
to write to the neighboring colonies, and communicate to them the resloves and
instructions.

AGREED, that the committee for the city and county of Philadelphia, or any
fifteen of them, be a committee of correspondence for the general committee of
this province.

Extract from the Minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Cl. Com.

AN ESSAY, This piece has been written in such haste, under so great
indisposition, and amidst such a confusion of public affairs, that it is hoped,
its inaccuracies will be looked upon with indulgence. If longer time could have
been bestowed upon its correction* it would have been at least shorter, if not
more exact* The first appointment of a committee to form a draught of
instructions, was made on the fourth of last month. See note on the extract,
dated the 18th of July.
etc.
THE authority of parliament has within these few years been a question much
agitated; and great difficulty, we understand, has occurred, in tracing the
line between the rights of the mother country and those of the colonies. The
modern doctrine of the former is indeed truly remarkable; for though it points
out, what are not our rights, yet we can never learn from it, what are our
rights. As for example -- Great Britain claims a right to take away nine-tenths
of our estates -- have we a right to the remaining tenth? No, -- To say we
have, is a "traitorous" position, denying her supreme legislature. So far from
having property, according to these late found novels, we are ourselves a
property.

WE pretend not to any considerable share of learning; but, thanks be to divine
Goodness, common sense, experience, and some acquaintance with the
constitution, teach us a few salutary truths on this important subject.

WHATEVER difficulty may occur in tracing the line, yet we contend, that by the
laws of God, and by the laws of the constitution, a line there must be, beyond
which her authority cannot extend. For all these laws are Parlt. Deb. 7. 409.
"What of that? Shall not we give judgment, because it is not adjudged in the
books before? We will give judgment ACCORDING TO REASON, and if there be no
reason in the books, I will not regard them"

Speech of Anderson, Lord chief justice of the queen's bench, in the reign of
Elizabeth. GOULDSB. REP. 96. edit. 1653.


grounded on reason, full of justice, "It seems to me, that the natural
justice, which is a duty of man, ought to be styled the parent, and nourisher,
of every other virtue: and assuredly, without this habit, a man can neither
moderate his desires, nor be brave, nor wise. For, it is a harmony, and peace,
of the whole soul; with a full concert of words, and actions: And the dominion
of such a habit may be rendered more conspicuous, if we examine the other
habits of virtue. For the good of these is private, respecting the individual;
but the good of natural justice respects whole systems, and throughout the
universe" --

In the celestial system of the world, as it marshals out the universal rule of
things, which are thus decreed by God; it is providence, and harmony, and
right. In a civil state, it is justly called peace, and good order. In a
domestic state, it is the like mindedness of husband, and wife, toward each
other; the good will of subordinate members. In the body it is health, and
symmetry of parts; which are principal things, and much beloved by every living
creature. In the soul, it is wisdom; that wisdom which arises amongst men, from
the knowledge of causes, and from natural justice.

Since therefore, this habit does thus instruct, and preserve, the whole and
every part; rendering all the same, in heart, and in tougue, why may it not be
faluted, by the universal voice; THE PARENT AND NOURISHER OF EVERY VIRTUE?"

POL. PYTH. LUC. apud STOBAEUM, pa, 105, edit, Tiguri, 1559.


and true equity," mild, and calculated to promote the freedom and welfare of
men. These objects never can be attained by abolishing every restriction, on
the part of the governors, and extinguishing every right, on the part of the
governed.

SUPPOSE it be allowed, that the line is not expressly drawn, is it thence to
be concluded, there is no implied line? No English lawyer, we presume, will
venture to make the bold assertion. "The King may reject what bills, may make
what treaties, may coin what money, may create what peers, and may pardon what
offenses, HE PLEASES." ^ BLACKST. COM. 250.
But is his prerogative respecting these branches of it, unlimited? By no
means. The words following those next above quoted from the "commentaries on
the laws of England," are -- "unless where the constitution has expressly, or
by EVIDENT CONSEQUENCE, laid down some exception or ^^UNDARY: declaring, that
thus far the prerogative shall go, and no farther." There are "some boundaries"
then, besides the "express exceptions;" and according to the strong expression
here used, "the constitution DECLARES there are." What "evident consequence"
forms those "boundaries?"

THE happiness of the people is the end, and, if the term is allowable, we
would call it the body of the constitution. Freedom is the spirit or soul. As
the soul, speaking of nature, has a right to prevent or relieve, if it can, any
mischief to the body of the individual, and to keep it in the best health; so
the soul, speaking of the constitution, has a right to prevent, or relieve, any
mischief to the body of the society, and to keep that in the best health. The
"evident consequence" mentioned, must mean a tendency to injure this health,
that is, to diminish the happiness of the people -- or it must mean nothing. If
therefore, the constitution "DECLARES by evident consequence;" that a tendency
to diminish the happiness of the people, is a proof, that power exceeds a
"boundary," beyond which it ought not to "go;" the matter is brought to this
single point, whether taking our money from us without our consent, depriving
us of trial by jury, changing constitutions of government, and abolishing the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, by seizing and "Of great importance to
the public is the preservation of this personal liberty: for if once it were
left in the power of any, the highest magistrate, to imprison arbitarily,
whomever he or his officers thought proper, (as in France it is daily practiced
by the crown) THERE WOULD SOON BE AN END OF ALL OTHER RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES."
--

"A natural and regular consequence of this personal liberty is, that every
Englishman may claim A RIGHT TO ADIDE IN HIS OWN COUNTRY SO LONG AS HE PLEASES,
and not to be driven from it unless by the sentence of law. (...) or
transportation is a punishment unknown to the common law. -- "The King cannot
constitute a man (...) lieutenant of Ireland against his will* nor make him a
foreign ambassador. For this might in reality be no more than an honorable
exile." I BLACKSTONE 135 to 138.

"These precedents collected by the reverend and learned judge, chief justice
Anderson and all written with his own hand, do fully resolve for the
maintenance of the ancient and fundamental point of LIBERTY OF THE PERSON, to
be regained by Habeas Corpus, when any one is imprisoned." Parl. Hist. 7. 418.


carrying us to England, have not a greater tendency to diminish our happiness,
than any enormities a King can commit under pretense of prerogative, can have
to diminish the happiness of the subjects in England. To come to a decision
upon this point, no long time need be required. To make this comparison, is
stating the claim of parliament in the most favorable light: For it puts the
assumed power of parliament, to do, "IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER," what they
please, upon the same footing with the acknowledged power of the King, "to make
what peers -- pardon what offenses, etc. ^e pleases." But in this light, that
power is not entitled to be viewed. Such is the wisdom of the English
constitution, that it "declares" the King may transgress a "boundary laid down
by evident consequence," even by using the power with which he is expressly
vested by the constitution, in doing those very acts which he is experssly
trusted by the constitution to do -- as by creating too many or improper
persons, peers; or by pardoning too many or too great offenses, etc. But has
the constitution of ENGLAND expressly "declared," that the parliament of
GREAT BRITAIN may take away the money of ENGLISH colonists without their
consent, and deprive them of trial by ju^y, etc? It cannot be pretended. True
it is, that it has been solemnly declared by parliament, that parliament has
such a power. But that declaration leaves the point just as it was before: For
if parliament had not the power before, the declaration could not give it.
Indeed if parliament is really "omnipotent," ^ Blackstone, 161.
that power is just and constitutional. We further observe, that no English
lawyer, as we remember, has pointed out precisely the line beyond which, if a
king, shall "go," resistance becomes lawful. General terms have been used. The
learned author of those commentaries, that notwithstanding some human
frailties, do him so much honor, has thought proper, when treating of this
subject, to point out the "precedent" of the revolution, as fixing the line. We
would not venture any reflection on so great a man. It may not become us. Nor
can we be provoked by his expressions concerning colonists; because they
perhaps contain his real, though hasty sentiments. Surely, it was not his
intention to condemn those excellent men, who casting every tender
consideration behind them, nobly presented themselves against the tyranny of
the unfortunate and misguided Charles's reign; those men, whom the house of
commons, even after the restoration, would not suffer to be censured.

WE are sensible of the objection that may be made, as to drawing a line
between rights on each side, and the case of a plain violation of rights. We
think it not material* Circumstances have actually produced, and may again
produce this question. -- What conduct of a prince renders resistance lawful?
James the second and his father violated express rights of their subjects, by
doing what their own express rights gave them no title to do, as by raising
money, and levying troops, without consent of parliament. It is not even
settled, what violation of those will justify resistance. But may not some
future prince confining himself to the exercise of his own express rights, such
as have been mentioned, act in a manner, that will be a transgression of a
"boundary?" laid down by "evident consequence," the "constitution de la^ing he
should go no further?" May not this exercise of these his express rights, be so
far extended, as to introduce universal confusion and a subversion of the ends
of government? The whole may be oppressive, and yet any single instance legal.
The cases may be improbable; but we have seen and now feel events once as
little expected. Is it not possible, that one of these cases may happen; If it
does, has the constitution expressly drawn, a line, beyond which resistance
becomes lawful? It has not. But it may be said, a king cannot arm against his
subjects -- he cannot raise money, without consent of parliament. This is the
constitutional check upon him. If he should, it would be a violation of their
express rights. If their purses are shut, his power shrinks. True. Unhappy
colonists! Our money may be taken from us -- and standing armies established
over us, without our consent -- every expressly declared constitutional check
dissolved, and the modes of opposition for relief so contracted, as to leave us
only the miserable alternative of supplication or violence. And these, it
seems, are the liberties of Americans. Because the costitution has not
"expressly declared" the line between the rights of the mother country and
those of her colonists, THEREFORE, the latter have no rights. A logic, equally
edifying to the heads and hearts of men of sense and humanity.

WE assert, a line there must be, and shall now proceed with great deference to
the judgment of others, to trace that line, according to the ideas we
entertain: And it is with satisfaction we can say, that the records, statutes,
law books, and most approved writers of our mother country, those "dead but
most faithful counselors" (as Sir Edward Coke calls them) "who cannot be
daunted by fear, nor muzzled by affection, reward, or hope of preferment, and
therefore may safely be believed," confirm the principles we maintain.

LIBERTY, life, or property, can, with no consistency of words or ideas, be
termed a right of the possessors, while others have a right of taking them away
at pleasure. The most distinguished authors, that have written on government,
declare, it to be "instituted for the benefit of the people; and that it never
will have this tendency, where it is unlimited." Even conquest "But in order to
say something more particular concerning this subject, let us observe that the
natural state of nations in respect to each other, is that of society and
peace. This society is likewise a state of equality and independance, which
establishes a parity of right between them; and engages them to have the same
regard and respect for one another. Hence the general principle of the law of
nations is nothing more than the general law of sociability, which obliges all
nations that have any intercourse with one another, to practice those duties to
which individuals are naturally subject.

"These remarks may serve to give us a just idea of that art, so necessary to
the directors of states, and distinguished commonly by the name of polity.
Polity considered with regard to foreign states, is that ability and address by
which a sovereign provides for the preservation, safety prosperity and glory of
the nation he governs, by respecting the laws of justice and humanity: that is,
without doing and injury to other states, but rather by procuring their
advantage, as much as in reason can be expected. Thus the polity of sovereigns
is the same as prudence among private people; and as we condemn in the latter
any art or cunning, that makes them pursue their own advantage to the prejudice
of others, so the like art would be censurable in princes, were they bent upon
procuring the advantage of their own people by injuring other nations. The
reason of state, to often alleged to justify the proceedings or enterprises of
princes, cannot really be admitted for this end, but inasmuch as it is
reconcileble with the common interest of nations, or which amounts to the same
thing, with the unalterable rules of sincerity, justice, and humanity."

" Gretius indeed acknowledges that the law of nature is common to all nations;
yet he establishes a positive law of nations (...) from the law of nature; and
reduces this law of nations to a sort of human law, which has acquired a power
of obliging in consequence of the will and consent of all or of a great many
nations. See Grotius, rights of war and peace: preliminary discourse 18. and
book 1. chap. 1.. 14.
He adds, that the maxims of this law of nations are proved by the perpetual
practice of people, and the testimony of historians.

"But it has been justly observed that this pretended law of nations,
contradistinct from the law of nature, and invested nevertheless with a force
of obliging, whether people consent to it or not, is a supposition destitute of
all foundation. See P^^fendorf, law of nature and nations, book 2. chap. 3. 23.
with Barbeyarc's notes.


For 1. all nations are with regard to one another in a natural independance
and equality. If there be therefore any common law between them, it must
proceed from God their common sovereign.

2. As for what relates to customs established by an express or tacit consent
among nations, these customs are neither of themselves, nor universally, nor
always obligatory. For from this only that several nations have acted toward
one another for a long time after a particular manner in particular cases, it
does not follow that they have laid themselves under a necessity of acting
always in the same manner for the time to come, and much less that other
nations are obliged to conform to these customs.

3. Against these customs are so much the less capable of being an obligatory
rule of themselves, as they may happen to be bad or unjust. The profession of a
corsair or pyrate, was by a kind of consent, esteemed a long while as lawful*
between nations that were not united by alliance or treaty. It seems likewise,
that some nations allowed themselves the use of poisoned arms in time of war.
See Virgil AEneid, book 10. v. 139. with the 15th note of the Abbe des
Foutaines.
Shall we say that these were customs authorized by the law of nations, and
really obligatory in respect to different people? Or shall we not rather
consider them as barbarous practices; practices from which every just and well
governed nation ought to refrain. We cannot therefore avoid appealing always to
the law of nature, the only one that is really universal, whenever we want to
judge whether the customs established between nations have any obligatory
effect.

4."All that can be said on this subject is, that when customs of an innocent
nature are introduced among nations; each of them is reasonably supposed to
submit to those customs, as long as they have not made any declaration to the
contrary. This is all the force or effect that can be given to received
customs; but a very different effect from that of a law properly so called."
BURLAMAQ. Princ. of not. ^aw, 1. vol. p. 196 -- 199.

"But I will conclude with that which I find reported by fir John Davis, who
was the King's sergeant; and so, by the duty of his place, would no doubt
maintain, to the uttermost of his power, the king's prerogative royal; and yet
it was by him thus said, in those reports of his upon the case of tanistry
customs," That the king's of England always have had a monarchy royal, and not
a monarchy signoral; where, under the first, says he, the subjects are free
men, and have property in their goods, and freehold and inheritance in their
lands; but, under the latter, they are as villains and slaves, and have
property in nothing. And therefore, says he, when a royal monarch makes a new
conquest, yet, if he receives any of the nation's ancient inhabitants into his
protection; they, and their heirs after them, shall enjoy their lands and
liberties according to the laws And there he voucheth this precedent and
judgment following, given before William the conqueror himself, viz.

That one Sherborn, at the time of the conquest, being owner of a castle and
lands in Norfolk, the conqueror gave the same to one Warren, a Norman; and,
Sherborn dying, the heir claiming the same by descent according to the law, it
was, before the conqueror himself, adjudged for the heir, and that the gift
thereof by the conqueror was void. See Davis's reports Lo^d. 162^, p. 41.
PARL. DEBATES, 7 vol. pa. 384.

See also Puffendorf's law of nature and nation's, b. 3. chapter 8. and b. 8. ch* 6.

It is held by the best writers, that a conqueror in a just war, acquires not a
right to the propetry of those of the subdued country, who opposed him not, nor
of the posterity of those who did: Nor can the pretense of obtaining
satisfaction for the charges and damages of the war justify such a claim.


itself is held not to destroy all the rights of the conquered. Such is the
merciful reverence judged by the best and wisest men to be due to human nature,
and frequently observed even by conquerors themselves.

IN fine, a power of government, in its nature tending to the misery of the
people, as a power that is unlimited, or in other words, a pow^^ in which the
people have no share, "In a free state, every man, who is supposed a free
agent, ought to be, in some measure his own governor, and therefore a branch,
at least of the legislative power ought to reside in the whole body of the
people. And this power, when the territories of the state are small and its
citizens easily known, should be expressed by the people in their aggregate or
collective capacity, as was wisely ordained in the petty republics of Greece,
and the first rudiments of the Roman state. But this will be highly
inconvenient when the public territory is extended to any considerable degree,
and the number of citizens is increased. In so large a state as ours, it is
therefore very wisely contrived that the people should do that by their
representatives, which it is impracticable to perform in person." 1 BLACKSTONE
158. 159.

The above quoted words are sufficient of themselves to refute the notion of
"virtual representation" of Americans in parliament.

As to the argument drawn from similitude between the case of those in England,
not qualified to vote by their property, though possessed of a considerable
share, as proprietors of the funds -- The East India company -- merchants --
manufacturers etc. and the case of colonists, the true answer is, that there is
no resemblance whatever between the cases. A few propositions will prove it:
But it may be proper to premise -- 1st. If representation was intended by the
constitution of England, a complete representation was intended; for the reason
of having any, requires having a complete one, as being the best. 2dly. -- If a
complete representation was intended by the constitution, ever, defect in the
representation, is against the intention of the constitution. 3dly. If a
respectable part of the people in England is not represented, it is a defect.
4thly. If therefore, the intention of the constitution is to be regarded as the
constitution, it involves a plain absurdity, to infer a greater defect being
constitutional, from a smaller defect which is unconstitutional. 5thly. The
intention of the constitution must be regarded -- and practices inconsistent
with its design, must be amended by it, if the happiness which it means to
promote and secure, is to be regarded. 6thly. If there is not such a
representation in England, as the constitution requires, there ought to be. As
to the resemblance above supposed. 1st. If many inhabitants of England HAVE NOT
a right to vote in the choice of members of the house of commons, there are
many who HAVE. 2dly. Not one inhabitant of the colonies, has that right. 3dly.
Some representation is better than none, though a complete one cannot be
obtained. The first, is a defect of mode, the latter an extinction of the
substance. There is, to a nice observer of nature, a perceptible difference
between a deformed man and a DEAD man. 4thly. Proprietors of the funds etc.
though they have no right to such vote, as proprietors etc. may yet have it under
another character, as freeholders etc. 5thly. When acting as freeholders etc.
they may take care of their interests as proprietors etc. for -- 6thly. Their
being proprietors etc, does not disqualify them, from acquiring and enjoying a
right to such vote by becoming freeholders etc. but 7thly. By acquiring and
enjoying a right to such vote, the colonists must cease to be inhabitants of
the colonies -- 8thly. Their being inhabitants of the colonies, therefore
disqualifies them from acquiring and enjoying the right to such vote. -- 9thly.
If those not entitled to such vote in England were not bound by statutes made
there they would not be bound by statutes, nor taxed at all, though possessed of
great property -- but 10thly. The colonists are bound and taxed by the acts of
their assemblies. 11thly. Even those not entitled to such vote in England, and
incapable of obtaining it, have this protection, that because representatives
and their electors are bound by the laws made, as well as the rest of the
people -- and the connections between the representatives, their electors, and
the rest of the people, all living together in the same kingdom, are so many
and so intimate, that even the actually unrepresented cannot be affected,
unless the representatives and their electors are affected also. 12thly.
Totally different is the condition of colonists, if bound by statutes
generally. -- By the acts of parliament for raising a revenue in America, the
commons use the words, "GIVE AND GRANT." Can men give and grant what they have
not? Did any of those acts take a single penny out of the pocket of a single
GIVER and GRANTOR? No. So far from it, that if there is any truth in the
proverb, and money saved is money got, these " dona ferentes" gentlemen put
money into their pockets by their Preambles to statutes for raising a revenue
in America.
"loyal and dutiful" generosity. EVERY INDIVIDUAL of them acquired by
bestowing. Pretensions thus to give, are such contradictions to fact and sense,
that in making them a sanction of injustice is sought from a principle of the
constitution, and in describing them, a solecism in speech becomes a proper
expression. It must be acknowledged however, that the commons are more than
sound divines, for they improve upon the text, Philippians 111. 7.
and " count their l^ss for gain."

Statutes might grind us, while not an elector in England would know or regard
our sufferings -- if acquainted with them, he might think the statutes
inflicting them, JUST and POLITICAL. An open avowal has been made in parliament
-- that it is These words are extracted from the protest of the lords on the
repeal of the American stamp act --. 6. -- 61 lords were against the repeal, 33
of them signed the protest.
"the INDISPENSIBLE DUTY of parliament to tax the colonies IN ORDER TO EASE THE
GENTRY AND PEOPLE OF GREAT BRITAIN." Let not Americans ever forget the lordly
words! To understand them fully, we should consider --

Our dispute includes not only the present taxes laid upon us. The universal
property of England was interested in Mr. Hambden's suit, about a few
shillings. If the crown had a right to th^se shillings, it had a right to every
shilling of every man in the kingdom. Great Britain is about ONE HUNDRED AND
FORTY MILLIONS OF POUNDS STERLING in debt. If she can pay any part of that
debt, by taxing us, she may pay the whole by taxing us, if we can raise the
money. If we cannot, yet as we are upbraided continually in pamphlets and
papers with the richness of our houses, our furniture, our equipage, our
tables, and our dress, she may be made to think we abound too much in these
conveniences. If we are reduced to the condition of French peasants, it is no
matter. We belong to the people of Great Britain: And all British subjects, but
Americans, may do what they please with their own. "It is her indispensible
DUTY, say their lordships, ^o ease herself by taxing us;" and surely there is
virtue enough left in a British parliament, notwithstanding all the dreadful
intelligence British writers send us over, to perform that "duty," exactly. But
this is not all. There are certain wicked Frenchmen and Spaniards, that in
every period of twenty or thirty years oblige Great Britain to add thirty or
forty millions to her debt. Upon an average, since the revolution, she runs
annually in debt about a million and an half. Can it be expected, her ministers
will be kinder to us, than they have been to her? Where will the demand upon
us, where will our wretchedness stop, if we have not resolution enough to
defend ourselves?

A statute intended to have force on the people of Great Britain, is the case
of A STATE acting upon ITSELF. A statute intended to have force on the people
of America, is the case of ONE state acting upon ANOTHER. The people of
Great Britain, who in the first case are subject to the statute -- in the
second, are the absolute sovereigns who impose it on others.

"Virtual representation" then, as applied to colonists -- is, to borrow
expressions of the excellent archbishop Tillotson, on another occasion,
altering only two words. -- "An absurdity of that monstrous and massy wei^ht,
that no human authority or wit are able to support it. It will "make the very
pil^ar of St." Stephens "crack, and requires more volumes to make it good than
would fill" Westminster Hall.

Yet this most despicable notion has been the pretense, for our fellow subjects
" Win their heart^, and you may soon have their hands and purses," was the
advice of old lord Barleigh to queen Elizabeth. She was wise enough to take it.
The world knows the consequences.
clapping muskets to our breasts, and taking our money out of our pockets.


is proved to be, by reason and the experience of all ages and countries,
cannot be: rightful or legal power. For, as an excellent Bishop of the Church
of England argues, HOADLEY'S Disc. on government.
"the ends of government cannot be answered by a total dissolution of all
happiness at present, and of all hopes for the future."

THE just inference therefore from these premises would be an exclusion of any
power of parliament over these colonies, rather than the admission of an
unbounded power.

WE well know, that the colonists are charged by many persons in Great Britain,
with attempting to obtain such an exclusion and a total independance on her. As
well we know the accusation to be utterly false. We are become criminal in the
sight of such persons, by refusing to be guilty of the highest crime against
ourselves and our posterity. NOLUMUS LEGES ANGLIAE MUTARI. This is the
rebellion with which we are stigmatized. [We have committed the like offense,
that was objected by the polite and humane Fimbria against a rude senator of
his time. We have " disrespectfully refused to receive the whole weapon into
our body." We could not do it, and live. But that must be acknowledged to be a
poor excuse, equally inconsistent with good breeding and the supreme
legislature of Great Britain.]

FOR these ten years past we have been incessantly 4 Geo. 3, chapter 15. 4 Geo. 3,
chapter 34. 5 Geo. 3, chapter 12. 5 Geo. 3, chapter 45. 6 Geo. 3, chapter 12. 6 Geo. 3, chapter 52*
7. Geo. 3, chapter 41. 7 Geo. 3, ch 59. 8 Geo 3, chapter 22. The resolves that
colonists may be tried in England under the 35 Hen. 8. -- The blockade of
Boston -- the Rhode Island court, etc. etc.
attacked. Hard is our fate, when, to escape the character of rebels, we must
be degraded into that of slaves: as if there was no medium, between the two
extremes of anarchy and despotism, where innocence and freedom could find
repose and safety.

WHY should we be exhibited to mankind, as a people adjudged by parliament
unworthy of freedom? The thought alone is insupportable. Even those unhappy
persons, who have had the misfortune of being born under the yoke of bondage,
imposed by the cruel laws, if they may be called laws, of the land, where they
received their birth, no sooner breathe the air of England, though they touch
her shore only by accident, Somerset's case.
than they instantly become freemen. Strange contradiction. To this
contradiction, the following may be added -- Her policy at once to keep peace
with her natural enemies. and to provoke her natural friends, whose assistance
one day -- and that day seems to be approaching -- in the vicissitudes of human
affairs, great as she is, she may want; -- her interest, as she thinks, to
protect and to oppress PROTESTANT countries -- to abhor a large standing army,
and yet voluntarily to put herself under the absolute necessity, of
perpetuating an immensely large one, to govern the many millions of slaves she
expects soon to have on this vast continent. Two of the strewdest, though not
best emperors, that ever lived, Augustus and Tiberius, prohibited every man of
distinction from setting his foot in Egypt, Tac
because of the importance of that province to Rome. But Great Britain, as if
these numerous provinces, much more remote from her, than Egypt from Rome, were
of little consequence, willingly obliges herself to trust a mighty armed power
into the hands of a subject, in these colonies, the tempting interest of which
subject and of the people, may engage them to unite in establishing an
independent empire, on her own model. Great Britain ought not to forget, that
Rome was ruined by keeping standing armies in her provinces.
The same kingdom at the same time, the asylum and the bane of liberty.

To return to the charge against us, we can safely appeal to that Being, from
whom no thought can be concealed, that our warmest wish and utmost ambition is,
that we and our posterity may ever remain subordinate to, and dependant upon
our parent state. This submission our reason approves, our affection dictates,
our duty commands, and our interest enforces.

IF this submission indeed implies a dissolution of our constitution, and a
renunciation of our liberty, we should be unworthy of our relation to her, if
we should not frankly declare, that we regard it with The Privernates had
revolted from the Romans, but were reduced. The question was, what judgment
should be given against them. This is Livy's account of the affair, in the 21st
chapter of his 8th book.

"Quum ipsa per se res anceps esset, prout cujusque ingenium erat, atrocius
mitiusve suadentibus; tum incertiora omnia unus ex Prive^natibus legatis feci^,
macis conditionis, in qua natus esset, quam praesentis necessitatis, memor:
qui, interrogatus a quodam tristioris sententiae auctore, quam ^oenam meritos
Privernates censeret? e^m, in^uit, quam merentur, qui se liberate dignos
censent: cujus quum seroc^ responso infestiores factos videret con^ul eos, qui
ante Privernatium causam impugnabant; ut ipse benigna interrogatione mitius
responsum eliceret, Quid, si ^oe^am, inquit, remittimus vobis, qualem nos pacem
vobiscum habituros speremus? Si bonam de^eritis, inquit, and fidam, and
perpetuam: si malam, ^aud diuturnam. Tum vero minari, noc id ambigue,
Privernatem quidam, (...) illis vocibus ad rebellandum incitari pacatos
populos, pars melior senatus ad meliora responsum trahere, and dicere, Viri,
and liberi, vocem a^ditam, (...) credi posse, ullum populum, aut hominem
denique,* in ^a condition, cujus eum poenitea^, diutius, quam necess^^sit,
mansur^m? Ibi pacem esse sidam, (...) voluntarii pacati sint: neque ^o (...),
ubi servitut^m ^sse (...), sidem ^^erandam esse. In hanc sententiam maxim
consul ipse inclinavit anim^s, identidem ad principes sententiarum consulares,
uti exaudiri posset a pluribus, dicendo, Fos demum, qu^ nihil, pr^^terquam de
libertat^, cogitent, dignos esse, qui Rowani siant. Itaque and in senat^ causam
obtinuere, and ex a^ctoritate Patrum latum ad populum est, ut Privernatibus
CIVITAS DARITUR."


horror; and every true true Englishman will applaud this just distinction and
candid declaration. [Our defense necessarily touches chords in unison with the
fibers of his honest heart. They must vibrate in sympathetic tones. If we,
(...) kindred, should be base enough to promise the humiliating subjection, he
could not believe us. We should suffer all the infamy of the engagement,
without finding the benefit expected from being thought as contemptible as we
should undertake to be.]

BUT this submission implies not such insupportable evils: and our amazement is
inexpressible, when we consider the gradual increase of these colonies, from
their slender beginnings in the last century to their late flourishing
condition, and how prodigiously, since their settlement, our parent state has
advanced in wealth, force and influence, till she is become the first power on
the sea, and the envy of the world -- that these our better days should not
strike conviction into every mind, that the freedom and happiness of the
colonists are not inconsistent with her authority and prosperity.

THE experience of more than one hundred years will surely be deemed, by wise
men, to have some weight in the scale of evidence to support our opinion. We
might justly ask of her, why we are not permitted to go on, as we have been
used to do since our existence, conferring mutual benefits, thereby
strengthening each other, more and more discovering the reciprocal advantages
of our connection, and daily cultivating affections, encouraged by those
advantages?

[WHAT unknown offenses have we committed against her within these ten years,
to provoke such an unexampled change in her conduct toward us? In the last
war, she acknowledged us repeatedly, to be faithful, dutiful, zealous and
useful in her cause. Is it criminal in us, that our numbers, by the favor of
Divine Providence have greatly increased? That the poor choose to fly from their
native countries in Europe to this continent? Or, that we have so much improved
these woods, that if we can be forced into an unsuccessful resistance, avarice
itself might be satiated with our forfeitures?]

IT cannot with truth be urged, that projects of innovation have commenced with
us. Facts and their dates prove the contrary. "The winds lift up the waves", --
said a wise man -- yet we read of a weak man, who scourged waves -- but he had
not raised them. To excite commotions, and then to scourge for being excited,
is an addition to the wildness of a Xerxes, reserved more particularly to
distinguish the present age, already sufficiently illustrious by the injuries
offered to the rights of human nature.
Not a disturbance has happened on any part of this continent, but in
consequence of some immediately preceding provocation.

To what purpose? The charge of our affecting one great, or many small
republics, must appear as contemptible a madness to her, as it does to us.
Divided as we are into many provinces, The genius of a (...), suggested to him
the condition of a large empire verging into servitude -- the only plan for
saving it, -- and the difficulty of executing that plan. "An overgrown republic
(says he, and such a limited monarchy as that of Great Britain with such an
extent of dominions, may well be called, "an overgrown republic,") can only be
saved from despotism, by subdividing it into a number of confiderate republics.
But how is this practicable? By a despotic dictator, who with the courage of
Sylla, has as much genius for building up, as that Roman had for pulling down.
(...) he be an ambitious man, his reward, will be immortal glory; if a
philosopher, the blessings of his fellow citizens will sufficiently console him
for the loss of authority, though he should not be insensible to their
ingratitude."

What was argument in Italy, is reality to Great Britain, with this additional
circumstance in her favor, that she must always continue if she wisely conducts
her affairs, though (...) than all, yet greater than any. The immense
advantages of such a situation, are worthy the closest attention of every
Br^^on. To a man, who has considered them with that attention, perhaps it will
not appear too bold to aver, that, if an a^changel had planned the connection
between Great Britain and her colonies, he could not have fixed it on a more
lasting and beneficial ^^^ndation, unless he could have changed human nature. A
mighty naval power at the head of the whole -- that power, a parent state, with
all the endearing sentiments attending the relationship -- that never could
disoblige, but with design -- the dependant states much more apt to have feuds
among themselves -- she the umpire and controuler -- those states producing
every article necessary to her greatness -- their interest, that she should
continue free and flourishing -- their ability to throw a considerable weight
into the scale, should her government get UNDULY POISED -- she and all those
states PROTESTANT -- are some of the circumstances, that delineated by the
masterly hand of a Beccaria, would exhibit a plan, vindicating the ways of
heaven, and demonstrating, that humanity and policy are nearly related. An
Alexander, a Coesar, a Charles, a Lewis, and others have fought through fields
of blood, for universal empire. Great Britain has a certainty, by population
and commerce alone, of attaining to the most astonishing and well founded power
the world ever saw. The circumstances of her situation are new and striking.
Heaven has offered to her, glory and prosperity without measure. Her wise
ministers disdain to accept them -- and prefer -- " a pepper corn." Mr.
Nugent's speech.


So dire^^^ opposite to the interest of Great Britain, has the conduct of
administration been for some time past, that it may safely be affirmed, that,
if their view was, to establish arbitrary power over Great Britain, schemes
more dangerous could not have been laid. To profess this purpose, would ensure
a defeat. Any man, who had such a design, would first take the opportunity of
peace, TO SET ONE PART OF THE SUBJECT AGAINST THE OTHER. -- This might be done
in the following manner.

Let every session of parliament produce a fresh injury. Give no rest, or hope
of rest. Let insult added to insult, fill up the vacancies between the
sessions. Tease and persecute into opposition. Then let ministers themselves
rejoice in the freedom of the press. Let every action of the oppressed be
exaggerated. Let innumerable false invectives be vented in pamphlets and
newspapers. Let all the provocations and excuses be concealed from public
sight as much as possible. Load the devoted with the terms of traitors and
rebels. Nearly in this way Scotland was treated by the arbitrary ministry of
Charles the first. But the parliament and people of England had common sense
and virtue. The base deception could not pass upon them. They saw the snare
laid for them; and resented it so deeply, that an army of Englishmen fled
before an army of Scotchmen at Newburn. For once it was glorious to fly. But it
required English heads and English hearts to understand and to act the part.

Thus the colonies have been treated. At last a civil war may be worked up. It
should be considered, as Lord Mansfield expresses it -- whether "the play is
worth the candle." In such a war, every victory will be a defeat. If the
colonies are subdued, vast sums must be raised, and a p^^^gious army must be
supported, to keep them in subjection. Great Britain must feel the weight of
that influence, added to the power of the crown. The colonies are increasing.
Who can compute the extent and effect of such an influence "But, on the other
hand, it is to be considered, that every prince, in the first parliament after
his accession, has by long usage a truly royal addition to his hereditary
revenue settled upon him for his life; and has never any occasion to apply to
parliament for supplies, but upon some public necessity of the whole realm.
This restores to him that constitutional independence which at his first
accession seems, it must be owned, to be wanting. And then with regard to
power, we may find perhaps that the hands of government are at least
sufficiently strengthened; and that an English monarch is now in no danger of
being overborne by either the nobility or the people. The instruments of power
are not perhaps so open and avowed as they formerly were, and therefore are the
less liable to jealous and invidious reflections; but they are not the weaker
upon that account. In short, our national debt and taxes (besides the
inconveniences beforementioned) have also in their natural consequences
thrown such a weight of power into the executive scale of government, as we
cannot think was intended by our patriot ancestors; who gloriously struggled
for the abolition of the then formidable parts of the prerogative, and by an
unaccountable want of fore^ight established this system in their stead. The
entire collection and management of so vast a revenue, being placed in the
^^nds of the crown, have given rise to such a multitude of new officers,
created by and removeable at the royal pleasure, that they have extended the
influence of government to every corner of the nation. Witness the
commissioners, and the multitude of dependents on the customs, in every port of
the kingdom; the commissioners of excise, and their numerous subalterns, in
every inland district: the postmasters, and their servants, planted in every
town, and upon every public road; the commissioners of the stamps, and their
distributors, which are full as scattered and full as numerous; the officers of
the salt duty, which, though a species of excise and conducted in the same
manner, are yet made a distinct corpse from the ordinary managers of that
revenue; the surveyors of houses and windows* the receivers of the land tax;
the managers of lotteries; and the commissioners of hackney coaches; all which
are either mediately or immediately appointed by the crown, and removeable at
pleasure without any reason assigned: these, it requires but little penetration
to see, must give that power, on which they depend for subsistence, an
influence most amazingly extensive. To this may be added the frequent
opportunities of conferring particular obligations, by preference in loans,
subscriptions, tickets, remit^ances, and other money transactions, which will
greatly increase this influence; and that over those persons whose attachment,
on account of their wealth, is frequently the most desirable. All this is the
natural, though perhaps the unforeseen, consequence of erecting our funds of
credit, and to support them establishing our present perpetual taxes: the whole
of which is in^irely new since the restoration in 1660; and by far the greatest
part since the revolution in 1688. And the same may be said with regard to the
officers in our numerous army, and the places which the army has created. All
which put together gives the executive power so persuasive an energy with
respect (...) the persons themselves and so prevailing an interest with their
friends and families, as will amply make amends for the loss of external
prerogative.

"But, though this profusion of offices should have no effect on individuals,
there is still another newly acquired branch of power; and that is* not the
influence (...) but the force of a dis^iplined army: paid indeed ultimately by
the people, but immediately by the crown; raised by the crown, officered by the
crown, commanded by the crown. They are kept on foot it is true only from year
to year, and that by the power of parliament; but during that year they must,
by the (...) of our constitution, if raised at all, be at the absolute disposal
of the crown. And there need but few words to demonstrate how great a trust is
thereby reposed in the prince by his people. A trust, that is more than
equivalent to a thousand little troublesome prerogatives.

"Add to all this, that, besides the civil list, the immense revenue of almost
seven millions sterling, which is annually paid to the creditors of the public,
or carried to the sinking fund, is first deposited in the royal exchequer, and
thence issued out to the respective offices of payment. This revenue the people
can never refuse to raise, because it is made perpetual by act of parliament;
which also, when well considered, will appear to be a trust of great delicacy
and high importance." 1 BLACKSTONE'S COM. b. 1. chapter 8. p. 334 -- 336.


? Undone by her victories, she must resign her LIBERTY or some future MONARCH
WITH HER COLONIES, unless she first loses them in another way. If she is
unfortunate, public calamities may make great changes. Such changes seem to be
intended by some men. Great Britain has been led into the Ru^icon. She has not
yet past it. We consider the hostilities already practiced, as the maneuvers
of a ministerial war. We know the machinations formed against us* and the
favorite publications industriously spread abroad, to excite a jealous^ of us
among our British brethren. We know how acceptable to many an earthquake would
be to "sink some of the colonies in the ocean" and how pleasing, to employ the
rest "in raising staple commoditi^^:" That we are thought "too numerous," and
how much it would be judged by some for the interest of Great Britain, if a
pestilence should sweep off a million and a half of us. These wonderful
lucubrations have not (...) us. But here we are, by Divine Providence, three
millions of souls. What can be done with us? If we were to be considered, only
as Great Britain put herself to a very considerable expense last war in de^ence
of Portugal, because that kingdom was her ^ally, and she derived great
advantages from an intercourse with her. But what are those advantages or the
affections arising from them, when compared to the advantages and affections
that connect these Colonies with Great Britain? Words cannot express the
surprise, that men free from passion must feel, on considering her impolicy, in
laboring to disjoin from herself the only true friends she has in the world.
If her ministers were p^nsioner^ of France and Spain, they could not pursue
measures more pleasing and advantageous to to those kingdoms.
PROTESTANT allies, we ought to be esteemed by a wise people. Such a people
certainly would not be careful to disunite us from their interest -- to make us
foes when they might have us friends. Some states have thought it true policy
to grant greater indulgences to remote dominions, than were enjoyed by
themselves: And this policy has been much applauded. The enjoyment of valuable
privileges by inferior states, under the protection of a superior, is the
strongest bond of dependence. Why should we prefer a dependence on
Great Britain to a dependence on France, if we enjoy less freedom under the
former, than we may under the latter? " Firmi^^imum imperium, quo obedie^tes
GAUDENT" -- or as lord chief justice C^ke expresses it, in his comment on the
25th of Edward the third, "the state of a king stands more assured by the
love and favor of the subject, than by the dread and fear of laws, etc."
"During all our happy days of concord, partly from our national monderation,
and (...) from the wisdom, and sometimes perhaps from the carelessness of our
ministers, they have been trusted in a good measure with the entire management
of their affairs; and the success they have (...) with ought to be to us an
ever memorable proof, that THE TRUE (...) OF GOVERNMENT IN NO^ GOVERNING (...).
And why should friendship and gratitude, and long attachments, which inspire
all the relish and sweetness of private life, be supposed to be of no weight in
the intercourse between great communities. These are principles of human
nature, which act with much greater certainty on numbers than on individuals.
If properly cultivated they may to us be productive of the noblest benefits;
and, at all events, will neither lessen the extent of our power, nor shorten
the duration of it." Bishop of (...). ASA^H'S S^^mon, p. 1^


Ought Great Britain to despise the advantages she actually receives with
safety from us, because by the adoption of Spanish maxims, she might with
danger extort more?

It is the duty of every colonist to oppose such maxims. They threaten ruin to
our mother country and to us. We should be guilty of treason against our
sovereign and the majesty of the people of England, if we did not oppose them.
England must be saved in America* Hereafter, she will rejoice that we have
resisted -- and thank us for having offended her. Her wisdom will in a short
time discover, the artifices that have been used by her worst enemies to
inflame her against her dutiful children; that she has supported not her own
cause but the cause of an administration; and will clearly distinguish, which
will most conduce to her benefit, safety, and glory, well treated and
affectionate colonies, or millions of slaves, an unnatural increase of her
standing forces, and an addition to the influence of the crown, defying all
calculation.


and incapable of union, except against a common danger, she knew, that we
could not think of embarking our treasures of tranquillity and liberty, on an
ocean of blood, in a wandering expedition to some Utopian port. The history of
mankind, from the remotest antiquity, furnishes not a single instance of a
people consisting of husbandmen and merchants, voluntarily engaging in such a
phrenzy of ambition. No. Our highest pride and glory has been, with humble
unsuspecting duty It has been suggested, "that subjects sometimes err, by not
believing that princes mean as well as they do" -- But, the instances are
numerous where princes and their courtiers ^rr, by not believing, that subjects
mean as well as they do.
to labor in contributing to elevate her to that exalted station, she holds
among the nations of the earth, and which, we still ardently desire and pray,
she may hold, with fresh accessions of fame and prosperity, till time shall be
no more.

THESE being our sentiments, and, we are fully convinced, the sentiments of our
brethren throughout the colonies, with unspeakable affliction, we find
ourselves obliged to oppose that system of dominion over us, arising from
counsels pernicious both to our parent and her children -- to strive, if it be
possible, to close the breaches made in our former concord -- and stop the
sources of future animosities. -- And may GOD Almighty, who delights in the
titles of just and merciful, incline the hearts of all parties to that
equitable and benevolent temper, which is necessary, solidly to establish peace
and harmony, in the place of confusion and dissension.

THE legislative authority claimed by parliament over these colonies consists
of two heads -- first, a general power of internal legislation; and secondly, a
power of regulating our trade: both, she contends are unlimited. Under the
first, may be included among other powers, those of forbiding us to See Canada
bill.
worship our creator in the manner we think most acceptable to him -- imposing
taxes on us -- collecting them by their own officers -- enforcing the
collection by admiralty courts or courts martial -- abolishing trials by jury
-- establishing a standing army The army under the command of general GAGE, in
the province of Massachusetts Bay alone amounts to several thousand men -- kept
there without consent of their assembly. and to be augmented as the general
shall think proper.

I must own sir. I can see but one reason for raising at this present juncture,
this additional number of troops, and that is to strengthen the hands of the
minister against the next elections by giving him the power of disposing of
commission to the sons, brothers, nephews, cousins, and friends of such as have
interest in boroughs into some of which perhaps, troops may be sent to procure
the free election of their members, in imitation of the late Czarina sending
her troops into Poland to secure the free election of a king

But still there is one thing more fatal than all I have yet named that must be
the consequence of so great a body of troops being kept on foot in England, and
will be the finishing stroke to all our liberties. For as the towns in England
will not be able much longer to contain quarters for them, most of those who
keep public houses being near ruined by soldier's billeted on them; so on
pretense of the necessity of it, barracks will be built for quartering them,
which will be as so many fortresses WITH STRONG GARRISONS IN THEM, erected in
all parts of England, WHICH CAN TEND TO NOTHING, but by degrees to subdue and
enslave the kingdom.

But if ever this scheme should be attempted, it will be incumbent on every
Englishman to endeavor to prevent it by all methods* and as it would be the
last stand that could be ever made for our liberties, rather than suffer it to
be put in execution, IT WOULD BE OUR DUTY TO DRAW OUR SWORDS, AND NEVER PUT
THEM UP, till our liberties were secured, and the authors of our intended
slavery brought to condign punishment. -- I hope I shall be forgiven if during
the debates I shall take the liberty of speaking again; for I am determined to
fight inch by inch, every proposition that tends, as I think this does to the
enslaving my country.

Lord Viscount GAGE'S Speech in 1739. Parl. Deb book 11th, p. 383. See (...).
on standing armies.

A minister declared in the house of commons, that he should "always consider
it as a part of the constitution that the military should act under the civil
authority." But, by order, the commander in chief of the forces has precedence
of a governor, in the province under his government. By his majesty's order,
transmitted in a letter dated the 9th of February 1765, from the secretary of
state to the commander in chief, it is declared, "that the orders of the
commander in chief, and under him, of the brigadiers-general, commanding in the
northern and southern departments, in all military affairs, shall be SUPREME,
and must be obeyed by the troops, as such, in all the civil governments in
America. That in cases, where no specific orders have been given by the
commander in chief, or by the brigadier-general commanding in the district, the
civil governor in council, and where no council there subsists, the civil
governor, may, for the benefit of his government, give orders for the marching
of troops, the disposition of them, for making and marching detachments,
escorts, and such purely military services within his government, to the
commanding officer of the troops, who is to give proper order for carrying the
same into execution: PROVIDED they are not contradictory to, or incompatible
with, any order he may have received from the commander in chief, or the
brigadier-general OF THE DISTRICT."

In May 1769 the house of representatives for Massachusets-Bay, requested
governor Bernard "to give the necessary and effectual orders for the removal of
the forces by sea and land out of the port of Boston, and from the gate of the
city, DURING THE SESSION OF THE SAID ASSEMBLY;" to which he answered --

Gentlemen, I have NO AUTHORITY over his majesty's ships in this port or his
troops within this town, nor can I give any orders for their removal.

May 31, 1769. Fra. Bernard.


Thus, our governors, the captains-general and commanders in chief,
representing the sovereign, and known to the constitution of these colonies,
are deprived of their legal authority, IN TIME OF PEACE, by an order -- and a
perpetual dictatorial power established over us. To accomplish this great
purpose, it was thought proper during the last war, to change the mode of
granting military commissions, and to pass that to the general in America under
the great seal. It is not known, whether this uncommon formality has been
observed with regard to the major-generals of the respective "DISTRICTS."


among us in time of peace, without consent of our assemblies -- paying them
with our money -- seizing our young men The Germans have been justly celebrated
in different ages, for sagacity in promoting the arts, and for martial spirit;
yet how unhappy have they been made in a short period of time, by that single
engine of arbitrary power, a standing army. Their distress was wrought up to
such a degree, that thousands, and tens of thousands, relinquished their native
country, and fled to the wildernesses of America. It was a way of thinking and
acting that became them. For Germans may truly be called the Fathers of
Englishmen. From 1 Blackst. p. 147.
Germany came their ancestors and the first principles of the constitution.
Germans therefore seem to be more justly entitled than other foreigners to the
blessings of that constitution. To enjoy them, in this free country as it then
was, they came here, but now unfortunately find, arbitrary Government and a
standing army pursuing them even into these woods. Numbers of them now in these
provinces, have served in the armies of the several princes in Germany and know
well, that one reason with their rulers, for putting swords into their hands
was to cut the throats of their own-fathers, brothers and relations who should
attempt to relieve themselves from any part of their miseries. Their former
sovereigns are now completing, it is said, the cruel tragedy of tyranny. They
will not suffer those they have made wretched, to seek for a more tolerable
exi^^ence in some other part of the globe. It is their DUTY, say these
unfeeling princes, "to be unhappy, and to renounce all hopes of relief." They
are prohibited from leaving their country. Those who have already escaped into
these colonies, remember what they and their parents suffered in Germany. The
old tell the stories of their oppressions to the younger; and however
improbable it may appear on the other side of the Atlantic, it is asserted by
persons well acquainted with this people, that they have very little
inclination TO SUFFER THE SAME CRUELTIES AGAIN in America.
for recruits -- changing constitutions of government Bill for changing the
constituting of Massachusets-Bay.
-- stopping the press -- declaring any action, even a meeting of the smallest
number, to consider of peaceable modes to obtain redress of grievances General
Gage's proclamation, dated June 29, 1774.
high treason -- taking colonists to Great Britain to be tried Resolves in the
house of lords on 35th Hen. 8. chapter 2d.
-- exempting "murderers" Bill for the administration of justice, etc.
of colonists from punishment, by carrying them to England, to answer
indictments found in the colonies -- Boston act.
shutting up our ports -- prohibiting us from slitting 23d Geo. 2 chapter 29.
iron to build our houses, -- making 5th Geo. 2 chapter 22
hats to cover our heads, or clothing to cover the rest of our bodies, etc. If
Great Britain has a constitutional power to prohibit us from slitting iron as
she has done, she has a constitutional power, that is, a right, to prohibit us
from raising grain for our food; for the principle that supports one law, will
support the other. What a vast demand must be made on her for this article, and
how firmly would her dominion be established, if we depended wholly on her for
our daily bread? Her modern writers consider colonists as slaves of Great
Britain shut up in a large workhouse, constantly kept at labor, in procuring
such materials as she prescribes, and wearing such clothes as she sends. --
Should she ever adopt the measure abovementioned, and on our complaints of
grievances, withhold food from us -- what then? why then, on her principle --;
it would be right --; TO BE STARVED. To say in such case we should have any
other right, would be a " traitorous and rebellious denial of the supreme
legislature of Great Britain." for she "has power of right to bind us by
statutes IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER."

Let not any person object that the supposition of such a case is the
suggestion of fancy. The Carthaginians, those masters in the sublime politics
of commerce -- politics that have produced so many dreadful scenes upon earth,
forbad the Sardinians to raise corn, in order to keep them in due subjection.
The East Indies, St. Vincents, the proceedings at Rhode Island, and the Boston
act, etc. give rise to many alarming apprehensions in America. There are few
men on this continent would be as much surprised at that measure, as at some
late measures. The beginning justifies any apprehensions. Power debauches the
affections. The improbability of cases happening, is no answer in such
important considerations. The laudable spirit of commerce may be inflamed into
rapacity and cruelty in a nation as well as in an individual. We must regard
the POWER claimed by Great Britain, not solely her WILL or CONTINGENCIES
DEPENDING ON THAT WILL. If she affixes no limits to her power why should we
affix any to its effects? "I know (says Mr. Hoadly) it is next to impossible,
that any such case should happen: But if such things be said, and such cases,
in effect, be put, it is necessary to speak, upon the supposition of such
cases. -- And me thinks it is but a narrow spirited proceeding in us to go just
no farther in our notions, than a compliance with our own present condition
forces us; to exclude from our regard the condition of all other n^^tions, and
all cases, but just that, which has happened last of all in our own."

That the plan of governing us by withholding necessaries of life has been
considered, and in what light colonies are viewed at home, the following
extracts will partly show."

It appears that the original and grand evil attending them was, the settlement
of so considerable a part in a climate incapable of yielding the commodities
wanting in Britain.

These northern colonies, long after their disadvantageous nature was known,
were continually increased by fresh migrations from Europe; which, as I before
observed, ought totally to have been prevented, and such migrations have been
encouraged only to the beneficial colonies.

Since the late war, Britain laid the trade of the colonies under some very
strict regulations, which certainly cut off many inlets by which they formerly
received much Spanish and Portuguese coin. The principle upon which such
regulations were formed, of securing to the mother country alone all matters of
commerce, I have already attempted to prove just and necessary.

When once their supernumeraries are become manufacturers, it will require more
than British policy to convert them into planters.

I must think this point of such great importance, as to extend probably to the
annihilation of manufacturers in our colonies -- To conclude, it is in the
proposed settlement on the Ohio we must first look for hemp and flax; as such
great numbers of the old American farmers have removed and settled there, which
may, in those fertile tracts, be cultivated in such abundance, as to enable us
to undersell all the world, as well as supply our own consumption. It is on
those high, dry, and healthy lands, that vineyards will be cultivated to the
best advantage, as many of those hills contain quarries of stone, and not in
the unhealthy sea-costs of our present colonies. To these we should bring the
settlers from Europe, or at least suffer none to go north of New York; by which
means our numbers would increase in those parts, where it is our interest they
should increase; and the report of the settlers from the new colony on the Ohio
would be a constant drain of people from our unprofitable northern ones, by
which means they would, in future times, as well as the present, be prevented
from extending their manufactures.

What I shall therefore venture to propose is, that the government, through the
means of a few merchants acquainted with the American trade, that can be
tolerably depended upon, should establish factons at Boston, Philadelphia, New
York, and a few other ports, for the sale of such cargoes of British
manufactures as should be consigned to them; and to consist of such
particularly as were most manufactured in the province, with directions
immediately and continually to undersell all such colony manufactures. By this
means the operation of the succeeding measures, from the number of hands
rendered idle, would be so much the easier to be executed.

The ships which carried out such cargoes should be large bulky ones, of eight,
nine hundred, and one thousand tons burden, for the sake of bringing large
quantities of deals, etc. back, at a less proportionate expense; and, previous
to their arrival in America, cargoes of these should be ready for them. The
colonists should be engaged to work their iron mines, and get the product ready
in bars, etc. and vast quantities of deals and squared timber ready for loading
the ships: All which, on the certain and immediate prospect of a sale would
easily be effected; as it is well known they have more than once proved to the
legislature, that they could supply all Europe with these articles, had they
but the demand.

But I laid it down as a rule to proceed upon, that trade, fishing, and
manufacturing, were put an entire stop to among the colonies.

If the sugar islands contained ten millions of people, AS DESTITUTE OF
NECESSARIES as they are at present, Britain would be as SURE of their
allegiance as she is at present -- provided no power more formidable than
herself at sea arose for their protection.

The first dependence of our colonies, as well as all their people, is, to
change the terms a little, upon corn worked into bread and iron wrought into
implements; or, in other words, it is upon necessary agriculture and necessary
manufactures; for a people who do not possess these, to think of throwing off
the yoke of another who supplies them with them, is an absurd idea. This is
precisely the case with our sugar islands. Let us suppose the continental
colonies to be as happy in the necessary agriculture as they really are, but to
be absolutely without manufactures, could they throw off their allegiance to
Britain be their numbers what they would? No. certainly; for that is nothing
more than supposing they should throw off their allegiance to hoes and spades,
and coats and shoes, which is absurd to imagine: can any one imagine that a
rebellion can be carried on among a people, when the greatest success must be
attended with the loss of half the necessaries of life!

The following, among other effects relative to this point, would be the
consequence of the plan sketched out in the preceding section.

The people would depend on Britain for those necessaries of life which result
from manufactures.

The cultivation of staples would be more profitable to them than any other
employment whatever.

The sale of those staples would depend on Britain.

The people would all be spread over an immense country as planters; -- none of
them collected in towns. "This point, which is of infinite importance, would
pretty fully be occasioned by other parts of the plan. But, to ensure so great
a point, no new towns should be suffered, nor even villages; than which nothing
could be easier to manage: nor would they be any where necessary but by the
magazines of naval stores for loading ships. All possible decrease of numbers
in the cities already in being, should be effected. So systematically absurd is
it to found towns and cities, as Britain has hitherto constantly done, in all
the colonies she has formed."


"To which circumstances I shall add, in respect to Britain's further policy.

"That she should abide by the boundaries fixed already to the old colonies,
that of the rivers heads; and all further settling to be in new colonies,
wherever they were traced.

"That she should keep the inland navigation of the continent, that is, of all
the great lakes and navigable rivers, to herself, and not suffer any sets of
men to navigate them, and thereby communicate from one part of the continent to
another

That she should never suffer any provincial troops or militia to be raised,
but reserve entirely to herself the defense of the frontiers. "Specie tuendi
finium, jugum liberis provinciis meditatur" STRADA, lib. 2.




That she should throw whatever obstacles she could, upon all plans of
communication from colony to colony, or conveniences of speedy removals from
place to place.

That in proportion as any colony declined in staples and threatened not to be
able to produce a sufficiency of them, the inhabitants should receive such
encouragement to leave it, as more than to drain its natural increase, unless
new staples were discovered for it.

This is now the case with those I have distinguished by the title of the
northern colonies; insomuch that Nova Scotia, Canada, New England, New York,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, would be nearly of as much benefit to this
country DURIED IN THE OCEAN as they are at present. Political Essays.

The conduct of administration corresponds exactly with the sentiments of this
modern writer, and with the measures pursued by Philip the second of Spain
against the Low Countries. The reasons given by one in administration for
attacking the colonies, seem to be copied (with some small alterations on
account of religion) from the famous advice of the unfeeling duke of Alva, that
"specie retinendae dignitatis," cost his master, his glory, his happiness, and
his provinces -- and sunk his country into distresses, from which she is not
yet recovered. "At vero dux Albanus ARMA and ULTIONEM, contendebat, unicum
laesae auctoritati principis remedium. Quippe ceteris artibus ac diuturna
facilita^e nihil aliud effectum, quam ut regi obedientia, rebellibus timor
adimeretur. Postulasse principio Belgas, ut Hispanus e provincia mises
excederet: id scilicet unum deesse constantes ad quiete^^ popu^orum. Number
propterea, impetrata externorum mission^ q^^ievisse? An potius and confidentius
efflagitasse, ut ^clavo (...) baretur GRANVELLANUS. At unius forte naufragio
complacat^s fuisse ventos. -- Quin immout licentia crescit facilius -- (...) a
^ostra facilitate securi -- libellis deridiculis, flagigiosis conspiratioribus
-- improbis palam carminibus -- minis -- precibus arma^is -- extorserent quod
averent -- obstinatis inverecunde legationibus Hispaniam FATIGARENT -- Hic
quoque visum clementiae p^^ncipis aliqua indigna poscentebus indulgere. Enim
ve^o quid ex illa indulgentia relatum, nisi ut votorum ubique compotes, non
parendo; subditos sese obliviscerentur, obseqium dediscerent, atque exuta
principis reverentia, communicata provinciarum defectione, tanquam culpae
societate tutiores, humana omnia contrectatae semel libertati post haberent.
Nunc vero non unius civitatis, sed provincia^um consensu peccatum esse in
regem. Nec quia rebels in presentia conquiescant, minus ferociae animis
inesse, resumpturos utique vires, ubi metum ultionis abjecerint. Sic ille
PRONUS AD ASPERIORA, disserebat." Strada de bello Belgico, lib. 6.

It is evident, that the British ministers have diligently studied Strada and
the other authors who have transmitted to posterity the pleasing and
instructive annals of Phili^pic policy, as every measure they have taken, is
founded on a precedent set by that celebrated school of humanity.

Alva is the favorite master -- on his conduct they keep their eyes steadily
and reverently fixed, and it may truly be said -- they follow him with no
unequal steps. Great, good, and wise men! whom some future Puffendorf or Temple
will duly celebrate.

"In 1564, GRANVILLE was removed from the council, to appease the people. Their
joy was short lived; for as the same measures were pursued, it soon began to be
said publicly, that though his body was removed from, his spirit still
influenced the council. Upon application for a relaxation (...) the edicts, it
was said, that moderation had only made matters worse, and the observation of
them was again enjoined upon more severe penalties than before.

"At length an ASSOCIATION was entered into, for mutually defending each other.
This being signed by above 400 persons of quality, who all protested, that they
meant nothing but the honor of God, the glory of the king, and the good of
their country, they met and PETITIONED, that the proclamation might he revoked:
but the king would consent to no mitigation. Good advice was given to him. But
the duke D'Alva's violent counsel, WHO PROPOSED THE ENTIRE ABOLISHMENT OF THE
LIBERTIES OF THE PROVINCES "LAY THEM AT MY FEET."
was most pleasing and followed. The cruel duke was sent into the Low Countries
with a powerful army. The counts D'Egmont and Horn, were immediately seized, on
a pretense that they had underhand, spirited up the people's disaffection. They
were afterward executed. All who had signed the ASSOCIATION or PETITION were
declared guilty of See Genesis Gage's procla.
HIGH TREASON, and answerable for what had happened. A council called from its
cruel proceedings, Resolutions in parliament for trying colonists in England.
Rhode Island Court. Late acts for Massachusetts Bay.
THE COUNCIL OF BLOOD, was erected for trying the accused, from which there was
no appeal. (NOTE WELL) Al^a himself tried the accused in their own country,
where their friends and witnesses might attend them, -- where the pains of
death itself might be mitigated, by seeing with their dying eyes, that they
expired beloved and lamented. Here, the disciples exceed their tutor. This is
too great a consolation to be indulged to a colonist. He must be carried 3000
miles across the ocean that he may not only dye, but be insulted in his last
moments, with the mockery of a trial where the clearest innocence stands no
chance of acquittal, and with the formality of a sentence founded on a statute
past before the colonies existed. On the approach of the army, the prince of
Orange and other lords fled; and being summoned to appear before the council,
in default thereof were condemned, and their estates confiscated. Alva treated
all, the innocent and guilty with such rigor, that it gave rise to the
following saying of a Spanish officer -- " Hoeretici fraxerunt templa; boni
nihil faxerunt contra: ERGO omnes debent patibulari"

Puffendorf's introduction -- Art. "Spain" and "the United Provinces."

Sir William Temple's account of the disturbances in the Low Countries agrees
exactly with the foregoing extracted out of Puffendorf, by which it will appear
wi^h what a surprising exactness of resemblance the affairs of the colonies
have been carried on by administration.

"The war with France being concluded, it was resolved to keep up the troops in
these provinces, and that the states should support them, which by a song
course of war was grown customary." When Philip would have put Spanish
garrisons into some of their towns; and for the sake of their admitting them
quietly, gave the command to the Prince of Orange and Count Egmont: they told
him plainly, "That all the brave stands they had made against the power of
France, availed them but little, if they must at last be enslaved by another
foreign power. Puff. "The hatred of the people, the insolence of the troops,
with the charge of their support, made them looked upon by the inhabitants in
general, as the instruments of their oppression and slavery, and not of their
defense, when a general peace had left them no enemies: And therefore the
states began here their complaints, with a general consent and passion of all
the nobles, as well as towns and country. And upon the delays that were
contrived or fell in, the states first refused to raise any more moneys either
for the Spaniards pay, or their own standing troops; and the people ran into so
great despair, that in Zealand they absolutely gave over the working at their
dikes, SUFFERING THE SEA TO GAIN EVERY TIDE UPON THE COUNTRY, and resolving, as
they said, rather to be devoured by that element, than by the Spanish soldiers;
so that at last the king consented to their removal. Another grievance was the
appointment of new judges, Admiralty courts* (...)* Island court, for enforcing
the statute of ^5 Hen. 8. Act for regulating the government of
Massachusetts Bay. Act for administration of justice, etc.
and those absolutely depending on the king, etc."

"GRANVILLE, strained up to the highest his master's authority and the
execution of his commands, while the provinces were resolute to protect the
liberties of their country, against the admission of this NEW AND ARBITRARY
JUDICATURE, UNKNOWN TO ALL ANCIENT LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THEIR COUNTRY. The king
at last consented to GRANVILLE'S recess. Then all noise of discontent and
tumult was appeased. But quickly after the same counsels were resumed. The
disturbances then grew greater than before. But by the prudence and moderation
of the duchess of Farma, the governess, the whole estate of the provinces was
restored to its former peace. This duchess, and the duke of Feria, one of the
chief ministers in Spain, thought and advised, that the THEN PRESENT PEACE OF
THE PROVINCES OUGHT NOT TO BE INVADED BY NEW OCCASIONS, nor the royal authority
lessened, by the king being made a a party in a war upon his subjects. But the
king was immovable; he dispatched Alva into the Low Country at the head of ten
thousand veteran Spanish and Italian troops, under the command of the best
officers, which the wars of Charles the fifth, or Philip the second had bred up
in Europe; which, with two thousand more in the provinces, under the command of
so old and renowned a general as the duke of Alva, made up a force, which
nothing in the Low Countries could look in the face with other eyes, than of
astonishment, submission or despair. This power was for the assistance of the
governess, the execution of the laws, the suppressing and punishing all who had
been authors or fomentors of the late disturbances. See speeches in parliament,
and preambles to the late acts.
On his arrival the governess having obtained leave of the king, retired out of
the province. The duke of Alva was invested in the government, with powers
never before given to any governor. A council, called THE COUNCIL OF BLOOD, See
note in page 75.
was erected for the trial of all crimes committed against the king's
authority. The towns stomached the BREACH OF THEIR CHARTERS, the people OF
THEIR LIBERTIES, the knights of the golden fleece the CHARTERS OF THEIR ORDER,
by these NEW AND ODIOUS COURTS OF JUDICATURE; all complain of the DISUSE OF THE
STATES, Frequent Dissolutions of assemblies -- and their total use lessness, if
parliament taxes us.
of the INTRODUCTION OF ARMIES, but all in vain. The king was constant to what
he had determined. Alva was in his nature cruel and inexorable. The new army
was fierce and brave, and desirous of nothing so much as a rebellion in the
country. The people were enraged, but awed and unheaded. All was SEIZURE and
PROCESS; -- CONFISCATION and IMPRISONMENT; -- BLOOD and HOR^OR; -- INSOLENCE
and DEJECTION; -- PUNISHMENTS executed, and meditated REVENGE. The smaller
branches were lopt off a pace; the great ones were longer a hewing down. Counts
Egmont and Horn lasted several months; but at length, in spite of all their
services to Charles the fifth, and to Philip, as well as of their new merits in
quieting of the provinces, and of so great supplications and intercessions as
were made in their favor, both in Spain and Flanders, they were publicly
beheaded at Brussels, which seemed to break all patience in the people; and by
their end to give those commotions a beginning, which cost Europe so much
blood, and Spain a great part of the Low Country provinces. The war begun, Alva
had at first great success. Moved with no rumors, terrified with no threats
from a broken and unarmed people, and thinking no measures or forms were any
more necessary to be observed in the provinces; he pretends greater sums are
necessary for the pay and reward of his victorions troops than were ANNUALLY
GRANTED UPON THE KING'S REQUEST BY THE STATES OF THE PROVINCES: ( Note. Here
our ministers have again improved upon Philip's; for they have taxed us,
without making requests.) Another advantage the British ministers have over the
Spanish in depth of policy, is very remarkable. Spain was a great empire. The
Low Countries a mere spe^k, compared with it. Spain was not a maritime state
that depended upon them for the supply of her revenue. Had they been funk in
the sea, she would scarcely have fel^ the loss. Her prospect of success was
almost certain. France, ^er then inveterate enemy, exhausted by a civil war,
and divided into two powerful parties. Every circumstance is directly the
reverse to Great Britain in her present contest with the colonies. "Siquidem
veris^imum est, ignem tectis injicere, et injecto spa^ium (...). Statuere, non
esse in ejusdem mann." STRADA, lib. ^^.


And therefore demands a general tax of the hundredth part of every man's
estate, to be raised at once: and for the future, the twentieth of all
immovable, and the eighteenth of all that was sold. The states with much
reluctance consent to the first, as a thing that ended at once. They PE^^^ITION
the king, BUT WITHOUT REDRESS; draw out the year in contests, sometimes
stomachful, sometimes humble with the governor: Till the duke, impatient of
delay, causes the edict, WITHOUT CONSENT OF THE STATES, to be published. The
people REFUSE TO PAY; the SOLDIERS begin to LEVY BY FORCE; the TOWNSMEN ALL
SHUT UP THEIR SHOPS; the PEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY FORBEAR THE MARKET; so as not so
much as bread and meat is to be bought in the town. The duke is enraged; calls
the soldiers to arms; and commands several of the inhabitants, WHO REFUSED THE
PAYMENTS, to be hanged that very night UPON THEIR SIGN POSTS; which moves not
the obstinacy of the people. AND NOW THE OFFICERS AND THE GUARDS ARE READY TO
BEGIN THE EXECUTIONS, when news comes to town of the taking of the Bri^l, by
the Gueses, Beggars -- They were called so in contempt, when they (...). The
people thereupon assumed that name, perhaps to keep up the memory of an insult
occasioned by their l^yalty.
and of the expectation that had given of a sudden revolt in the province of
Holland.

"This unexpected blow STRUCK the duke of Alva, and foreseeing the consequences
of it, because he knew the stubble was dry, and now he found the fire was
fallen in, he thought it an ill time to make an end of the tragedy in Brahant,
whilst a new scene was opened in Holland; and so giving over for the present
his TAXES and EXECUTIONS, applies his thoughts to the suppression of this new
enemy that broke in upon him from the sea. And now began that great commotion
in the Low Countries, which never ended but in the loss of those provinces,
when the death of the royal government gave life to a new commonwealth."

Observat* upon the UNITED PROVINCES of the Netherlands by sir William Temple.

Philip and his junto of cabinet ministers thought themselves no doubt very
wise, and politic as so many Machiavels. But what says, and will say mankind as
long as the memory of those events is preserved? That their counsels were
des^icable, their motives detestable, and their minds like those described by
the bishop of Lerida, that exactly resembled the hor^s of the cows in his
country -- LITTLE, "HARD, and CROOKED."




IN our provincial legislatures, the best judges in all cases what suits us --
founded on the immutable and unalienable rights of human nature, the principles
of the constitution, and charters and grants made by the crown at periods, when
the power of making them was universally acknowledged by the parent state, a
power since frequently recognized by her, -- subject to the control of the
crown as by law established, is vested the exclusive right of internal
legislation.

SUCH a right vested in parliament, would place us exactly in the same
situatian, the people of Great Britain would have been reduced to, had James
the first and his family succeeded in their scheme of arbitrary power. Changing
the word Stuarts for parliament, and Britons for Americans, the arguments of
the illustrious patriots of those times, to whose virtues their descendants owe
every blessing they now enjoy, apply with inexpressible force and appositeness,
in maintenance of our cause, and in refutation of the pretensions set up by
their too forgetful posterity, over their unhappy colonists. Confiding in the
undeniable truth of this single position, that, "to live by one man's Hooker.
"For a man to be tenant at will of his liberty. I can never agree to it. It is
a tenure, not to be found in all Littleton." Speech of Sir Edward Coke.

" Etiam si dominus non sit molestus, tamen miserrimum est, posse si velit."
CICERO.

-- "The free,
Know no gentle tyranny."
ROW.
will, became the cause of all men's misery," they generously suffered. -- And
the worthy bishop before mentioned, who, for strenuously asserting the
principles of the revolution, received the unusual honor of being recommended
by a HOUSE OF COMMONS to the sovereign for preferment, has justly observed,
that " misery is the same whether it comes from the hands of MANY or of ONE."

"IT could not appear tolerable to him (meaning Mr. Hooker author of the
ecclesiastical policy) to lodge in the governors of any society an UNLIMITED
AUTHORITY, to anull and alter the constitution of the government, as they
should see fit, and to leave to the governed the privilege only of ABSOLUTE
SUBJECTION in all such alterations; HOADLY'S dis^* on government.
or to use the parliamentary phrase, "in all cases whatsoever."

^ FROM what source can Great Britain derive a single reason to support her
claim to such an enormous power? That it is consistent with the laws of nature,
no reasonable man will pretend. That it contradicts the precepts of
christianity, is evident. For she strives to force upon us, terms, which she
would judge to be intolerably severe and cruel, if imposed on herself. "Virtual
representation," is too ridiculous to be regarded. The necessity of a supreme
sovereign legislature internally superintending the whole empire, is a notion
equally unjust and dangerous. "The pretense (says Mr. justice Blackstone
speaking of James the first's reign)" for which arbitrary measures was no other
than the TYRANTS PLEA of the NECESSITY OF UNLIMITED POWERS, in works of evident
utility to the With such smooth words may the most dreadful designs be glossed
over. "There are some men who call evil, good, and bitter, sweet. -- Justice,
is now called popularity and Faction" Parl. hist. 8. 193.

"A man shall not unprofitably spend hi^ contemplation, that upon this occasion
a considers the method of GOD'S justice (a method terribly remarkable in many
passages, and upon many persons, which we shall be compelled to remember in
this discourse) that the same principles, and the same application of those
principles should be used to the wresting all sovereign power from the crown,
which the crown had a little before made use of for the extending its
authority, and power, beyond it is bounds, to the prejudice of the just rights
of the subject. A SUPPOSED NECESSITY was then thought GROUND ENOUGH to create a
power, and A ^AR^ AVERMENT OF THAT NECESSITY to beget a practice to impose what
tax THEY THOUGHT CONVENIENT upon the subject, by writs of ship money never
before known, and a supposed necessity now, and a bare averment of that
necessity, is as confidently, and more fatally, concluded a good ground to
exclude the crown from the use of any power, by an ordinance never before heard
of, and the same maxim of "salus populi suprema lex," which had been used to
the infringing the liberty of the one, made use of for destroying the rights of
the other."

Lord Clarendon's hist. b. 5, p. 54.


public, the supreme reason above all reasons, which is the salvation of the
king's lands and people." This was not the doctrine of James only His son
unhappily inherited it from him. On this (...) foundation was built the claim
of ship money etc. Nor were there wanting men, who could argue, from the
courtly text, that parliaments were too stupid or too factious to grant money
to the crown, when it was their (...) and their duty to do so. This argument
however, was fully refuted, and slept above a century in proper contempt, till
the posterity of those, who had overthrown it, thought fit to revive the
exploded absurdity. Tri^^ing as the pretense was, yet it might much more
properly be urged in favor of a single person, than of a multitude. The
counsels of a monarch may be more secret. His measures more quick. In passing
an act of parliament for all the colonies, as many men are consulted, if not
more, than need be consulted, in obtaining the assent of every legislature on
the continent. If it is a good argument for parliament, it is a better against
them. It therefore proves nothing but its own futility. The supposed advantages
of such a power, could never be attained but by the destruction of Thus the
patriots of Charles's days argued -- "It is not, that ship money has been
levied upon us, but it is, that thereby ship money is claimed, which is the
gift and EARNEST PENNY OF ALL WE HAVE: it is not, that our persons have been
imprisoned, for the payment of ship money, but that our PERSONS and LIVES are,
upon the same ground of law, delivered up to will and pleasure. It is, that our
BIRTHRIGHT is destroyed, and that there has been an endeavor to reduce us to
a lower state than villainage. The lord might tax his villain de haut et de
basse, might imprison him, but -- his LIFE was his own; THE LAW SECURED HIM
THAT." Lord Clarendon.
real benefits, evidenced by facts to exist without it. The Swiss Cantons, and
the United Provinces, are combinations of independent states. The voice of each
must be given. The instance of these colonies may be added: For stating the
case, that no act of internal legislation over them had ever been past by
Great Britain, her wisest statesmen would be perplexed to show, that she or the
colonies would have been less flourishing than they now are. What benefits such
a power may produce hereafter, time will discover. But the colonies are not
dependant on Great Britain, it is said, if she has not a supreme unlimited
legislature over them. "I would ask these loyal subjects of the king (says the
author of a celebrated invect we against us) See note on these words --
"Therefore a power of regulating our trade, involves not in it the idea of a
supreme legislature over us." pa. 121.
what king it is, they profess themselves to be loyal subjects of? It cannot be
his present most gracious majesty, George the third, king of Great Britain, for
his title is founded on an act of parliament, and they will not surely
acknowledge that parliament can give them a king, which is of all others, the
highest act of sovereignty, when they deny it to have power to tax or bind them
in any other case; and I do not recollect, that there is any act of assembly,
in any of the colonies for settling the crown upon king William or the
illustrious house of Hanover "The controversy between Great Britain and her
colonies reviewed." The learned gentleman who wrote this piece, has thought
proper to quit his argument, step out of his way, personally abuse and severely
attack the writer of the "Farmer's Letters." His principal objections are the
following, and the answers here given may perhaps be sufficient to show with
what force his objections are generally urged. 1st. He says, "the writer of the
letters, tells us, that the drawbacks which are allowed on some articles upon
their exportation from England amount to more money than all the duties
together which are laid upon them on their arrival in the colonies will
produce. I believe it is the first time that the colonies of any state have
complained of the injustice of the mother country in laying taxes upon them,
which were not sufficiently heavy, nor was it ever (...) discovered that the
proper means to (...) the grievances of any people, were to increase their
taxes" Page 10. Answer. The truth of the assertion in the letters is not
denied. It is assumed, by the author of the "controversy," as the foundation of
his argument. I^ then, parliament would have raised more money, " by stopping
the drawbacks, than by saying the duties to be paid in the colonies," why were
they laid? From respect for parliament it must be supposed, they were laid for
some purpose. It was not for the sake of the money. For what then? To establish
a PRECEDENT for taxing the colonies, says the writer of the letters. The author
of the controversy does not deny it: but enters into a dissertation upon the
more and the less, which is not the point in question. 2dly. The writer of the
letters say, that "an act of parliament commanding us to to do a certain thing,
if it ha^ any vaildity, is a tax upon (...) the expense This sentence related
to the dissolution of the assembly of New York, for not complying with the act
of parliament for not supplying the troops. Last session of parliament an act
was passed for the more commodious quartering of the troops in America. It is
not yet come over; but deserves the attention o^ the colonists, even if it has
not the remarkable features, that distinguish the productions of the last
session.
that accrues in complying with it." In rep^y to this, the author of "the
(...)" enumerates many i^ sta^ces of sovereignty subjecting the colonies to
expense* which he supposes may be legally exercised WITHIN the colonies "BY ACT
OF PARLIAMENT". Pages 23, 24. Answer. The propriety of this supposition is
denied, and remains to be proved. "Absurdities and contradictions" are
plentifully attributed to the writer of the letters, because he (...) not
acknowledge, that the power of parliament "to regulate trade, and preserve the
connection of the whole empire in due order," involves in it a power to " tax
the colonies," or "to put them to any expense," parliament shall please. A
person of such sagacity, as the author of the controversy, might plainly have
perceived, if his resentment had not prejudiced his candor, that the writer of
the letters, was unwilling to give up any point, which he then thought
essential to the freedom and welfare of his country, and at the same time was
"If any person shall imagine that he discovers, in these letters, the least
dislike of the dependence of these colonies on Great Britain, I beg that such
person will not form any judgment on particular expressions, but will consider
the te^or of all the letters taken together. In that case, I flatter myself,
that every unprejudiced reader will be convinced, that the true interests of
Great Britain are as dear to me, as they ought to be to every good subject.

"If I am an enthusiast in any thing, it is in my zeal for the perpetual
dependence of these colonies on their mother country. -- A dependence f^unded
on mutual benefits, the continuance of which can be secured only by mutual
affections. Therefore it is, that with extreme apprehension I view the smallest
seeds of discontent, which are unwarily scattered abroad. Fifty or sixty years
will make astonishing alterations in these colonies: and this consideration
should ^ender in the business of Great Britain more and more to cultivate our
good dispositions toward her: But the misfortune is, that those great men, who
are wrestling for power at home, think themselves very slightly interested in
the prosperity of their country fifty or sixty years hence, but are deeply
concerned in blowing up a popular clamor for supposed immediate advantages.

"For my part, I regard Great Britain as a bulwark, happily fixed between these
colonies and the powerful nations of Europe. That kingdom remaining safe, we,
under its protection, enjoying peace, may diffuse the blessings of religion,
science, and liberty, through remote wildernesses. It is therefore
incontestably our duty, and our interest, to support the strength of
Great Britain. When confiding in that strength, she begins to forget from
whence it arose, it will be an easy thing to show the source. (...) may readily
be reminded of the loud alarm spread among her merchants and tradesmen, by the
universal association of these colonies, at the time of the stamp act, not to
import any of her MANUFACTURES.

"In the year 1718, the Russians and Swedes entered into an agreement, not to
suffer Great Britain to export any NAVAL STORES from their dominions but in
Russian or Swedish ships, and at their own prices. Great Britain was
distressed. Pitch and ^ar rose to three pounds a barrel. At length she thought
of getting these articles from the colonies; and the attempt succeeding, they
fell down to fifteen shillings. In the year 1756, Great Britain was threatened
with an invasion. An ^asterly wind blowing for six weeks, she could not MAN her
fleet, and the whole nation was thrown into the utmost consternation. The wind
changed. The American ships arrived. The fleet sailed in ten or fifteen days.
There are some other reflections on this subject, worthy of the most deliberate
attention of the British parliament; but they are of SUCH A NATURE, that I do
not choose to mention them publicly. I thought it my duty, in the year 1765,
while the stamp act was in suspense, to write my sentiments to a gentleman of
great influence at home, who afterward distinguished himself, by espousing our
cause, in the debates concerning the repeal of that act." FARMER'S LETTER, xii.
p. 10^.

If the author of "the controversy" had seen the letter above referred to, he
would have found, that, the difference between the PREROGATIVE in Great Britain
and in America, and the exercise of INTERNAL LEGISLATION by parliament over the
colonies, with some other points therein mentioned, were represented in the
strongest terms the writer of the letters could use, as unjust, and certainly
tending in a few years to produce the deepest discontents. The time is at
length come, when silence in America on these subjects would be stupid or
criminal.


unwilling to propose any new subject of dispute. Justly has the author of the
controversy observed -- that "it would be endless to trace this doctrine of
TAXES THROUGH ALL THE CONSEQUENCES." pa. 23. 3dly. The writer of the letters
says, "we are as much dependant on Great Britain, as a perfectly free people
can be on another." On this the author of the controversy kindly observes, that
-- "it is a pity the learned editor (the English editor, it is supposed) has
not given the public a dissertation on that most ingenious and instructive
passage." pa. 25. Answer. American understandings discover no inconsistency in
the idea of "a state being dependant, and yet perfectly free," and their temper
is so moderate that they would be content with that degree of freedom, which is
compatible with a dependence. If the proposition puzzles British
understandings, it is presumed to be, because Britons will not give themselves
the trouble to think of any dependence, but of such, as is destructive of all
freedom; though they themselves are dependant in some measure on others. 4ly.
The writer of the letters says -- "if money be raised upon us by others without
our consent, for our defense, those who are the judges in levying it, must also
be the judges in applying it. [OF CONSEQUENCE, the money, said to be taken from
us for our defense, may be employed, to our injury. We may be The probability
of this measure taking peace, is confirmed by the CANADA bill, a political
device so extraordinary, as to excite surprise even in those colonists who live
in the year 1774. By this bill, it is said, the legislative power is lodged in
the governor and a few men, not less than 17 nor more than 23, appointed and
removeable by the crown; and the government becomes wholly military. -- Trials
by jury are abolished, though multitudes of English subjects settled there on
the encouragement given by the king's proclamation in 1763 -- The French laws
are restored, and ALL THE COUNTRY ON THE BACK OF THESE COLONIES is added to
Canada and PUT UNDER THE SAME MILITARY GOVERNMENT. This is indeed to be
"chained in." Nothing is wanting to complete the plan, but our money, to defray
the expense of erecting strong holds among our woods and mountains, and to
bribe our Indians: and then the expression of " beating our swords into
plough-shares will be reversed in an extraordinary manner; for "our
plough-shares" will furnish the very "swords (...) are to cut our own throats.
chained in by a line of fortifications -- obliged to pay for the building and
maintaining them -- and be told that they are for our defence] With what face
can we dispute the fact after having granted that those who apply the money,
had a right to levy it? For surely it is much easier for their wisdom to
understand how to apply it in the best manner than how to levy it in the best
manner. Besides the right of levying is of infinitely more consequence than
that of applying. The people of England, who would burst out into fury if the
crown should attempt to levy money by its own authority, have always assigned
to the crown the application of money."

From these words relating to "application" the author of "the controversy"
deduces a "proof," that the writer of the letters is very deficient in "his
knowledge of the constitution" Page 2^
etc. Answer. Is this treatment generous? In such questions ought the attack to
be turned from the cause to the man? The writer of the letters, pretends not to
be distinguished, as a "critic on government" nor for "justness or elegance of
composition." Pages 22 and 25
Surely, even the author of "the controversy" must now be convinced of his
aversion, to writing, as that performance, with all "the justness and elegance
of its composition, knowledge of the subject handled, and constitutional
learning displayed in it," and employed to pull to pieces the reputation of the
writer of the letters, has not rouzed him during so many years since its
publication, to make a single effort in vindication of his character. Was it
imagined, that every objection was just, because not replied to? Many reasons,
besides a fear of encountering objections, may prevent an answer. In truth, he
cannot be called a volunteer author. -- He never DID, and never DARED to write,
but when the honor or interest of his country was assaulted -- when duty
compelled every one to contribute what assistance he could in her defense --
and when he hoped, the cause would draw some kind of a veil over his defects.
He expected, he might escape as the Spartan youth did, with some slight censure
for engaging improperly armed, but that his motive would excuse him from a
severe one. How well founded the present reproach is, will now be considered.
One would imagine, that a man of common sense on reading the foregoing extract
from the letters, would understand the writer plainly to mean by "levying," the
power of "taxing" -- and by "applying," the power of "employing" the money
raised by taxing; or in other terms, the actual expenditure of it. This meaning
is evident -- the conclusion being express, that "if others may be judges in
applying money, OF CONSEQUENCE it may be employed to our injury" and then
follow some instances, in which it "may be so employed." All this is very
clear. How then doe^ the very ingenious gentleman open his way to the writer of
the letters, to give him this violent blow? By a dexterity worthy of imitation
-- if justifiable. He leaves out of his quotation, all the words enclosed
within the last crotchet, beginning at the words "OF CONSEQUENCE" and ending at
the words "our defense," that showed beyond a possibility of doubt in what
sense the word "applying" was used -- takes no notice of the omission --
imposes another sense on the word -- and then insults, may it be said, over the
supposed mistake of saying, "that the people of England have always assigned to
the crown the application of money."

What sense he or others may assign to the word "application" is not the point:
but whether the word, taken in that sense which the writer of the letters
expressly annexed to it, is used with propriety by him, or whether it is used
in such a manner, as to "prove he is very deficient in his knowledge of the
constitution?" By that word, as he defines it, positively as language can
declare any meaning, he intends, the actual expenditure and "employment" of
money -- And is the reader to be tricked out of that definition, and another
sense shuffled in, merely to impeach a man's character by slight of pen?

HAS not the constitution "assigned to the crown the actual expenditure and
employment of money?" Is not this power part of the executive? Does not Mr.
justice Blackstone mention this power to show the vast influence of the crown?
-- He particularly takes notice of it with respect to the army -- in these
expressions -- " paid indeed ultimately by the people, but immediately by the
crown; raised by the crown; officered by the crown; commanded by the crown."
Blackstone (...).


Is not the word "application" used here too, not only properly, as defined,
but properly, in a constitutional sense?

True it is, that the word is sometimes used as synonimous with appropriation,
though this latter seems to be the ^ittest word to mean the designation of
money to particular purposes in acts of parliament. Could it be possible, that
the author of "the controversy" should imagine, the writer of the letters could
be ignorant of such designation or appropriation of money by parliament, when
one can scarcely open a book of statutes, without observing them? Parliament
may accommodate grants of money to public necessities -- and may call officers
of the crown to account for money, but these powers no more prove the actual
expenditure and employment of money to belong to parliament, than the power of
calling officers of the crown to account for injurious leagues, or declarations
of war, proves the power of parliament to make leagues or to declare war.
Besides, it being contended against the colonies, that the "sovereign power" is
lodged in king, lords, and commons, the same persons may tax and expend, to
what excess and in what manner THEY PLEASE, while the colonies will have NO
KIND OF CONTROL over them: And, that such an union of those powers, is
unconstitutional and dangerous to the colonies in extreme, was the point the
writer of the letter inoffensively ventured to assist on.

Exactly in the sense here contended for, are the wores "appropriation" and
"application" used in some of the best authorities. Bishop Else in his tracts
on liberty, page 31, says -- "The parliament, at present, in granting money
does for the most part appropriate it to particular services, whereby the
application of it is more effectually secured." "When any aids are given, the
commons only do judge of the necessities of the crown, which cannot be
otherwise ^^ade manifest to them, than by inquiring, how the money which has
been granted, and revenue of the crown, is expended and applied." Words of the
commons at a conference with the lords. Parl. (...)
"Out of the aids given by parliament. (which by the law of England are
appropriated, and ought to have been employed in the common profit of the whole
realm) many large sums of money, during the times of such heavy taxes upon the
people, have been diverted under the head of secret services, and for salaries,
bounties and pensions etc." Address of the house of commons to queen Anne.
Parl. ^ist.


Some other unfairnesses there are in this famous piece, that need only be
viewed, to be refuted; but of which, it may be said, if a "precedent"
established by the respectable gentleman himself, can procure pardon for the
expression, that "they are not entitled to notice." How could he venture to
assert as he does, that -- "the purpose of the letters was to excite resentment
in the colonies against the^^ parent country and to push them on to a
separation from her." The letters prove the contrary. Few men have expressed a
warmer zeal for the connection, than the writer of them! Yet his reputation is
to be attacked on every account, and a charge even of disloyalty directly
levelled against him. The author is welcome to take what o^^er licenses he
pleases in his reprehensions of the writer; but he ought not to have denied his
integrity. Their intentions must stand the test of a tribunal, that decides for
eternity. May they then appear equally pure.

True indeed are those words of lord Clarendon. -- "Let no honest man that is
once entered into the lists, think, he can by any skill or comportment, prevent
these conflicts and assaults -- but let him look upon it as a purgatory he is
unavoidably to pass through; and constantly performing the duties of justice,
integrity and uprightness, depend upon PROVIDENCE, and time, for a vindication."


" "Curious reasoning this." Id. p. 17.
It is to be wished the gentleman had "recollected" that without any such "act
of assembly" none of the colonists ever rebelled. What act of parliament is
here meant? Surely not the 11th of Henry the seventh, chapter the 1st in favor
of a king de facto. Probably the 12th and 13th of William the 3d chapter the 2d
"for the further limitation of the crown etc." is intended. And, is it imagined
that the words "dominions and territories thereunto belonging" in that statute,
form his majesty's title to the sovereignty of these colonies? The omission of
them might have looked odd; but what force is added by their insertion? The
settlement of the crown of England includes the settlement of the sovereignty
of the colonies. King William is mentioned -- and will the gentleman venture to
say, that William was not king of England and sovereign of these colonies,
before his title was "declared" or "recognized" by "an act of parliament?" The
gentleman slurs over this case. His zeal for the "illustrious house of Hanover"
would be little gratified, by infering, that because the two houses with the
consent of the nation, made a king, therefore the two houses can make laws. Yet
that conclusion would be as justifiable as this -- that the assent of the
colonies to an election of a king by the two houses, or to the limitation of
the crown by act of parliament, proves a right in parliament to bind the
colonies by statutes "in all cases whatsoever." In such great points, the
conduct of a people is influenced solely by a regard for their freedom and
happiness. The colonies have no other head than the king of England. The person
who by the laws of that realm, is king of that realm, is our king.

A DEPENDENCE This word "dependence" as applied to the states connected with
England, seems to be a new one. It appears to have been introduced into the
language of the law, by the common wealth act of 1650. A "dependence on
parliament" is still more modern. A people cannot be too cautious in guarding
against such innovations. "The credentials of the imperial ambassadors to the
states of Holland, were directed "TO ^OUR FAITHFUL AND BELOVED." The words seem
to be very kind; but the cautious states discovered that this was the style of
the imperial chancery in writing to the vassals of the empire. The question
was, whether the credentials should be opened? and it was urged, that a solemn
embassy ought not to be disappointed, for a few trifling words. But the states
resolved to send them back unopened, which they did. Other credentials were
then sent, with a proper direction; and the ambassadors were well received."
Arcana imp. det. p. 196.
on the crown and PARLIAMENT of Great Britain, is a novelty -- a dreadful
novelty. It may be compared to the engine invented by the Greeks for the
destruction of Troy 7 Co. 18.
. It is full of armed enemies, and the walls of the constitution must be thrown
down, before it can be introduced among us.

WHEN it is considered that the king as king of England has a power in making
laws -- the power of executing them -- o^ finally determining on appeals -- of
calling upon us for supplies in times of war or any emergency -- that every
branch of the prerogative binds us, as the subjects are bound thereby in
England -- and that all our intercourse with foreigners is regulated by
parliament. -- Colonists may "surely" be acknowledged to speak with truth, and
precission, in answer to the "elegantly" expressed question -- "What king it is"
etc. by saying that "his most gracious majesty George the third" is the king of
England, and therefore, "the king" they -- profess themselves to be loyal
subjects of?"

WE are aware of the objection, that, "if the king of England is therefore king
of the colonies, they are subject to the general legislative authority of that
kingdom." The premises by no means warrant this conclusion. It is built on a
mere supposition, that, the colonies are thereby acknowledged to be within the
realm, and on an incantation expected to be wrought by some magic force in
those woods. To be subordinately connected with England, the colonies have
contracted. To be subject to the general legislative authority of that kingdom,
they never contracted. Such a power as may be necessary to preserve this
connection she has. The authority of the sovereign, and the authority of
controuling our intercourse with foreign nations form that power. Such a power
leaves the colonies free. But a general legislative power, is not a power to
preserve that connection, but to distress and enslave them. If the first power
cannot subsist, without the last, she has no right even to the first, -- the
colonies were deceived in their contract -- and the power must be unjust and
illegal; for God has given to them a better right to preserve their liberty,
than to her to destroy it. In other words, supposing, king, lords and commons
acting in parliament, constitute a sovereignty over the colonies, is that
sovereignty constitutionally absolute or limited? That states without freedom,
should by principle grow out o^ a free state, is as impossible, as that
sparrows, should be produced from the eggs of an e^gle. The sovereignty over
the colonies, must be " Nec REGIBUS infinita aut libera potestas, was the
constitution of our German ancestors on the continent, and this is not only
consonant to the PRINCIPLES of NATURE, of LIBERTY, of REASON and of SOCIETY,
but has always been esteemed an express part of the COMMON LAW of England, even
when prerogative was at the highest." 1 Blackst. 233.
limited* Hesiod long since said, "half is better than the whole;" and the
saying never was more justly applicable, than on the present occasion. Had the
unhappy Charles remembered and regarded it, his private virtues might long have
adorned a throne, from which his public measures precipitated him in blood. To
argue on this subject from other instances of parliamentary power, is shifting
the ground. The connection of the colonies with England, is a point of an
unprecedented and delicate nature. It can be compared to no other case; and to
receive a just determination, it must be considered with reference to its own
peculiar circumstances. The learned Judge, [in Vol. 1. page 107.] says this
country was not " uninhabited when discovered and planted by the English, etc.
but ought to be considered as a conquered, ceded, or infidel country. Our
American plantations are principally of this latter sort, being obtained in the
last century, either by right of conquest and driving out the natives (with
what natural justice, I shall not at present inquire) or by treaties: and
therefore the common law of England, as such, has no allowance or authority
there, they being no part of the mother country, but distinct (though
dependent) dominions. They are subject however to the control of the
parliament."

According to this doctrine, the colonists are considered in a legal view by
the parent state, "as infidels or conquered people," not as her children with
her consent establishing societies for her benefit. Though not a single man of
the "infidels or conquered" people, should now be found to reside in each
colony; yet a political contagion is communicated to Englishmen in secula
seculorum, because Indians once fished in the rivers, and hunted in the woods.
If this be their "condition," then according to the law laid down by the judge,
"they are subject not only to the control of parliament," but the " King may
alter and impose what laws he pleases." 1 Blac^^kst. 107. and the cases there
cited.


It is not known, what the learned Judge means by the word "principally."
Perhaps he alludes to the ill directed humanity and justice of the first
settlers of some colonies, who purchased the lands from the natives, for
valuable and satisfactory considerations. It was a very useleless exercise of
their virtues, for their posterity. It they had by accident settled an
"uninhabited" country, the invaluable rights of the common law would have
attended them; but when they dared to obtain a settlement by humanity and
justice, they forfeited all rights of the common law, to the latest succeeding
ages. Can this be law? Every case quoted by the Judge, it is humbly
apprehended, makes a distinction between states or societies composed of
English subjects, and those composed of "conquered" people, etc. and that this
is, the only distinction warrantable by those cases. That the conquerors should
be considered AS the conquered, the expellers of the natives AS the expelled
natives, and the christian possessors and owners by fair purchases from those
who had a right to sell, AS at the infidels no longer possessing or owning,
seems to involve a confusion of ideas, little agreeing with the strength of
reason that informs the common law.

It is very remarkable, how our ablest antagonists are perplexed in framing
their arguments against us. Even the learned judge does not express himself
with his usual perspicuity: But the want of it is well atoned, if we,
colonists, can be thereby deprived of the benefits of the common law, and be
absolutely subjected to the king; for these courtly tenets are the only
consequences deducible from the curious argument that tends to involve these
colonies in the misfortunes of " conquered, ceded, or infidel countries." The
"control of parliament," is asserted to be supreme, in every case. Whether the
colonies were settled in "uninhabited countries," or in "conquered, ceded, or
infidel countries," makes no difference as to that point.

Another learned gentleman has discovered, that we "are not entitled to as
great a degree of freedom as Ireland." Why? "Because Ireland was a conquered
country." This remark does not seem to remove the difficulty. Let us hear the
point a little more explained. " Ireland it is true was conquered, but certain
concessions were made to the people. These were the terms granted them, but
England is obliged to keep no terms with the colonists." At every step these
gentlemen take, those writers, who have contributed so much to the glory of
their country, turn upon them, and directly oppose them. They at first shrink
before these venerable advocates for liberty and humanity -- but recollecting
themselves, they distinguish and refine, in order to take away the substance of
every argument, and to whittle down a (...) and a Lock into a Lestrange and a
Filmer. After taking these liberties, they at length grow bold enough to
arraign the authority of any man, even Mr. Lock himself, if his writings
cannot, by all this art, be turned to their purpose.

We need no^ be surprised after this, that every colonist, who ventures
honestly, to assert, as well as he can, the cause of his native ^and, should be
treated with little respect. The colonies have always been on (...) defensive.
IT IS HOPED THEY WILL ALWAYS CONTINUE SO. But the author of "the controversy"
charges them with great cunning, a left handed wisdom, that must disgrace any
people -- because they have not resisted, in places where they were not
immediately attacked. "It is the artifice of the managers, on the part of the
colonies, to avoid general questions, and to keep back and conceal
consequences, least the unsuspecting people of England should too soon catch
the alarm, and resolve to withstand their first attempts at independency." Pa.
15
That is -- they have acted just as the "unsuspecting people of England" have
done in their controversies with the crown. They confined themselves from time
to time, to a demand of redress, for the injuries offered them. This behavior
of the colonists, would, by some persons, be deemed modest and respectful. Now
indeed the conduct of administration demonstrates to us, that we must enlarge
our views, and endeavor to take a prospect of all the mischiefs necessarily
attending a claim of boundless power with an unbounded inclination to exercise
it. The gentleman may perhaps call for fire and faggots to extirpate our
political heresy; but we trust, and trust firmly, that, the sense and
generosity of the good people of England, will discover and defeat the present
plan against their libeties, as they have already so many other schemes of that
tendency -- that they will behold their dutiful children with compassionate
love, and with just indignation those unrelenting enemies, from whom they can
expect no other favor, but that England "shall be the last they will devour."


The common law extends to colonies; yet Mr. justice Blackstone says, "such
parts of the law as are neither necessary nor convenient for them, as the
jurisdiction of the spiritual courts, etc. are therefore not in force." If even
the COMMON LAW, in force within the realm of England when the colonists quitted
it, is thus abridged by the peculiar circumstances of colonies, at least
equally just, and constitutional is it, that the POWER OF MAKING NEW LAWS
within the realm of England, should be abridged with respect of colonies, by
those peculiar circumstances. The author of the controversy, in page 31 of his
work, argues thus concerning the legislative power of Great Britain over the
colonies. The lands in all the colonies having therefore been clearly shown to
be part of the dominions of Great Britain, and the possessors of them to hold
them under authorities and titles derived from the British state, Mr. Lock
would require no other proof of the right of the legislative power of
Great Britain to the obedience of the possessors of those lands; for speaking
of the manner by which a man tacitly makes himself a subject of any country or
government, he says.

(...) is commonly supposed, that a father could oblige his posterity to that
government of which he himself was a subject, and that his compact held them;
whereas it being only a necessary condition annexed to the land, and the
inheritance of an estate, which is under that government reaches only those who
will take it on that condition, and so is no natural tie or engagement, but a
voluntary submission; for every man's children being by nature as free as
himself, or any of his ancestors ever were, may, whilst they are in that
freedom, choose what society they will join themselves to, what commonwealth
they will put themselves under; but if they will enjoy the inheritance of their
ancestors, they must take it on the same terms their ancestors had it, and
submit to all the conditions annexed to such a possession. Whoever (says he in
another place) by inheritance, purchase, permission, or otherways, enjoys any
part of the lands so annexed to, and ^^der the government of, that common
wealth, must take it with the condition it is under; that is, of submitting to
the government of the commonwealth under whose jurisdiction it is, as far,
forth as any subject of it. page 31* The ingenuity of the gentleman is here
again remarkable Mr. Lock in his 8th chapter on civil government "Of the
beginning of political societies," immediately before the words abovementioned
"Whoever by inheritance," etc. speaks of a man who " unites his person which
was before free to a society for the securing and regulating of property, and
submits to the community those possessions which he has or shall acquire, that
do not already belong to any other government." These words the gentleman not
thinking quite to his purpose in this place. separates from the words of his
quotation, and so gives Mr. Locke's conclusion without his premises However
three pages after, he is so candid, as to give the premises without the
conclusion. How, or why? to support this most curious distinction, -- that Mr.
Lock. in that celebrated part of his argument where speaking of "government
taking the property of subjects," he says "WHAT PROPERTY HAVE ^IN THAT, WHICH
ANOTHER MAY BY RIGHT TAKE FROM ME WHEN HE PLEASES," Pa. 33
" means no more" than that the supreme legislative power has no right to take
the property of others without their consent "for the PRIVATE USE OR PURPOSE of
the legislative." So that according to this construction, the constitution of a
well established government, or the freedom of a people, depends not on the
great right which GOD has given them "of having a share in the government of
themselves," whereby their property is secured, but merely, on the " purpose,"
to which the property taken from them without their consent is applied by those
who thus take it. And yet this gentleman has severely attacked the writer of
the letters for using the word " purpose" in a much more confined sense, in
saying, a "tax is an imposition on the subject for the so^e purpose OF LEVYING
MONEY."

Mr. Lock, in the preceding chapter, speaking of monarchy says, "that absolute
power purifies not men's bloods. For if it be asked what security or sense
arises in such a state, against the violence and oppression of the absolute
ruler? the very question can scarce be borne. They are ready to tell you it
deserves death, only to ask after safety* Betwixt subject and subject they will
grant there must be measures, laws and judges for their mutual peace and
security: But as for the ruler, he ought to be absolute, and is above all such
circumstances; because he has power to do more hurt and wrong, it is right when
he does it. To ask how you can be guarded from harm or injury on that side,
where the strongest ^and is to do it, is presently the voice of faction and
rebellion." But here our opponent may come in with another distinction. "Mr.
Lock speaks here of an absolute ruler, not of absolute rulers. Lilly proves
that there is the singular number, and the plural number. A power that Mr.
Lock would have held illegal in a Pisistratus or a Stuart, he would have held
legal in the four bundred of Athens, or the parliament of Great Britain." Let
the distinction be allowed its due weight. Can it be believed that such a
friend to mankind, as Mr. Lock was, could ever think absolute dominion
Absolute dominion HOWEVER PLACED, is so far from being one kind of civil
soecity, that it is as inconsistent with it, as slavery is with property."
Lock on civil govrt. (...)
^ust or legal? Would not such a sentiment directly oppose those principles,
his benevolence induced him to take so much pains to vindicate and establish?
Would the sound of the words, -- "dependence -- " "subordination -- " "within
the realm -- " "part of the dominions -- etc. have convinced him, that it was
"the indispensable duty of parliament to ease the gentry and people of
Great Britain by TAXING the colonists without their consent?' -- and that it
was the indispensable duty of the colonists on constitutional principles to
submit to such taxation? The learned say that the too rigid attention of the
mind to one idea sometimes is the cause of madness. So rigid has been the
attention of many head^ in Great Britain to the idea of dependence, that it
seems to have occasioned a kind of insanit in them; and by ruminating,
speechifying, and enacting about it and about it, they have lost all ideas of
justice, humanity, law and consti^^tion, and in short of every quality that
used to distinguish men from the rest of this creation, and Englishmen from the
rest of mankind. But Mr. Locke's understanding, even in the present whirl of
the political world, would have preserved him. just and tenacious of his
principles. The case he puts, and on which the author of "the controversy"
argues, is that of a submission to the terms of government in a commonwealth.
The question between Great Britain and the colonies, is, what are the terms of
their connection under all the circumstances o^ it.

It is not recollected that Mr. Lock ever insinuates, that the parliament of
Great Britain might bind the people of Ireland by statutes, " in all case
whatsoever." Yet there was in his time a famous dispute concerning the
authority of parliament over that kingdom. So far was he from favoring the
claim of parliament, that it is hoped, it can clearly be proved, he favored
the other side of the question.

His friend Mr. Molineux, in a letter dated March 15. 16^7-8, tells him of his
intentions to visit him -- when he could get loose from business: "But this I
cannot hope for till the parliament in England rises. I should be glad to know
from you when that is expected, for indeed they bear very hard upon us in
Ireland. How justly they can bind us, without our consent and representatives,
I leave the author of the two treatises on government to consider" -- meaning
Mr. Locke's two treatises -- one on government -- the other on civil
government; though they are published also as one treatise, the first book of
which is under the first title, and the second book under the second title.

Mr. Lock, in his answer dated April 6, School, says, amongst other things I
would be glad to talk with you about, before I die, is that which you suggest
at the bottom of the first page of your letter. I am mightily concerned for the
place meant in the question you say you will ask the author of the treatise you
mention, and wish extremely well to it. and would be very glad to be informed
by you what would be best for it, and debate with you the way to compose it.
But this cannot be done by letters; the subject is of too great extent, the
views too large and the particulars too many to be so managed. Come therefore
yourself, and come as well prepared as you can. But if you talk with others on
that point there, mention not me to any body on that subject; only let you and
I try what good we can do for those whom we wish well to; great things have
sometimes been brought about from small beginnings well laid together."

Mr. Molineux quickly after came over from Ireland to England to see Mr. Lock.




THE laws of England with respect to prerogative, and in other instances, have
accommodated themselves, without alteration by statutes to a change of
circumstances, the welfare of the people so requiring. A regard for that grand
object perpetualiy animates the constitution, and regulates all its movements
-- unless unnatural obstructions interfere -- Spiritus intus alit, totamque
infusa perartus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore misect.


ANOTHER argument for the extravagant power of internal legislation over us
remains. It has been urged with great warmth against us, that "precedents" show
this power is rightfully vested in parliament.

SUBMISSION to unjust sentences proves not a right to pass them. Carelessness
or regard for the peace and welfare of the community, ^nay cause the
submission. Submission may sometimes be a less evil than opposition, and
therefore a duty. In such cases, it is a submission to the divine authority,
which forbids us to injure our country; not to the assumed authority, on which
the unjust sentences were founded. But when submission becomes inconsistent
with and destructive of the public good, the same veneration for and duty to
the divine a^thority, commands us to oppose. The all wise Creator of man
impressed certain laws on his nature. A desire of happiness, and of society, are
two of those laws. They were not intended to destroy, but to support each other
Man has therefore a right to promote the best union of both, in order to enjoy
both in the highest degree. Thus, while this right is properly exercised,
desires, that seem selfish, by a happy combination, produce the welfare of
others. "This is removing submission from a foundation unable to support it,
and injurious to the honor of GOD, and fixing it upon much firmer ground."
Hoadly's disc. on government.


No sensible or good man ever suspected Mr. Hooker of being a weak or ^actious
person, "yet he plainly enough teaches, that a society upon experience of
universal evil, have a right to try by another form to answer more effectually
the ends of government" -- And Mr. Hoadley asks -- "Would the ends of
government be destroyed should the miserable condition of the people of France,
WHICH HAS PROCEEDED FROM THE KING'S BEING ABSOLUTE, awaken the thoughts of the
wisest heads amongst them; and move them all to exert themselves, so as that
those ends should be better answered for the time to come?"

WHAT mind can relish the hardy proposition, that because precedents have been
introduced by the inattention or timidity of some, and the cunning or violence
of others, THEREFORE the latter have a right to make the former miserable --
that is, that precedents that ought never to have been set, yet being set,
repeal the eternal laws of natural justice, humanity and equity. -- "I could
never think
"A mortals law of power or strength sufficient
"To abrogate the unwritten law divine,
"Immutable, eternal, not like these
"Of yesterday, but made ever time began."
Sophocles's Antig. Franh. Trans^. It should be considered, whether it ever was
or ever can be the true interest of a kingdom or state to violate the laws of
natural justice, equity and humanity. These laws may be called the laws of GOD.
Can they be broken with impunity? The scriptures are full of lessons on this
subject, and history furnishes instances sufficient to alarm (...), if they
would attend to them. All the glories of Charles the bold; -- Charles the
^^fth, -- Philip the second, -- Charles the twelfth, -- Lewis the fourteenth,
-- and a numerous list of distinguished princes, were overcast, when
unrelenting cruelty came to preside over their resolutions. From Athens to
Genoa the observation holds true. Let not the opinion be condemned as
presumptuous, before it be fully enquired into. It is worth an enquiry.

"Discite justitiam moniti and non temner^ divos."

England has been prosperous in many civil wars, but they were in defense of
liberty. She never engaged in one against liberty. -- Would to Heaven, she
would set the world the much wanted example of lenity in government. Mankind
might gain by it. The other mode has been suffficiently tried, and proved to be
impolitic and ruinous.




THE argument from precedents begins unluckily for its advocates. The first
produced against us by the gentleman before mentioned, was an act passed by the
Commonwealth parliament in 1650 to "punish" Virginia This loyal, generous
colony preserved its principles with such spirit, notwithstanding the
oppression abovementioned, that in January 1659, they threw off all obedience
to the parliament, replaced the kings governor, and proclaimed Charles the
second, several months before the restoration in Europe.
, Barbados, Antigua, and Bermudas, FOR THEIR FIDELITY TO CHARLES THE SECOND. So
ancient is the right of parliament to "punish" Colonists for doing their duty.
But the parliament had before overturned church and throne, so that there is an
older "precedent" set against these.

THAT parliament sat amidst the ruins that surrounded it, fiercer than Marius
among those of Carthage. Brutal power became an irresistible argument of
boundless right. What the style of an Aristotle could not prove, the point of a
Cromwell's sword sufficiently demonstrated. Innocence and Justice sighed and
submitted -- What more could they do? The Restoration took place, and a legal
parliament would not doubt but it had as extensive a right as an illegal one.
The Revolution succeeded, and with it methods for blending together the powers
of king and people in a manner before unknown. A new political alembic was
fixed on the great principle of resistance, and in it, severe experiments were
to be made on every other principle of the constitution. How the boldness of
ministers and contempt of the people have increased since that period, not a
man the least acquainted with English history can be ignorant. The Colonies
were in a state of infancy -- still in a state of childhood. Not a single
statute concerning them i^ recollected to have been past before the Revolution,
but such as related to the regulation of trade. "Precedents" were afterward
made, that, when they grew up, the authority of a master might succeed that of
a parent.

PRECEDENTS, it is apprehended, are no otherwise regarded in the English laws
than as they establish certainty FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE -- according to
the maxim -- "miserable is the servitude when the laws are uncertain."
Precedents militating against the welfare or happiness of a people, are
inconsistent with the grand original principle on which they ought to be
founded. Their supposed sanction increases in proportion to the repetitions of
injustice. They must be void. In subjects of dispute between man and man,
precedents may be of use, though not founded on the best reason. They cause a
certainty, and all may govern themselves accordingly. If they take from an
individual one day, they may give to him the next. But precedents to overthrow
principles, to justify the perpetual oppression of all, and to impair the power
of the constitution, though a cloud of them appear, have no more force than the
volumes of dust that surround a triumphal car. They may obscure it: They cannot
stop it. What would the liberties of the people of England have been at this
time, if precedents could have made laws inconsistent with the constitution?
Precedents tending to make men unhappy, can with propriety of character be
quoted only by those beings, to whom the misery of men is a delight.

"IF the usage had been immemorial and uniform, and ten thousand instances
could have been produced, it would not have been sufficient; because the
practice must likewise be agreeable to the principles of the law, This is a
maxim of law, that -- "a bad usage ought to be abolished."
in order to be good: whereas this is a practice inconsistent with, and in
direct opposition to the first and clearest principles of the law" Letter on
general warrants. --
-- to those feelings of humanity, out of which mankind will not be reasoned,
when power advances with gigantic strides threatening dissolution to a state --
to those inherent though latent powers of society, which no climate, EQUAL
DISTRIBUTION of JUSTICE, and FREE ENJOYMENT of PROPERTY, are the great objects
of society; and no time, precedent, statute, or institution, should deter men
from keeping these UPPERMOST in their thoughts." Mr. Humes's hist. of England.

"The jursdiction of the star chamber, martial, law: prisonment by warrants
from the privy council several practices of a like nature, though (...) English
to be centuries; were scarce ever allow (...) AFFECTION OF THE parts of their
constitution (...) PREVAILED OVER ALL NATION FOR (...) ALL POLITICAL REASONING:
PRECEDENT, (...) powers, after being long the source The exercise of (...)
among the people, was, in ^ulness of secret solemnly abolished, as illegal, at
least as oppressive, by the whole legislative authority." id. To these
instances may be added, the late practice of general warrants, that had the
sanction of precedents, even since the revolution.


no time, no constitution, no contract, can ever destroy or diminish." 1
Blackstone p. 245.


A PARLIAMENTARY power of internal legislation over these colonies, appears
therefore to us, equally contradictory to humanity and the constitution, and
illegal.

As to the second head, a power of regulating our trade, our opinion is, that
it is legally vested in parliament, not as a supreme legislature over these
colonies, but as the supreme legislature and full representative of the parent
state, and the only judge between her and her children in commercial interests,
which the nature of the case, in the progress of their growth admitted. It has
been urged, with great vehemence against us, and seems to be thought their fort
by our adversaries, "that a power of regulation is a power of legislation, and
a power of legislation, if constitutional, must be universal and supreme in the
utmost sense of the words. It is therefore concluded, that the colonists, by
acknowledging the power of regulation, have acknowledged every other power." On
this objection we observe, that according to a maxim of law, "it is deceitful
and dangerous to deal in general propositions." The freedom and happiness of
states depend not on Our chance of success would be slight indeed, if it
depended o^ ^^bleties of reasoning. Who can resist the skilful and courageous
attacks of those Britons, who have not long since distinguished themselves in
the pol^mical fields? Have they not proved to the satisfaction of thousands,
the non existence of matter -- the necessity of human actions -- consequently
the innocence of them -- the comfortable mortality of the soul -- that virtue
is a name -- vice a just -- liberty a ^^nentity -- christianity an imposture --
and, with due detestation ^e i^ mentioned; that we have no idea of power. nor
of any Being endowed with any power, MUCH LESS of one endowed with infinite
power?"

(...) explosions of learning and flashes of wit, these well small (...) would
keep (...) a terrible fire of artillery and not meet them (...) undisciplined
Americans. We must BE MADNESS IN THE ^^ock of battle. THAT WOULD of our natural
advantages. --.(...) We must make the most the forces that can be brought to
(...) are safe; and all be able to prevail against us. To (...), will never
"Inquiry ceases to be rational, and becomes (...) metaphor* (...) and
pernicious, when it advances as far as (...) late authors have carried it, to
controvert the first principles o^ knowledge, morality, religion, and
consequently the fundamental laws of the British government, and of all well
regulated society." Mr. Beattie on truth.

It has been asserted by some men distinguished as historians, that the zeal of
the reformers in religion engaging them to think liberally on that subject, led
them to think with like freedom in civil affairs, whereby the government of
England received its greatest improvement. If the sentiment is just, may it not
be inferred, that contempt for religion, must necessarily introduce an
indifference for all the just rules of government and the principles of the
constitution?


artful arguments, but on a few plain principles. The plausible appearance of
the objection consists in a confused comprehension of several points, entirely
distinct in their nature, and leading to consequences directly opposite to each
other. There was a time, when England had no colonies. Trade was the object she
attended to, in encouraging them. A love of freedom was manifestly the chief
motive of the adventurers. The connection of colonies with their parent state,
may be called a new object of the English laws. That her right extinguishes all
their rights, -- rights essential to freedom, and which they would have
enjoyed, by remaining in their parent state, is offensive to reason, humanity,
and the constitution of that state. Colonies could not have been planted on
these terms. What Englishman, but an idiot, would have become a colonist on
these conditions? to mention no more particulars, "That every shilling he
gained, might rightfully be taken from him -- trial by jury abolished -- the
building houses or making cloths with the materials found or raised in the
colonies prohibited -- and armed men set over him to govern him in every
action?"

HAD these provinces never been settled -- had all the inhabitants of them now
living, been born in England, and resident there, they would now enjoy the
rights of Englishmen, that is, they would be free in that kingdom. We claim in
the colonies these and no other rights. There no other kingdom or state
interferes. But their trade, however, important it may be, as the affairs of
mankind are circumstanced, turns on other principles. All the power of
parliament cannot regulate that at their pleasure. It must be regulated not by
parliament alone, but by treaties and alliances formed by the king WITHOUT THE
CONSENT OF THE NATION, with other states and kingdoms. The freedom of a people
consists in being governed by laws, in which no alteration can be made, without
their consent. Yet the wholesome force of these laws is confined to the limits
of their own country. That is, a supreme legislature to a people, which acts
internally over that people, and inevitably implies personal assent,
representation, or slavery. When an universal empire is established, and not
till then, can regulations of trade properly be called, acts of supreme
legislature. It seems from many authorities, as if almost the whole power of
regulating the trade of England was originally vested in the crown. One
restriction appears to have been, that no duty could be imposed without the
consent of parliament. Trade was little regarded by our warlike ancestors. As
commerce became of more importance, duties, and severities were judged
necessary additions to its first simple state, parliament more and more
interfered. The constitution was always free, but not always exactly in the
same manner. "By the Feodal law, all navigable rivers and havens were computed
among the Regalia, and were subject to the sovereign of the state. And in
England it has always been held, that the king is lord of the whole shore, and
particularly is guardian of the ports and havens, which are the inlets and
gates of the realm: and therefore, so early as the reign of king John, we find
ships seized by the kings officers, for putting in at a place that was not a
legal port. These legal ports were undoubtedly at first assigned by the crown;
since to each of them a court of portmote is incident, the jurisdiction of
which must flow from the royal authority. The erection of beacons, lighthouses,
and sea marks is also a branch of the royal prerogative. The king may injoin
any man from going abroad, or command any man to return. The powers of
establishing public marts, regulating of weights and measures, and the giving
authority to, or making current, money, the medium of commerce, belong to the
crown. By making peace or war, leagues and treaties, the king may open or stop
trade as he pleases. The admiralty courts are grounded on the necessity of
supporting a jurisdiction so extensive, though opposite to the usual doctrines
of the common law. The laws of Oleron were made by Richard the first, and are
still used in those courts." In the "Mare clausum", are several regulations
made by kings The power of regulating trade, was carried so far by the crown,
as sometimes to impose duties; and queen Elizabeth obtained several judgments
in the exchequer on such regulations. Lord chief justice Coke answers the
argument founded on these -- in 2 inst. 62. 63. Princes aimed at too much power
-- exceeded due bounds -- their imprudence produced "grievances" -- and the
people who always suffer, when their rulers are weak or wicked, would no longer
trust such opportunities of oppression in their hand. The power of impressing
seamen, shows the extensive authority in naval affairs trusted to "the crown."
1 Blackst. 419 Fosters rep. 154.

So extremely averse were the English to foreign affairs, and to the exercise
even of parliamentary authority concerning them, that though the nation was
justly provoked against the French king for the injury done to Edward the 1st
by withholding Aquitaine and his other inheritances in manner (as lord chief
justice Coke observes in his 2d inst. pa. 532.) and by some cruel actions of
Frenchmen against Englishmen, and had in full parliament granted him aids,
subsidies, for the maintenance of his wars in foreign parts, yet in the
CONFIRMATIONES CHARTARUM, Ed. 1st, therein taking notice, "that many men
doubted, whether these grants by parliament might not turn in servage of them
and their heirs, as precedents, expressly declares in those statutes, that such
grants shall not be drawn into custom." The comment says -- "it was holden that
the subjects of the realm ought not to contribute to the maintenance of the
kings wars out of the realm -- but this matter was never in quiet, until it was
more particularly explained by diverse acts of parliament." The comment then
mentions several acts declaring that no Englishman shall be bound to contribute
to the kings wars out of England, in Scotland, Gascoigny, Ireland, Calais,)
though these three last were countries dependant on England,) and says, "the^e
acts of parliament are but declarations of the ancient law of England -- But
here may be observed, that when any ancient law or custom of parliament" (such
as before mentioned by making acts relating to foreign wars) "is broken, and
the crown possessed of a precedent, how difficult a thing it is, TO RESTORE THE
SUBJECT AGAIN TO HIS FORMER FREEDOM AND SAFETY." 2 ins. 527 -- 529.

The author of "the controversy," who with a liberality of sentiment becoming a
pleader against freedom and the best interest of mankind, counts, "statute
books" -- "ministers" -- "king's council" -- pa. 77. 78. --:"scraps of
journals" -- pa 81. and ordinances of "the rump parliament" -- pa. 87. among
his "DEITIES" pa. 78; and grieves that we poor "infidel" colonists will not pay
his idols the veneration his zeal judges due to them, has collected a good many
fragments of proceedings in the house of commons from the year 1614 to 1628.
The amount is this, that the ministers of the crown insisted, that parliament
could not make laws for America; that the the commons doubted; but at length in
1724, came to an opinion, that the king's patent for "a monopoly of fishing on
the coasts of America was a grievance," -- that a "clause of FORFEITURE"
against those who interfered in the fishery was void -- and past a bill "for a
free liberty of fishing" etc. It appears in the debates that the fishery was
free before the patent was granted -- These extracts do not show, what became
of the bill in the house of lords. One Mr. Brook said in 1621 -- "We may make
laws here for Virginia, for if the king gives consent to this bill past here
and by the lords, this will control the patent."

It seems, as if the notion of the king's regulating power still prevailed,
but, that "a clause of forfeiture" in such regulations was void." So much had
the power of parliament grown since king John's reign. Nor does it appear to
have been unreasonable, as commerce became of more consequence. The instance
here mentioned, related to a regulation of trade; and however the king might
have accommodated the point, with the other branches of the legislature, the
whole proceeding is immaterial. If it was a right actually enjoyed by
Englishmen to fish on the coasts of a plantation -- and a grant by the crown of
the fishery to the people of the plantation excluding the people of England,
could not divest them of their right -- or, "if by the king's giving his
consent to a bill passed by lords and commons," -- "the patent might be
controuled" -- it does not follow, that the king, lords and commons could
divest the people of the plantations of all their rights.


Time forbids a more exact enquiry into this point: but such it is apprehended,
will on enquiry be found to have been the power of the crown, that our argument
may gain, but cannot lose. We will proceed on a concession, that the power of
regulating trade is vested in parliament.

COMMERCE rests on concessions and restrictions mutually stipulated between the
different powers of the world; Case of the Ostend East India company.
and if these colonies were sovereign states, they would in all probability be
restricted to their present portion "Another light, in which the laws of
England consider the king with regard to domestic concerns, is the arbiter of
commerce. By commerce, I at present mean domestic commerce only. It would lead
me into too large a field, if I were to attempt to enter upon the nature of
foreign trade, its privileges, regulations, and restrictions; and would be also
quite beside the purpose of these commentaries, which are confined to the laws
of England. Whereas no municipal laws can be sufficient to order and determine
the very extensive and complicated affairs of traffic and merchandise; neither
can they have a proper authority for this purpose. For, as these are
transactions carried on between subjects of independent states, the municiple
laws of one will ^^t be regarded by the other. For which reason the affairs of
commerce are regulated by a law of their own, called the law merchant or lex
mercatoria, which all nations agree in and take notice of. And in particular it
is held to be part of the law of England, which decides the causes of merchants
by the general rules which obtain in all commercial countries; and that often
even in matters relating to domestic trade, as for instance with regard to the
drawing, the acceptance, and the (...) of inland bills of exchange."
. The people of England were freemen, before they were merchants. Whether they
will continue free, they themselves must determine. How they shall trade, must
be determined by Germans, French, Spaniards, Italians, Turks, Moors, etc. The
right of acquiring, property depends on the rights of others: the right of
acquired property, solely on the owner. The possessor is no owner without it.
"Almost every leaf and page of all the volumes of the Common Law prove this
right of property Parlia. hist.
." Why should this right be sacred in Great Britain, "the chief corner stone"
in the solid foundation of her constitution, and an empty name in her colonies?
The lamb that presumed to drink in the same stream with a stronger animal,
though lower down the current, could not refute the charge of incommoding the
latter, by disturbing the water. Such power have reasons that appear despicable
and detestable at first when they are properly enforced.

FROM this very principle arose her power; and can that power now be justly
exerted, in suppression of that principle? It cannot. Therefore, a power This
distinction between a supreme legislature and a power of regulating trade, is
not a new one. We find it clearly made, by the judges of England, at a period,
when the modern profitable mode of blending together in parliament the
authorities of the crown and people, had not extinguished all reverence for the
principles of the constitution.

By the statute of the 2d of Henry 6th chapter 4th Calais was confirmed a staple
place for the wool exported from England, Wales and Ireland. Some wool shipped
from this last kingdom, was consigned to Sluice, in Flanders. The ship by
stress of weather was forced into Calais, where the wool was seized as
forfeited. The chief question in the exchequer chamber was, whether the statute
bound Ireland. In Rich. 3, 12, the case is thus reported. "Et ibi quoad ad
primam questionem dicebant, quod terra Hibernioe inter se habet parliamentum
and omnimodo cur as prout in Anglia, and per idem parliamentum faciunt leges
and mutant leges, and NON OBLIGANTUR PER STATUTA IN ANGLIA, QUIA NON HIC ^ABENT
MILITES PARLIAMENTI; sed hoc intelligitur DE TERRIS per REBUS IN TERRIS TANTUM
EFFICIEND; sed PERSONAE EORUM SUNT SUBJECTI RUGIS et tanq^am subejcti ERUNT
obligati ad aliquam rem EXTRA TERRAM ILLAM FACIENDAM contra statutum, sicut
habitantes in Callesia, Gascognia, Guien, etc. dum fuere subjecti; and
obedientes erunt SUB ADMIRALITATE ANGLIAE DE RE FACTA SUPERALTUM MARE; et
similiter breve de errore de judiciis redditis in Hibernia in banco regis hic
in Anglia."

Brook lord chief justice of the common pleas, mentions the case almost in the
same words, title parliament 98 -- but 90 says -- "the chief justice was of
opinion, that the statutes o^ England shall bind Ireland, which was in a manner
agreed by the other justices; and yet it was denied the former day: YET note,
that Ireland is a realm of itself, and has a parliament in itself"

Here it may be observed, first, that the reason assigned by the judges, why
the statutes of England bind not the people of Ireland, though specially named,
contains a constitutional principle, the sine qua non of freedom. Secondly,
that the people of Ireland, as subjects of the king, were "under, the admiralty
of England as to things done on the high sea;" which is a strong confirmation
given by the judges of England, to the supposition before made, of the power of
regulating trade being formerly vested in the king. Thirdly, that the opinion
of the chief justice, and of the other justices, such as it was, "reddendo
singula singulis, and ^ecundum subjectam materiam," proves at most, only that
Ireland was bound by statutes regulating their trade, for such was the 2 Henry
6th chapter 4th on which the case arose. Fourthly, that Brook a man of great
eminence and dignity in the law, appears by his note, to have been dissatisfied
with the judgment, tho only on a statute of regulation, for this reason of such
weight with an Englishman, -- "because Ireland is a realm of itself and has a
parliament within itself" Fifthly, that the authority of the crown, including
the regulation of the trade of Ireland, and sending writs of error there, were
sufficient restraints, to secure the obedience and subordination of that
kingdom. This reason seems to have held its ground, till lord chief justice
Coke's time; and though a great reverence is entertained for his memory, yet it
can never be acknowledged, that an "obiter dietum" of his, or of any other man,
is a rule of law. In Calvin's case, the chief justice reciting the foregoing
case, says, "Hibernia habet parliamentum, and faciunt leges, and nostra statuta
non ligant eos, QUIA non mittunt milites ad parliamentum (which "adds he," is
to be understood, unless they be especially named) And does the "especially
naming them," give them a representation, or remove the injustice of binding
them without it? This observation in plain English would run thus* "Our
statutes do not bind the people of Ireland, when we do not intend to bind them,
BECAUSE, they are not represented in our parliament: but our statutes bind
them, when we intend to bind them." What is this but saying -- "that to speak
of their not being represented, is a mere jargon; and the sole point is whether
it is our will to bind them" -- or in other words -- "that our statutes do not
bind them for a reason, as strong as man can give, and so acknowledged by us to
be, which yet, is no reason at all: for, where there is no occasion for its
operation, it applies not; and where there is occasion, it is of no force" His
Lordship had just before taken notice that "a writ of error did lie in the
king's bench of England of an erroneous judgment in the king's be^ch of
Ireland;" and perhaps that led him in the course of his ar^ument to imagine,
there might be a like pre^^eminence of the parliament of England over that of
Ireland. That this was his reason seems certain, because at a meeting of
commissioners to consider of a projected union between England and Scotland, at
which the chief justice was present. -- Moor ^796, it is said, "that parliament
has power over Ireland, AS IS PROVED by that a writ of error may be brought of
a judgment in the king's b^^ch of Ireland" In the 4th inst. he also says the
people of Guernsey, Jers^y and Man are not bound by the statutes of England,
unless they are specially named* Yet whoever (...) the statutes relating to
Ireland, Guernsey, Jersey and Man, will have very little cause to believe, that
it has (...) in England, that statutes would generally (...) people of these
countries, notwithstanding the subject (...) of Ireland, and the other islands,
the many distresses of the former, and the weakness of the latter have afforded
opportunities of extending such a power over them. With respect to all these
places scarce a statute can be found of any (...), but for the regulation of
their trade. The same observation may be made as to Gas^^igny, Guienne Calais,
(...) Wild in (...) ve^^. 5. said, "he had seen a charter whereby these places
were recited to be united to England (...). And writs of error run there." "
Wales was a conquered country, and the people submitted to Edward (...)

Whatever pretense the chief justice's opinion was founded on, it has been
carefully repeated in many law books since. Whether his lordship meant, that
statutes of England could bind the people of Ireland, in taking away trials by
jury, -- taxing them, and indeed, " in all cases whatsoever," o^ only in
preserving their subordination, as by regulating their trade, which was the
case referred to in his comment, does not appear. The parliament in declaring
the dependence of Ireland, did not venture to claim a power of binding the
people of that kingdom "in all cases whatsover." Nor, to this day does
parliament tax the^, etc. And therefore the inference is just, (...) meant such
a power.
With respect to all these declarations, however, as they are made to refer to
us, we may answer as the lion did to the man in the fable.

Much the same arbitrary construction has been made on the question; whether a
man could be tried in England on a charge of committing treason in Ireland. In
queen Elizabeth's reign, " Cerrade, chancellor of Ireland moved that question
to the counsel of the queen, and it was held by Wray, Dier, and Gerrarde,
attorney general, he could not, because he was a subject of Ireland and not of
England, and if tried in England, he could not be tried by his peers." Dier,
360. Afterward, to gratify the queen's resentment against some rebels, they
were tried in England; and thus passion and complaisance made very good law
against reason and justice.

Having mentioned Calvin's case, it may not be improper to observe, that if the
author of "the controversy" had taken the tr^^ble of reading it, he might have
found his perplexities removed on the question that has given him so much
anxiety, and brought such a load of reproaches on the colonies. He is provoked
at our insolence for pretending to be any thing more than (...) in England,
while we deny the power of parliament to bind us "in all cases whatever." In
that case, the gentleman would have discovered, that the judges of England
held, that a man b^^n in Scotland, under the allegiance of James the first,
after his accession to the throne of England, was entitled to all the rights of
a subject born in England; though the objection, that statutes of England could
not bind Scotland, or a man residing there, who held lands in England, was
mentioned in the course of the argument. That great difficulty being got over,
if the gentleman, will go a step farther, and perceive some little distinction
between colonies proceeding out of the loins of England, and the "conquered"
countries of Ireland and Wales, -- the countries of Gascoigny Guienne, and
Calais. "united by mutual pact to England" -- and the islands of Guernsey, etc.
" lying within the four seas, whose sovereigns annexed them to England:" and
will only allow the colonists a little more regard than is professed in law books
for those countries, and about as much as has been actually observed toward
them by parliament, he will have no further occasion to say severe things of
those, who are willing to esteem him; and then, if he can persuade his worthy
countrymen to adopt his sentiments, their anger will no longer give pain to
those who almost adore them.


of regulating our trade, involves not in it the idea of supreme legislature
over us. The first is a power of a preserving "protecting" nature. The last, as
applied to America, is such a power as Mr. Justice Blackstone describes in
these words, "whose enormous weight spreads horror and destruction on all
inferior movements." The first is a power subject to a constitutional check.
Great Britain cannot injure us by taking away our commerce without hurting
herself immediately. The last is a power without check or limit. She might ruin
us by it. The injury thereby to herself might be so remote as to be despised by
her.

THE power of regulation was the only band that could have held us together;
formed on one of those "original contracts," -- which only can be a foundation
of just authority. Without such a band, our general commerce with foreign
nations, might have been injurious and destructive to her. Reason and duty
reject such a license. This our duty resembles that of children to a parent.
The parent has a power over them: but they have rights, which the parent cannot
take away. Heaven grant that our mother country may regard us as her children,
that if by the dispensation of Providence, the time shall come, when her power
decreases the memory of former kindnesses, may supply its decays, and her
colonies like dutiful children, may serve and guard their aged parent, for ever
revering the arms that held them in their infancy, and the breasts that
supported their lives, while they were little ones.

IT seems, as if the power of regulation might not inaptly be compared to the
prerogative of making peace, war, treaties, or alliances, whereby "the whole I
Blackst. 252, 257.
nation are bound, AGAINST THEIR CONSENT:" and yet the prerogative by no means
implies a supreme legislature. The language held in "the Commentaries" on this
point is very remarkable. "With regard to FOREIGN CONCERNS the king is the
delegate or representative of the people; and in him, as in a center, all the
rays of his people are united Id. 252.
and the SOVEREIGN POWER quoad hoc is vested in his person Id. 257.
Will any Englishman say these expressions are descriptive of the King's
authority, WITHIN THE REALM. "Is the SOVEREIGN POWER within that vested in his
person?" He is styled "sovereign" indeed; "his realm is declared by many acts
of parliament an Empire and his crown Imperial." But do these splendid
appellations, the highest known in Europe signify, that " sovereign POWER is
vested in his person within the realm?" We have a full answer in the
Commentaries. "The meaning of the legislature, when it uses these terms of
empire and imperial, and applies them to the realm and crown of England, is
only to assert, that our king is equally sovereign and independent within these
his dominions; and owes no kind of subjection to any potentate upon earth."
Thus WE maintain, that with regard to FOREIGN AFFAIRS, the parent original
state, "is the delegate or representative," of the entire dominions, "the
sovereign power QUOAD HOC is vested" in her. Her acts under this power
"irrevocably bind the whole nation." But yet this power by no means implies a
supreme legislature.

THE exercise of this power by statutes was absolutely necessary; because it
was, and could only be lodged, as the laws of the parent state, stand, in the
supreme legislature of that state, consisting of king, lords, and commons; and
statutes are the modes by which this united sentiments and resolutions are
expressed. It is universally acknowledged in Great Britain, that it infers no
power of taxation in king and lords, that their limited authority is used in
clothing, (...) and grants of the commons with the forms of law -- nor does it
infer supreme legislature over us. that the limited authority of king, lords,
and commons is used in clothing regulations of trade with the form of law. The
commons joining in the act, is not material. The difference is only in the mode
of assent. Theirs is express, ours is implied, as the assent of the "whole
nation," is, in the preceding instances.

THIS power of regulation appears to us to have been pure in its principle,
simple in its operation, and salutary in its effects. But for some time past we
have observed, with pain, that it has been turned to other purposes, than it
was originally designed for, and retaining its title, has become an engine of
intolerable oppressions and grievous taxations. The argument of an eminent
judge, states the point in a similar case strongly for us, in these words. --

"Though it be granted, that the king has the custody of the havens and ports
of this island, being the very gates; of this kingdom, and is trusted with the
keys of these gates; yet the inference and orgument thereupon made, I utterly
deny. For in it there is mutatio hypothesis, and a transition from a thing of
one nature to another; as the premises are of a power only fiduciary, and in
point of trust and government, and the conclusion infers a right of interest
and gain. Admit the king has custodiam portuum, yet he has but the custody
which is a trust and not dominium utile. He has power to open and shut, UPON
CONSIDERATION OF PUBLIC GOOD TO THE PEOPLE AND STATE, but not to make gain and
benefit by it: the one is PROTECTION, the other is EXPILATION." By common law
the king may restrain a subject from going abroad, or enjoin him by his
chancellor from proceeding at law: But to conclude, that Le may therefore take
money, not to restrain or not to enjoin, IS TO SELL GOVERNMENT, TRUST, AND
COMMON JUSTICE Rights of the people, as to impositions etc.
.

THE END
ERRATA:
For "the equal sum" in note of pa. 21. -- read -- "the same sum."

For "raising money" in same note r. -- "raising and expending money."

Dele in same note these words --."The same reasoning holds as to the
application of money."

Dele in pa.^^ these words -- "no English (...), (...) remember, has pointed
ou^ ^^^cisely" -- and r. "the constitution has not expressly drawn."

Dele in same pa. these words -- General term have been used.

Dele in note of pa. 47 -- this word -- because."

In note of pa. 51 -- (...) Geo. 3 chapter 41. -- r. 7 Geo. 3 chapter 46.

In note of pa. 61. after the word (...) Government" -- r. "consists"

In note of pa. 84 for "pa. 121" -- r. -- p. 120.

APPENDIX.
Addition to Note in pa. 51.
THE statutes since the 8th year of this reign, relating to the colonies,
follow one another much in the same quick manner as before: but they could not
be collected. Many of the statutes here mentioned, particularly those relating
to the admiralty courts and the commissioners of the customs, are connected
with a multitude of other statutes, by being compared with which, the artifices
will appear, that gradually departing from the laws of England, have at length
invested these courts and commissioners with such new, unreasonable,
unconstitutional and dangerous powers.

Additional Note to pa. 80.
THE whole country of the seven United Provinces is not as large as one half of
Pennsylvania; and when they began their contest with Philip the second for
their liberty contained about as many inhabitants as are now in the province of
Massachusetts Bay. Philip's empire then comprehended in Europe, all Spain and
Portugal, the two ^^icilies, and such provinces of the Low Countries as adhered
to him, -- many islands of importance in the Mediterranean -- the Milanese and
many other very valuable territories in Italy and elsewhere. -- In Africa and
Asia, all the dominions belonging to Spain and Portugal -- in America the
immense countries subject to those two kingdoms, with all their treasures and
yet unexhausted mines, and the Spanish West Indies. His armies were numerous
and veteran, excellently officered, and commanded by the most renowned
generals. So great was their force, that during the wars in the Low Countries,
his commander in chief the prince of Parma, marched twice into France, and
obliged that great general and glorious king Henry the fourth, to raise at one
time the siege of Paris and at another, that of (...) (...) considerable was
the naval power of Philip, that in the midst of the same wars, he fitted out
his dreadful armada to invade England. Yet seven little provinces, or counties,
as we should call them, inspired by one generous resolution -- to die free,
rather than to live slaves," not only baffled, but brought down into the dust,
that enormous power, that had contended for universal empire, and for half a
century, was the terror of the world. Such an amazing change indeed took place,
that those provinces afterward actually PROTECTED Spain against the power of
France.


