A ^^^^TY STORY ^^^^TEN IN THE (...) ^ur LORD 2774.

BY ^RIEVOUS, Esquire ^ B. C. D. E.

(...) in Speculo.

^^^OND EDITION.

^^^^ADELPHIA: (...) by JOHN DUNLAP. MDCC, LXXIV.

PREFACE.
A BOOK without a preface is like a face without a nose. Let the other features
be ever so agreeable and well poportioned, it is looked on with detestation and
horror if this material ornament be wanting.

Or rather, a book is like a house: The grand portico is the dedication; the
flagged pavement is an humble address to the reader, in order to pave the way
for a kind reception of the work; the front door with its fluted pillars,
pediment, trigliffs and modillions are the title page with its motto, author's
name and titles, date of the year, etc. The entry is the preface (oftentimes of
a tedious length) and the several apartments and closets are the chapters and
sections of the work itself.

As I am but a clumsy carpenter at best, I shall not attempt to decorate my
little cottage with any out of door ornaments; but as it would be inconvenient
and uncomfortable to have my front door open immediately into the apartments of
my house, I have made this preface by way of entry.

And now, gentle reader, if you should think my entry too plain and simple you
may set your imagination to work, and furnish it with a grand staircase, with
cornices, stucco and paintings. That is, you may suppose that I entered very
unwillingly upon this work, being compelled to it by a chain of unforeseen
circumstances: That it was written in the midst of a great hurry of other
business, and under particular disadvantages of time and place, and that it was
only intended for the inspection of a few friends, without any expectations of
ever seeing it in the Press.

You may, kind reader, go on to suppose that when my friends perused my work,
they were struck with the energy of my genius, and insisted that the public
ought not to be deprived of such a fund of amusement and improvement through my
obstinate modesty; and that after many solicitations and powerful persuasions I
had been prevailed upon to bless mankind with the fruits of my labor.

Or, if you like not this, you may suppose that the following sheets were found
in the cabinet of some deceased gentleman; or that they were dug out of an
ancient ruins, or discovered in a Hermit's Cave, or dropped from the clouds in
a hail storm. In short, you may suppose just what you please. And when, by the
help of imagination, you have seasoned the preface to your palate, you may turn
over this leaf, and feast upon the body of the work itself.

A PRETTY STORY.
CHAP. I.
ONCE upon a time, a great while ago, there lived a certain Nobleman, who had
long possessed a very valuable farm, and had a great number of children and
grandchildren.

BESIDES the annual profits of his land, which were very considerable, he kept
a large shop of goods; and being very successful in trade, he became, in
process of time, exceeding rich and powerful; insomuch that all his neighbors
feared and respected him.

WITH respect to the management of his family, it was thought he had adopted
the most perfect mode that could be devised, for he had been at the pains to
examine the economy of all his neighbors, and had selected from their plans
all such parts as appeared to be equitable and beneficial, and omitted those
which from experience were found to be inconvenient. Or rather, by blending
their several constitutions together he had so ingeniously counterbalanced the
evils of one mode of government with the benefits of another, that the
advantages were richly enjoyed, and the inconveniences scarcely felt. In
short, his family was thought to be the best ordered of any in his
neighborhood.

HE never exercised any undue authority over his children or servants; neither
indeed could he oppress them if he was so disposed; for it was particularly
covenanted in his marriage articles that he should not at any time impose any
tasks or hardships whatever upon his children without the free consent of his
wife.

NOW the custom in his family was this, that at the end of every seven years
his marriage became of course null and void; at which time his children and
grandchildren met together and chose another wife for him, whom the old
gentleman was obliged to marry under the same articles and restrictions as
before. If his late wife had conducted herself, during her seven years
marriage, with mildness, discretion, and integrity, she was re-elected; if
otherwise, deposed: By which means the chidren had always a great interest in
their mother in law; and through her, a reasonable check upon their father's
temper. For besides that he could do nothing material respecting his children
without her approbation, she was sole mistress of the purse strings; and gave
him out, from time to time, such sums of money as she thought necessary for the
expenses of his family.

BEING one day in a very extraordinary good humor, he gave his children a
writing under his hand and seal, by which he released them from many badges of
dependence, and confirmed to them several very important privileges. The chief
were the two following, viz. That none of his children should be punished for
any offense, or supposed offense, until his brethren had first declared him
worthy of such punishment; and secondly, he gave fresh assurances that he would
impose no hardships upon them without the consent of their mother in law.

THIS writing, on account of its singular importance, was called THE GREAT
PAPER. After it was executed with the utmost solemnity, he caused his Chaplain
to publish a dire Anathema against all who should attempt to violate the
articles of the Great Paper, in the words following.

This is a true and genuine denunciation copied from the archives of the family.
In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, AMEN! Whereas our Lord and
master, to the honor of God and for the common profit of this farm has
granted, for him and his heirs for ever, these articles above written: I, his
Chaplain and spiritual pastor of all this farm, do admonish the people of the
farm once, twice, and thrice: Because that shortness will not suffer so much
delay a to give knowledge to the people of these presents in writing; I
therefore enjoin all persons, of what estate soever they be, that they and
every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these articles
granted by our Lord and master in all points. And all those that in any point
do resist, or break, or in any manner hereafter, procure, counsel, or any ways
assent to resist or break these ordinances or go about it by word or deed,
openly or privately, by any manner of pretense or color: I the aforesaid
Chaplain, by my authority, do excommunicate and accurse, and from the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and from all the
sacraments of holy church do sequester and exclude.

CHAP. II.
NOW it came to pass that this Nobleman had, by some means or other, obtained a
right to an immense tract of wild uncultivated country at a vast distance from
his mansion house. But he set little store by this acquisition, as it yielded
him no profit, nor was it likely to do so, being not only difficult of access
on account of the distance, but was also overrun with innumerable wild beasts
very fierce and savage; so that it would be extremely dangerous to attempt
taking possession of it.

IN process of time, however, some of his children, more stout and enterprising
than the rest, requested leave of their father to go and settle on this distant
tract of land. Leave was readily obtained; but before they set out certain
agreements were stipulated between them -- the principal were -- the old
Gentleman, on his part, engaged to protect and defend the adventurers in their
new settlements; to assist them in chacing away the wild beasts, and to extend
to them all the benefits of the government under which they were born: Assuring
them that although they should be removed so far from his presence they should
nevertheless be considered as the children of his family, and treated
accordingly. At the same time he gave each of them a bond for the faithful
performance of these promises; in which, among other things, it was covenanted
that they should, each of them in their several families, have a liberty of
making such rules and regulations for their own good government as they should
find convenient; provided these rules and regulations should not contradict or
be inconsistent with the general standing orders established in his farm.

IN return for these favors he insisted that they, on their parts, should at
all times acknowledge him to be their father; that they should not deal with
their neighbors without his leave, but send to his shop only for such
merchandise as they should want. But in order to enable them to pay for such
goods as they should purchase, they were permitted to sell the produce of their
lands to certain of his neighbors.

THESE preliminaries being duly adjusted, our adventurers bid adieu to the
comforts and conveniences of their father's house, and set off on their
journey. -- Many and great were the difficulties they encountered on their way:
But many more and much greater had they to combat on their arrival in the new
country. Here they found nothing but wild nature. Mountains overgrown with
inaccessible soliage, and plains steeped in stagnated waters. Their ears are no
longer attentive to the repeated strokes of industrious labor, and the busy
hum of men, instead of these, the roaring tempest and incessant howlings of the
beasts of prey fill their minds with horror and dismay. The needful comforts of
life are no longer in their power -- no friendly roof to shelter them from
inclement skies; no fortress to protect them from surrounding dangers.
Unaccustomed as they were to hardships like these, some were cut off by
sickness and disease, and others snatched away by the hands of barbarity. They
began however, with great perseverance, to clear the land of encumbering
rubbish, and the woods resound with the strokes of labor; they drain the
waters from the sedged morass, and pour the sun beams on the reeking soil; they
are forced to exercise all the powers of industry and economy for bare
subsistence, and like their first parent, when driven from Paradise, to earn
their bread with the sweat of their brows. In this work they were frequently
interrupted by the incursions of the wild beasts, against whom they defended
themselves with heroic prowess and magnanimity.

AFTER sometime, however, by dint of indefatigable perseverance, they found
themselves comfortably settled in this new farm; and had the delightful
prospect of vast tracts of land waving with luxuriant harvests, and perfuming
the air with delicious fruits, which before had been a dreary wilderness, unfit
for the habitation of men.

IN the mean time they kept up a constant correspondence with their father's
family, and at a great expense provided wagons, horses and drivers to bring
from his shop such goods and merchandise as they wanted, for which they paid
out of the produce of their lands.

CHAP. III.
NOW the new settlers had adopted a mode of government in their several
families similar to that their father had established in the old farm; in
taking a new wife at the end of certain periods of time; which wife was chosen
for them by their children, and without whose consent they could do nothing
material in the conduct of their affairs. Under these circumstances they
thrived exceedingly, and became very numerous; living in great harmony amongst
themselves, and in constitutional obedience to their father and his wife.

NOTWITHSTANDING their successful progress, however, they were frequently
annoyed by the wild beasts, which were not yet expelled the country; and were
moreover troubled by some of their neighbors who wanted to drive them off the
land, and take possession of it themselves.

TO assist them in these difficulties, and protect them from danger, the old
Nobleman sent over several of his servants, who with the help of the new
settlers drove away their enemies. But then he required that they should
reimburse him for the expense and trouble he was at in their behalf; this they
did with great cheerfulness, by applying from time to time to their respective
wives, who always commanded their cash.

THUS did matters go on for a considerable time, to their mutual happiness and
benefit. But now the Nobleman's wife began to cast an avaricious eye upon the
new settlers; saying to herself, if by the natural consequence of their
intercourse with us my wealth and power are so much increased, how much more
would they accumulate if I can persuade them that all they have belonged to us,
and therefore I may at any time demand from them such part of their earnings as
I please. At the same time she was fully sensible of the promises and
agreements her husband had made when they left the old farm, and the tenor and
purport of the great paper. She therefore thought it necessary to proceed with
great caution and art, and endeavored to gain her point by imperceptible steps.

IN order to this, she first issued an edict setting forth, That whereas the
tailors of her family were greatly injured by the people of the new farm,
inasmuch as they presumed to make their own clothes whereby the said tailors
were deprived of the benefit of their custom; it was therefore ordained that
for the future the new settlers should not be permitted to have amongst them
any shears or scissars larger than a certain fixed size. In consequence of
this, our adventurers were compelled to have their clothes made by their
father's tailors: But out of regard to the old gentleman, they patiently
submitted to this grievance.

ENCOURAGED by this success, she proceeded in her plan. Observing that the new
settlers, were very fond of a particular kind of cider which they purchased of
a neighbor who was in friendishp with their father (the apples proper for
making this cider not growing on their own farm) she published another edict,
obliging them to pay her a certain stipend for every barrel of cider used in
their families! To this likewise they submitted: Not yet seeing the scope of
her designs against them.

AFTER this manner she proceeded, imposing taxes on them on various pretenses,
and receiving the fruits of their industry with both hands. Moreover she
persuaded her husband to send amongst them from time to time a number of the
most lazy and useless of his servants, under the specious, pretext of defending
them in their settlements and of assisting to destroy the wild beasts; but in
fact to rid his own house of their company, not having employment for them; and
at the same time to be a watch and a check upon the people of the new farm.

IT was likewise ordered that these protectors as they were called, should be
supplied with bread and butter cut in a particular form: But the head of one of
the families refused to comply with this order. He engaged to give the guests,
thus forced upon him, bread and butter sufficient; but insisted that his wife
should have the liberty of cutting it in what shape she pleased.

THIS put the old Nobleman into a violent passion, insomuch that he had his
son's wife put into gaol for presuming to cut her loaf otherwise than as had
been directed.

CHAP. IV.
AS the old Gentleman advanced in years he began to neglect the affairs of his
family, leaving them chiefly to the management of his steward. Now the steward
had debauched his wife, and by that means gained an entire ascendancy over her.
She no longer deliberated what would most benefit either the old farm or the
new; but said and did whatever the steward pleased. Nay so much was she
influenced by him that she could neither utter Ay or No but as he directed. For
he had cunningly persuaded her that it was very fashionable for women to wear
padlocks on their lips, and that he was sure they would become her exceedingly.
He therefore fastened a padlock to each corner of her mouth; when the one was
open, she could only say Ay; and when the other was loosed, could only cry No.
He took care to keep the keys of these locks himself; so that her will became
entirely subject to his power.

NOW the old Lady and the steward had set themselves against the people of the
new farm; and began to devise ways and means to impoverish and distress them.

THEY prevailed on the Nobleman to sign an edict against the new settlers, in
which it was declared that it was their duty as children to pay something
toward the supplying their fathers table with provisions, and to the
supporting the dignity of his family; for that purpose it was ordained that all
their spoons, knives and forks, plates and porringers, should be marked with a
certain mark, by officers appointed for that end; for which marking they were
to pay a certain stipend: and that they should not, under severe penalties,
presume to make use of any spoon, knife or fork, plate or porringer, before it
had been so marked, and the said stipend paid to the officer.

THE inhabitants of the new farm began to see that their father's affections
were alienated from them; and that their mother was but a base mother-in-law
debauched by their enemy the steward. They were thrown into great confusion and
distress. They wrote the most supplicating letters to the old Gentleman, in
which they acknowledged him to be their father in terms of the greatest respect
and affection -- they recounted to him the hardships and dfficulties they had
suffered in settling his new farm; and pointed out the great addition of wealth
and power his family had acquired by the improvement of that wilderness; and
showed him that all the fruits of their labors must in the natural course of
things unite, in the long run, in his money box. They also, in humble terms
reminded him of his promises and engagements on their leaving home, and of the
bonds he had given them; of the solemnity and importance of the Great Paper
with the curse annexed. They acknowledged that he ought to be reimbursed the
expenses he was at on their account, and that it was their duty to assist in
supporting the dignity of his family. All this they declared they were ready
and willing to do; but requested that they might do it agreeable to the purport
of the Great Paper, by applying to their several wives for the keys of their
money boxes and furnishing him from thence; and not to be subject to the
tyranny and caprice of an avaricious mother-in-law, whom they had never chosen,
and of a steward who was their declared enemy.

SOME of these letters were intercepted by the steward; others were delivered
to the old Gentleman, who was at the same time persuaded to take no notice of
them; but, on the contrary, to insist the more strenuously upon the right his
wife claimed of marking their spoons, knives and forks, plates and porringers.

THE new settlers observing how matters were conducted in their father's family
became exceedingly distressed and mortified. They met together and agreed one
and all that they would no longer submit to the arbitrary impositions of their
mother-in-law, and their enemy the steward. They determined to pay no manner of
regard to the new decree, considering it as a violation of the Great Paper. But
to go on and eat their broth and pudding as usual. The cooks also and butlers
served up their spoons, knives and forks, plates and porringers without having
them marked by the new officers.

THE Nobleman at length thought fit to reverse the order which had been made
respecting the spoons, knives and forks, plates and porringers of the new
settlers. But he did this with a very ill grace: for he, at the same time
avowed and declared that he and his wife had a right to mark all their
furniture, if they pleased, from the silver tankard down to the very chamber
pots: that as he was their father he had an absolute control over them, and
that their liberties, lives, and properties were at the entire disposal of him
and his wife: that it was not fit that he who was allowed to be omnipresent,
immortal, and incapable of error, should be confined by the shackles of the
Great Paper; or obliged to fulfill the bonds he had given them, which he averred
he had a right to cancel whenever he pleased.

HIS wife also became intoxicated with vanity. The steward had told her that
she was an omnipotent Goddess, and ought to be worshipped as such: that it was
the height of impudence and disobedience in the new settlers to dispute her
authority, which with respect to them, was unlimited: that as they had removed
from their father's family, they had forfeited all pretensions of being
considered as his children, and lost the privileges of the Great Paper: that,
therefore, she might look on them only as tenants at will upon her husband's
farm, and exact from them what rent she pleased.

ALL this was perfectly agreeable to Madam, who admitted this new doctrine in
its full sense.

THE people of the new farm however took little notice of these pompous
declarations. They were glad the marking decree was reversed, and were in hopes
that things would gradually settle into their former channel.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time the new settlers increased exceedingly, and as they
increased, their dealings at their father's shop were proportionably enlarged.

IT is true they suffered some inconveniences from the protectors that had
been sent amongst them, who became very troublesome in their houses: They
seduced their daughters; introduced riot and intemperance into their families,
and derided and insulted the orders and regulations they had made for their own
good government. Moreover the old Nobleman had sent amongst them a great number
of thieves, ravishers and murderers, who did a great deal of mischief by
practicing those crimes for which they had been banished the old farm. But they
bore these grievances with as much patience as could be expected; not chosing
to trouble their aged father with complaints, unless in cases of important
necessity.

NOW the steward continued to hate the new settlers with exceeding great
hatred, and determined to renew his attack upon their peace and happiness. He
artfully insinuated to the old Gentleman and his foolish wife, that it was very
mean and unbecoming in them to receive the contributions of the people of the
new farm, toward supporting the dignity of his family, through the hands of
their respective wives: that upon this footing it would be in their power to
refuse his requisitions whenever they should be thought to be unreasonable, of
which they would pretend to be judges themselves; and that it was high time
they should be compelled to acknowledge his arbitrary power, and his wife's
Omnipotence.

FOR this purpose, another decree was prepared and published, ordering that the
new settlers should pay a certain stipend upon particular goods, which they
were not allowed to purchase any where but at their father's shop; and that
this stipend should not be deemed an advance upon the original price of the
goods, but be paid on their arrival at the new farm, for the express purpose of
supporting the dignity of the old Gentleman's family, and of defraying the
expenses he affected to afford them.

THIS new decree gave our adventurers the utmost uneasiness. They saw that the
steward and their mother-in-law were determined to oppress and enslave them.
They again met together and wrote to their father, as before, the most humble
and persuasive letters; but to little purpose: A deaf ear was turned to all
their remonstrances; and their dutiful requests treated with contempt.

FINDING this moderate and decent conduct brought them no relief, they had
recourse to another expedient. They bound themselves in a solemn engagement not
to deal any more at their father's shop until this unconstitutional decree
should be reversed; which they declared to be a violation of the Great Paper.

THIS agreement was so strictly adhered to, that in a few months the clerks and
apprentices in the old Gentleman's shop began to make a sad outcry. They
declared that their master's trade was declining exceedingly, and that his wife
and steward would, by their mischievious machinations, ruin the whole farm;
they forthwith sharpened their pens and attacked the steward, and even the old
Lady herself with great severity. Insomuch that it was thought proper to
withdraw this attempt likewise upon the rights and liberties of the new
settlers. One part only of the new decree remained unreversed -- viz. the tax
upon Water Gruel.

NOW there were certain men on the old farm who had obtained from the Nobleman
an exclusive right of selling Water Gruel. Vast quantities of this Gruel were
vended amongst the new settlers; for it became very fashionable for them to use
it in their families in great abundance. They did not however trouble
themselves much about the tax on Water Gruel: they were well pleased with the
reversal of the other parts of the decree, and considering Gruel as not
absolutely necessary to the comfort of life, they were determined to endeavor
to do without it, and by that means avoid the remaining effects of the new
decree.

THE steward found his designs once more frustrated; but was not discouraged by
this disappointment. He formed another scheme so artfully contrived that he
thought himself sure of success. He sent for the persons who had the sole right
of vending Water Gruel, and after reminding them of the obligations they were
under to the Nobleman and his wife for their exclusive privilege, he desired
that they would send sundry wagon loads of Gruel to the new farm, promising
that the accustomed duty which they paid for their exclusive right should be
taken off from all the Gruel they should send amongst the new settlers: And
that in case their cargoes should come to any damage, he would take care that
the loss should be repaired out of the old Gentleman's coffers.

THE Gruel merchants readily consented to this proposal, knowing that if their
cargoes were sold, they would reap considerable profits; and if they failed,
the steward was to make good the damage. On the other hand the steward
concluded that the new settlers could not resist purchasing the Gruel to which
they had been so long accustomed; and if they did purchase it when subject to
the tax aforesaid, this would be an avowed acknowledgment on their parts that
their father and his wife had a right to break through the tenor of the Great
Paper, and to lay on them what impositions they pleased, without the consent of
their respective wives.

BUT the new settlers were well aware of this decoy. They saw clearly that the
Gruel was not sent to accommodate, but to enslave them; and that if they
suffered any part of it to be sold amongst them, it would be deemed a
submission to the assumed Omnipotence of the Great Madam.

CHAP. VI.
ON the arrival of the Water Gruel, the people of the new farm were again
thrown into great alarms and confusions. Some of them would not suffer the
wagons to be unloaded at all, but sent them immediately back to the Gruel
merchants: others permitted the wagons to unload, but would not touch the
hateful commodity; so that it lay neglected about their roads and highways
until it grew sour and spoiled. But one of the new settlers, whose name was
Jack, either from a keener sense of the injuries attempted against him, or from
the necessity of his situation, which was such that he could not send back the
Gruel because of a number of mercenaries whom his father had stationed before
his house to watch and be a check upon his conduct: he, I say, being almost
driven to despair, fell to work, and with great zeal stove to pieces the casks
of Gruel, which had been sent him, and utterly demolished the whole cargoe.

THESE proceedings were soon known at the old farm. Great and terrible was the
uproar there. The old Gentleman fell into great wrath, declaring that his
absent children meant to throw off all dependence upon him, and to become
altogether disobedient. His wife also tore the padlocks from her lips, and
raved and stormed like a Billinsgate. The steward lost all patience and
moderation, swearing most profanely that he would leave no stone unturned
'till he had humbled the settlers of the new farm at his feet, and caused their
father to trample on their necks. Moreover the Gruel merchants roared and
bellowed for the loss of their Gruel; and the clerks and apprentices were in
the utmost consternation lest the people of the new farm should again agree to
have no dealings with their father's shop. -- Vengeance was immediately set on
foot particularly against Jack. With him they determined to begin; hoping that
by making an example of him they should so terrify the other families of the
new settlers, that they would all submit to the designs of the steward, and the
Omnipotence of the old Lady.

A VERY large Padlock was, accordingly, prepared to be fastened upon Jack's
great gate; the key of which was to be given to the old Gentleman; who was not
to open it again until he had paid for the Gruel he had spilt, and resigned all
claim to the privileges of the Great Paper: nor then neither unless he thought
fit. Secondly, a decree was made to new model the regulations and economy of
Jack's family in such manner that they might for the future be more subject to
the will of the steward: and, thirdly, a large gallows was erected before the
mansion house in the old farm, and an order made that if any of Jack's children
or servants should be suspected of misbehaviour, they should not be convicted
or acquitted by the consent of their brethren, agreeable to the purport of the
Great Paper, but be tied neck and heels and dragged to the gallows at the
mansion house, and there be hanged withot mercy.

NO sooner did tidings of this undue severity reach the new farm, but the
people were almost ready to despair. They were altogether at a loss how to act,
or by what means they should avert the vengeance to which they were doomed: but
the old Lady and steward soon determined the matter* for the Padlock was sent
over, and without ceremony fastened upon Jack's great gate. They did not wait
to know whether he would pay for the Gruel or not, or make the required
acknowledgments; nor give him the least opportunity to make his defense -- The
great gate was locked, and the key given to the old Nobleman, as had been
determined.

POOR Jack found himself in a most deplorable condition. The great inlet to his
farm was entirely blocked up, so that he could neither carry out the produce of
his land for sale, nor receive from abroad the necessaries for his family.

BUT this was not all -- His father, along with the Padlock aforesaid, had sent
an overseer to hector and domineer over him and his family; and to endeavor to
break his spirit by exercising every possible severity: for which purpose he
was attended by a great number of mercenaries, and armed with more than common
authorities.

ON his first arrival in Jack's family he was received with considerable
respect, because he was the delegate of their aged father: for, notwithstanding
all that had past, the people of the new settlements loved and revered the old
Gentleman with a truly filial attachment: attributing his unkindness entirely
to the intrigues of their enemy the steward. But this fair weather did not last
long. The new overseer took the first opportunity of showing that he had no
intentions of living in harmony and friendship with the family. Some of Jack's
domestics had put on their Sunday clothes, and attended the overseer in the
great parlour, in order to pay him their compliments on his arrival, and to
request his assistance in reconciling them to their father: but he rudely
stopped them short in the midst of their speech; called them a parcel of
disobedient scoundrels, and bid them go about their business. So saying, he
turned upon his heel, and with great contempt left the room.

CHAP. VII.
NOW Jack and his family finding themselves oppressed, insulted, and tyrannised
over in the most cruel and arbitrary manner, advised with their brethren what
measures should be adopted to relieve them from their intolerable grievances.
Their brethren, one and all, united in sympathising with their afflictions;
they advised them to bear their sufferings with fortitude for a time, assuring
them that they looked on the punishments and insults laid upon them with the
same indignation as if they had been inflicted on themselves, and that they
would stand by and support them to the last. But, above all, earnestly
recommended it to them to be firm and steady in the cause of liberty and
justice, and never acknowledge the Omnipotence of their mother-in-law; nor
yield to the machinations of their enemy the steward.

IN the mean time, lest Jack's family should suffer for want of necessaries,
their great gate being fast locked, liberal and very generous contributions
were raised among the several families of the new settlements for their present
relief. This seasonable bounty was handed to Jack over the garden wall -- all
access to the front of his house being shut up.

NOW the overseer observed that the children and domestics of Jack's family
had frequent meetings and consultations together; sometimes in the garret, and
sometimes in the stable: understanding, likewise, that an agreement not to deal
in their father's shop, until their grievances should be redressed, was much
talked of amongst them, he wrote a thundering prohibition, much like a Pope's
Bull, which he caused to be pasted up in every room of the house: in which he
declared and protested that these meetings were treasonable, traitorous, and
rebellious; contrary to the dignity of their father, and inconsistent with the
Omnipotence of their mother-in-law: denouncing also terrible punishments
against any two of the family who should from thenceforth be seen whispering
together, and strictly forbidding the domestics to hold any more meetings in
the garret or stable.

THESE harsh and unconstitutional proceedings irritated Jack and the other
inhabitants of the new farm to such a degree that

Coetera desunt.

