Mr. Maccarty's TWO SERMONS On a Special FAST.

M,DCC,LXXIV.

Reformation of manners, of absolute necessity in order to conciliate the
divine favor, in times of public evil and distress.

SHOWN IN TWO SERMONS, PREACHED AT WORCESTER, Upon a special Fast observed
there, as well as in many other Towns, JULY 14th, 1774.

On account of the public difficulties of the present Day.

BY THADDEUS MACCARTY, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Worcester.

Turn us O GOD of our Salvation, and cause thine Anger toward us to cease. --
Will thou not Revive us again, that thy People may rejoice in thee? -- Psalm.
lxxxv. 4, 6. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM McALPINE, about Midway
between the Province-House, and Dr. Gardiner's, in Marlborough-Street.
M,DCCLXXIV.

Advertisement.
THE author apprehended, that upon such an occasion, he should act most in
character to confine himself to the moral grounds of the distresses and
perplexities of the present day, and accordingly to point out the moral remedy:
He willingly leaves the political consideration of them, to those who have had
much more opportunity for knowing, and who are of mo^e enlarged capacities. He
trusts that his intentions in these discourses were good, they were hastily
composed; and a critical eye will doubtless perc^ive many inaccuracies He hopes
however, that nothing will be perceived inconsistent with truth, either upon
the ^oundation o^ reason or scripture -- He needs and he asks the candor of
all who may vouchsafe to give them a reading. He has reason to think that the
beloved people of his charge heard them with that candor, which he has o^ a
long sea^on met with from them, respecting his ministerial performances with
all their defects and imperfections. As an evidence o^ this, he immediately
found in them an earnest desire of their publication. With a view to their
being further serviceable to them, he consents hereto. And he earnestly wishes
that the blessing of God may accompany them, and make them serviceable to all,
into whose hands they may come. -- And may God have all the glory.

1 Epistle of PETER, CHAP. v. VERSE 6. Humble yourselves therefore, under the
mighty hand of GOD, that he may exalt you in due time.
WITHOUT staying to consider these words in their primary reference, as pointed
out in the context, I shall proceed to discourse upon them, agreeable to the
occasion of the present day, as I apprehend they will furnish suitable matter
therefore.

GOD that created the universe, has set himself at the head of it, and
undertaken to manage and control it, as seems good in his sight. Universal
empire and dominion of right belongs to him, and to none other: Nor is any
other being at all equal to it, for the power of all other beings is finite,
but the power of God is infinite, and such a power is absolutely necessary in
order to universal government. This is a doctrine, which reason alone clearly
dictates, and it is abundantly held forth in the sacred inspired writings.

As to this lower world, the divine majesty is to be considered as the prime
efficient in all events that take place. What ever may be said of the
undesireable operation of the lusts and corruptions of men, their pride,
malice, envy, avarice, etc. as productive of uncomfortable events; what ever
may be said of instrumental and secondary causes, yet the mighty hand of God is
firstly to be eyed and acknowledged. It is a clear dictate of reason and
scripture that nothing happens, particularly in this lower world, to
individuals, or to societies, greater or less; but it is by God's permission
and providence, and the events that take place, are very various. And
considering the moral obligations that mankind are under to God, it certainly
becomes them to conduct toward him agreeable to those dispensations that he
visits them with.

THE words of our text, leads us to the consideration of an important duty
under calamitous events. -- Humble yourselves etc.

THEY lead us also to a consideration of the happy effect, and consequence of
complying with this duty -- That he may exalt etc.

FIRST, We may consider the duty here enjoined under calamitous events. Humble
etc. This phrase here. The mighty hand of God, under which men are called to
humble themselves is expressive of dispensations and events, in divine
providence, that are distressing, grievous and calamitous. Sometimes indeed it
is expressive of Gods favorable dispensations, as when Moses tells the people
of Israel, that the Lord their God brought them out of Egypt, through a mighty
hand, and, by a stretched out arm. Deuteronomy. iv. 34. God kindly interposed for
them, and displayed his almighty power for their deliverance. And so other
places might be mentioned: But here in our text, as I just said, the mighty
hand of God, is expressive of calamitous events. Otherwise there would be no
propriety in the apostles exhortation, for men to humble themselves under it.
Favorable dispensations of God, call rather for gladness and rejoicing before
him, than humiliation.

I would therefore go on and say, that the great governor of the world is
various in his dispensations, not only toward individuals, but toward
communities. At times many great and public blessings are enjoyed, the same in
kind which Moses speaks of to Israel, and encourages them to expect from the
good providence of God, if they approved themselves an obedient people. Deuteronomy.
xxviii, 3d. etc. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed shall thou be
in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine and the flocks of
thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store etc.

BUT though they are sometimes made to rejoice under the smiles of divine
providence, yet by and by the scene is changed: Their situation and
circumstances are quite the reverse. Wars, famines, pestilences succeed, or
come in the room of peace health and plenty. And great fears, distresses and
perplexities necessarily attend such calamitous events. And sometimes after
long enjoyment of civil and religious liberties and privileges, a people are
bro't into great embarassments and distresses. And their public affairs, their
civil and sacred privileges, their trade and business and occupations, wear a
dark and gloomy aspect, so that they know not what to do, or how to extricate
themselves. Such are the changes and alterations that are made in kingdoms,
nations and provinces, in the course of Gods providential government. And in
the language of our text, in all this is the mighty hand of God. His powerful
hand it is that brings on these distresses and calamities. Thus as it is in the
book of Job. xii. 23. He increases the nations and destroys them, he
enlarges the nations and straiteneth them again. That of the prophet Jeremiah
may be applied here, chap. xxv. 30. etc. The Lord shall roar from on high, and
utter his voice from his holy habitation, he shall mightily roar upon his
habitation, he shall give a shout as they that tread the grapes against all the
inhabitants of the earth. A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for
the Lord has a controversy with the nations etc.

In a word here. All good and evil, public as well as personal, is principally
to be attributed to the governing providence of God most high, who performs
all things. This is the doctrine of the bible. I form the light, says God, and
create darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things.
Isai. xlv. 7.

AND in all public distresses and calamities, it is evident the Lord has a
controversy with that people among whom they happen. This is expressed in the
passage I just mentioned from the prophet Jeremiah. So also is it in that of
the prophet Hosea, and the ground of his controversy is therein mentioned,
Hosea chap. 4. from the beginning, Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of
Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By
swearing and lying and killing and stealing and committing adultery, they break
out, and blood touches blood.

Now when the scripture speaks of God's having a controversy with a people; it
naturally supposes that he is displeased and angry with them. A controversy
between man and man, supposes that they are at odds with each other, that there
is some ground or cause of uneasiness and displeasure, and hence they are wont
to take methods to decide it, each aiming to make his part good, or to gain the
ascendancy, that so he may have it in his power to curb and chastise his
antagonist. This is no ground for controversy, when an entire harmony and good
agreement subsists. So that, as I just said, God's having a controversy with a
people, supposes his anger and displeasure against them. Accordingly when his
mighty hand is lifted up, when he visits them with those evils and calamities
we have mentioned at this time, it is an undoubted evidence that he is wroth
with them, calamities are so many tokens of his anger. This is very frequently
expressed in scripture. I shall only mention that of the prophet, Isaiah chap.
ix. 11, 12. Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against
him, and join his enemies together. The Syrians before, and the Philistines
behind, and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Now the question is, what is it that excites the anger of God, and causes him
to manifest it in calamitous dispensations? I answer in general it is on
account of their wickedness and rebellion against him. If a people were
universally or very generally a virtuous, religious, obedient people, it is not
to be though it that the righteous and holy God, who loves goodness and
righteousness, would have any controversy with them, that he would bring any
evils and calamities upon them, but would be their constant friend, guardian
and protector. When therefore he contends with them and greatly distresses
them, it must be because their iniquities and rebellions have provoked him to
do so. All this may be fairly argued not only from the holy scripture, but from
his character as the moral governor of the world. Mankind in all ages even unto
the present, must take to themselves the blame of all the evils, distresses and
calamities that have befallen them.

THEY must do so besure, if they don't confine their views to instrumental and
secondary causes, but regard almighty God, as the great first cause of all
events. And no one who exercises a rational, sober though it, but must be led thus
to consider him. They must be led to acknowledge his hand in all calamities,
and to consider the moral ground or reason of them; namely, their disobedience
and rebellion against him.

AND in this view of things, arises the duty pointed out in our text, viz. to
humble ourselves. Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God.

THIS may be considered as an exhortation to repentance when the dispensations
of the great governor of the world are distressing and calamitous. We find God
uttering that complaint concerning the Jews, when his mighty hand ^as lifted up
against them, yea, when he let it fall heavily upon them, and they were bro't
into sore distresses. Jer. viii. 5. Why then is this people of Jerusalem
slidden back, by a perpetual backsliding, they hold fast deceit, they refuse to
return. It is plain he expected this from them; and he waited to see how it
would be with them, whether they altered their conduct, that so the way might
be prepared for his altering his conduct toward them. Accordingly it follows
in the next verse, I hearkened and heard. I took a particular, critical notice
how it was with them, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? What hand have I had in procuring the
Lord's controversy with this people, or in bringing on these evils and
calamities? Instead of this they went on audaciously and resolutely in their
iniquities and rebellions, as though they could carry the day against him, and be
an over match for him. Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth
into the battle.

Was this to comply with God's expectations concerning them? No verily, but
quite the reverse. From the passage I just mentioned, it is plain that he
expected that they would repent of all those evils and transgressions which had
procured his frowns.

REPENTANCE don't consist merely in any external rites and observances. The
J^ws were wont to lay great stress upon these, and imagined they were of great
account with God, and what would undoubtedly conciliate his favorable regards
and this at the same time that they were grossly and h^^^ously culpable before
him, as violaters of his holy and good law. This is set forth in very strong
colors, in the 1 st. chap. Isaiah. We therein find the holy God who was
perfectly acquainted with all their henious immoralities, sharply and pungently
expostulating with them, for their laying so much stress upon external ritual
observances, and sufficiently expressing the unavailableness of them to engage
his favorable regards, while they went on in their iniquities. Yea, expressing
his great detestation and abhorence of them. It was in vain for them to think
of substituting these in the room of real righteousness goodness and virtue, 13
th verse etc. Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me,
the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting Your new moons and your appointed ^eas^s, my
soul hates etc.

AND then he goes on expressly to telll them, what was the main and principal
thing he looked at and what would be most beneficial and advantages them, verse
16, 17. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

THOSE things that go to constitute true repentance, are here set forth in
general terms, abstaining from every vice and immorality, and practicing those
things that are pious, virtuous, just and righteous.

REPENTANCE however, I would observe, is not to be considered, as consisting
merely in an external reformation of manners, there must certainly in the first
place be an inward good disposition. And indeed it is not likely that there
will be an outward reformation of manners, in the want of such an inward good
disposition. It is not to be expected that there will be good fruit, unless the
tree be good, to allude to our Saviors manner of expression, Matthew. chap. vii.

AND accordingly, the terms and phrases made use of in scripture to express
repentance, plainly show that there is something more in it than what is
external; that it consists also in that which is inward. Accordingly, it is
sometimes expressed by a broken and contrite heart, by sorrowing and mourning,
which is internal, so also by men's humbling themselves, as in our text.

WE have observed that when the mighty hand of God is lifted up, or when
distressing calamitous events come upon a people, through the overruling
providence of God, it is for the wickedness and rebellion of a people against
his holy Majesty.

THE procuring cause, therefore, of such events is that which calls for
repentance, and that from all orders, ranks and characters of persons. Public
distresses and calamities are undoubtedly to be looked upon as tokens of the
righteous anger of the Majesty of heaven: who is dishonored, affronted and
vilely and shamefully treated by the impieties and wickednesses that are
prevalent among them. And this is reason sufficient for universal mourning and
humiliation before God.

THE Majesty of heaven most certainly deserves other sort of treatment than
this. The excellencies of his nature demand the highest esteem, veneration and
subjection from his whole intelligent offspring. And so does the paternal
relation he stands in to them. When his being and perfections are struck at,
when he is insulted and abused, as most certainly is the case, when many and
heinous vices are rise in a community is it to be though it strange, that his anger
is excited, and that he manifests it by inflicting sore evils upon them,
bringing on days of darkness perplexity and distress; especially when for a
long time he has exercised his patience and forbearance toward them, and
caused them to see much good and outward prosperity? Can it, I say, be though it
strange that his offended majesty should lift up his hand against them and make
them know feelingly, what an evil and bitter thing it is that they have
departed from the Lord their God, and that his fear has not been with them?

Favorable dispensations of his providence, not having had a kindly effect,
their becoming a willing, obedient people, he sees it fit to distress them in
his anger -- to lift up his mighty hand against them -- to visit their
transgressions with the rod and their iniquities with stripes. And yet such
tokens of his anger are sometimes disregarded, and fail of producing proper
effects.

THE prophet Isaiah presents us with all this in one view, chap. xvi. 10. 11.
Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness; in the
land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of
the Lord. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see.

THEY receive many mercies (as one notes upon it) from God, he causes his sun
to shine and his rain to fall upon them, nay, he prospers them, and into their
hands he brings plentifully; they escape many of the strokes of God's
judgments, which others less wicked then they, have been cut off by -- and yet
all is in vain, they will not learn righteousness, will not be led to
repentance by the goodness of God. God lifts up his hand but they take no
notice of it -- they will not see, shut their eyes against the clearest
conviction of guilt and wrath, ascribe that to chance, or common fate, which is
manifestly a divine rebuke, who regard not the threatening symptoms of their own
ruin, but cry peace to themselves, when the righteous God is waging war with
them.

How unjust, how unreasonable a conduct was this under the dispensations of
heaven?

MOST certainly it becomes a people to see, to take notice of the hand of God,
when it is lifted up, to regard the work of the Lord, and the operation of his
hand. And how are they to see and regard it? Why, by humbling themselves, and
learning and practicing righteousness. This is the end proposed by him, in
lifting up his hand against them. This is what he justly expects on their part.

IT is certainly necessary in this day of darkness, perplexity and distress,
through the mighty hand of God lifted up against us, that there be great
searching of heart; a serious and thorough eninto the grounds of God's
controversy with us; what have been the evils and abominations that have
incensed the divine anger against us. This certainly is the main thing, and not
merely looking at instruments and second causes. For let these be what they
will, yet (as was said before) God Almighty, is the first cause, and ought to
be regarded as such. It becomes us to be deeply humbled before him, for the
many and heinous evils in the midst of us which have procured the tokens of his
anger and displeasure. We cannot be properly humbled under divine rebukes,
unless we are humbled for the caurse of them, the moral cause I mean. And to be
thus humbled, necessarily supposes that we have some just and right sense of
the badness the vileness, and unreasonableness of the cause; or in other words,
tha^ we have a just sense of the vileness and malignity of sin or moral evil,
as it is against God, as it counteracts his authority, as it is downright
rebellion against his crown and dignity, destructive of all regularity and
order in the moral system, naturally adapted to throw all things into
confusion, to the dishonor of God, and thwarting the designs of all his grand
operations in the kingdom of providence and of grace. To be humbled before God
under his mighty hand, supposes that we have a just and thorough sense, of all
this. And so also the iniquity in all its forms is most vile and base
ingratitude against the divine being, who is the sourse of all good and
felicity to communities as well as individuals, and upon whose powerful care
and protection they absolutely are dependant for every future good. Such
humiliation taking its rise from the considerations mentioned, carries in the
idea of it, true genuine sorr^^ and mourning before God, grieved that we have
acted so vile, so base, so irrational and unworthy a part: And at the same time
solicitous to obtain forgiveness from him, applying earnestly, importunately
and perseveringly to his throne of grace, for the obtainment of it, not for our
sakes, but for his own name's sake, and for the sake of his Son Jesus, the
great mediator and reconciler.

AND in close connection with all this, and indeed as the natural result of all,
there will be firm and hearty resolutions, through the divine aids, to abandon
all those vicious practices that have been habitually indulged: That they will
no more indulge to profaneness, intemperance, uncleanness, stealing, making
and propagating false reports, wounding the character of their neighbors,
overreaching, defrauding, sabbath-breaking, disobedience to parents, despising
dignities, idling away their time to the neglecting their proper business, and
making proper provision for their families and dependants, needlessly spending
their time and money in public houses. And so I might mention other enormities.
If we are humble under the mighty hand of God, we shall cease from all these
evils, which have occasioned his lifting it up against us. And we shall
heartily betake ourselves to the practice of the opposite virtues. We shall
practice upon the sacred rules laid down in the Bible: Be sober and temperate
in all things, be chaste, be just, honest and righteous; treat the characters
and reputation of others with tenderness, and as true citizens of Zion, not
take up a reproach against our neighbors. Children will obey their parents in
the Lord, servants be obedient to their masters in all things, not purloining,
but using all fidelity, regarding the holy sabbath and making a business of
attending the sacred exercises thereof in God's sanctuary, maintaining family
religion, statedly by offering up to God, morning and evening, the sacrifices
of prayer and praise, rendering honor to whom honor is due. Submitting to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, as the apostle exhorts, and leading quiet
and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. If we are truly humbled
under the mighty hand of God, such will be the reformation of manners among us,
as the natural consequence of it. And if there is not such a reformation, we
cannot be said to be humbled under God's mighty hand, nor may we expect to be
exalted. This leads me to the 2 d. h^ad, but this, wi^h what remains I shall
leave till the afternoon.

The End of the first Sermon.
The second SERMON.
1. Peter, v. 6. We have considered the mighty hand of God, as intended of
public distresses and calamitous events, brought on by his overruling
providence. Also the mo^al, procuring cause hereof, and the duty here exhorted
to, Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God.
I Go on now in the next place, to consider the probable happy consequence of
complying with this duty. Humble yourselves etc. that he may exalt you in due
time. To be exalted here, may intend obtaining deliverance out of those evils
and calamities, that God in his righteous anger has inflicted, and being
restored to the state of ease and tranquillity and outward prosperity and
happiness heretofore enjoyed.

It is natural to desire to be freed from evil and calamities, to be extricated
out of public difficulties. And men are will not to be full of schemes and
contrivances and most vigorous exertions, that they may be so. But as there are
such a variety of circumstances and events, that must concur in carrying them
into execution, and as there are many circumstances unforeseen and unthought
of, so they sometimes prove abortive. Men of the greatest penetration and
sagacity have failed in their expectations and pursuits. In evil, and
calamitous times, it is no doubt duty to contrive and endeavor after
deliverance, and plain incumbent duty ought to be done. But then, neither
individuals nor collective bodies of men can command the event. This is beyond
their power, it is very plain from the manner of expression in our text, that
though it is our duty to humble ourselves under God's mighty hand, yet the event
is wholly with God, and that he will take his own way and time in causing it to
take place. That he may exalt you, when? You desire help and deliverance
immediately, you think it best that it should be had without any delay. But if
you are exalted or delivered, not only must God bring it about but he will take
his own time for it. In due time, the time the infinite wisdom sees fittest and
best.

AND now I would observe, tha^ as God is infinite in goodness, and delights
to do good to his creat^res, he never afflicts them willingly nor grieves them,
so he is never backward to appear for their help and deliverance when they
suitably and reverendly acknowledge him. As there is a moral cause for evils
and calamities, which I have mentioned this day, even the sins and
transgressions of a people, so upon the foundation of reason and scripture the
removal of them may only be expected when this cause is removed. Or as we may
thus express it. As the immoralities and vices of a people, causes God to lift
up his mighty hand against them, and they are brought into great distress and
perplexity, so as it is written, righteousness exalts a nation or people,
repentance and reformation, and the practice of universal righteousness, is the
most likely method to take in order to their being exalted, delivered from
evils and restored to a state of ease, tranquillity and public happiness. Yea,
it is represented in scripture, that repentance and reformation, is the way to
keep off divine calamities, such as a land lies exposed to, and which seems to
be hastening on, and to be continued in a prosperous and happy state. And so on
the other hand, the impenitence and indulged moral evils, were preventive of
the good and felicity, which God thought to confer upon it. Hence we have that
of the prophet Jeremiah xviii. 7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it: If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil: I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them. And at what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom to build
and to plant it. I^ it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I
will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them.

IF, when it seems as though God's mighty hand, was just ready to fall upon them,
to distress them, and ven ruin and destroy them, if the nation or people take
the alarm, (as one observes) and repent of their sins, and reform their lives,
turn every one from his evil way, and return to God, God will graciously accept
them, will not proceed in his controversy, will return in mercy to them, and
though he cannot change his mind, he will change his way, so as that it may be
said, he repents him of the evil he said he would do to them. Thus often in the
time of the Judges, when the oppressed people were penitent people, still God
raised them up Saviors, and when they turned to God, their affairs presently
took a new turn. And so if a nation or people whom God has loaded with
benefits, do evil in his sight, and obey not his voice, if it lose its virtue,
and become debauched and profane, if religion grow into contempt, and vice get
to be fashionable, and so be kept in countenance and reputation, and there be a
general decay of serious godliness among them, then God will turn his hand
against them, will pluck up what he was planting, and pull down what he was
building. What favors were further designed shall be withheld. That God
hurried Israel back into the wilderness, when he had brought them within sight
of Canaan. Sin defeats Gods kind intentions concerning a people, baffles their
pleasing expectations from him. It ruins their comforts, prolongs their
grievances, brings them into straits, and retards their deliverance. Isaiah
lix. 1, 2. Behold the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: Neither
his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not
hear.

WHEN God was about destroying Nineveh, in which sin greatly abounded, when
upon the warning given them of approaching d^struction, they changed their way,
God also changed his. They believed God, proclaimed a fast, put on all the
external tokens of grief and penitence, and agreeable to the exhortation of the
King, no doubt cried mightily to God, yea, turned every one from his evil way,
and from the violence that was in his hand, and this upon a peradventure, not
having an absolute certainty that God would appear for their deliverance. And
accordingly it so happened God aw their works, that they turned rom their evil
way, and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and
he did it not. Jonah iii, last verse.

AND I would just observe here, that we shall find for the most part besu^e,
that the fasts that were observed under the old testament, were so on account
of evils impending, or brought on, through the righteousanger of God for the
abounding wickednesses and immoralities in one place and in another.

THUS it was as to the fast at Nineveh, we just made mention of. And thus it
was as to the fast observed in the days of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, Jeremiah
36, 9. And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim etc. That they
proclaimed a fast before the Lord to all the people in Jerusalem, etc.

THE occasion of that day of fasting we have in the 6, and 7. verses. And so I
might mention other instances. It is plain from the instances mentioned, that
they did not fast for strife or debate, or to smite with the fist of
wickedness, they did not do so from any sinister views and designs, but they
did so from the sense of the anger of God that was out against them, for the
evils and abominations they had committed in his sight. And this it is, such a
sense of things as this, that only can give propriety to the observance of such
days now as well as formerly. And when days of fasting are observed after such
a manner it is a token for good, that God has favors in store for the people.

WE have observed that God has sometimes averted impending evils, such as a
sinful people have been imminently exposed to, and had the utmost reason to
expect, when they have repented and returned to him, as was the case with
Nineveh. And it may from hence be fairly argued, that he is ready to remove
evils and calamities, which are already felt, when God beholds them humbled
under his mighty hand, repenting and returning to him. The great end of public
distresses and calamities, is the repentance and reformation of the nation and
land who are visited with them. And when this end is answered, may it not be
expected that God will return to them in ways of favor and kindness, that he
will delight to do them good with all his heart, to smile upon them in all
their interests and concerns, and make them a prosperous happy people. As
public vices tend to draw down public calamities, so public vices and
prevailing goodness tends to procure public blessings. So that to humble
ourselves under the mighty hand of God, is the most likely method to be exalted
in due time, the time that infinite wisdom thinks best: The all-wise God knows
better when to appear for the help of a humbled, penitent, reformed people, and
to extricate them out of their troubles and perplexities, than they can
prescribe to him. And when they have complied with his requirements it is their
wisdom and their duty humbly to refer events to him, to order them out when and
as he sees fittest and best. To be in the hands of infinite wisdom most
certainly is to be in the best hands.

I shall only add here, what Moses in God's name says to the people of Israel,
after pronouncing a variety of blessings upon them, upon their approving
themselves an obedient people. Deuteronomy. xxviii. from the 9th verse, to the 14. The
Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, if thou shall keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways. And all the people of
the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the Lord, and they
shall be afraid of thee. And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods. The
Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heavens to give the rain unto
thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: And thou shall
lend unto many nations, and thou shall not borrow. And the Lord shall make thee
the head, and not the tail; and thou shall be above only and thou shall not be
beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the Lord thy God.

BUT I will no further enlarge here, but shall offer some things with
plainness, and I trust with seriousness, relative to the occasion of the day,
and agreeable to the subject I have been discoursing upon. It is I suppose
universally acknowledged to be a day of great public distress and difficulty,
so as that we know not well what to do, nor how to extricate ourselves.

LET what will have been the instrumental or secondary causes, yet I trust, you
have all of you this sense of things, that the great Governor of the world, in
his overruling providence, has brought about such a state of things among us*
Or why do we appear before God in his house this day, to spread our case before
him, and to supplicate the kind interpositions of his providence toward us? Is
not the language of this day's solemnity this, that we look upon it, that the
mighty hand of God is lifted up against us? That he has a controversy with us?
That we lie under his frowns and displeasure? If we have not such a sense of
matters as this, it would be trifling with the divine majesty, and indeed be a
mockery of him, to come before him this day, in this manner. And as it is
written, God will not be mocked. I should be loath to entertain an opinion of
any one who has desired that such a day might be observed, that it was from a
party-spirit, but would charitably hope, that it was to do honor to the great
Governor of the world, religiously to acknowledge him as super-intending human
affairs, and accordingly to supplicate the gracious and powerful interpositions
of his providence to relieve us from all our difficulties and distresses. And
in this view of the case, and i^ we are humbled under the mighty hand of God,
and the solemnities of this day are followed with an universal repentance and
reformation, we may hope that in due time God will exalt us, that he will
relieve us of all our burdens and difficulties, and restore us to a state of
prosperity and happiness. Nor unless this is the case with us, may we upon any
good and solid grounds, expect this. For as sin is a reproach to a people, so
it has a tendency, both naturally, and morally, to destruction and ruin.

As to religion, that, which is pure and undefiled before God and the Father,
perhaps there has been as great a proportion of this in New England, as in any
part of the christian world.

THE fathers of this land were actuated from this noble principle in forsaking
their native country, and their many near and dear connexions and fair
inheritances, and enterprising the settlement of this howling wilderness.
Religion appeared in its true glory and luster, in the early times of this
country. There was a great regard to the holy scriptures, a great regard to the
holy sabbaths and public worship: And they would go great distances willingly
and cheerfully, rather than be deprived of such precious advantages and
privileges. There was a great regard to family worship, instruction and
government, there was much of kindness, brotherly-love and charity in those
puritanic times. And profane cursing and swearing was a rare thing indeed, and
many enormities and vicious practices, which have greatly obtained in modern
times, were scarcely known among them. I don't mean to represent that
generation as absolutely perfect, for this is incompatible to the present
state. Nevertheless they were very generally, a very excellent set of men. And
their names and their memories, as they have been, so will be in future
generations fragrant as the precious ointment. And the holy and righteous God
owned and honored them accordingly. That righteousness, which was so
conspicuous among them, greatly exalted them. God was with them and for them,
and who then could be against them? Verily none, and so it appeared, for by a
variety of remarkable interpositions of his providence, God drove out the
heathen before them, prepared room for them* and they prospered and increased
under the smiles of heaven, and laid a broad foundation for those that come
after them to build upon. And a grand and noble superstructure has been raised
upon it, as we see at this day: And particularly since the conclusion of the
last war, in which the country of Canada, that was so long a scourge to us,
since, I say, that country has been subjected to the British empire, what a
surprising spread and increase has there been to the English territories!

THE primitive, religious constitution of this country was very excellent, and
under the smiles and blessing of the God of grace, has been abundantly
affectual to subserve the ends of vital piety, and godliness, and the purposes
of redeeming grace. We have had excellent means of liberal education, through
the pious care of our ancestors, our churches have greatly multiplied, and
perhaps as great a proportion of able learned pious and faithful ministers of
the gospel, as any part of the christian world can boast of. And such I doubt
not they are at present, however lightly esteemed of by some, and however some
may be disposed to distress them and reduce them to penurious circumstances, to
the great hindrance of the gospel, as well as damage to the commonwealth. For
however regardless many may be of the gospel and the spiritual and everlasting
blessings of it, yet it seems to be the general opinion that the christian
ministry is an excellent institution, considered only in a civil and political
light. And I would just say further here; that if it was wholly suppressed and
banished the land, we should be in a situation not far superior to that of the
aboriginal natives.

WE have had an excellent civil constitution, good and wholesome laws, the due
execution of which, have produced the most salutary, and beneficial effects. At
present, this people are thrown into great distress and perplexity through the
operation of certain acts of the British legislature, imposing duties and taxes
upon them, which, if the right it claims should be granted, yet must be looked
upon by all, as contrary to the principles of sound policy, considering the
intercourse between the Parent state and the Colonies, and the vast commercial
interest maintained between them to their mutual benefit and advantage.

VERY sad is the present situation of our capital town, blocked up by a
powerful squadron, to the cramping it is navigation and commerce, and to the
impoverishment and distress of multitudes. And this distress that has befallen
it, must have it is influence upon the whole community. If the head suffers, the
members must in many respects suffer with it. -- May God afford deliverance in
due time, and give us occasion to rejoice in the kind interpositions of his
providence in removing this and every other difficulty and grievance! For we
ought to bear this in mind, that our main dependence in the case is upon his
overruling providence. We are not to trust in an arm of flesh, but in the Lord
Jehovah, in whom is everlasting strength. Unto him are we to pray, -- and unto
him must we return, -- that he may return in favor to us. Turn us again, O God
of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved. It is at present, as
has been said, a time of great perplexity and distress. But are we to look
altogether to the dark side of things? Is there no bright side to turn to? Yes
verily, there is. Thus, it is a remarkable time of health throughout the land:
We hear of no contagious, mortal sickness prevailing any where: We have not
this season been visited with scorching droughts, with devouring insects. We
have had the refreshing rains and shines of heaven, and the fruits of the earth
necessary for the support of man and beasts, were perhaps never in a more
flourishing state, nor a better prospect of a plentiful increase.

WE yet enjoy our quiet sabbaths, and christian institutions, the day and the
means of grace. And so I might mention many other favors and blessings of
heaven. So that notwithstanding all our difficulties and grievances, yet our
state is not absolutely forlorn and desperate. We have a bright side to look
to, and ought to look to it; we have great reason for thankfulness to the great
Governor of the world, at the same time that we have much cause for
humiliation before him considering the moral grounds and reasons of this
controversy with us.

WE are desirous of being extricated out of all our difficulties, and enjoying
public good and happiness of every kind. Now the subject I have been
discoursing upon, directs us to the most effectual method to betake ourselves
to, in order to this. The way to be exalted, is to humble ourselves under the
mighty hand of God. All schemes and plans that may be laid, all endeavors that
may be used, are not of that importance, nor will they be likely to be so
efficacious, as securing the friendship, the guardian-ship and protection of
the God of heaven, who has all events and all hearts in his hands, and who can
in the most surprising, unexpected manner, scatter dark clouds, change the face
of things, bring good out of evil, and open a fair, bright and refreshing
scene, turn our mourning into dancing, put off our sackcloth and gird us with
gladness. O! what a great thing is it, to have the omnipotent God engage on the
side of a people! Every thing then must go well with them in spite of all
obstructions and oppositions. For there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
counsel against the Lord. Prove 21, 30.

THERE is none that can avail any thing any more than for a worm to pretend to
cope with a Lion.

BUT in order that we may enjoy the friendship of God and be under his smiles
and blessings, we must on our part be in friendship with him. And then only are
we so, when we are brought to that repentance and reformation that we have
spoken of this day. This verily is of very great importance in regard of God's
glory, and as we would consult our own good and prosperity even at present. O
that there were such an heart in us all, and in this whole people, that we may
humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt us in due time.
If vice and wickedness, especially in all its grosser forms was suppressed, and
piety and virtue, righteousness, temperance, charity etc. were generally to
prevail in the midst of us, what a token for good would this be! We might then
securely depend upon God's kind care and protection, and that his blessing
would be upon us in all regards. But now, instead of the prevalence of these
duties and virtues, is it not too evident, that we are a people laden'd with
iniquity, notwithstanding all the goodness of God that he has manifested to us,
and notwithstanding all his frowns and displeasure, which by our iniquities we
have procured?

CAN it be said that the troubles, perplexities and difficulties of the present
day have produced a general repentance and reformation of manners? May it not
be truly said, that the lusts and corruptions of many have greatly and
unhappily operated, which instead of diminishing have very much increased our
troubles! What jealousies and resentments have been entertained among old
friends, neighbors and relatives? What hard and opprobrious names have been
given to one another! What a disposition to raise and propagate false reports
without regarding the mischievous consequences of them! Yea, what wrath and
malice, bitterness, clamor and evilspeaking has there been! How much horrible
profaneness and impiety has there been, to the dishonor of God, to the eating
out the very vitals of religion, the religion of the blessed Jesus, which
breaths a quite different spirit, and tending also to the destruction of the
very form of it.

SUCH evils as these, alas! how greatly prevalent have they been in these days,
in which the mighty hand of God has been lifted up against us! Nor is his anger
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. It is far from being agreeable
to me, in itself considered, to enumerate the evils of the times, but I should
not be faithful if I did not. And all who are themselves conscientious, must
approve of faithfulness in others.

I WOULD now offer a few things by way of counsel, hoping they will be received
and practically regarded.

In the first place, let every one search and try his own heart and ways,
humble himself before God, implore forgiveness through Christ, and grace for
the future, to live in a holy, obedient manner. If it should be thus with every
one, then reformation would be general And in this case we might hope to be
highly exalted.

Again,

LET it be the care of every one to get possessed of a spirit of charity and
brotherly kindness. This is of very great importance to the comfort and
wellbeing of societies, both the greater and the less. For where there is
contention, there is confusion and every evil work. In almost all matters,
civil, secular and religious, a diversity of sentiments takes place amongst
mankind. It is in vain to expect, that in all things they will be of the same
mind and of the same judgment. And therefore a great deal of forbearance,
candor, condescension, meekness and charity is necessary. Persons may and
ought to be good neighbors and friends, and to treat one another as brethren,
however they may be of different opinions from one another in many matters.

BROTHERLY kindness and charity, as it is a great christian duty, so it is the
beauty, strength and glory of societies. It tends greatly to alleviate burdens
and to sweeten life. I shall only just add her, the fine and beautiful
description of charity in the 1 st epistle to the Corinth 13 th chap. 4. 8.
Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly, seeks not her own,
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth: Bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things.

ANOTHER thing I would mention, relative to the observation of this day. Some
may not see their way clear to observe it, it not being enjoined in the usual
way. The observation of this day was not, as usual, by a proclamation from the
civil authority. It appears that the late House of Representatives applied to
his Excellency Governor GAGE that a public fast might be appointed. But at his
Excellency was not pleased to comply with said motion; it was voted in the
house, that the Representatives upon their return home, apply to their
respective Parish Ministers that such a day might be observed. Having been
applied to accordingly, and finding upon laying it before the congregation in
this place, which I th^'t but a just respect to them notwithstanding said
application, and perceiving that it was very generally desired, the day was
observed. And I have the pleasure to declare that there was not the least
disorder upon said day. Many respectable persons who did not see so clearly
into the propriety of it, yet being unwilling to give offense to their
neighbors and brethren, laid aside all their secular concerns, and with but
few exceptions attended the public exercises. And I would further declare, that
so far as I had opportunity to observe among my people, the principle that
seemed to govern them, was not an opposition to government, but from a sense
they professed to have of the frowns of heaven upon us, and the propriety of
imploring God's gracious and powerful interposition.
Now as no one is under any compulsion in the case, so I would earnestly advise
that there may be no hard and severe reflections cast upon any, and that there
be no uncivil, indecent conduct toward any upon the occasion. Let there be
nothing inconsistent with the character of men and christians. This will
doubtless be productive of the most salutary and comfortable effects. Again,

WITH respect to those that have been desirous of the observation of this day,
(and this seems to be very general) I would say that you ought to regard it as
unto the Lord. Do not you hereby profess to do honor to the great Governor of
the world, to express your unworthiness before him, your dependence upon him,
to acknowledge and bewail your sins which have occasioned him to lift up his
mighty hand, and to bring us into difficulties and distresses, to implore his
forgiveness and the return of his favor. Those that are sincere and hearty in
all this, may upon good grounds hope and expect that God will accept them
therein. You mean the solemnity of this day, brethren! or the attendance upon
it, as an act of religion. Now will not you all of you carry the religion of this
day into your families? Will Not you consider it as your duty, besides joining in
the public prayers of the sanctuary, to offer up your prayers and
supplications to the divine majesty in your houses, for those favors and
blessings from him that are peculiarly needed in the present day, and which we
have publicly spread before God? Or does this day's observance complete the
whole affair?

MAY it not justly be expected by God himself that a genuine repentance and
reformation will follow this days solemnity? shall it be said that any after
this go on in profaneness, intemperance, unchastity, in fraud and oppression, in
bitterness, wrath, malice, anger, dishonesty, unrighteousness, sabbath
breaking, neglecting the public worship of God? Shall it be said after this,
that there are any more prayerless families, that live like heathens, not
calling upon the name of the Lord? I must speak freely and faithfully here,
that I fear that there are a great many prayerless families among you, and I
must earnestly expostulate with you upon this head. Why will you thus live
without God in the world? Are you afraid or ashamed to acknowledge your Maker
and daily benefactor? Can you live without him, live independent on him? You
surely will not acknowledge this, unless your are professed Atheists. But I am
well persuaded that none of you are of this abandoned class of mortals. You
acknowledge, all of you, I presume that there is a God, and that you are
absolutely dependant upon him for public, personal and family blessings. And
will you not then erect an altar for him in your houses, whereon to offer
religious sacrifices daily, morning and evening? How can you expect the
blessing of God upon your persons or families, if you neglect having any
concern with him in the way I have now mentioned? I must earnestly exhort such
as have hitherto neglected family worship, that they immediately set it up, and
not to make a bye business of it, but constantly to attend it. Consider what
you owe to your children. They are committed to your care not only to provide
for their outward welfare and comfort, but to train them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. And is it likely that they will have any sense of God
or religion if they see their parents live in the neglect of such a plain
incumbent duty, as that of family worship is? And will no religion, the most
important thing in the world, be lost among the rising generation if you go on
in such a neglect? I hope what I have now said upon this matter will be
seriously laid to heart by those of you to whom it is especially applicable.
And may it please God to render it effectual to bring about a reformation in
this matter! And I would just add in a word, that it will ill become those to
live in the neglect of family worship, who have discovered a zeal, that this
day of fasting and prayer be observed on account of our public difficulties.

I SHALL now close all with briefly saying. That while you are in such anxiety
respecting your civil liberties, it infinitely concerns you, that you be in
earnest that you may have a share in the glorious liberties and privileges of
the children of God. Civil liberty it is acknowledged is a most valuable
enjoyment. And what all are earnestly desirous of the enjoyment of. And as
every one is desirous of it for himself, so every one ought to be willing that
his neighbor should enjoy it. But is it acting a consistent part to vilisy and
reproach others, because they take that liberty which God and nature have given
them to think and speak differently from them? No one can soberly pretend this.
No doubt all aim at the same thing, whatever difference there may be in opinion
and conduct. Let us remember, Brethren! That the present scene will quickly be
closed upon us. And we shall have no more any concern with the affairs, and
transactions of the present state. And if we get to heaven, as God in his
infinite mercy through Christ grant we all may, we shall there be all of one
heart and soul There harmony, love and peace will universally take place. There
we shall enjoy liberty of the right sort, be eternally free from the bondage of
Satan and our own corruptions, and all the penal effects of them, and love God,
and love one another entirely and sincerely, and with the utmost freedom and
cheerfulness, serve and glorify God and the Lamb throughout eternal ages.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 3 from the bottom, for Deuteronomy. iv. 34. read Deuteronomy. ix 29.

Page 12. line 5 from the bottom, for advantages them, read, advantagous to
them. p. 16, 4th l, from top, for eninto, read enquiry into. Besides several
litteral errors that escaped the Printers notice.

PAGE 9. l. 19 from the top, for this, read there. P. 1^, l. 8 from the bottom
for telil, r. tell. P 16, l. 17. for caurse, r. cause. Last l. for the, r. that
P. 17. l. 2. for sourse r source P 19. l. 18. for evil* r evils P. 20, l 16, r.
that infinite, l. 7 from the bottom, del as, l. 5 from the bottom, r. cause. P.
21. l. 7, r seem. l. 9, r. that impenitance. P. 22. l 15. r. Thus God etc. P
23, l. 4 from the bottom, r. a sense. P 24, l. 4 from the top, r. that people,
P. 24, l. 10 from the bottom, for vices, r. virtues. P. ^8. l. 10 from the
bottom, r. effectual, P. 30, l. 13 from the bottom, r. beast P. 31, l. 1 r.
this controversy. P. 32. l. 16 from the bottom r. laden. P. 34, l 4 from the
bottom, r. is relative. P. 36 l 3 from the top, for therein r. herein. l. 10
from the bottom, r. heathen. P. 37, l. 14 from the top, del. to.


