Mr. LOCKWOOD'S ELECTION SERMON; May 12 th, 1774.

CIVIL RULERS AN ORDINANCE OF GOD, FOR GOOD TO MANKIND.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE General Assembly, Of the Colony of CONNECTICUT,
AT HARTFORD; ON THE DAY OF THEIR Anniversary ELECTION, MAY 12th, 1774.

By Samuel Lockwood, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN ANDOVER.

THERE is no Power but of GOD: -- Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do
that which is good; -- and thou shall have Praise of the same. ST. PAUL.
NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY TIMOTHY GREEN, PRINTER TO THE GOVERNOR AND COMPANY. M,
DCC, LXXIV.

AT a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the GOVERNOR and COMPANY of the Colony of
CONNECTICUT; holden at HARTFORD, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno Domini,
1774.
ORDERED, That Eliphalet Dyer and Phineas Strong, Esqrs; return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Rev'd Samuel Lockwood, for his SERMON delivered before the
Assembly on the 12th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may be printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr'y.

An Election Sermon.
ROMANS XIII. 4. FOR he is the minister of GOD to thee for good.
AS man was formed a sociable creature, capable of the delights and advantages
of social life; to be enjoyed in pursuing his own good, with that of others at
the same time; consequently, his happiness in degree must consist, in the
exercise of those social virtues essential to his nature. And that these may be
gratified, there must be opportunity had therefore. Which is obtained in some
measure, by men's forming into society and connections; each individual
becoming a member of the community; whereby, they may be mutually serviceable
to each other; and promote the good of the whole collectively. -- For the
strength of each member united, forms the strength of the whole body: designed
for general security and public happiness. And capacitates all, both rulers
and subjects, to serve GOD and their generation, better than their condition
would permit them to do, while unconnected individuals.

THIS appears to be an obvious dictate of nature. For it is supposed that all,
even the most ignorant and barbarous nations on earth, entirely destitute of
the light of divine revelation, are under at least, some general political
rules of government. Nor can a people subsist in a vicinity, with any tolerable
safety without it. For it is observed, that a state of mere anarchy, is a state
of perpetual war; where no security, or social happiness can be expected.

VARIOUS are the forms of civil government, that have obtained in different
countries, through successive ages. It Is evidently the will of GOD, and
agreeable to the nature of man, to form into societies; not only of a
religious, but likewise of a political nature; for mutual good and public
benefit. But he has not been pleased to give us the particular form of it, to
be perpetually observed by all generations. This appears to be left among the
discretionaries to the sons of men. As all are born free, therefore antecedent
to all combinations, no one has an inherent, independent, underived power and
right of dominion over his neighbor.

BUT in an unconnected state of independent liberty, nothing forbids a people,
by mutual consent incorporating, and becoming a body politic, consisting of
rulers and subjects; which is comprised in the idea of civil government. And
the subjects may give up of their rights, liberties and properties; and put all
that power into the hands of the rulers, so far, as is necessary to answer the
good ends of government: the public safety and happiness. And when this is
done by free consent, and mutual compact, it becomes the moddle of government
-- the band of society: -- it limits the power of the rulers -- secures the
rights of the people -- is the standard of justice for rulers, and subjects --
and the regulating measure of duty to both, mutually.

THERE is (probably) no human form of government on earth, free of all possible
inconveniences. And perhaps no one form can suit the state and genius of every
nation (if of any one) at all times. Which probably is one reason of that
multifarious government that obtains in the world of mankind.

BUT, the British legislature, consisting of three branches; to check,
moderate, and temper each other; it is imagined is preferable to any other, we
have the knowledge of. GOD grant, the British constitution may long continue!
-- the just claims of the crown and subject, be mutually acknowledged, and
fully enjoyed: without which the good ends of government may not be looked for.

WHEN men in free states, (under the directing and disposing providence of GOD)
are, by the suffrages of electors, put into seats of power and government, (so
far as it corresponds with the divine will,) GOD as it were ratifies it;
whereby they become civil ministers of GOD: and as such are to be acknowledged,
and treated by the subjects.

THUS the context: Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there
is no power, but of GOD: the powers that be are ordained of GOD. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of GOD. But lest any
should be filled with unnecessary apprehensions from the civil sword, St. Paul
adds, will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same. For civil power, as an ordinance of GOD,
was never designed to hurt the innocent; but to protect and defend them; as
well as to punish offenders. For as in the text he (that is the civil
magistrate) is the minister of GOD to thee for good. As this will be the effect
and consequenct of wise government, duly exercised, and cheerfully submitted to
for consceience sake.

THE words thus introduced, invite our attention to three things.

I. CIVIL rulers are an ordinance of GOD. -- He is the minister of GOD.

II. THE subject, concerning and over whom, civil government is to be
exercised; i.e. the people under government. For he is the minister of GOD to
thee.

III. THE great, and primary end of government, (subordinate to GOD's glory) is
the good of mankind, or the public interest, He is the minister of GOD to thee
for good.

Of these in order.

I. CIVIL rulers are an ordinance of GOD. -- He is the minister of GOD.

To evidence which we may observe,

FIRST,

THAT it is apparently agreeable to the will of GOD, as his ordinance,
evidently pointed out, and prescribed in the sacred oracles; that there should
be rulers and subjects, with expressed duties enjoined upon rulers, by divine
authority, to act in character, as civil ministers of GOD. And I need not
depart from the text, and context, fully to establish the point in view. St.
Paul expressly says, There is no power but of GOD: (i. e. no just power that
GOD will ever own) the powers that he, are ordained of GOD. Whosoever therefore
resists the power, (with which the civil magistrate is properly invested, and
duly exercises), resists the ordinance of GOD. For he is the minister of GOD.
For which reason, rebellion against just authority, properly exercised, is
resisting an ordinance of GOD; and not of man only. The civil magistrate is a
revenger in GOD's stead, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. For this he
does, not in a private capacity, but as GOD's minister and servant. This
chapter, which is called by some, the politics of St. Paul, suffici^^tly
confirms the truth of the proposition. But as this point has often been largely
discussed in this desk, on a like occasion, I shall but touch upon it: and
proceed to say,

SECONDLY,

THAT the directing and overruling providence of GOD, is specially concerned,
in the disposal of civil power and authority; into the hands of individuals for
public use. This is so manifest a truth, that it cannot be denied; without
denying GOD's government over his own world: to do which, is no better than
saying there is no GOD. For there is no event can take place in the universe,
unconnected with the governing, and disposing providence of GOD.

AND as it is the pleasure of HEAVEN, that there should be magistrates, to
protect the innocent -- punish the guilty -- and guard the peace of society; so
there is evidently the hand of divine Providence, in directing to the
particular persons for rulers. Which seems to be more especially concerned in
this, than in many other matters. For the supreme Ruler himself, has been wont
sometimes, to interest himself, so far, as to nominate and appoint the
individuals: as Saul, David, Solomon and others. Thus, he called Cyrus by name,
at least two hundred years before he was born, to rule over the Persian empire;
and to do signal service for GOD, and his people. Thus says the LORD to his
anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before
him: For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called
thee by thy name. Isaiah xlv.1, 4.


INDEED, the disposing providence of GOD is evidently concerned in events, to
men, the most contingent and fortuitous. As the wise man observes, The lot is
cast into the lap: but the whole disposing thereof is of the LORD. Prove. xvi.33.
With great truth and propriety then we may say, that the providential hand of
the supreme Ruler of the world, is very specially concerned in the disposal of
government over men: and that equally so, even in the most free elective
states. For GOD has the hearts of all men, as well as of kings, in his hand:
and as the rivers of water, he turns them whithersoever he will.

And to say,

THIRDLY, Civil ministers are an ordinance of GOD, in as much as it is by
direction and assistance from GOD, they are enabled to act up to their
character, in discharging the trust reposed in them. The divine system of moral
government, holds forth much light and direction to civil rulers: and the more
they conform to it, in heart and in life, the better will they answer to the
appellation given them as Gods; and more effectually reach their character, as
civil ministers of GOD, for public good to mankind.

AND we find wisdom itself, (or CHRIST) expressly says, Counsel is mine, and
sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have strength. By me kings reign, and
princes decree justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of
the earth. Prove. viii.14, 15, 16.


KING Solomon says, The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers
of water: he turns it whithersoever he will. Prove. xxi.1.
And early upon his accession to the jewish throne, although he was second to
none for wisdom; yet sensible of the importance of his exalted station, and his
need of divine aids to sway the scepter in righteousness; he asked for an
understanding heart, to discern judgment, and rule over so great a people. This
he preferred to any other gift, when put to his option: and the thing pleased
the LORD; who not only granted his request, but added likewise riches and
honor. 1 Kings, chap. 3.


A sensible dependence on GOD the supreme Ruler, and exhaustless source of
light, understanding and wisdom for direction and assistance, is highly
becoming political rulers. And doubtless every one of that dignified character,
whose hearts are warmed and influenced by the love of GOD, and benevolence to
man, will servently desire, and earnestly ask wisdom of HIM, who gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not. James 1.5.
That he may rise up to the character of a servant, and instrument of GOD, for
public good to mankind: whose happiness he feels himself interested in, and
deeply concerned to promote.

Which brings into view, the

II. General proposition, viz.

THE subject, concerning and over whom, civil government is to be exercised: i.
e. the people under government. He is the minister of GOD to THEE.

THIS is the next, and immediate object, that claims the attention of civil
rulers. It Is expressed in the text by the word THEE; which although it be of the
singular number, yet in this connection it admits of a plural construction. It
means the subjects over whom civil ministers of GOD are set.

RULERS and subjects are correlates, in free elective states (like this
colony), they have a necessary relation to, and mutual dependence on each
other: Nor can it be otherwise in all respects, so long as that relation
subsists.

GOD never ordained magistracy, and by his disposing providence advanced men to
seats of dignity and authority over others, to have self, and their own private
interest, the grand object to aim at. Such a thought, would be a dishonorable
reflection upon the wisdom and benevolence of the supreme Ruler.

NO one can pretend that civil government, as an ordinance of GOD, was ever
designed to advance men to seats of dignity and rule, to plume themselves with
the gilded feathers of state; in order to indulge sloth -- luxury -- and
avarice, at public expense. Much less wantonly to exercise the power with
which they are invested, in acting the tyrant. Nor yet, to improve fawning
dependents and parricides, to oppress the subjects with unconstitutional
decrees, and unrighteous measures, which they will greedily execute, for a low
title, and a piece of bread. Surely no.

GOD's institutions are all worthy of himself.

CIVIL RULERS are to fix their eyes, and their hearts too, upon the interesting
concerns of their subjects; so far as they are found within the province of
rulers. And if they loose sight of that object, they will miss the mark; and
fail of reaching the end of their institution. For it must be remembered, that,
rulers (as an ordinance of GOD,) are made for the people; and not people for
the rulers. And they are by divine appointment, to attend continually upon this
very thing. And in return, a tribute of honor, love, fear, subjection and
reward; in proportion to the dignity of their respective departments and
services, is their due from the subject. Thus says the Apostle to the Gentiles:
Wherefore, ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. For, for this cause, pay you tribute also: for they are GOD's
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all
their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor. Cont. 5, 6, 7.
And a general reason for which, is summed up in the words of our text; For he
is the minister of GOD to thee for good.

AND this turns our attention to the

III. GENERAL observation, viz.

THE great and primary end of civil government, (next to the honor of GOD,) is
the good of mankind; or the public interest. For he is the minister of GOD to
thee for GOOD.

THIS is the very end, for which the GOD of Heaven instituted the order. It is
an expression of divine benevolence to the children of men; whereby they are
put into a capacity of acting agreeable to their social nature; and thereby of
promoting their own, and each others happiness. And what lower end can render
it expedient, or beneficial for men born free; to give up certain native rights
to others, and subject themselves to government; by incorporating into civil
society.

SURELY no people, who have tasted the sweets of liberty, and enjoyed the
happiness of freedom, would ever do it; but from a rational prospect of benefit
to the whole, and to each individual. Not to loose, but with a special view to
secure and perpetuate their personal liberties and properties, unmolested; as
well as to enjoy the pleasure of social life, to be found in society only.

AND how this may be effected by the civil magistrate, comes now immediately
under consideration.

AND this depends,

FIRST, Upon civil rulers themselves being good; fearers of GOD, and haters of
covetousness. -- The GOD of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me; he
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of GOD. II Sam. 23.3.
This qualification GOD himself requires in civil rulers; that they be men of
strict probity, virtue and religion; who pay a sacred regard to the honor of
GOD; by whom kings reign, and princes decree justice.

THE Christian system, (and that only) can fully instruct us in our duty: which
consists in the love, fear, and veneration of the DEITY. From this root, the
moral and social virtues spring, with universal benevolence to mankind. When
civil rulers are influenced by this spirit, nothing can intimidate, nothing
obstruct them in their progress. For he whose heart is warmed with divine love,
or (in the emphatic language of inspiration) touched with a coal from the holy
altar, is above frowns or flatteries; and moves in an exalted sphere, calm and
unshaken: uninfluenced with bribes, and superior to opposition. Vice, though it
has his scorn, yet has his pity too: for his charity, his benevolence, is
universally extended to all. With this spirit there is a beautiful coalition of
self-love and benevolence: for both are gratified in promoting the good of
mankind. When this is the governing temper in civil rulers, it will effectually
induce them, to make the divine oracles the man of their counsel; and fetch
their maxims of government from thence, where the best are to be found.

WICKED rulers, who fear not the LORD; are a curse to a people, over whom they
are set. King David says, The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men
are exalted. Psalm xii.8.
GOD has sometimes given such; but it was in anger, and in judgment; to punish
the madness of the times, and chastise a rebellious people. As were some of the
kings of Israel and Judah; who did evil in the sight of the LORD, and caused
the people to transgress. For it is an undoubted truth, that when corruption
lies at, or near the fountain; it is much more dangerous and hurtful in its
consequences and effects, than when found in some remote streams only.

THUS, we find the impure stream, opened by Jeroboam the king of Israel, in
establishing idolatry, took a wide spread; and run to the end of that unhappy
kingdom. Hence that stigma is fixed upon him by GOD himself; Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

WE might instance likewise in wicked Haman, that prime minister in the Persian
empire; who had so great ascendency over the king his master, as to induce him
to a compliance with, and ratification of, his impolitic and detestable plan;
for crushing, and extirpating all the Jews in the realm, by a general carnage:
which would have been much to the king's damage. The unrighteous and murderous
edict, was sealed with the royal signet, and forwarded with hasty dispatch, to
the remotest colonies in the empire: to be executed, within a prescribed
limited time. But GOD, in his good providence, by the wise counsel of Mordecai,
and intercession of the queen; defeated the execrable design, of that corrupt
minister; and brought him, through much disgrace, to a condign punishment: for
he sought himself, and not the public emolument.

BUT good rulers, are a public blessing: and in a proper sense may be called a
gift of GOD: -- a token of the divine favor to a people, over whom they are
set. For such have the good of their subjects at heart, and exercise their
political wisdom and understanding, to discern the signs of the times: and
their judgment with prudence, in concerting the most salutary measures:
together with steadfast and unshaken fortitude, pursue them for the public
good: improving every favorable opportunity, to promote the interest and
happiness of their subjects.

WHEN civil ministers keep their eye upon the proper object, and wisely pursue
the true end of government, discharging the duties of their respective
departments; not with contracted selfish views, but with a spirit of true
patriotism; a people under such government, can hardly fail of being happy:
except, by a perverse and wilful neglect, or vile abuse, of what, in its own
nature, if duly improved, would conduce to their real advantage.

SECONDLY,

THAT civil ministers of GOD may reach the end of their appointment, ( the
public good), it is necessary that they be zealous promoters of religion; and
steady upholders of the public worship of GOD.

AS religion is the highest glory of a people, and morality and virtue,
necessary for the good of the state; it is not aside from the character of
civil rulers, but the noblest branch of it; to be zealous promoters of virtue
and the public service of GOD: as nursing fathers to his church and people.

KING David's heart was warmly engaged in this matter. What an ecstasy was he
in? Leaped for joy: yea danced with all his might, at the translation of the
ark. And again he says, I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the
house of the LORD. Psalm cxxii.1.
Yea, the zeal of GOD's house eat him up.

KING Solomon not only worshipped GOD with others, but he himself lead the
devotion; he prayed with and for his subjects, at that memorable transaction,
the dedication of the temple. And seemed then to lay in a fund of prayers for
them; that if in any future time, they should be brought into tribulation and
distress, and should then pray to GOD; toward (the holy temple as a type of
CHRIST) that the LORD would hear from Heaven, forgive and love them. 1 Kings
viii.


KING Asa commanded Judah to seek the LORD GOD of their fathers, and to do the
law and the commandment. II Chron. xiv.4.


HEZEKIAH, from the moment he began to reign, expressed his zeal for the
service of GOD; he brought in the priests and levites to cleanse the house of
the LORD. and chap. xxix.


AND good Josiah restored the true worship of GOD; not only in Judah, but in
the ten tribes also: he repaired the LORD's house, and ordered the book of the
law to be read. II Chron. xxxiv. chap.


NO one, who allows religion to be beneficial to the state, can hesitate a
moment, whether it be conducive to the public interest, and good of mankind;
for civil rulers zealously to concern themselves in promoting religion and
virtue. And examples, especially in high characters, seem to carry in them the
force of commands; for they are, eagerly copied by those in lower rank.

THIRDLY,

THAT civil ministers of GOD may reach the end of their institution, the good
of mankind; it is requisite that they enact such laws, and form such political
regulations agreeable to the constitution of the community, as are found
necessary for the safety, peace, and good order of the state. For no community
of any kind, however well formed, can exist in character; without laws and
regulations suited to the state, and circumstances of the body: whereby, every
wholesome member of society, may find protection, and receive benefit. For in a
community wisely formed, and duly provided with laws, and all needful
regulations for public good; the weakest members are secure as the strongest;
the poor as the rich; each having the strength of the whole community, for his
defense and safeguard. To provide which, is doubtless within the province of
the legislature; and the nature and well-being of society renders it necessary.
And when this is done, and provided for by the legislative body; a good basis
is laid, for social happiness, and public advantage; -- especially, if to this
there be added,

FOURTHLY,

A wise, able, and faithful administration. -- Which conduces much to the
public emolument, -- the peace and happiness of society; and is absolutely
necessary, to answer the great and good ends of government. When administration
or executive power, is lodged in the hands of discerning, wise, and
understanding men; who execute the trust reposed in them, with skill, fidelity,
and unshaken fortitude, in the impartial administration of justice; they become
a terror to evildoers: as well as defend the cause of the just. They act then
in character. For they bear not the sword in vain; but are servants, or
ministers of GOD for public good. For when a spirit of mercy and truth, by
which iniquity is purged, Prove. xvi.6.
runs through all ranks and orders of men, in civil trust and power, even down
to the lowest informing officer; it sensibly beats down the head of vice, and
checks the abounding of iniquity. Transgressors will be afraid of the sword;
nor dare resist the power. For there are doubtless many persons, of a vicious
dissolute character; who do not submit and obey for conscience sake, yet would
do it for wrath. -- But if a system of the best laws be enacted and published,
yet if treated with neglect, or undue execution of them; the good ends of
government cannot be obtained.

IT IS therefore necessary that there be set thrones of judgment: and they who
sit thereon, be not only endowed with wisdom and understanding; but likewise
despise the gain of oppression, and shake their hands from holding of bribes:
and thence administer justice with an impartial hand; whence the subject has a
constitutional right to look for it. For he is the minister of GOD to thee for
good.

HENCE says the prophet Amos; let judgment run down as waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream. Amos v.24.


THUS does the due administration of civil power, in the executive branch of
it, discountenance and punish vice; and establish righteousness and truth:
which conduces much to the public good. -- No doubt, but king Jehoshaphat
viewed it in this light: who not only provided good laws, but looked well to
the execution of them. He set judges in the land, throughout all the fenced
cities of Judah, city by city; and said to the judges, take heed what ye do:
for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in judgment.
Wherefore now, let the fear of the LORD be upon you, take heed and do it. II
Chron. xix.5, 6, 7.
-- A noble example this, worthy of imitation.

And FIFTHLY,

THAT civil rulers may reach the end of their institution, (the public good),
it is expedient, that they countenance and encourage sobriety, temperance,
frugality and industry; so necessary for the public peace, wealth and
happiness. And likewise duly frown upon, and check the opposite vices; such as
intemperance, idleness, prodigality and dissoluteness; so hurtful to the
public and destructive to individuals. For these have a train of other vices,
they are either connected with, or productive of; which prey upon the vitals of
the state, sap the foundation of government, and produce much disorder tending
to a general ruin. These are some of the sins of Sodom, which brought down the
judgments of Heaven, to the overthrow of the city, and the destruction of its
incorrigibly wicked inhabitants. Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness was in her. Ezekiel. xvi.49.
To frown upon, and correct such vices and destructive evils, is within the
magistrates claim; whose end is the public peace and happiness.

GOOD rulers, assiduously attentive to their work, will view themselves under
sacred obligations, to exercise their vigilance and authority, to suppress
vice; and encourage virtue in every species of it. For they are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. If thou do that which is evil, be afraid; (says
the Apostle), for he bears not the sword in vain; but is by office (as GOD's
civil minister;) a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

To observe once more,

SIXTHLY,

CIVIL ministers, (as an ordinance of GOD) are for public good, when they are
suitably attentive to the duties of their respective departments; devoting
their time and talents, so far, as the business of government requires, to
secure and advance the public interest. St. Paul calls them GOD's ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing. Being industrious to know the state
of the community; and feel their relation to the subjects with a tender
affection for them.

THUS did Jehoshaphat, by visiting his kingdom through all his dominions, in
his own person; after he had done it by his officers. And by this practice, he
became personally acquainted with the state of his subjects; corrected the
disorders he found; and provided what he judged needful, for their future peace
and happiness. II Chron. xix.4, and 9, etc.


WISE rulers will not fail of being public benefactors, when they feel a
benevolency of heart to their subjects; as nursing fathers, and guardians of
their rights and privileges: -- when they are easy of access, by the lowest of
the people in their distresses: -- ready to redress their grievances: -- defend
the poor, protect the widow and the fatherless.

THE business of government, becomes comparitively easy, when they rule in the
hearts of the people: who will then find it their pleasure, as well as duty, to
yield a cheerful subjection; not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake
-- When this is the happy case, government is well established. The subject
will love, honor, and revere the magistrate. And rulers will hold the reins
with case, and govern the affair of state with pleasure: proving themselves, to
be civil ministers or GOD, for public good to the people. And when their whole
character is brought into view, it evidently appears, that the great and
primary end of civil rulers as a divine ordinance, is, (next to GOD's glory)
the good of mankind.

I HAVE now gone through with my proposed plan, in a doctrinal way; and the
body of the discourse being so much of a practical nature, that I shall throw
all the improvement I make, into those usual addresses, which custom has
rendered decent on this occasion. --

To which we now proceed.

And here FIRST,

WITH all due deference to dignified characters; and yet with a freedom
becoming a christian minister: I shall address the honorable, the GOVERNOR, the
DEPUTY GOVERNOR, the ASSISTANTS in council, and the REPRESENTATIVES of the
freemen, convened in general court.

Honored, and much respected SENATORS;

I HAVE attempted in miniature to bring into view, the nature and end of
magistracy. The end for which you are advanced to seats of dignity, above your
brethren; and the civil sword put into your hands as an ordinance or GOD: not
indolently to sleep in the chair of government; much less, wantonly to exercise
your power, for selfgratification and personal interest: but rather to improve
it, with wisdom, vigilance and fidelity, for the public emolument.

THIS is the great, the worthy object, you are constantly to hold in view, as
civil ministers of GOD, designed for public usefulness -- the good of mankind.

AND we would this day, gratefully acknowledge the smiles of Heaven upon us;
that our political fathers and guardians, hitherto, have pursued that noble
object, with so desirable success: for that many worthy deeds have been done by
them.

WE confide in your known abilities, and integrity of heart; that your
patriotick fire will yet burn: so that the community of which you are a part,
may long feel your benign influence, to their sensible happiness and real
advantage. Then will they sit under your political shadow, with great delight.

THE return of this anniversary day of election, refreshes our minds with our
ELECTIVE PRIVILEGES: when the suffrages of the freemen are brought into public
view; and the chief seats of government, filled, (by the good hand of our GOD
yet upon us) not with strangers; but with our brethren; who will naturally care
for our state.

HONORED sirs,

WE rely on your integrity and wisdom; and have a right to look to you, (under
GOD the supreme RULER) and expect to receive benefit from the exercise of that
power, with which you are invested. That according to your political skill, you
will pursue those salubrious measures; best adapted to promote the public
weal, and reach the good ends of government; (security, to the persons and
properties of the subjects:) for which purpose you are now convened, in your
leslative character.

IT IS not for me, (I am sensible) to put on dictator-ship. However, may I be
permitted to ask, whether the state of the college, does not merit a share in
your political deliberations; and claim your friendly assistance, to put it
into a reputable condition: best adapted to answer the important ^^ds of its
institution?

THIS honorable General Court, need not be informed, of the apparent necessity
of a new edifice being erected, for the accommodation of the students; and
thereby relieving them, of the present necessity, and great inconveniency, of
crowding into private families as boarders. --

HAVE not both church and commonwealth, received signal advantage, from that
source of light and knowledge; and might not more be yet expected, with growing
increase; if that seminary, (the glory of the colony,) meets with sufficient
encouragement and relief, from the civil board?

IT is therefore, earnestly recommended to this honorable legislature, that
they would form some plan, or come into some measures, as their wisdom shall
direct, for the building of a new college; and the granting such other favors,
as are found needful; for the future prosperity, of that school of the
prophets. In doing of which, ('it is apprehended), rulers, would act in
character, as civil ministers of GOD, for public good to mankind. --

But to proceed;

WOULD it be unseasonable on this occasion, to ask; Is there not a growing evil
in this colony, worthy of the attention of our civil guardians, to provide a
remedy for? I mean the surprising number of lawsuits; and their issues so
often protracted. The disadvantages of which, are too numerous and manifest, to
need a rehearsal at this time. But should this wise legislature, provide a
remedy, for so destructive an evil; it is imagined, they would do real service
to the government in general; and merit the thanks of the public.

ONCE more, (with indulgence). Do not the times bespeak the attention of this
honorable board; to devise some method, to prevent the multiplying of vagrant
beggars, and idle persons, stroling up and down the colony? indangering our
properties if not our lives too. Many of whom, are well able to support
themselves, and benefit the public, if put to labor: which it appears they
have no disposition for, if they can find but a slender support without it.

THEIR beggary, and idle manner of spending time, breeds many vices,
detrimental to the state: particularly, the temptation is strong, for lying and
thest: which lead on to highway robbery and murder. To prevent which, might
not the civil fathers of the people act in character, and serve the public to
good purpose; by ordering such vagrants to be taken up, and put to service for
a maintenance? Or if this be judged impolitick: May I yet ask, Is
transportation across the atlantic, practicable only from east to west? Can
there be no such thing, as remittances made of a species, the greater part of
which has probably crossed the seas; in the despicable character of convicts?
But it is readily submitted, to the superior wisdom of this honorable
legislature, to adopt the most salutary measures, for redressing our public
grievances.

WORTHY senators, whom I honor and revere; we confide in your pious regard for
the honor of GOD; that you will carefully provide, all within your province,
for the due observation of the LORD'S DAY; with a constant attendance on the
public worship of GOD.

GREAT and important is the public trust in your hands: -- You will need the
exertion of your superior wisdom, and tried abilities; in your several
departments; to comport with your character, as civil ministers of GOD, for
public good: and above all other dependencies, to make Him your trust and
helper, who is Wisdom itself; and says, By me kings reign, and princes decree
justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.
Prove. viii.15, 16.
You will profitably contemplate the message, which GOD sent to king Asa, Judah
and Benjamin. The LORD is with you, while ye he with him; and if ye seek him,
he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. II Chron.
xv.2.
On which important passage, the celerated Doct. Owen remarks; That the
presence of GOD with a people, in special providential dispensations, for their
good; depends, on their obediential presence with him, in their public
administrations to his glory. And if this be the course you steer, while you
conduct the business of the state, you will not fail of being a public
blessing to this colony. And if you are faithful to serve GOD, and your
generation, according to his will, until death; he will not fail, to bestow
upon you, a crown of life.

IN the next place, I shall turn to the ministers of CHRIST convened on this
occasion.

MY reverend Fathers, and dear Brethren:

IS the great and primary end of the civil ministry, (next to the honor of
GOD) the good of mankind? it is of ours, more emphatically so, by divine
designation and appointment, as ministers of religion.

INDULGE me then, a brief attempt, to warm your hearts and my own, with a sense
of the peculiar obligations upon us, to fulfill the sacred ministry, we have
received in the LORD.

THE honor of GOD our SAVIOR, who has bled and died for the sheep, is deeply
concerned in it: our own, and the best good to the souls of men, depends much,
on our hearty concurrence with the benevolent designs of redeeming love; and in
advancing the honor of divine grace, in the salvation of men.

THE important and arduous embassage we have undertaken, demands our attention;
our strict adherence to the sacred instructions given us: and with persevering
fidelity pursue our work, while we have a standing in the LORD'S vineyard.

WE are to preach like dying men, to dying creatures; bound into the eternal
world, to appear before GOD the judge of all: knowing that we may not long
continue by reason of death. And shall not this, be a powerful stimulus, to
redouble our diligence, with fervent application, to whatsoever our hands find
to do, that will turn to a good account, in the day of the LORD JESUS?

IT IS true, we are set for the defense of the gospel; and upon occasion, must
earnestly contend for the faith. But we have no time to waste, in warm debates,
about things not essential to a state of grace -- divine consolation -- an holy
life -- or eternal salvation. Which are apt to gender strife, and create
alienation and disunion.

MAY we not more profitably, for GOD and man; unite our efforts, to bring the
divine character into view, and that of fallen man? -- to proclaim the terrors
of the LORD, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men: -- to alarm
the secure in sin -- and point them to the city of refuge: -- to unfold, and
evince the doctrines of grace, the grand peculiarities of the gospel of JESUS:
-- to open to the view of our hearers, the gospel way of life; -- acquaint
them, with the terms of peace and acceptance with GOD, through the blood and
merits of JESUS CHRIST; upon the plan of the new and well-ordered covenant; and
besoech sinners in CHRIST's stead, to be reconciled to GOD; yea, compel them to
come in, that CHRIST's house may be filled.

WE are to preach CHRIST, and his unsearchable riches: and urge the importance
of holiness, both in heart, and in life. And in order to which, evidence the
necessity of a new heart; -- of repentance toward GOD, and of faith in our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. We are likewise, to inculcate the duties of social life;
with every species of christian morality; and press the necessity of subjection
to the civil magistrate, as an ordinance of GOD: and that, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake.

LET us, reverend sirs, by united endeavors, strengthen the things which
remain that are ready to die: And diligently watch for souls, as they who must
give an account. And may we be honored, as humble instruments, in turning many
to righteousness. And when we are dismissed, from our labors in the LORD'S
vineyard; may we then meet the rewards of the faithful, in GOD's eternal
kingdom.

THE address will now close, with a few words to the assembly in general.

My brethren,

ARE civil rulers an ordinance of GOD, designed by HEAVEN for good to mankind?
Then they are to be known and treated in character. Let none imagine, that it is
characteristick of good rulers, to be all lenity and mercy; for such would not
be for the public emolument: the peace and good of society. But if thou do
that which is evil, be afraid; for be bears not the sword in vain. Nor may he
do so. But he is the minister of GOD by office; a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil.

AS you are members of society, you are under obligations, as well as the
rulers, to seek its good; in promoting the public wealth, peace, and
happiness; -- to shun faction, and discountenance groundless surmises against
the rulers of the people, which it tolerated, will tend to enervate the sinews
of government; and much disorder the body politic. But rather, render unto all
their dues: And follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another. Romans xiv.19.
That thereby you may strengthen the hands of the rulers, and render government
both easy to them, and beneficial to yourselves: yielding subjection for
conscience sake, under the sweet and powerful influence of religion. Fear GOD,
honor the king, and pray for all in authority over us; that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. I Tim. ii.2.
Depart from evil, and practice that which is good. Remembering, it is
righteousness, that exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.
Prove. xiv.34.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee. Psalm.
cxxii.6.
And happy is that people, whose GOD is the LORD. Psalm. cxliv.15.


FINIS.

