SERMONS ON CHURCH GOVERNMENT. In REPLY to a DISCOURSE on that Subject,
Delivered a few Days before, from the same Desk, by the Rev. Mr. ROSS. Preached
at NEWTOWN, December 19. A. D. 1773. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A brief View of the
Scripture Texts, subjoined to some of the most exceptionable Articles in the
SAY-BROOK PLATFORM, showing them to be very impertinent to the Purpose of
consociated Connection and Authority.

And also an APPENDIX, In which an ACCOUNT is given of the essential FACTS,
relative to the CONDUCT of the CONSOCIATED COUNCIL, toward the PASTOR, and
FIRST CHURCH of CHRIST in NEWTOWN.

By DAVID JUDSON, A. M. Pastor of the Congregational Church of CHRIST in
Newtown.

That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the gospel.

St. PAUL. NEW HAVEN; Printed and sold by T. and S. Green, near the College.

PREFACE.
AS this reply was made from the mere hearing of that discourse, which was the
occasion of it. It cannot therefore be expected, that the very words should be
exactly remembered, to be made use of in the reply. But so far as the author's
memory served him, he has heartily endeavored, fairly to express the
sentiments held forth in said discourse, as he received and understood at the
hearing. And so far as he has been able to learn, was generally understood by
the auditory. And is as well assured, as one well can be in such a case, that
there is no essential mistake made in any particular. Which should there happen
to be; may be easily set to rights before the public, by the publishing of
said discourse. Which upon diverse accounts, would be very agreeable to many of
the hearers. And a sufficient justification of the style of this reply.

The view of the scriptures subjoined to the articles, is set forth for the
assistance of such, as have been too negligent, carefully to compare and
examine for themselves.

And the appendix is added, merely to gratify the curiosity of the inquisitive.

NEWTOWN, Jan. 31, A. D. 1774.
SERMONS On CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
Matt. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.


TRULY my hearers, I am really disposed to look upon it, an instance of the
wonderful wisdom of divine providence, in permitting such a discourse on church
government* to be delivered from this desk, as you have lately heard. As not
doubting, but it will prove an occasion, of the more clear and satisfying
manifestation of the truth on that subject; to the minds of many of you: From
the reply, which I have now, by this providence, a loud call of God to make.
With a view, neither to gratify nor reflect upon any person or party; but to
approve myself in my office, as becomes a minister of Jesus Christ, by a
faithful manifestation of the truth; and that in opposition to all the
dangerous errors cast in your way.

In regard to which, I earnestly crave, my hearers, your serious and candid
attention, to the scripture proofs and plain reasonings, fairly grounded
thereupon; which I have to offer on the subject.

You will suffer me to use great plainness of speech, that if possible, such as
are dull of hearing may discern and understand. Gladly would I shun all
personal reflections: But plain and pungent representations, must be admitted.
I desire to be heard patiently through to the end: And then every one, will be
under advantage, fairly to judge for themselves, whether what may be offered,
be agreeable to the law and to the testimony or not.

For the foundation of what is intended, I have chosen the words now read.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. To come at
the full and proper force and meaning of which, it is requisite to look into
the context a few verses back: In which an account is given, of the appearance
of Jesus to the eleven disciples, on a mountain of Gallilee. And when they saw
him, they worshipped him: But some doubted. Ver. 16.17. And Jesus came and
spoke unto them, saying, all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
Ver. 18. In which, Jesus made known to his disciples the fullness of power that
he was invested with by the father. As God indeed, the Son has in himself all
power, equal with the Father. But as God man, mediator, his power was given to
him of the Father. Even all power in heaven and in earth: Over all
principalities and powers, both in this world and also in that which is to
come. And of consequence, all power both in the kingdom of providence and of
grace. And as invested with, and in virtue of, this plenitude of power, Jesus
gave out a special commission to his apostles, saying as in the 19th ver. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. As though he had said, having all power in
heaven and in earth given unto me; I do therefore now commission, order, and
send forth you my apostles; to go teach and disciple all nations; baptizing all
that believe my gospel; in the name of the sacred Three. Teaching them, as it
follows in the words of our text, to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you. In these words then, we have the special orders given by the
Lord Jesus Christ, to the eleven disciples, his apostles, when he commissioned
and sent them forth to teach and disciple the nations. Authorizing and
directing them, to teach those that should be discipled; to observe all things
whatsoever he commanded. Which strict injunction, to teach the observance of
all his commandments, plainly implies a restriction, not to teach the
observance of any other commands. Jesus had indeed farther commands, yet to
give unto his apostles. And yet this injunction, ever continued in force
binding upon them; to teach all and no other observances, but such as he
commanded. And now, though the apostles left no successors in their proper
apostolic office, yet this is the commission, by virtue of which, all gospel
ministers are authorized to teach and baptize. And according to which, they are
all restricted to teach, even to the end of the world. For that in this sense,
it has respect to all succeeding ministers of the gosepl, is manifest from the
following sentence: "And lo I am with you always even unto the end of the
world." In Mr. Henry's exposition, it is observed upon the words of our text,
That Christians are hereby obliged to confine themselves to the commands of
Christ, and as not to diminish from them, so not to add to them. And more
generally, all dissenting divines, have taken the words in this restricted
sense. According to which, gospel ministers have no commission or authority
from Christ, to teach his disciples, the observance of any laws whatever; but
of those only which he had commanded. So far as any gospel minister therefore,
teaches the necessity of observing in the church of Christ, any canon laws and
rules of human devising; he teaches for doctrine the commandments of men: In
direct violation of this his commission by Christ.

But what we have now specially in view is, the commands of Christ respecting
the government of his church. And here you are sensible the laboring enquiry
is, whether Christ has given laws sufficient for the government of his church?
The affirmative of which, I shall endeavor to prove. In opposition to that
negative, which you have been lately taught. By this proposition; that Christ
has given laws sufficient for the government of his church, is not meant, you
must observe, that Christ has given rules in his word, in all respects so
explicit, as not to leave room for the use of a discretionary prudence in the
church: Respecting circumstances of time, place, etc. Many things of this sort,
are left discretionary, in the breasts of the judges, in all, even the most
perfect civil states. But the meaning of the proposition is: That Christ has
given laws, so completely sufficient for the government of his church, as not
to need for that purpose, the addition of any canon laws or rules of human
devising. In this sense, I assume the affirmative; in direct opposition to that
discourse in which it was plainly denied. And therefore pleaded, that there was
a necessity of the addition of human rules and canons, for the purposes of
church government.

But what can be requisite, to the laws of Christ being sufficient for the
government of his church; more than these three things? That the nature of the
crimes cognizable, be sufficiently specified: The judges, pointed out with
sufficient plainness: And the nature of the proof required, sufficiently
expressed? In all these respects, it was strenuously argued and insisted upon,
That the laws of Christ are not sufficient. Nor was there, that I remember, any
deficiency argued; but what is fully comprehended under one or the other of
these propositions. If therefore, it can be made to appear, that the matters
contained under these three particulars, are pointed out in the gospel, with
precision sufficient, for all the purposes of church government; it must follow
by the consent of all, that the laws of Christ are fully sufficient for the
government of his church, without the addition of any human canons for that
purpose. Wherefore let the scriptures be carefully attended to respecting these
matters. And as to the crimes then, that are properly cognizable before the
church. See 1 Cor. 5.11. But now I have written unto you, not to keep company,
if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, no
not to eat. Here is given an express enumeration of several kinds of crimes;
under the one or the other of which, are included most of the scandalous
crimes, that mankind are incident unto. But see also, 2 These. 3.6. Now we
command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
tradition which he received of us. By walking is here plainly meant an open
course of life. For that course of life, in which any man openly lives, in
that he is said to walk. And to walk disorderly, is explained by the apostles
own words to mean, walking not after, i. e. not agreeable to, the tradition
received of us, the apostles of Jesus Christ. All which apostolic traditions,
are now set forth in writing in the new testament. If any brother therefore,
persists in living openly contrary to scripture rule; he is to be withdrawn
from, or separated by the brotherhood from their communion. And so again, it is
added in the 14. v. And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that
man, and have no company with him that he may be ashamed. But this epistle
holds forth the validity of every divine rule. Every man therefore that lives
in the open violation of any divine precept; is to be noted and his company
avoided; in all matters of special christian fellowship. But farther heresy
also, is particularly mentioned. Tit. 3.10. A man that is an heretic, after
the first and second admonition reject. Under which, all scandalous damnable
error is included. Besides many other scriptures that might be mentioned
directly to the purpose. But according to these already cited; all the commands
of Christ, are to be considered as his laws specifying matters cognizable
before his church. And what rational man can now say, but that the crimes
cognizable by a church, are pointed out in the gospel with a precision
abundantly sufficient?

In the next place then, we are to consider, to whom it belongs to act and
concur in judgment. And whether this matter be pointed out in scripture with
sufficient plainness?

It has been much insisted upon, that it cannot be learnt from scripture, who
the church are, or of what members it does consist. Because the word church, is
sometimes used in the gospel in different senses. But though the word church, is
sometimes used in the gospel to different senses; yet by the church, when
meaning the church of Christ, in its present visible state here in this world:
is always in the new testament plainly meant, a body or community of the same
kind. And what sort of a body that is, may plainly be discerned, from the model
of the first church of Christ at Jerusalem. As set forth Acts. 2.41; and on,
Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized: And the same day there
were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfastly
in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayers. -- And all that believed were together. -- And they continued daily
with one accord in the temple. -- And the Lord added to the church daily such
as should be saved. Thus such as being baptized, were added to that number,
which continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers, were thereby added to the church: Which
number therefore was the church. And every such kind of number then, consorting
together for the like purposes, is a church. Wherefore there can be no doubt,
what is meant in the gospel by a church; when a church of Christ is intended.
And in the next place we find, that the exercise of discipline is committed to
a church. And are plainly directed how it is to be introduced; and what the
judgment or penalty to be inflicted upon incorrigible offenders. As in Mat.
18.15, and so on. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: But
if he neglect to hear the church, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a
publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: And whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Here it is carefully to be noted, that the very same church, unto which
an offense is to be told; are to judge thereof; and that from their judgment,
there lies no appeal to any other board under heaven. Because expressly
declared, that according to the judgment of said church, it shall be bound or
loosed in heaven. Whereby an absolute bar is laid in, against the judgment of
any other board on earth. And neither therefore to be attempted, but in direct
violation of this express law of Christ.

But it has been objected, that this could not be meant of a church of Christ:
Because his church was not yet formed. And must have reference therefore to the
Jewish church. But the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess
that he (Jesus) was the Christ, he should be put out of the synagague. Joh.
9.22. Nothing therefore can be more absurd, than to imagine, that Jesus here
meant to direct his disciples, in case offense should fall out among
themselves; to go and tell it to the Jewish church. The very supposition is an
affront to common sense.

But although the church of Christ was not yet formed; yet, it is very clear from
the context, that Christ is therein speaking in special reference to his
church, when it should take place. For he is there expressly speaking of the
kingdom of heaven; and matters thereunto pertaining. And by the kingdom of
heaven, in the gospel is commonly meant, the new kingdom of Christ began here
in grace, to be perfected in glory. Thus John the baptist, came preaching;
saying repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Matt. 3.2. And again,
from that time Jesus began to preach and say repent, for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. Matt. 4.17. That is, the gospel dispensation, is just about to be
introduced. So here in the 18th of Matt. the disciples said to Jesus; "Who is
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" V. 1st. Although as yet, they knew not
what the form of Christ's church might be: Yet they were looking forward, in
expectation of his setting up a new kingdom upon earth. And therefore, having
yet ambitious views cleaving to them; they inquired who should be greatest in
said kingdom. And Jesus therefore, to convince them of the inconsistency of
their ambitious views, with the nature of his new kingdom, called a little
child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, verily I say unto
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this
little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. V. 2, 3, 4.
Which has a plain reference to Christ's new kingdom of grace, teaching the
absolute necessity of humility in all the subjects of that kingdom. And so also
it is very observable, that Christ took occasion from the little child which he
called and set in the midst of them; to speak of his little ones, believing on
him; who were to be the subjects of his new kingdom of grace. And that in
regard to the offenses, that might arise toward them either from the world, or
even one among another. In regard to offenses arising from the world, Jesus
said, but whosoever shall offend one of those little ones that believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depths of the sea. Woe unto the world because of offenses,
etc. v. 6, 7. Take heed said Jesus, that you despise not one of these little
ones. V. 10. And again, even so it is not the will of your Father which is in
heaven, that one of these little ones should perish. V. 14. And so in
continuation of the same subject, it is added in the 15 v. Moreover if thy
brother shall tresspass against thee, go and tell him his fault, etc. Jesus had
spoken before, in reference to offenses arising from the men of the world. That
in regard to such, it were better for them that a millstone were hanged about
their necks, etc. Importing, that God himself, would be severely avenged for
his children upon them. But here Jesus proceeds to point out to his little
ones, believing on him; how to deal with one another, in case of offenses
falling out among themselves; in his new kingdom of grace: In plain reference
to which he is still speaking. Whence it is clearly manifest, that by the
church is here meant Christ's church in his new kingdom of grace. Such as was
that first church of Christ set up at Jerusalem. And accordingly it is found in
fact, that when the churches came to exercise discipline; all those who
consorted together to eat the Lord's supper; did concur together, in putting
away offenders. As in the instance of the incestuous Corinthian. St. Paul
declared to that church, the mind and will of Christ about that matter. To
deliver such an one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Purge out therefore, said he,
the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ
our possover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 1 Cor. 5.5. etc. Plainly importing,
that the whole body of communicants, which eat the feast of the Lord's supper
together, were to concur, in purging out that old leaven of wickedness from
among them; that they might be as a new and unleavened lump. Thus plainly is
the church, to which the exercise of discipline is committed, pointed out: Even
so plainly, that there can be no room for any but mere futile cavils about it.

In the next place then, we are to consider; whether the nature of the proof to
be required, be sufficiently pointed out. And to this purpose see Matt. 18.16.
That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
Which to common sense, plainly imports, that the evidence of facts to a church;
must be such, as equals that credibility of a fact, which arises from the
evidence of two or three credible witnesses. And what that is, must in the
nature of things, be left in the breasts of the judges; in all trials whether
civil or ecclesiastical. As to witnesses being sworn; it may be observed; That
in every ecclesiastical trial, the process is carried on in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The solemnity of which, is equal to the solemnity of an oath
in any civil court.

Thus I have briefly considered, what is expressly taught in the gospel; of
crimes, judges and evidence respecting church government. And judge ye now, my
hearers, your own selves; whether the laws of Christ are not abundantly
sufficient, for all the purposes of church government; without the addition of
any canon laws of human devising? Cavilling disputers indeed, may cavil still.
But most certainly the Lord Jesus Christ himself, does look upon the laws which
he has given for the government of his church, perfectly sufficient for that
purpose. Because he expressly declares in his word; that the scriptures, which
are given by inspiration of God; are such, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17. Plainly importing,
that by the inspired writings, the man of God may, as to laws and rules, be
thoroughly furnished to every good work, and of consequence, to all the duties
of church government; without any superadded canons about the matter. And
indeed if it be not so, there is such a deficiency left in Christ's kingdom;
infinitely the most perfect of all kingdoms; as can never be made up; without a
new revelation from heaven. Because Jesus as King and head of the church, is
the only lawgiver therein. Of whom it is written, the Lord is our judge, the
Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. Isai. 33.22. In
which high and noble capacity, all power in heaven and in earth, is given unto
him. Who never commissionated any of his servants; to set forth any laws or
rules in his kingdom; but only by his inspiration or direction. Yea, but has
laid in a prohibition in bar, to prevent any of his servants from attempting,
to set forth or teach the observance of any laws or rules in his church; but
such as he himself has commanded: As implied in the words of our text. So that
if the laws of Christ be deficient; they must, as to all human power and
authority remain deficient to the end. And Christ's church, which he purchased
with his own blood, be left without laws sufficient for its well being, order
and government; exposed to the rage of a wicked world; and to inevitable
disorder and confusion among themselves. The very supposition of which, is a
vile impeachment of the wisdom and goodness of the glorious Lawgiver, on the
holy hill of Zion: Of his wisdom, as though incapable of giving laws sufficient;
or of his goodness, as though when capable, he had not kindness enough for his
church and people, to give them laws every way sufficient for their well being.
But as the Jewish church was sufficiently furnished with laws to all needful
purposes by Moses: Even much more is the gospel church, by the laws of Christ.
As plainly implied in that. Heb. 3.5.6. And Moses was verily faithful in all
his house as a servant. -- But Christ as a son over his own house, whose house
are we.

But it has been suggested, that it is no argument of imperfection in the
scriptures; that there is not yet set forth therein, all the laws that are
needful to the government of the church. Even as it is no argument of
imperfection in the scriptures, that the art of surveying and navigation, are
not taught therein. Just as though the art of surveying, was as essential to
the welfare and glory of Christ's kingdom; as the government and good order of
his church. How weak and absurd the comparison?

All such arts and sciences as relate to the affairs of the kingdoms of this
world, are within the reach of human investigation. These therefore, are left
to the invention of men; under the guidance of a common providence. But as to
the kingdom of Christ, it is entirely of a different kind: not of his world,
but of a spiritual, holy and heavenly nature. And therefore furnished and
provided with all needful light and instruction, by divine revelation.

Such my hearers, is the nature of church government pointed out in the gospel;
according to which, all the authority which is given for that purpose, is only
of an executive nature, and that vested in every particular church. This is
that order of church government, commonly called congregational. Which I have
been aiming to teach, and practice. To which my conscience is bound by the word
of God. And by which I mean, through the grace of God, firmly to abide; as not
doubting the approbation thereof by the great Judge of all.

SERMON Second.
MATT. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.


HENCE it was proposed to consider the commands of Christ; more especially
respecting the government of his church. Whether the Lord Jesus Christ, has
indeed given laws to his church. sufficient for the government thereof? Not so,
but that circumstances of time and place, etc. are left discretionary. But so
sufficient, as not to need the addition of any canon laws or rules of human
devising. The affirmative side of which I have assumed; in direct opposition to
that negative part, which has of late been so strenuously urged. As a counter
part to which, the laws of Christ, as set forth in the gospel, respecting this
matter, have been particularly considered. Whence it has been made clearly to
appear, that the crimes cognizable, who the judges are, how causes are to be
introduced, what penalties are to be inflicted, and the nature of proof to be
required; are all pointed out in the scriptures, with so much plainness and
precision, as to be fully sufficient for all the purposes of church government;
without the addition of any human canons for that purpose.

And now in reply to the many things, that have been held forth in vindication
of the opposite side of the question, I shall endeavor so far as my memory
serves me, at a true representation. And if any essential mistake should be
made, I promise to retract it; when ever it shall be clearly manifested. For we
do not, however much has been injuriously suggested to the contrary, arrogate
all wisdom and grace to ourselves; never pretending to judge others of any
sect, as to their spiritual state: but leaving every man in that respect, to
stand or fall to his own Master. It is only with their errors, manifested forth
in words and in deeds, that we are concerned.

It was urged, you may remember, as a matter manifest in fact, that the laws of
Christ are not sufficient, for the purpose of church government; without the
addition of human canons; in that the christian world have been so divided
about this matter; and have adopted so many different forms of church
government. Which, it is not supposable, they would ever have done, had
Christ's laws been sufficient to that purpose. But by this way of arguing, it
must also be concluded, that there is no certain scheme of doctrine,
sufficiently set forth in the scriptures. Because the christian world are so
divided about the great doctrines of religion. A way of arguing, which leads
directly to that fundamental maxim of deism, That human reason is the best
guide in matters of religion. Such are the pitiful shifts, which even men of
sense betake themselves unto, when driven off the scripture ground.

It was also urged, that authority to exercise ecclesiastical discipline is not
committed to, or invested in a particular church. Because it is obvious to
common sense, that churches are made up of very unsuitable judges in such
matters: as including women, children, superannuated and prejudiced members.
And yet, it was allowed, that cases of scandal ought to be first tried in
particular churches, where they fall out; and if possible, settled by them. But
what gross inconsistency is this? To say that the churches are not, according
to common sense, suitable judges. And yet, that according either to reason or
scripture, it does belong to them to judge first in the case. Baptized
children, it was said, belong to the church. True, they do so. But under the
wing of their parents, who act for them, until they come of age capable of
acting for themselves. And if then, they do not come as desciples of Jesus to
eat the Lord's supper, they can have nothing to do, according to the scriptures
in receiving or rejecting others.

But women also belong to the church, true. And according to the scriptures,
females have as good a right as male-members, to be satisfied of the grounds of
charity for those, with whom they commune in the supper; and as good a right to
the redress of all their grievances. If therefore, they cannot silently concur,
with what the male-members act, they have most certainly a right some way, to
make known their grievance.

As to prejudiced members, that ought not to be suffered, they need to be first
taken care of and reclaimed.

And as to ignorant and superannuated members; there are none, that are capable
of examining themselves and discerning the Lord's body; as the scriptures
require of all that eat the Lord's Supper; but that are able also, by the
assistance of wiser members, to judge about matters of fact. So that when
suitable care is taken, about the admission of members; churches under the
guidance of their pastors, are much better judges respecting such matters as
are cognizable before them, than the jury in civil courts often are, in respect
to many intricate cases laid before them. But it has been urged, that if
ecclesiastical authority be vested only in particular churches; then there can
be no dealing with an elder: but he must be left without control, an absolute
pope. And it is indeed, no wonder, should this seem to some a very weighty
objection. But that it should seem so to any, that read the gospel with
attention, is quite strange. Because it is so plain in the gospel, that he that
runs may read; that there was a plurality of elders, in every of the primitive
churches. See Act. 14.23. And when they had ordained them elders in every
church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord on whom
they believed. Before they had elders ordained; the apostles had the oversight
and care of them: But now having ordained them elders; they commended them to
the Lord, to be under his care and direction; and not under any other juridical
authority under heaven. Accordingly we read of Elders in the church at
Jerusalem; of the elders of the church at Ephesus, etc. Which elders were to
govern, not of themselves juridically; but with the concurrence of the church
over which they presided. Hence it is written, Obey them that have the rule
over you and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls as they that must
give account. Heb. 13.17. It was those that watched for their souls; that had
the rule over them. When one elder therefore transgressed, the church with
their remaining elders, or elder, might deal with the elder offending; as well
as with any other member. Now though a plurality of elders, be not absolutely
essential to the being of a true church; yet, where there is this deficiency of
elders, if the one that is, offends, the deficiency in the nature of things, by
fair deduction from the word, is to be supplied; by calling in the assistance
of neighboring elders; not to rule of themselves juridically; but even as
their own elders, in concurrence with the church Hence also it may be inferred,
That it is agreeable to the gospel plan, that in judicial trials in a church,
in which there is but one elder, neighboring elders should be called in, to
make a plurality or presbytery, unitedly to preside, and to assist and act in
concurrence with the church, even as the plurality of elders did in the first
gospel churches.
.

But we have been referred to the 15th chap. of the Acts for something like a
juridical judgment of council. Excepting which, there was nothing pleaded, from
the form of that council; nor upon any other grounds through the whole discourse,
to show the necessity of consociated, rather than congregational councils. But
as to the council spoken of in that chapter. It is certain, it was nothing like
the form of present consociated councils. As it consisted only of the apostles
that were at Jerusalem, with the elders of, together with that whole church.
For Paul and Barnabas that carried the question; do not appear to have acted in
council. The business of which council, was not any cause of discipline: But a
question of conscience, about the mind and will of Christ; respecting the rites
to be observed in the Gentile churches. And unto the apostles, it did in a
special manner appertain, as inspired men, to declare the mind and will of
Christ in that matter, and accordingly their determination, is set forth in the
scriptures; as a part of the law of Christ, given by inspiration of the Holy
Ghost: Binding upon his churches through all generations.

But the preacher pleaded, in order to make out that their judgment, was a
precedent justifying the juridical judgment of ordinary councils; that its
being said, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, etc. does not imply,
that said judgment was of divine inspiration, any more than all rational
conclusions, that are obtained by a common concurrence of the spirit. And to
make out, that it was really no more of divine inspiration; it was argued, that
the council conferred and reasoned together upon the subject. So that the
determination was merely of reason and not of divine inspiration. A very
notable conclusion indeed, for a minister of the gospel!

The Lord Jesus Christ, declares in his word, That all scripture is given by
inspiration of God. 2 Timothy 3.16. But lo, here comes one in his name: declaring,
that this part of scripture, the determination of the apostles in the 15th
chap. of the Acts; was not, by inspiration of God. Shocking! to all that revere
the bible as the book of God! For by this way of arguing, all those scriptures,
wherein the sacred penmen used reasoning and argumentation; must be set aside,
as not being by inspiration of God. Which lands us directly amongst the
christian deists, as they are called. Thus according to this preacher, the
scriptures are not only deficient to the necessary purposes of Christ's church
and kingdom; but even the scriptures which we have, are in danger of being
entirely invalidated. But what now would you say, my hearers, if this pretended
patron for the Say-Brook platform; should be found by his scheme, removing the
very foundation corner stone of that same platform? The very supposition, you
will doubtless imagine, must surely be without the least foundation. But let
the matter be fairly considered. And then, judge ye, your ownselves, if it be
not most glaringly manifest?

And here, you will be pleased carefully to bear in mind, that leading
proposition, the grand hinge upon which the whole discourse turned: That the
laws of Christ, are not sufficient for the government of his church. Not merely
as to circumstances of time, place, etc. But not even as laws; without the
addition of canon laws and rules of human devising. And with this full in view,
be pleased to hear what the platform says, in the confession of faith. Chap.
1st. art. 6th. are these words, The whole counsel of God concerning all things
necessary for his own glory, man's salvation, faith and life is either
expressly set down in scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be
deduced from scripture; unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether
by new revelations of the spirit, or traditions of men. -- There are some
circumstances, concerning the worship of God and government of the church,
common to human actions and societies, which are to be ordered by the light of
nature, and christian prudence, according to the general rules of the word,
which are always to be observed. Now in what sense the compilers of the
platform, understood this article, and how they meant to act in perfect
consistency with it, even in regard to those very rules which they compiled;
appears from their own words; as in the preface to the confession of faith.
Where they express themselves thus: That you be immoveably and unchangeably
agreed in the only sufficient, and invariable rule of religion; which is the
holy scripture the fixed canon, incapable of addition or dimunition. You ought
to account nothing ancient, that will not stand by this rule, nor any thing new
that will. Do not hold yourselves to unscriptural rites in religion, wherein
custom it self does many times misguide. Believe it to be the honor of
religion to resign and captivate our wisdom and faith to divine revelation.
That you be determined by this rule in the whole of religion. Thus spoke the
compilers of the platform. A language as diametrically opposite, to that of the
late preacher, as the east is from the west. And so again, in the preface to
the heads of agreement. They express themselves thus, There is no constitution
on earth has ever been established on such sure foundations, nor so fully
provided for its subsistence, as the church of God, it being built on the
prophets and apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. The
wisdom of our Lawgiver, King, and Judge, who alone has the original
sovereignty of giving being to, and laying the foundations of the church, and
whose only is the legislative power therein, has given such ample rights and
privileges to the church, and such excellent rules for its government, as are
inviting to strangers like a city set on a hill. Most excellently expressed. As
full to our purpose, in direct opposition to the late sermon, as words can be.

Those venerable fathers therefore, never meant to set forth any rules of
church discipline; but such only, as were in the plain sense thereof, in their
view, evidently contained in the scriptures. Even as they themselves expressly
declare; in this same preface. Saying, For the healing our wounds, a more
explicit asserting the rules of government sufficiently provided in the holy
word, has been thought highly expedient. Thus they never meant to make any new
rules; but only more explicitly to set forth such rules, as they supposed were
sufficiently provided in God's word. Whence they annexed scripture texts to
every article for the proof thereof, though very impertinent to the main point;
as might easily be made to appear. The unhappy mistake, therefore, which
attended them about the matter was really this: That they supposed some things
about church government, to be contained in the scriptures, which really are
not to be found there.

And so dubious it seems, did the matter appear even to themselves, as not to
imagine, they had certainly hit upon the right scripture plan. Whence they
recommended the rules which they set forth, in the following words: Hoping till
it please the Lord, to send forth further light and truth in these more
controversial matters, this method may be a blessed means of our better
unanimity, etc. Further light and truth they did not expect by any new
revelation from heaven; but by a clearer understanding of that already given.

Whence it appears very manifest, that we who cannot find, the sense of the
articles of discipline, to be contained in the scriptures; do act perfectly
agreeable to the fundamental leading sentiments of the compilers themselves,
even in rejecting those very articles which they compiled. And indeed upon
their own principles, they must certainly have approved of us, as acting
therein perfectly right.

But it is really very questionable, if they would have admitted any, holding
such sentiments, as set forth in the late sermon; so much as to communion with
them in any of their churches: much less to rank among them as a minister of
the gospel: For the primitive fathers of New England, were extremely averse to
that doctrine, of the insufficiency of the scriptures, as a rule of church
government; held forth in the leading proposition of said sermon. As well
knowing that to be the gap, through which at first entered, and by which there
was great danger of being again introduced, all the superstitions, rights and
fooleries of the church of Rome. With a special view therefore, to adhere to
the scriptures, as the only rule of faith and discipline, it was, that they
left all the pleasant accommodations of their native country; for this then
howling wilderness.

But how strange! How marvelous strange and astonishing! that a man of sense
should come to us, as in the name of the Lord, publicly to reprove and rebuke
this church; for rejecting a comparitively small part of the Say-Brook
platform! While he himself, at the same time was endeavoring, by a set
discourse, to remove the very foundation corner stone of that same platform!
Yea, and to strike away the main pillar; which in the view of the compilers,
was designed to support the whole! Be astonished ye heavens, and wonder O earth
at this! Let the world say, was there ever such effrontery; such daring
barefaced effrontery; transacted before toward any church in America? If this
parson be not, for his heretical sentiments, publicly delivered in the
presence of some of their own members; called to an account and chastised by
the council that sent him; let all that hear of these matters judge, if they do
not justly deserve to rank with those, of whom our Lord said, "ye blind guides,
which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel?"

But to pave the way for our rebuke, it was very shrewdly noted, that the
apostles never denied the jurisdiction of the Jewish courts, before which they
were called. Notably pertinent indeed! If it be considered, that they
absolutely denied obedience, to their unrighteous commands. Saying, we ought to
obey God rather then men. On whom then, does the designed reproach rebound?

But the stress of the reproof was laid upon this, That we renounced the
consociated connection without asking leave. As though we had no right to do it,
without asking. And if no right without asking; surely none without leave
given. But if unscriptural connections, ought not to be renounced, without
asking, and obtaining leave; all the protestant churches on earth, must have
been to this day, in subjection to the Pope. For surely his pretended holiness,
would never have consented to be so forsaken. And that for this very important
reason: Because it could not, upon his principles, be for the good of the
churches.

But we were rebuked for not asking leave of them, the consociation. And who
are they? Lords over us? Yea, let all that hear thereof judge, if in their
conduct toward us, they are not lording it over God's heritage?

But to complete the farce, we have been charged with breach of covenant, in
renouncing connection.

But was there ever any express covenanting about the matter? Was not the
connection practically fallen in with, merely as custom led the way? And
certainly then, to be practically renounced, as soon as found to be
unscriptural.

But you have been twitted of unkindness, in what you have done: After all he
great and good things which consociated councils have done for you. But surely
all those same purposes, so far as needful, might have been done for you full
as well; by congregational councils; without ever having been obnoxious to
their rebuke; for adhering to the scriptures, or for renouncing unscriptural
connections, without asking their leave.

But it is worthy special remark, that there were no arguments offered, nor
even attempted to be offered, directly to vindicate that very juridical
authority; given to consociated councils in the articles of discipline; with a
special view to which it was, that we renounced connection. So that after all,
the very essence of the great laboring point, was not so much as once
pertinently touched. Our great crime therefore, of which we have been
admonished to repent: When we come to the bottom of the matter; consists only
in this, that the church were not fully agreed. A sad calamity truly. But for
which, no man had ever dared to give any rebuke in the case. This preacher's
attempt to establish the articles of discipline, not by the word of God, but
upon the footing of human reason, brings to mind a saying of Luther's; who
having wrote to Pope Leo the tenth thus, I offer myself prostrate under the
feet of your holiness, with all that I am and have, save me, kill me, call me,
recall me, reprove me, condemn me, even as you please. -- I will acknowledge
your voice, the voice of Christ residing and speaking in you. Here see men,
said he, in my case, how hard it is to rise cut of errors generally received,
and by long custom become as it were natural: How true the proverb is, it is
hard to leave customs, and custom is another nature: And how truly Austine
says, custom if it be not resisted will become necessity. I who had then seven
years read and taught the scriptures most diligently, privately and publicly,
and had some taste of the knowledge of Christ, viz. That we were justified and
saved not by works but by faith in Christ. And now defended publicly that the
Pope is not by divine right head of the church; yet I did not see what
naturally follows thence, viz. that the Pope is therefore of necessity of the
devil; for what is not of God, is necessarily of the devil. I was so corrupted
by example, and the title of holy church and custom, that I granted to the Pope
an human right, which if it be not underpropt with divine authority is a lie
and develish; For we must obey parents and magistrates, not because they
command, but because it is the will of God. His. Mar, vol. 2. p. 3.


If therefore any of you, my hearers, that were the designed subjects of that
lordly rebuke, have been ready, as Issachars, to crouch down under the burden.
You must needs doubtless begin to feel a secret consciousness in your own
breasts; that you have been shamefully faint hearted in the cause of Christ.
Far from that unshaken constancy, and noble magnanimity, which becomes good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, the great Captain of our salvation. Wherefore
seriously consider what the mind and will of Christ really is, about these
matters. And knowing his will, take up your cross and follow him. And be ye
steadfast and immovable in your subjection and obedience to all his commands.
Standing fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. That
overcoming all the temptations, that may be found in your way, through this evil
world: you may finally attain, to sit down with Christ in his throne: Even as
he also overcame, and is sit down with his father in his throne.

As to those of you, my hearers, who affect to be neuters in these matters, it
stands you in hand, seriously to consider, whether it be at all probable, that
the different schemes of church government contended for, can be equally
agreeable to the mind and will of Christ. And if not, it must certainly concern
you, as well as others, to see on which side the truth lies: And to embrace it
with firmness, and to follow it with constancy and diligence. For lukewarmness
and indifferency in matters pertaining to the kingdom of Christ, agree not to
the character of his true and faithful disciples and followers. But as to those
of you, my hearers, who are taken with a great liking to the late discourse; it
is a very pitiful dilemma, that you are fallen into. For if you hold by the
scriptures, as a sufficient rule of church government, you must give up the
articles. And own the congregational order to be the scripture plan. But if
with your patron, you hold to the articles of discipline; even though the sense
thereof be not contained in the scriptures. Then you must give up the
confession of faith. And even that grand pillar, the doctrine of the
sufficiency of scripture, as a rule of church discipline, upon which the
venerable compilers of the platform meant to erect the whole. And so while you
pretend a very great regard for them, yet really renounce the very foundation
on which they meant to build. You will not, I hope, count me your enemy because
I tell you the truth. My heart's desire and prayer to God for you is, that you
may be led into all truth; and that you may be perfect in all the will of God;
built up in faith and holiness; blessed with a part in all the blessings of the
kingdoms of grace here. And that you and I, and all that hear me this day, may,
through the power and grace of God in Christ, finally attain to the world of
perfect harmony, peace, and love, to the everlasting praise of his holy name.

A BRIEF VIEW Of the scripture texts subjoined to some of the most
exceptionable articles in the Say-Brook platform; showing them to be very
impertinent to the purpose of consociated connection and authority.
"ARTICLES for the administration of church discipline, etc. Say-Brook, Sept.
9, 1708." Most certainly it is highly reasonable to be expected, that these
articles compiled by so learned a council, should be supported by the most
pertinent proof to be found in the bible. But although this was a truly venerable
council, yet as general councils have often erred, this council might very
possibly err also. Whose decrees therefore, are not to be received with an
implicit faith. But it becomes us freely to examine and impartially to judge
every one for ourselves, whether they are well supported by the sacred
scriptures, according to which they ought to stand or fall.

Article 1st. That the elder or elders of a particular church, with the consent
of the brethren of the same, have power and ought to exercise church discipline
according to the rules of God's word, etc. This article is so entirely
agreeable to the heads of agreement, and the scripture subjoined so pertinent,
that there needs no special observations to be made upon it.

Article 2d. That the churches, which are neighboring each to other, shall
consociate for mutual affording to each other such assistance, as may be
requisite, upon all occasions ecclesiastical. And that the particular pastors
and churches, within the respective counties in this government shall be one
consociation (or more if they shall judge meet) for the end aforesaid. Psalm.
122, 3, 4, 5, and 133.8. Eccl. 4, 9, to 12. Acts 15, 2, 6, 22, 23. 1. Tim. 4,
14. 1 Cor. 16, 1. Let us see then the propriety of these texts: To prove that
there ought to be such a consociation of the churches; Psalm. 122, 3, 4, 5.
Jerusalem is built as a city, it is compact together; whether the tribes go up,
the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the
name of the Lord. For there are set thrones of judgment; the thrones of the
house of David. Spoken in reference to the orders given under the Mosaic
economy, for all the tribes of Israel to repair to the house of the Lord, the
temple in Jerusalem, both for worship and also for judgment in all difficult
matters. Agreeable to Deuteronomy. 16.6. and 17.8. But what is that to the present
purpose? Is it to be imagined that the thrones of judgment at Jerusalem, were
typical of, or any how pointed at the consociation of gospel churches; to be as
thrones for all parties to repair to for judgment? No surely. See also Psalm.
133, 1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together
in unity. And is this any reason for the consociation of churches? Does it not
plead as pertinently for the unity of all churches, in the Bishop of Rome the
pretended vicar of Christ? Or may it not be as forcibly pleaded by the church
of England, for the unity of all the churches in the kingdom in their
hierarchy? See also Eccl. 4.9, to 12. Two are better than one, because they
have a good reward of their labor: For if they fall the one will lift up his
fellow: But woe unto him that is alone when he falls, for he has not another
to help him up, etc. Thus the royal preacher sets forth (in opposition to the
nigardly miser, of whom he had been speaking) the peculiar benefit and
advantage of social life. But what is this to the consociation of churches? Or
at least, what stronger plea does it afford for the combination of churches
according to the articles, than according to the model of the church of
England, or even the church of Rome? But let us attend to Acts 15.2, 6, 22, 23.
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with
them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them, should
go up to Jerusalem, unto the apostles and elders about this question. (Whether
the gentile converts ought to be circumcised after the manner of Moses.) And
the apostles and elders came together to consider of this matter. -- Then
pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church, to send chosen men of
their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas. -- And wrote letters by
them, etc. Thus the church at Antioch, in a dissension that arose among them
about circumcision, sent up a question about that matter, by the hands of Paul
and Barnabas, to the apostles and elders that were at Jerusalem, to be
determined and settled by them. A question of great importance, respecting the
church of Christ through all generations. God therefore saw fit, that it should
be determined, not by any one, but by all the apostles and elders that were at
Jerusalem; whence the gospel was to go forth unto the nations. In the
determination of which, they were favored with the special assistance of the
Holy Ghost. "For it seemed good," said they v. 28, to the Holy Ghost and to us,
etc. Thus the churches, while the apostles lived, looked to them to make known
the mind and will of Christ. And now they are fallen asleep, it is equally
fitting to appeal to their writings for the decision of every religious
controversy. For unto the apostles were committed in a peculiar sense, the keys
of the kingdom. Math. 16.19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom
of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Whereby is
to be understood a power of binding and loosing doctrinally, i. e. by declaring
the mind and will of Christ, binding upon the conscience. And agreeable hereto,
Jesus breathed upon his apostles, and said unto them, receive ye the Holy
Ghost. Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins
ye retain, they are retained. John 20.22, 23. Hence all the apostolic writings
are binding upon conscience: So as no uninspired writings can be. And in the
proper exercise of this power it was, that the apostles, with the elders and
church at Jerusalem, decided the question sent from Antioch about circumcision.
Loosing the Gentiles therefrom, but binding them, as seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, to abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, etc. A power not
to be claimed by any uninspired men, without daring presumption. The Pope
indeed, who claims as the successor of St. Peter, the infallible assistance of
the Holy Ghost, challenges a right of determining all such matters. But far be
it from protestants. See also 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on the hands of the
presbytery. Thus there was it seems a presbytery concuring in the ordination of
Timothy. But there may be congregational presbyteries for that purpose; such as
officiated in all ordinations in New England previous to the Say-Brook
platform. We come then to the last text, under this article, 1 Cor. 16.1. Now
concerning the collection for the saints as I gave order to the churches of
Galatia even so do ye. Thus St. Paul gave directions to the Corinthian church,
even as he had done before to the churches of Galatia, respecting a collection
for the saints. But what is this to the purpose of churches being consociated?
As there were churches of Galatia, so also there were churches of Connecticut
without being consociated.

Article 3. That all cases of scandal, that fall out within the circuit of any
of the aforesaid consociations, shall be brought to a council of the elders and
also messengers of the churches within the said circuit, i. e. the churches of
one consociation, if they see cause to send messengers, when there shall be
need of a council for the determination of them. 3 John v. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 16.1.
Gal. 6.1, 2. 2 Cor. 13.2. Acts 15.23. 2 Cor. 8.23. -- Let these texts now be
attended to. 3 John v. 9.10. I wrote unto the church, but Diotrephes who loves
to have preeminence among them, receives us not. Wherefore if I come, I will
remember his deeds, which he does prating against us, with malicious words, and
not content therewith neither does he himself receive the brethren, and
forbideth them that would, and casts them out of the church. There was it
seems great disorders in the church, to which the apostle had a special
reference in this epistle; occasioned by one Diotrephes that conducted very
tyrannically; whom therefore the apostle threatened to correct and chastise.
But what is this to the purpose of consociated councils having the hearing of
all cases of scandal that fall out within their circuit? Are they invested with
apostolic authority? None surely will assume such a pretense. See also 1 Cor.
16.1. Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given orders to
the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Thus St. Paul gave direction to the
churches of Galatia, concerning a collection. And does it therefore follow,
that consociated councils have a right to determine all matters of scandal,
that fall out in the churches within their district? How altogether wide of the
purpose? The next is Gal. 6.1, 2. Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another burdens and so fulfill
the laws of Christ. Here christian brethren are expressly directed to restore
one another. How directly contrary then, to the natural import of this text, to
go about to infer from hence, agreeable to the article, that councils have a
right to hear and judge in all cases of scandal? See also 2 Cor. 13.2. I told
you before and foretell you as if I were present the second time, and being
absent, now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all others
that if I come again I will not spare. And because the apostle determined not
to spare suitable reproof, does it thence follow, that councils have a right to
judge offenders? Surely nothing of that nature. See also Acts 15.23. And wrote
letters by them after this manner: The apostles and elders and brethren send
greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, etc. The
apostles and elders sent letters greeting, to the brethren at Antioch; but what
is that to the purpose of councils judging cases of scandal? Next we have 2
Cor. 8.23. Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow helper
concerning you, or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the
churches and the glory of Christ. Here we have the name of messengers applied
by St. Paul to some that were sent by the churches, either to collect or to
carry a collection for the saints, of which the apostle was speaking. But what
shadow of relation has that to messengers judging in cases of scandal? Though yet
according to the following article, the elders may judge and determine as well
without them.

Article 4. That according to the common practice of our churches nothing shall
be deemed an act or judgment of any council, which has not the major part of
the elders present concuring, and such a number of the messengers present, as
makes the majority of the council: Provided, that if any such church shall not
see cause to send any messengers to the council, or the persons chosen by them
shall not attend, neither of these shall be any obstruction to the proceedings
of the council, or invalidate any of their acts. Acts 15.23. 1 Cor. 14.32, 33.
Let us now see what relation these texts have to such a manner of determining
judgment. Acts 15.23. And wrote letters by them after this manner: The apostles
and elders and brethren send greeting, unto the brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia. For as said in the preceding verse
Then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church, to send chosen
men of their own company to Antioch, etc. Thus the text referred to, speaks of
the united concurrence of a whole body. But what is this to the purpose, of
there being so many messengers in a vote, as to make a majority of the council?
The only proper inference from hence would be, that there ought to be the
united concurrence of the whole. See also 1 Cor. 14.32, 33. And the spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets. For God is not the author of
confusion, but of peace as in all the churches of the saints. Thus all things
are to be conducted in the church, in an orderly manner. But what is this to
the purpose of determining judgment according to the article? Can there be no
order in the case, but by a major part of the elders, and so many messengers as
to make a majority of the whole?

Article 5. That when any case is orderly brought before any council of the
churches, it shall there be heard and determined, which (unless orderly removed
from thence) shall be a final issue, and all parties therein concerned shall
sit down, and be determined thereby. And the council so hearing, and giving the
result or final issue, in the said case as aforesaid, shall see their
determination, or judgment duly executed and attended, in such way and manner,
as shall in their judgment be most suitable and agreeable to the word of God.
Acts 15. 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 2.6, 11, and 13.2. Phil. 3.15. Romans 14.2, 3.

In this we have the quintessence of the matter, respecting the juridical
authority of councils: Here the grand canon is erected. Here therefore the
clearest proof is to be expected. Let these texts therefore be carefully
attended to. Acts 15. Refering to the whole chapter, which as to the essentials
of it, has been considered already, under the 2d article. And there shown to
have no manner of relation to ordinary councils judging in cases of scandal.
See then 1 Cor. 5.5. To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Here the
church at Corinth, were directed to cast out one of their own disorderly
members; which is altogether beside, yea even directly counter to, the purpose
of juridical judgment to be given by a council. See then 2 Cor. 2.6, 11.
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was inflicted of many. Lest
Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his devices.
Plainly intimating, that the punishment inflicted upon the incestuous
Corinthian, was done by the mutual concurrence of the many brethren of that
particular church. But who can imagine that to be in any wise to the purpose of
councils passing a juridical judgment upon offenders? It would surely be much
more pertinent hence to infer, that consociated councils have no concern in
such matters. See also 2 Cor. 13.2. I told you before, and foretell you as if I
were present the 2d time, and being absent, now I write to them which
heretofore have sinned and to all other, that if I come again I will not spare.
i. e. The apostle would not spare suitable reproof and rebuke to them that had
sinned. But what is that to the juridical judgment of councils? It is surely
quite off the purpose. See also Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you. Thus St. Paul, professing for himself as in the
preceding verse, to forget the things which are behind, to reach and press
forward toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ.
Here exhorts all that are perfect in the christian profession, to be thus
practically minded, in the diligent pursuit of the glorious prize of the high
calling of God in Christ. As far from the purpose of juridical judgment, as the
east is from the west. Attend then to Romans 14.2.3. For one believes that he
may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs. Let him that eats
despise him that eats not, and let not him which eats not, judge him that
eats, for God has received him. But what is this to the purpose? Except it
be to intimate that after all, this claim of juridical power, is a matter of as
real indifferance, as that of eating or not eating herbs? Which yet in truth it
is not, unless more countenance can be found for it in the scriptures, than is
contained in the texts here cited.

Article 6. That, if any pastor and church does obstinately refuse a due
attendance and conformity to the determination of the council, that has
cognizance of the case, and determines it as above, after due patience used,
they shall be reputed guilty of scandalous contempt, and dealt with as the rule
of God's word in such cases does provide, and the sentence of noncommunion
shall be declared against such pastor and church. And the churches are to
approve of the said sentence, by withdrawing from the communion of the pastor
and church, which so refused to be healed. Romans 16.17. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. by
proportion Gal. 2.11. to 14. 2 These. 3.6, 14.

Let these texts now be attended to: Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you, brethren,
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned; and avoid them. Here St. Paul beseeches the brethren, called to
be saints in the church at Rome, to mark and avoid such among themselves, as
walked contrary to the gospel; which has plainly no manner of relation to
councils in any respect. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Moreover if thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if
he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee,
then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell
it unto the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee
as an heathen man and a publican. Here we have a plain direction given by the
Lord Jesus Christ, for every particular church, to cast out their own members
refusing to hear them; which teaches nothing about consociated councils
declaring sentence of noncommunion, against such pastor and church as refuse
subjection to their decrees. The following texts, are said to be by proportion,
i. e. like reason. Gal. 2.11. to 14. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I
withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For before that certain
came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come he
withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision.
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation. But when I saw that they walked not
uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them
all, if thou, being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as
do the Jews, why compelest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Here Paul
reproved Peter a prevaricating kind of conduct, relative to the Jewish rites.
But it does not appear, either that Paul insisted upon, or that Peter made any
acknowledgment in the case. And yet neither is there the least intimation, that
Paul denounced sentence of noncommunion against Peter. What shadow of
proportion therefore there is in the case, is not to be imagined; except it be
in Peter's withdrawing and separating himself from the Gentiles: The very thing
for which he was to be blamed. But further by proportion, see 2 These. 3.6, 14.
Now we command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which he received of us. And if any man obey not our word by this
epistle, note that man and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Here the brethren of the Thessalonian church, were expressly commanded to
withdraw themselves, from every brother of theirs that walked disorderly, in
disobedience to the apostolic word. Whence by plain proportion, it appears to
be the duty of every particular church, to put away all such as walk
disorderly; in disobedience to the word of truth. Which has no manner of
relation to a council's declaring sentence of non communion with a pastor and
church. And it is surely very unreasonable, that arguments by proportion,
should be so far fetched in such weighty matters.

But now as these texts, subjoined to the several articles that have been
considered, are in no wise applicable to the proof and support thereof, it may
fairly be presumed, the bible affords none at all to that purpose. It is quite
needless therefore, to proceed upon the remaining articles: Because if these
that have been considered, are void of scripture support; these which are the
main pillars, being left without any scripture foundation, must inevitably
fall: And of consequence the whole building tumble to ruin; and great will be
the fall of it. And when once the emoluments annexed, are as thoroughly removed
as the scriptures are from its support, very sudden also will be the fall
thereof.

It is obvious to any careful observer, that a consociated council convened
according to platform, thereby becomes a body invested with such horns of
power, as that whethersoever the body moves, thither the horns move also,
enforcing their every act, judgment, counsel, opinion, or advice with binding
authority. Which being an unscriptural body, ought not therefore to be joined
with, in any case whatever. -- The princes of this world indeed, have fought in
almost all ages, to model the religion of the state to the civil polity. For a
state religion has generally been deemed needful, even by heathen as well as by
christian states. And indeed in some respects, much more reasonably by heathens
than by christians. Because to the heathens, it seemed a very plausible maxim,
that every state had a right to model religion as they pleased; and of
consequence, that all the various members in particular, ought to be subject to
the model which the state enjoined. Whereas by divine revelation, religion is
become a certain fixed and determinate matter: In no wise pliable to the
devices of human policy, but absolutely binding upon every man's conscience,
according to what God himself has enjoined. And therefore every individual,
has an irrefragible right to see and judge for himself. And yet even christian
states, have more generally been endeavoring, to accommodate the modes of
religion to the model of civil polity. Mr. Bowers in his history of the Popes
writes thus, The new form of government introduced (by Constantine the first
christian Emperor) into the state, served as a model for the government of the
church. That during the three first centuries, each church was in a manner
independent (for then paganism was the state religion) but in the fourth and
following ages, great alterations were made in both, (church and state) the
church adapting her government to that of the state. So also the hierarchy of
the church of England, is adapted to the model of the civil monarchy. But
whether there be not in such political forms of religion, designedly adapted to
the model of the civil state, something more than a mere distant resemblance of
the image of the beast, that goes into perdition; deserves a very serious
consideration. As also, whether the model of church government set forth in the
Say-Brook articles, be not in some measure framed in coherence with the model
of the civil government? And whether so far consequently, it must not partake
of the same kind of obnoxiousness to the just vengeance of heaven; with all
other political models of religion? For every mode introduced into religion,
aside from the scripture rule, must needs be at best, such wood, hay, and
stubble as shall surely be burnt up. Happy is he that condemns not himself in
that thing which he allows. And he that doubts is damned if he eat, because
he eats not of faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Whosoever
therefore submits to any model of church government, which Christ has not
appointed, had need see to it in earnest, how he will answer it to his great
Judge, who will shortly be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels; in
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

I take it for granted, (says an elegant writer Gent. Mag. July 1772.
) that the religion of a christian lies in the new testament; that is the great
charter of our salvation, and it is fully and completely sufficient for that
purpose. -- The decisions of synods, councils, convocations, or assemblies of
divines, are nothing to us, can be of no force or value, nor of the least
importance to us as christians, otherwise than as they are found, upon a candid
examination to agree with this rule. -- Upon this foundation, namely, the
sufficiency of the scriptures, and the right of private judgment, the
protestant cause is built. The command of our Lord is not, -- Search the
writings of the rabbis and doctors of the law, or the traditions of the
elders, but search the scriptures for they testify of me. -- An attempt to
establish religion by law, is a weak and vain attempt, and argues great
ignorance of the nature of true religion; neither can it possibly have any
other effect than to make men hypocrites. -- In all the new testament, the
magistrate has no power or authority in matters of religion delegated to him.
-- His business lies only with the civil concerns of mankind; and when he goes
beyond this, or attempts to interfere with the faith of christians, he meddles
with things out of his proper sphere, and most certainly infringes upon the
prerogative and authority of the great Lawgiver and head of the church; it is,
in fact, an attempt to wrest the scepter out of his hand, and deprive him of
his kingdom. The case is the very same, whether this power is usurped by the
Pope of Rome, or the Primate of England; by the convocation of the clergy, or
an assembly of divines.

The church of Christ stands upon a firmer basis than the authority of the
civil magistrate, the determination of councils, or any human authority or
power whatsoever, even upon the authority of Jesus Christ, whose kingdom is not
of this world, neither subject to the law of it, but is purely of a spiritual
nature. -- And to speak of the church of Rome, the church of England, the
church of Scotland, or any particular community of Christians, as a church,
distinguished by any peculiar establishment, distinct from, and independent of,
the sole authority of Jesus, is unscriptural and antichristian. -- The church
of Christ is not, cannot, be in danger from the severest attacks of its
greatest enemies. Establishments of men may be, and often are in danger -- in
great drnger of being overturned; and those, who get their wealth by the craft
of them, may cry out for fear lest they should be buried under the ruins, or
else, like the shrine-makers at Ephesus lose their trade, and consequently
their profit together. Such, no doubt, think they do well to be angry, because
they have so much at stake, when men of more honest and liberal spirits point
out to others, the shallow foundation upon which such establishments are built;
and great art has been often used, and pains taken, to impose upon the reason
and senses of mankind, by making them believe that such establishments are the
true church of Christ, and they have in too many instances succeeded; but the
members of Christ's true church know, or should know, that the foundation of
God stands sure, and never can be in danger from the rudest shocks. -- To any
person, who views it without prejudice, it will appear stronger and stronger,
more beautiful and excellent, the more it is examined; it will appear to be a
building of God, a house not made with hands, begun on earth by almighty power,
supported by his never failing energy, and shall be complete and eternal in the
heavens. -- When the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with
songs, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away for ever.

APPENDIX.
In which an account is given of the essential facts, relative to the conduct
of the consociated council, toward the pastor and first church of Christ in
Newtown.
IN July, A. D. 1770, the pastor of said church publicly declared, that he
renounced that part of Say-Brook platform, entitled, Articles for the
administration of church discipline: as not being in his view, in the main
thing therein aimed at, agreeable to the gospel: And that if the church chose
to take that for their rule of discipline, and in the case impending, call in a
council, which is a suitable political expedient for such churches, as cannot
be agreed among themselves, about the scripture plan of discipline; he would
freely resign the work of the ministry among them; who joined consociated
councils no more. For which he gave his reasons in public print.

With difficulty the church chose a messenger once afterward to attend a
consociated council. In the mean time the pastor had a friendly conference with
two associations on that subject. And at a church meeting, Aug. 16, A. D. 1773,
it was proposed, whether this church mean to stand in the consociated
connection according to Say-Brook platform or not? Voted in the negative. But
as some manifested a dissatisfaction with said vote; upon their desire another
meeting was soon after warned to reconsider the matter; and the Rev. Mr.
Bartlet desired to preach upon that occasion. At a church meeting, Sept. 25, A.
D, 1773. The Rev. Mr. Bartlet being present, was at the motion of the
dissatisfied, desired by a vote of the church to officiate as moderator.

Proposed, Whether it be the mind of this church to stand in the consociated
connection according to Say-Brook platform or not? Voted in the negative.

At a society meeting also, soon after called for that purpose: Proposed,
Whether the society would concur with the vote of the church renouncing
consociated connection? Voted in the affirmative.

Proposed also, Whether the society would choose a committee to call a council?
Voted in the negative, very few it is said being on the affirmative side.

But a considerable number of individuals, according to common report,
afterward signed a petition to the association for their counsel and advice;
which was presented to the association at Ripton, after the council was
adjourned. At a church meeting, Oct. 20, A. D. 1773, was read a circular letter
from the church of Christ at Ripton, desiring the assistance of this church by
their pastor and messenger in ordaining a pastor over them; and Major John
Chandler was chosen to attend on that occasion. And when the ordaining council
at Ripton was about to form, said pastor and messenger being present,
signified, that he, said pastor and their church had renounced the consociated
connection according to Say-Brook platform: And desired therefore to know, if
the council meant to act in the consociated form? For if so, they could not
consistently join them. And as some of the leading members insisted, they were
called to be a council of, and meant to act in that form; said pastor and
messenger refused to join them; but continued present until the next evening.
And no enquiries were made of the reasons of their conduct: But the next week,
was delivered to said pastor, the following notification:

To the Rev. Mr. David Judson, and the church under his pastoral care.
YOU are hereby notified that the consociation of this district, have appointed
the Rev. Mess. Elijah Sill, Nathaniel Bartlet, and Robert Ross, together with
Col. John Read, and Col. Joseph Plat Cook, a committee, to enquire into the
reasons of your renouncing your consociated connection, and use their best
endeavors to reclaim you, and remove all difficulties subsisting among you,
that love and peace may be restored. To meet at the house of Dr. Thomas, at
four o'clock in the afternoon, on the first Tuesday of Dec. next.

ROBERT ROSS, Moderator.
Ripton, Oct. 27, 1773.

And we were also told by common fame, and no other way till the council met,
that the council was adjourned to Newtown, on the last Tuesday of December; but
pursuant to said notification, a church meeting was warned and attended, and
the matter laid before them for their consideration: And adjourned for a week:
Met according to adjournment, when the following remonstrance was read and
agreed to.

To the Consociation's Committee.
GENTLEMEN,
PERCEIVING by the notification sent by the council from Ripton, to me and to
the church under my care, signed Robert Ross, moderator, that the council have
taken in hand, authoritatively to call me and my church to an account, for
renouncing the consociated connection. And to reclaim us, as having already
judged that we have done amiss and ought to be reclaimed. These are therefore
to inform you, though doubtless well knowing to it before, that years since I
have publicly disclaimed and renounced the juridical authority of consociated
councils; as set forth in the Say-Brook articles of church discipline. For
which I have given my reasons in public print, to which no fair reply has been
made. And have, as desired in a christian manner, by the consociation, held a
friendly conference once and again with the association on that subject; by
whom I never yet could perceive any sufficient reasons offered, to convince me
of an error in that matter; nor even to persuade me, as they themselves seemed
inclined chiefly to plead, that there was no very great or essential
difference, but am rather more and more firmly persuaded, the more I consider
and weigh the subject, that the said consociated connection and authority is
entirely void of any warrant, either by precept or example from the sacred
oracles, by which my conscience is entirely bound in matters pertaining to
Christ's church and kingdom: Whereby I am in duty holden to reject all such
ecclesiastical claims, as Christ has given no warrant for in his word, as
being of an antichristian nature. And when one of the Rev. elders of your own
body was present at one of our church meetings, and by the desire of the
dissatisfied, chosen moderator thereof; at which meeting the consociated
connection was a second time fairly voted out; said moderator, was by some of
the leading members repeatedly and earnestly urged, to produce scripture
warrant, if there was any, for the support of the consociated claims; that we
might thereby, if we had done amiss, be reclaimed; but could be moved to no
attempts to that purpose, nor had any thing to object, but that we had a right
to pass such a vote as we did, under his guidance as moderator.

And that now after all this, the consociation should take upon them
juridically to reclaim us, I shall freely submit to the public to judge,
whether it be not in fact a very strange and unaccountable attempt. Wherefore
though I am ready to pay all due deference to you, as Gentlemen, and freely to
render to you as Christians, if desired, merely as such, still further reasons
respecting this matter; yet as I cannot but look upon the juridical measures
now taken by the consociation, to be of such an antiscriptural nature, as
justly to deserve an entire disregard. I am bold therefore to declare in the
face of the world, that I cannot submit thereunto; however I may be
necessitated to suffer undesirable consequences. But leaving all events to the
righteous Governor of the world, and praying that we may all be led in ways of
righteousness and truth. I remain, Gentlemen,

Your friend and servant, DAVID JUDSON.


At a church meeting in Newtown, Nov. 17, A. D. 1773, proposed, whether
agreeable to this church to concur with their pastor in the above written, as a
suitable return to be made by him, to the committee of the consociation, in
reply to their notification to us, dated at Ripton, Oct. 27, 1773, signed
Robert Ross, moderator? Voted in the affirmative. Having in the exercise of
that liberty to which we have a just right as men and as christians, renounced
the consociated connection, from a real conviction, that the authority annexed
thereto, by the articles of church discipline in the Say-Brook platform, is
without any grounds for its support, either precept or example in the gospel;
and therefore in point of duty justly to be rejected. And as the consociation
have, is the exercise of that same authority, which we in obedience to God have
renounced, taken upon them to reclaim us, as being already prejudged guilty by
them; as appears by their notification to us, dated Ripton, Oct. 27, A. D.
1773, signed Robert Ross, moderator. We therefore, cannot look upon ourselves
under any obligations, either in point of duty or even of good manners, to pay
any kind of obediential regard, to such unscriptural, usurped authority over
us. Though yet we stand ready to render unto them and to all others asking merely
as christians, the reasons of our proceed-dure; even as we have herein already
briefly done.

At a church meeting in Newtown, Nov. 17, A. D. 1773, proposed, whether
agreeable to the minds of this church, that the above written be presented to
the committee of the consociation, as as suitable return to be made by this
church, to their notification, dated Ripton, Oct. 27, 1773? Voted with the
concurrence of their pastor, in the affirmative.

The committee met according to appointment, and sent to said pastor to desire
his company or to appoint a time and place for a conference together. When the
preceding votes of the church were sent in to them, with a line signifying
that he would be very willing to wait upon them at his own house when they
pleased; which they did the next morning, and matters relative to their
business freely conversed upon. In the afternoon was that sermon preached,
which was the occasion of the preceding reply. The council met according to
adjournment, but gave out no result. The Rev. Mr. Baldwin preached, and gave a
very seasonable word of exhortation, from Phi. 4.2. The association took into
consideration, a memorial that had been presented, signed by a number of the
church and society, signifying that the pastor and church had gone off from the
foundation on which he was settled, praying their counsel and advice; which
they gave out in the following form:

Dec. 28, 1773.
An association of the eastern district of Fairfield county, met according to
adjournment, at the house of Dr. Thomas, in Newtown.

THE association having carefully attended to the memorial from the aggrieved
members of the church of Newtown, and heard what they had further to urge
relative to their grievances; and having likewise heard what the pastor and
those of the majority of the church saw fit to reply. -- Feel deeply affected
with the melancholy situation of the church, and the great danger of a lasting
division therein. Which they apprehend would be of fatal consequence to both
sides. Are therefore of opinion, that all lawful measures should be tried, to
keep the church if possible from a division, and think that under the present
circumstances of this place, it is especially incumbent on both sides to be of a
moderate yielding disposition; and to give up every thing they can consistent
with a good conscience for the sake of peace. We would therefore earnestly
recommend it to the church and society to reconsider their votes, by which they
have renounced their consociated connection with the neighboring churches; and
thereby relieve the consociation from the disagreeable necessity of renouncing
all further connection with, and watchful care over the church of Newtown. We
desire they would consider, whether the adhering to that vote, will not lay
them under many disagreeable inconveniences? And whether it will not in all
probability be productive of a division of the church? In the almost fatal
consequences of which, they that adhere to the vote, as well as the others must
deeply share. We would earnestly recommend it to the Rev. Mr. Judson, to
consider how far he can go, without violating those principles in church
government, which he thinks himself obliged in conscience to adopt and act
agreeable to, in order to restore peace to this divided church. Would the Rev.
Mr. Judson be willing to continue in connection with the neighboring churches,
attend their associations and consociations, his declining to act, when they
find themselves under the necessity of acting decisively, (which is but seldom
the case) we apprehend would make no breach between the consociation, and the
pastor and church here. We heartily wish the Rev. Mr. Judson might continue his
pastoral relation to this church, if it may be without making a schism in the
body. But unless Mr. Judson and the church and society can be prevailed upon to
comply with the above advice, we are very doubtful whether this can be the
case. If Mr. Judson thinks he cannot comply thus, we would still urge it upon
the church and society to rescind their votes respecting consociational
connection. And would advise the Rev. Mr. Judson to resign his pastoral office
(as he has manifested his willingness to do) in case the majority of the
society and church should be willing to continue in consociated connection with
the churches of this district. We would also observe to the church here, that
we apprehend they imagine, the power of councils upon the Say-Brook platform to
be greater than really it is: Besure greater than what is claimed by this
consociation. As we do not suppose but that every church will judge, whether
they will receive the decisions of a council. And that their obstinate refusal
exposes them only to a sentence of noncommunion in consociational connection;
unless there be scandalous immorality or damnable heresy embraced by the
church; in which case congregational churches at large, or even independent
churches, must renounce communion with such a church in all gospel ordinances,
lest by such a communion they be partakers of their sin. We hope if these
things are duly considered, the church and society will be willing still to
continue their consociational connection. In case this advice be complied with,
we advise those brethren that have been aggrieved with the conduct of the
pastor and church, cheerfully to continue in the communion of the church, and
to banish from their minds all hard thoughts and jealousies, they have
entertained of their pastor and brethren. And we do exhort these brethren
freely to meet with their pastor and brethren, to converse with them upon their
unhappy difficulties, to labor to effect a reconciliation upon the plan here
proposed. But in case the above advice should be wholly rejected by the church
and society, we would yet advise the aggrieved brethren not to shun free
conversation with the other, to see if they cannot come into some plan, in
which they can with a good conscience continue in communion together. For as we
look upon it that a division of the church and society, would be attended with
the most fatal consequences, we can not advise to it, unless absolutely
necessary. But if after all these measures have been taken, the aggrieved
brethren think themselves bound in conscience to discontinue their communion
with the other part of the church, we advise that they lay their grievances
before a consociated council of this district, to consider what relief it may
be proper to grant them under their unhappy circumstances. In the mean time we
would advise them by all means steadily to attend to Mr. Judson's preaching,
and by no means neglect attending public worship at the meeting house, till
such time as they have the direction of the consociation in this affair.

Test. Ebenezer Baldwin, scribe.
Extracted from the doings of the association at Newtown, and compared, per
Nathaniel Bartlet, moderator.


Pursuant to the above advice, a society meeting was holden in Newtown, Jan.
12, A. D. 1774, proposed for vote, whether this meeting will agree, in matters
of difficulty to call a council to advise and act with the society and church,
and vote with them in all such difficult cases; and that this vote be preferred
to the council for their approbation. This vote, as some Gentlemen very safely
say, is what it is. -- See note page 19.


Voted in the affirmative.

Thus far, and no farther have matters hitherto proceeded. Upon the proceedings
of the council and association, it is to be observed, that we hear never a word
of counsel, direction or advice, by them given to the minor party, to endeavor
to fall in quietly and peaceably with the majority of the church and society in
their votes; as a matter of right, that ought to govern in all communities,
even as a thing essential to the orderly subsistence of every community;
excepting where the rights of conscience are violated. But few or none even of
the council themselves, it is presumed, would say, but that with a good
conscience, they could join in membership with a congregational church, were
their dwelling fixed with such. Whereas had the council, from the beginning of
clamorous complaints thrown in before them, urged advice of such a nature,
instead of giving directions and going into measures, which tended greatly to
strengthen and encourage rising opposition, but to terrify the feeble minded of
the major party; no unprejudiced person, that knows how these matters have been
agitated from the beginning, can entertain a rational doubt, but that this
church with their pastor would ere now, have been in peace and quietness; a few
individuals excepted. But of the christian propriety of such proceedings, it is
freely submitted to the public to judge for themselves.


