Mr. Lathrop's THANKSGIVING DISCOURSE.

A DISCOURSE PREACHED, December 15th 1774.

BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED By the Provintial Congress, TO BE OBSERVED In
thanksgiving to God for the Blessings enjoyed; and humiliation on account of
public Calamities.

BY JOHN LATHROP, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by D. KNEELAND; and Sold by SAMUEL WEBB, in Queen Street. 1774.

A DISCOURSE,
FROM PSALM CI.1. I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee O Lord will I
sing.


AUTHORIZED by a divine precept, Exodus 34.22.
and excited by the feelings of gratitude, the inhabitants of these northern
provinces, have made it their constant practice, to meet in their religious
assemblies, at the close of the year, and devoutly offer unto the LORD, their
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

WHEN the fruits of the earth are gathered in, and we are furnished with
provisions for an expensive winter season, nothing can be more proper, than for
a people professing godliness, to unite in paying their thankful
acknowledgments to the father of the universe, for the expressions of his
goodness. -- And we rejoice, that the representatives of this Province, who, in
the present distracted state of our public affairs, have been consulting the
most proper ways to recover and secure our invaded liberties, were not
unmindful of the blessings we receive from GOD almighty; but have invited us to
observe this as a day of general thanksgiving.

BUT although we have much reason to bless the Lord, for the many expressions
of his goodness, through the course of the last year, it is proper, even on
this day of festivity, to humble ourselves before GOD, on account of those
sins, for which he has suffered our present calamities to come upon us, and
implore the divine blessing, that by the assistances of his grace, we may be
enabled to reform whatever is amiss, that so GOD may be pleased to continue to
us the blessings we enjoy, and remove the tokens of his displeasure. See the
recommendation from the Provential Congress, for a day of thanksgiving.


THE exercises of this day, will therefore be different from what have been
usual; and I could think of no passage of scripture, more suitable to place at
the head of a discourse, in which we are to have respect, both to the blessings
of divine providence, and the public calamities which have befallen us, than
the words of David, which have now been read.

A celebrated commentator on the text, has the following observations: -- When
GOD in his providence exercises us with a mixture of Mercy and Judgment, it is
our duty to sing, and sing unto him both of the one and the other: We must be
suitably affected with both, and make suitable acknowledgments of both.
Agreeable to the Chaldee paraphrase, -- If thou bestowest mercy upon me, or if
thou bring any judgment upon me, before thee, O Lord, will I sing my hymns
for all. HENRY o^ the pla^^


LET me then ask your attention, while I mention some of the blessings which
GOD is pleased to bestow upon us; and take notice of the principal calamities,
which, in righteous Judgment, he has suffered to befall us.

YOU will be sensible, the time allowed the preacher on a day of thanksgiving,
will not admit of an exact enumeration, either of the Blessings bestowed upon
us, or the calamities under which we suffer; we must therefore confine our
attention to those which are confessedly of the most importance: But should I a
little exceed the limits commonly observed on these Occasions, the nature of
the subject, I hope, will be an apology for me.

ALL who profess their belief of the holy Scriptures, will be free to
acknowledge, the mercy of God revealed in the gospel, demands our first, our
principle attention.

SUCH is the darkness of the human mind, that had not the children of men, been
favored with the light of divine truth, they would never have found the way to
glory. But the father of the universe, in compassion to the human race, exposed
to misery, in consequence of the spread of moral evil through the World, was
pleased to give his Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
might have eternal life. -- John ^.16.
The dayspring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
-- Luke 1.78, 79.
We have reason to join with the angels, and multitude of the heavenly host,
ascribing glory to GOD in the highest, that on earth there is peace, and good
will toward men. Luke 2.14.


THE mercy of GOD revealed to a guilty World, in the gift of his Son Jesus
Christ, will claim an everlasting tribute of Praise. -- How deplorable would
our condition have been, had the author of our existence, seen fit to leave us
to the power of those lusts, which war against the Soul. -- James 4.^.
Satan, the enemy of all good, was able to seduce our once innocent parents
from their loyalty, and render them obnoxious to the wrath of their creator. --
And had not Jesus Christ who is stronger than the strong man armed, and is able
to subdue all things to himself, Phillip. ^.21.
undertaken the work of redemption, none of our guilty race, could have
entertained a hope of future happiness, or even of life from the dead.

BUT by the gospel of the grace of GOD, life and immortality are brought to
light. -- By the gospel we are made certain of a future state; and the author
of our Salvation, has not only suffered for our offenses, and rose again for
our justification, but clearly pointed out the path to heaven.

WE have reason to be thankful, that notwithstanding, all our unworthiness, the
gospel is continued among us, and we have liberty to worship our creator,
according to the dictates of conscience, without disturbance or molestation.

MANY have endured the greatest afflictions, and suffered the most cruel death,
not only under pagon Monarchs, and the influence of romish inquisitions, but
under the arbitrary government of tyrants, who in ages past, disgraced the
throne of Britain.

NOT to mention persecutions in foreign countries, or look back to the ages of
darkness and gross ignorance, in our own nation, and in the short time which
past between the restoration of Charles the IId, and the glorious revolution,
besides many that were inhumanely murdered, five thousand Protestants died in
prisons, on account of their religion. See the History of England during the
Reigns of the Stuarts.


BUT while multitudes have suffered, because they did not choose to submit to
unscriptural usages, or attend to modes and forms of human invention, we have
enjoyed full liberty of conscience: In no part of the world has the right of
private judgment, in matters of religion, been more sacredly maintained, than
in America.

IN some provinces, all sects and denominations, professing christianity, Roman
Catholics not excepted, are freely tolerated.

IN those provinces where the church of England is established by law,
dissenters are allowed their own forms of worship; but required indeed, as in
most parts of the world, where a form of worship is established by authority,
to pay their proportion toward the support of the established clergy.

AND in these northern provinces, where the order and discipline, which have
generally been observed in the congregational or presbyterian churches, are
favored with an establishment, dissenters from our worship and discipline, are
not only tolerated, but upon their professing to be of other denominations,
they are excused from bearing any part of the expense, attending the support of
the ministry, and form of worship established by law. The following extract
from an Act "passed by the Great and General Court" of this Province, to exempt
the People called Quakers, and Antipedobaptists, from paying Taxes for the
support of Ministers settled by the Laws of this Province, and for the building
and repairing Meeting Houses or places of public Worship, may serve to evince
what was said above with respect to religious liberty, and the tenderness which
is exercised toward such as dissent from the mode of worship and discipline
established by law.

Be it enacted by the Governor, Council, and House of Representatives, that
none of the Persons who are either of the Persuasion of the People called
Quakers, or Antipedobaptists, who allege a scruple of Conscience as the reason
of their refusal to pay any part or Proportion of such Taxes, as are from time
to time assessed for the Support of the Minister or Ministers of any Church
settled by the Law of this Province, shall have their Polls or Estate, Real or
Personal in their own Hand, and under their actual Improvement; taxed or
assessed in any Tax or Assessment hereafter made for the raising any Moneys
toward the Settlement or Support of such Minister or Ministers, nor for
building or repairing any Meeting House or Place of public Worship, or be
obliged to collect any Taxes granted for the purposes aforesaid.

And to the intent that it may be better known who are to be exempted by this
Act.

Be it enacted, That no Person in any Town, District or Precinct in this
Province, shall for the future be esteemed or taken to be of the Persuasion of
the People called Quakers, or Antipedobaptists, so as to have his, her or their
Poll or Polls, or any Estate to him, her or them belonging, exempted by virtue
of this Act from paying a proportionable Part of the Ministerial or other Taxes
in this Act mentioned, but such whose Names shall be contained in a List or
Lists taken and signed by three Members of some Quaker or Antipedobaptist
Society or Congregation, who shall be chosen by said Society or Congregation
for that purpose; one whereof to be the Minister where there is any, who shall
therein certify for substance with respect to the People called Quakers in the
form following, viz. We the Subscribers being chosen a Committee by the Society
of the People called Quakers, who meet together for religious Worship on the
Lord's Day or first Day of the Week in (...) to exhibit a List or Lists of the
Names of such Persons as belong to said Society or Congregation, do Certify,
that (...) do belong to said Society or Congregation, and that they do
frequently and usually when able attend with us in our Meetings for religious
Worship on the Lord's Day or first Day of the Week, and we verily believe are
of our Persuasion.

Dated (...) Signed A. B. C. D. E. F.
Committee.

And with respect to the Antipedobaptists in the words following, viz. We the
Subscribers being chosen a Committee by the Society of the People called
Antipedobaptists, who meet together for religious Worship on the Lord's Day in
(...) to exhibit a List or Lists of the Names of such Persons as belong to said
Society or Congregation, do Certify, that (...) do belong to said Society or
Congregation, and that they do frequently and usually when able attend with us
in our Meetings for religious Worship on the Lord's Day, and we do verily
believe are, with respect to the ordinance of Baptism, of the same religious
Sentiments with us.

Dated (...) Signed A. B. C. D. E. F.
Committee,
which Certificate so signed, the said Committee shall cause to be delivered to
the Town, District or Precinct Clerk respectively, where such Person or Persons
contained in such List or Lists dwell or have Estates liable to be taxed, on or
before the first Day of September Annually; and the Clerk on receiving such
Certificate, shall enter the same at large in the Town, District and Precinct
Book in his keeping, with the time when the same was delivered to him, and
shall deliver an attested Copy of such Certificate and the time when the same
was delivered to him, to any Person desiring the same, receiving therefore, four
Pence only, which Copy shall be received as Evidence on any Trial respecting
the Taxing the Persons whose Names are contained in said Certificate for any
Ministerial Charge or Charges, or for building or repairing any Meeting House.






SUCH tenderness to our brethren who differ from us in their sentiments with
respect to the modes of worship, or the discipline of the church, is much to
the honor of this and the other New England Provinces.

AS the blessings of the gospel, and the privileges of a religious nature which
we enjoy, are exceeding precious, we ought to remember them with gratitude, and
render to the LORD the warmest affections of our heart for the continuance of
them.

WE have reason to be thankful for the smiles of divine Providence upon us with
regard to the seasons of the year, and the general health which has been
enjoyed. -- GOD has smiled on the labor of the husbandmen through the course
of the year: He has been pleased to grant those showers of rain, and kind
influences of the Heavens, which were necessary to perfect the fruits of the
earth. Our markets are filled with a variety of provisions; and notwithstanding
the multitude of strangers among us, we cannot complain that the necessaries of
life are sold us at an extravagant price. The following Regiments are now
Stationed at BOSTON, and at CASTLE-WILLIAM. -- FOURTH BATTALION of the Royal
Regiment of ARTILLERY. -- FOURTH (or King's own) REGIMENT. -- FIFTH REGIMENT.
-- TENTH REGIMENT. -- EIGHTEENTH (or royal Irish) REGIMENT.
TWENTY-THIRD-REGIMENT, Or royal Welsh Fusileers. -- THIRTY-EIGHTH REGIMENT. --
FORTY-THIRD REGIMENT. -- FORTV SEVENTH REGIMENT. -- FIFTY SECOND REGIMENT. --
FIFTY NINTH REGIMENT. -- SIXTY FOURTH REGIMENT. -- SIXTY FIFTH REGIMENT. -- We
have also the following large Ships of War, -- PRESTON, of 50 Guns. SOMERSET,
of 68. ASIA, of 64. BOYNE, of 64: Besides a number of smaller Ships and other
armed Vessels; together with the Transports which have been employed to bring
Troops to this unhappy Metropolis. --


WE have been visited with no uncommon sickness in this Town, or through the
land. The pestilence has not walked in darkness, nor has the destruction wasted
at noon day. -- Such indeed is human frailty, that every year we must expect to
bury some of our friends and valuable acquaintance: But we have reason to be
thankful, when mortal diseases have not been general.

"AND in particular", we have reason to be thankful, from a consideration of
the union which so remarkably prevails, not only in this Province, but through
the continent, at this alarming crisis.

IT must be acknowledged, America never saw a day so alarming as the present^
-- The unhappy controversy which now subsists between Great Britain and these
Colonies, is more painful than any of the distressing wars we have formerly
been engaged in. -- When the Savages annoyed our infant settlements, or those
who we used to consider as natural Enemies threatened to invade us, duty and
interest pointed us to the means of safety. -- Our young men offered themselves
freely to engage in the defense of their country; and being succeeded by
Heaven, victory from time to time, crowned their endeavors. --

BUT when the parent State is contending with us, nothing but the last
extremity, -- nothing but the preservation of life, or that which is of more
importance LIBERTY, can ever prevail with us to make resistance.

WE Glory in our attachment to the House of Hanover. -- We consider Britain as
our native land. -- We shall therefore bear much, we shall suffer many
hardships, before we can entertain a single wish to the disadvantage of our
brethren on the other side the Atlantic. -- We never will rebel against the
Sovereign of the British dominions. -- However provoked, -- however oppressed,
-- however threatened with Slavery and wretchedness, we will never be excited
to any other resistance, than what the impartial world shall Judge absolutely
necessary to our own defense.

BRITONS and Americans, subjects of the same Crown, connected by the ties of
nature, by interest and by religion, maintained the most perfect harmony, and
felt the purest joy in each others happiness for more than a hundred years: AND
would to GOD, that harmony had never been disturbed!

BUT by reason of false, and injurious representations which were made by some,
from whom indeed we might have expected better things, a system of government,
not long since, was formed for the colonies in America, too degrading and
oppressive for British Subjects, quietly to bear.

THE Parliament of Great Britain, some years ago, passed an Act, declaring That
his Majesty in Parliament, OF RIGHT, had power to bind the people of these
Colonies by statues IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER. -- The import of the words above
quoted, needs no discant: For the wit of man, cannot possibly form, a more
clear, concise, and comprehensive definition and sentence of slavery, than
these expressions contain. See the (...) Instructions to their Representatives.


IN this light was the declaratory Act viewed by Americans in general. -- And
by several Acts which have passed since, the inhabitants of these colonies have
been confirmed in their apprehensions, that the Government at home, had
determined to treat them, not as obedient children, but rather as Servants; and
let them know that they held life, and property, and whatever is dear to them,
at the pleasure of masters three thousand miles distant; on whose ambition they
can have no check, on whose power they have no control.

ALARMED it may well be supposed the Americans were, and not doubting but their
gracious King would hear their Petitions, and deliver them from their troubles,
they addressed the throne in the most humble and dutiful manner; but their
Petitions were rejected, and treated with contempt. Arbitrary measures were
taken to prevent the complaints of the injured and distressed from reaching the
Royal ear. -- Assemblies have been frequently dissolved, contrary to the rights
of the people, when they attempted to deliberate on grievances. Proceedings of
the American Congre^^ (...)


"THE attacks on our rights were incessant": Not satisfied with taking away our
money, in such quantities, and for such purposes as they pleased, the
Parliament proceeded, in direct methods, to invade our Charters, and threaten
us with transportation to Great Britain, in order to be tried, on supposition
any resistance should be made, to what the Americans might consider as
intolerable oppression.

HARD is our fate, when, to escape the character of rebels, we must be degraded
into that of slaves: As if there was no medium, between the two extremes of
anarchy and despotism, where innocence and freedom could find repose and
safety. Essay on the constitutional Power of Great Britain over the Colonies in
America.


SUCH were our sufferings, particularly in this Province, -- such our fears,
and such the apprehensions of all America, that it was judged expedient a
Continental Congress should be convened as soon as possible to take our public
grievances under consideration, and point out the most proper means of redress.

DEPUTIES were accordingly chosen by the several colonies from New Hampshire to
South Carolina. -- They entered upon the important business to which they were
appointed, as it become men professing the religion of Christ. -- They made
their humble addresses to the Lord of the universe for the influences of his
Spirit, to lead them in a safe path, succeed their endeavors to extricate an
injured people from their present difficulties, and lay a foundation for
lasting tranquillity, both in Great Britain and America. -- Many prayers were
made for them in our respective churches, and by serious people in their
private retirements.

THE members who met in that illustrious Assembly, were men of the first
character in the several provinces: Men who best understood the rights of
America, and were best able to judge what measures would be most proper for the
inhabitants in general to adopt, in order to recover and secure them.

AFTER Solemn deliberation on the important subjects which lay before them,
they came to a result, which has been made known to the World, and with which
you are all acquainted. -- We have much reason for thankfulness that the
members of the Congress were so remarkably united. -- Those among us who wished
the late oppressive acts of parliament to be carried into execution; were free
to declare, the Colonies would never unite, and endeavored to make us believe,
the Gentlemen who were chosen to represent the several Provinces, were of
sentiments extremely different from each other. Had the Congress dissolved
without forming any general plans, or had the members been greatly divided in
their opinions, it would have discouraged the friends of Liberty, and perhaps
given a fatal turn to our public affairs: But their Union has not only
expressed the Union of their constituents, but had an happy influence to
establish many in their friendship to the American cause, who were before,
wavering -- Their doings will, as they most certainly ought to, have the force
of laws. -- The man that ventures to rise in opposition to them, opposes both
the wisdom and strength of this amazing continent; and certainly no man in his
senses will act so foolish, so desperate a part.

THE penalty to be inflicted on such, if any such there should be, as in
contempt of the American Association, determine to pursue their own private
emoluments, regardless of the public good, is not immediate death, but it must
be confessed, it is very little short of it. -- You will allow me to repeat
some parts of the resolves which declare it. -- Whenever it shall appear to the
Committees which are, or may be chosen in every county, city, and town, for
executing the plans of the continental Congress, that any person within their
respective limits, has violated the Association, the truth of the case is to be
published, -- To the end, that all such foes to the rights of British America,
may be publicly known, and universally contemned as the enemies of American
Liberty; and thenceforth we respectively will break off all dealing with him or
her -- And we do further agree and resolve that we will have no trade,
commerce, dealings or intercourse whatsoever, with any Colony or Province in
North America, which shall not accede to, or which shall hereafter violate this
Association, but will hold them as unworthy of the rights of freemen, and as
inimical to the liberties of their Country.

WHO would not dread such a punishment, as much as any temporal evil that can
be mentioned? -- To be cut off from the privileges of human society and lie
exposed to universal contempt, is next, if not equal to being cut off from
among the living. -- People may affect to sport with popular resentment as much
as they please, when they have a few companions to flatter and encourage them;
but when that punishment, which they may ridicule at a distance, or think
little of in its beginnings, falls upon them in earnest, they must have
fortitude more than human, to support long under it. -- A man of any tender
feelings will be unhappy, when he knows a few of his acquaintance are offended
with him; how wretched must he then be, who is assured the resentments of
almost this whole continent, are raised against him, and that there is no town
or village that he can visit, on business, or for amusement, without being
exposed to the indignation of the inhabitants!

I have dwelt the longer on this particular, because it appears to me of
singular importance. -- The union which remarkably prevails through the
Continent, at this alarming crisis affords great encouragement, and requires
our thankful acknowledgments to almighty GOD.

IT is our duty, as we love righteousness, -- as we love peace, -- as we love
our Country, -- as we love the parent state, -- ourselves and millions of
unborn posterity, it is our duty, to do all in our power, to strengthen and
perpetuate, this union. -- And was I not sure, you are ready even of
yourselves, I would urge you my friends and fellow citizens, by arguments which
influence my own mind, To abide by and strictly adhere to the Resolutions of
the continental Congress, as the most peaceable and probable method of
preventing confusion and bloodshed, and of restoring that harmony between
Great Britain and these colonies, in which we wish might be established not
only the rights and liberties of America, but the opulence and lasting
happiness of the whole British Empire. See the Address of the Provential
Congress, presented to the several Ministers of the Gospel in this Province.


I CANNOT finish this part of the discourse, without mentioning another reason
the inhabitants of this Town in particular have for thankfulness, which, is a
consideration of the unexpected liberality of our brethren toward us, since
the Port has been shut up, by which thousands were reduced to poverty and
distress.

OUR condition would have been calamitous beyond expression, had not the hearts
and the hands of our Brethren been opened to assist us, when suffering in the
general cause.

WE thank our generous benefactors: We thank the Father of the universe, for
enabling and inclining them to do so much for us: And we thank those worthy
Gentlemen, who cheerfully devote a great part of their time to take care of the
money and provisions which are sent in from various parts, and make
distributions to the needy among us, for no other reward, than the consolation
of doing good. Some evil minded persons, have wickedly insinuated, that the
Committee, with whom the donations are entrusted, and by whom they are
distributed to such as stand in need, take pay for their trouble, or they would
never devote so great a part of their time to the service. -- This insinuation
is equally false and malicious. -- Those respectable Gentlemen have indeed the
thanks of the public, and the blessing of many ready to perish; besides which
they neither have nor wish for any reward. -- Is it not base and cruel then, to
insinuate, as some have done, that they pay themselves out of the charities
which were designed for the immediate sufferers.

But some people have a scurvy trick of lying, to support a certain interest,
and if possible injure those who are most faithful and unwearied in the service
of their country. -- But great is truth, and it will prevail.




THUS have we attended to some of the blessings GOD is bestowing upon us in the
course of his providence, which furnish us with proper reasons for praise and
thanksgiving.

BUT as we are called, by the alarming situation of our public affairs, to sing
of the judgments of the LORD, as well as of his mercies, we shall now,
agreeable to the method proposed, take notice of the calamities which GOD has
suffered to befall us.

THE calamities to which we are more especially called to give our attention,
are those which arise from "the present controversy between Great Britain and
the colonies."

WE are unhappy in being represented to the parent state as factious, --
impatient of government, and wishing for independence; when we can safely
appeal to that Being, from whom no thought can be concealed, that our warmest
wish, and utmost ambition is, that we and our posterity may ever remain
subordinate to, and dependent upon our parent state. This subordination our
reason approves, our affection dictates, our duty commands, and our interest
inforces. Essay on the constitutional power of Great Britain over the colonies
in America. p. 52.


GREAT BRITAIN is possessed of a naval power, able to protect our trade, and
guard our coast against a foreign enemy: And the colonies produce almost every
article necessary to support the parent state in her present greatness, and add
unspeakably to her future glory.

A CELEBRATED author, writing on the advantages which would naturally result
from the happy connection between Great Britain and the colonies, was no fatal
interruption to prevent, has the following elegant and striking expressions. --
The immense advantages of such a situation, are worthy the closest attention of
every Briton. To a man that has considered them with attention, perhaps it will
not appear too bold to (...), that if an archangel had planned the connection
between Great Britain and her colonies, he could not have fixed it on a more
lasting and beneficial foundation, unless he could have changed human nature.
-- An Alexander, a Caesar, a Charles, a Lewis and others have fought through
fields of blood, for universal empire. Great Britain has a certainty by
population and commerce alone, of attaining to the most astonishing and well
founded power the world ever saw. The circumstances of her situation are new
and striking. Heaven has offered her glory and prosperity without measure. Her
wise ministers disdain to accept them -- and prefer Mr. Nugent's Speech.
-- a pepper Corn. See the Note in the same Essay. p. 56, 57.


SINCE advantages of the most important nature might be derived to both
countries were they to be perpetually united in affection, as they are in
interest, how ardently is it to be wished, no unhappy controversy had arose
between them. -- But a controversy now subsists, which has a threatening aspect
on America, and Great Britain herself.

MANY calamities are already felt, more and greater are much to be feared. --
Instead of mutual love, and a desire of each others greatness, mutual
jealousies are strongly exercised: The unfailing consequence of which will be,
mutual endeavors to prevent each others interest. A principal of self
preservation, that law of nature, which has an uniform influence on the
children of Men, will excite them to wish the diminution of that power which
they suppose, is at present engaged against them, or in some future time may
rival them. And what they wish they naturally express, and will pursue in every
measure that promises success.

AND can it remain a matter of uncertainty, whether many in Great Britain are
jealous of the increasing greatness of the American interest, and wish to check
the growth of the colonies, when we are told what opposition was made to the
settlement of a new Province by a late minister of State. -- When we hear
another minister declaring he will lay the Americans at his feet. -- When we
hear with Application to one of the largest and most important Towns on the
continent, " delenda est carthago" Which is to be interpreted, let Boston be
demolished. The sage advice of Mr Van a member of the late parliament.
We know how acceptable to many an earthquake would be to sink some of the
colonies in the Ocean. -- That we are thought too numerous. And how much it
would be judged for the interest of Great Britain, if a Pestilence should sweep
off a million and a half of us. Essay on the constitutional power of
Great Britain etc. p. 61. the note.


IF Great Britain is jealous of the increasing interest of the colonies, no
doubt she will exert her power to cheek their growth, or her policy to draw off
their riches as fast as they acquire them. And from the measures which have
been pursued, with unremitting zeal for several years past, the Americans are
made to believe, that Great Britain does not wish the Colonies to make further
advances toward " powerful States". -- The business then is to embarrass new
settlements, -- to lay such burdens on the colonies now planted as to prevent
emigrations to them from the crowded parts of Europe, and establish such laws
as shall render, not only the money, but the persons of Americans, the property
of the British Parliament, or of the crown. The authority of Parliament, has,
within these few years, been a question much agitated; and great difficulty, we
understand, has occurred, in tracing the line between the rights of the mother
country, and those of the colonies. The modern doctrine of the former is truly
remarkable; for though it points out. what are not our rights, yet we can never
learn from it, what are our rights. As for example -- Great Britain claims a
right to take away nine-tenths of our estates -- have we a right to the
remaining tenth? No. -- To say we have, is a " traitorous position", denying
her supreme legislative. So far from having property, according to these late
found novels, we are our selves a property.

See Essay etc. p. 33, 34.




AND should I say, this business has been earnestly pursued, since the close of
the late war, I should have the authority of the greatest and best men in the
nation, -- I should have more than nine-tenths of America to support the
assertion.

THE execution of this business has given rise to the calamities, we are this
day called to lament. -- The time would not allow us to go into a very
particular consideration of the calamities we now feel, together with those
which we fear may be permitted to fall upon us: Let it suffice to mention those
which most sensibly affect us.

SEVERAL laws, have of late been enacted by the Parliament of Great Britain,
for the express purpose of raising a revenue in America. Had those laws been
executed according to their original design, the natural operation of them,
would have constantly weakened the interest of the people in general, by giving
their wealth to the servants of the crown. -- Had those laws been regularly
executed the servants of the crown, would have had it in their power, either to
riot on the spoils taken from the honest and industrious, or accumulate to
themselves great riches. The body of the people, being oppressed, would in time
be obliged to sell their lands, and other estates, and content themselves, if
contentment be possible in such a state, to be the slaves of imperious lords,
on whom, hard necessity had taught them to depend, for their bread. -- And
should they, remembering their former happy circumstances, grow uneasy and
factious, a standing army, supported by money taken from them, would be ready
to humble, or destroy them. -- Figure to yourselves all the calamities which
are felt by the inhabitants of France and Spain, or other parts of the World
where despotism is established, and I will be bold to say, we could have no
security against calamities equally great, unless in the virtue of the reigning
Prince, were the laws which have been passed, with respect to America, since
the last war, fully carried into execution.

IF the British Parliament, may "of right," without our consent, "give and
grant" any particular parts of our property, for any particular purposes, they
may the whole: They may with equal pretentions to right sell our persons as
slaves to what masters they please. For Liberty, Life, or Property, can, with
no consistency of words or ideas, be termed a right of the possessors, while
others have a right of taking them away at pleasure. See Essay etc. 41. See
LOCK on Government. Chap. V. What property have they in that, which another
may by right take, when he pleases to himself? Mr. PITT's SPEECH.


THAT such laws have been enacted, and that any of them are now in force, we
consider as a calamity, and lament that GOD has in judgment, suffered it to
befall the American colonies. -- The laws now referred to, have already done
unspeakable damage. The struggles which have been made by administration to
enforce them, and by the Americans in opposition to them, have not only kept
the whole continent in a ferment, but created such an alienation of affections,
and unhappy jealousies between the two countries, as we have reason to fear,
will never be wholly removed.

IT is a calamity that the parliament have resolved, That colonists may be
transported to England, and tried there upon accusations for treason, -- or
concealments of treasons committed in the colonies. -- Should any unhappy
Americans be accused of treason, and prosecuted according to this act, a severe
punishment would necessarily be inflicted on them, before it could be
determined whether they were guilty or not.

IT is a calamity that the roman catholic religion is established through the
vast province of Quebec, when, as a writer observes, The abject of the bill, is
to cut off all the liberties of the rest of the colonies. The Canada Act has
met with some small advocates in these parts, who pretend the roman catholic
religion is not established by it; and that nothing more is designed by that
part of it which has respect to religion, than a confirmation of what was
stipulated by the treaty of peace. -- But what say the GRAND AMERICAN CONGRESS
to this matter? -- In the session of Parliament last mentioned, an Act was
passed, for changing the government of Quebec, by which Act the Roman Catholic
religion, instead of being tolerated, as stipulated by the treaty of peace, is
established.

THE EARL OF CHATHAM has declared, that by the Canada Act, popery is
established: And LORD LYTTLETON, in his Letter to the abovementioned EARL, does
not deny that the Roman catholic religion is established in the Province of
Quebec, but endeavors to defend the whole Act, without exception. -- After
having said, The Canadians are above one hundred thousand, the English not more
than two thousand men, women, and children. And that the legislature was
therefore to consider whether the law and government ought to be adapted to the
many or the few, he goes on, to consider that part of the bill which has
respect to religion; and says, -- The best distinction I know between
establishment and toleration is, that the greater number has a right to the
one, and the lesser to the other. The public maintenance of a clergy is
inherent to establishment; at the reformation, therefore, as much of the church
estates as were thought necessary for its support were transferred to the
protestant church, as by law established. Surely then when the free exercise of
the national religion was given to the Canadian nation, it could never be
understood that they were to be deprived of their clergy* and if not, a
national provision for that clergy follows of course. -- What we have here
quoted from his LORDSHIP's Letter, is sufficient to show, that he not only
considered the Canada Act as establishing the Roman catholic religion in that
country, but that he supposed the British Legislature, acted a wise and
equitable part in so doing. -- But his LORDSHIP's reasoning does not carry with
it the fullest conviction. -- Suppose, by a strange jesuitical influence, in
some future period, more than one half the inhabitants of Great Britain should
be converted to the Roman catholic religion, would the legislature be bound in
duty to establish that religion, and only tolerate Protestants? -- It must be
so, it seems, if the best distinction between establishment and toleration is,
that the greater number has a right to the one, and the lesser to the other.

Wise legislative bodies, will examine the nature and doctrines of a religion,
before they favor it with an establishment; If they find the doctrines of any
religion are contrary to the holy Scriptures, and are persuaded that it is, in
its nature, unfriendly to the safety and happiness of the community, certainly
they will not establish it, although, the greater number, (of the community)
may, at present, be fond of it. --

Let us hear what the learned and pious BISHOP BURNET has said of roman
catholics, and their religion. -- It is certain, that as all Papists must, at
all times, be ill subjects to a protestant Prince, so that is much more to be
apprehended, when there is a pretended Popish heir in the case. -- Learn to
view popery in a true light, as a conspiracy to exalt the power of the clergy,
even by subjecting the most sacred truths of religion to contrivances for
raising their authority, and by offering to the world another method of being
saved, besides that prescribed in the gospel. -- Popery is a mass of
impostures, supported by men, who manage them with great advantages, and impose
them with inexpressible severities, on those who dare call any thing in
question that they dictate to them.

BISHOP BURNET's History of his own times. If the roman catholic religion is
what the good Bishop has here declared, is it not astonishing, that any
Protestant can plead for its establishment! For a British legislature to
tolerate such a religion, is as much, one would think, as they could do
consistent with their duty to GOD, and to that constitution of civil
government, which they are bound to maintain. --

It may be said a religion is established, where there are laws for the support
of it. -- Thus is the church of England established in a great part of the
British dominions. -- Thus are the congregational order and discipline
established in this Province, and thus is the roman catholic religion
established in Canada.




SHOULD that vast country which is now taken into the province of Quebec, be
filled up with roman catholics, who are by their religion unfriendly to
protestants, and especially to dissenters, it may be in their power, assisted
by the Indians to do unspeakable damage to the other colonies. We may easily
conceive it will be extremely difficult for Protestants, who now have
possessions in that part of the world, to live quietly, or for others to settle
where the established religion teaches its professors, that they may violate
the most solemn engagements with heretics, and exterminate them from their
country when it can be done with safety.

We view it as a calamity, that, by the Lords spiritual, that venerable Bench
of protestant Bishops, a warm opposition was not made to a bill brought in to
establish a Religion in the most important colony of his Majesty's dominions,
which has disgraced humanity, and crimsoned a great part of the world, with
innocent blood.

BY the part which the venerable seat of Bishops took in the Canada act, the
unparallelled sufferings of our ancestors, by the influence of some protestant
Bishops, The high Church party says Bishop Burnet, have all along been
unfriendly to the government established on revolution principles: They have
not been wanting to reproach those who were of moderate sentiments, and abuse
the dissenters, -- Why? Because moderate churchmen and Dissenters in general,
have been friends to the rights of mankind, and honest enough to oppose Tyrants
in church and state.

I would here beg leave to insert a paragraph from a Pamphlet which fell into
my hands since this discourse was delivered, called, An address to Protestant
Dissenters of all Denominations etc, -- The measures that are now carrying on
against the North-American colonies are alone a sufficient indication of the
disposition of the court toward you. The pretense for such outrageous
proceedings, conducted with such indecent and unjust precipitation, is much too
slight to account for them. The true cause of such violent amimosity must have
existed much earlier and deeper. In short, it can be nothing but the Americans
(particularly those of New England) being chiefly dissenters and whigs. For the
whole conduct of the present ministry demonstrates, that what was merit in the
two late reigns, is demerit in this. And can you suppose that those who are so
violently hostile to the offspring of the English dissenters, should be
friendly to the remains of the parent stock? I trust that both you and they
will make it appear, that you have not degenerated from the principles and
spirit of your illustrious ancestors, and that you are no more to be outwitted
or overawed than they were.


in former Reigns, are brought fresh to view: And we cannot but apprehend, a
foundation is laid, for like ecclesiastical tyranny, at least, in the province
of Quebec, should a prince of arbitrary sentiments, hereafter be placed on the
throne.

WE view it as a calamity, that our most gracious King was pleased to give his
royal assent to the Canada Act, by which he has grieved the greatest part of
his faithful subjects. -- But I forbear. -- That unfortunate Prince, who was
obliged to fly from Great Britain, to make way for the Hanoverian succession,
was charged among other things, with promoting the Roman catholic Religion --
May the reign of our present rightful Sovereign be long and happy. -- May he
ever enjoy the full confidence, and affection of all, and especially of his
protestant subjects.

WE view it as a calamity, that the Parliament have passed an act to alter our
ancient method of appointing Juries. -- With a Governor and Council entirely
dependent on the crown: With Judges and Sheriffs dependent on the Governor, and
all entirely independent on the people, we cannot suppose there is provision
for the impartial administration of justice: But we have the greatest reason to
fear, should any Americans be so unhappy, as to be brought into a dispute with
crown officers, or any, who on account of their good disposition toward some
late acts of Parliament respecting the Colonies, are called friends of
Government, a jury returned by such sheriffs, would be under an influence,
extremely threatening to the lives and liberties, of such unfortunate subjects.

THE noble Lords who entered their dissent, have given a reason, which has
respect to this part of the Act for regulating the government, sufficient to
convince every mind capable of feeling the force of argument, and is worthy to
be writ in letters of gold. -- They dissent, -- Because the Governor and
Council have the means of returning such a Jury, in each particular cause, as
may best suit with the gratification of their passions and interests. The
lives, liberties and properties of the subject are put into their hands without
control, and the invaluable right of trial by jury is turned into A SNARE FOR
THE PEOPLE, who have hitherto looked upon it as their main security against the
licentiousness of power. Much to our purpose is the following extract from
Doctor PETTINGAL's celebrated Enquiry into the use and practice of Juries among
the Greeks and Romans.

The privilege that every Englishman enjoys of having his person and property
so far secured, that no injury, under pretense of law can be done to one or the
other, but by the consent and approbation of twelve men of his own rank, is the
greatest happiness that can belong to a subject, and the most valuable blessing
that can attend society; for by this means the poor stands in no fear of
oppression from his governor or powerful neighbor; and the hands of the great
are tied up from disturbing the public by making inroads upon the ease and
property of individuals below them. -- So that the powers of each, in their
respective stations, are hereby happily directed to carry on one and the same
end, the peace, order, and good government of the whole.

In another place the same great Man writes, -- The trial by Jury was founded
on liberty, and contrived both in the Grecian and Roman polity, as a guard and
protection of the lower people, against the power and arbitrary judgments of
their superiors. -- And again, Civil liberty, being thus, both in Greece and
Rome, founded in equality, that is, a joint power and participation of enacting
and executing laws, we hence see the reason why the trial by our equals, the
legale judicium parium sucrum, makes so great a figure in the character of
English liberties; for while we are bound by no laws but those we consent to,
and suffer no judgment under those laws but by the approbation of honest men of
our own rank and condition, who have no interest in injustice, but an
expectation of the same candor and integrity in us upon some other occasions,
where perhaps we may be a jury on them or their affairs, there is no danger of
being ruined and undone by arbitrary laws, or oppressed by the partial
determination of a corrupt Judge. This was the liberty and happiness that arose
from the equality which was the foundation of the Greek and Roman constitution,
and is the very spirit and life of our own. -- p. 8. in Preface, 1.25, and 26.
in the Enquiry.. --




WE view it as a calamity that the British Parliament have lately passed "an
Act for regulating the government" of this Province, by which the most
important rights of our charter are violated, and the way is prepared for
exercising an arbitrary and despotic government over us.

ATTEMPTS to execute this act have already slung the Province into great
disorder. -- The inhabitants consider their charter, granted on the faith of
Kings, as sacred, and they cannot be prevailed with, either by flattery or
threats, to give it up. -- Those Gentlemen who have accepted the place of
Counselors on the new plan, are viewed as unfriendly to our constitutional
liberties: -- Our Courts of Justice are shut up: And we are nearly reduced to a
state of nature, -- In short we have no security for life, or property, or any
of the blessings of society, but from the virtue and resolutions of the
inhabitants in general.

"TO change the government of a people", says the BISHOP of St. ASAPH, who is
an honor to the sacred order, and an ornament to human nature, -- to change
the government of a people without their consent, is the highest and most
arbitrary act of sovereignty that one nation can exercise over another. The
Romans hardly ever proceeded to this extremity, even over a conquered nation,
'till its frequent revolts and insurrections, had made them deem it
incorrigible. -- The very idea of it implies a most total and abject, slavish
dependence in the inferior state.

THAT great and good man well knew, that attempts to change the government of
this province, would be productive of the utmost confusion: -- "It will make
them mad."

THE noble Lords, who opposed the bill for regulating the government of this
Province, entered their dissent, -- Because, say they, we think the appointment
of all the members of the Council, which by this bill is vested in the crown,
is not a proper provision for preserving the equilibrium of the colony
constitution. The power given to the crown of occasionally increasing and
lessening the number of the council on the report of governors, and at the
pleasure of ministers, must make those governors and ministers masters of every
question in that assembly, and by destroying its freedom of deliberation will
wholly annihilate its use. --

BUT the calamities arising from the unhappy controversy at present subsisting
between Great Britain and America, with which we, the inhabitants of this town,
are most sensibly, and in a peculiar manner affected, are yet unnoticed.

WHEN we look back, on our once happy state, and compare the blessings of peace
and plenty, which we freely enjoyed, with our present distresses, " the tears
are on our cheeks". How does the the city set solitary that was full of people!
How is she become as a widow! She that was great among the nations, and
princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary! Lamentations Chap.
1.1.


THE GOD of nature has taught us by the situation and uncommon advantages of
this place, that it was designed for extensive business: And here our fathers
planted themselves, that they and their posterity might prosecute those
branches of trade and merchandise, which give riches and strength, to nations
and states. -- And this, for many years, has been the peaceful residence of
commerce and wealth.

WHAT joy have we felt to see this capacious and safe harbor, white, with the
canvass of our own ships, or of foreigners who came to exchange their
treasures, for the commodities which we had to spare.

BUT how affecting is the change; How gloomy is the present appearance! -- Look
to our port, and you see it blocked up with British Ships of war -- No vessels
of trade are allowed to enter this harbor. -- Commerce which gave wealth to
many, and the means of a comfortable subsistence to thousands, has now ceased.
-- The well built wharfs are either left naked, or lined with transports, which
have been employed to bring the King's troops to this place. -- Stores which
were designed for merchandise, are, either unoccupied, or strange to relate! --
turned into barracks! -- Our public streets, -- our most pleasant walks are
filled with armed soldiers. -- The only avenue to the town by land is fortified
on each side, with heavy cannon, and strongly guarded day and night. -- In
short, all things wear the shocking appearances of war: Of war, not with the
natives of the wilderness, or those foreign enemies with whom we have formerly
engaged with success. -- But, -- how shall I speak? -- Of war between
Great Britain and the colonies! -- Between fellow subjects!! Between brethren!!!

BUT why these strange appearances? Why is the power of Great Britain so
unnaturally directed against America? -- Why is this Town filled with troops?
Why is this port blocked up, and the trade of the place ruined? -- certainly we
must have been guilty as a people of the most daring crimes. -- Nothing less
than an open and generally avowed rebellion against the best of Princes, one
would think, could justify such treatment. -- Have we been thus guilty? -- Are
we, thus charged? -- No. -- What then is our crime? -- It is not pretended to
be any more than a trespass, committed by some unknown persons, on private
property. -- Because a number of people, we know not who, destroyed some
cargoes of East India Tea, this whole community has been condemned, without
trial, and is this day suffering in a manner that can scarcely be parallelled
in the history of the world.

IT is supposed by the rigorous manner in which the port act is executed,
poverty, distress and calamity, are brought on 30,000 souls. The damages
arising from the execution of the Port Act are immense: Supposing 30000 people
suffer the loss of 1 s sterling pr day, one with another; which I believe will
be judged far short of what is real, considering the destruction of Trade, --
the multitudes flung into idleness, -- the useless condition of shipping,
Wharfs, Stores, Warehouses etc. And the damages the last Six months will be
270000 pounds Sterling.


OTHER calamities might have been mentioned, and those we have taken notice of
enlarged upon, did the time admit. -- You will just allow me to say, should the
British administration determine fully to execute the laws, of which we
complain: Or in other words, -- should the prime minister determine to LAY THE
AMERICANS AT HIS FEET; and should the new parliament grant supplies for that
purpose, we have yet to fear the calamities of a long civil war: For, from the
spirit now raised through this continent, and the firm union which subsists, it
may be presumed the struggle would be obstinate.

AMERICANS, who have been used to war from their infancy, would spill their
best blood, rather than submit to be hewers of wood, or drawers of water, for
any ministry or nation in the world. See the address of the American Congress
to the People of Great Britain.


BUT we hope in GOD, and it shall be our daily prayer, that matters may never
come to this. -- We hope some wise and equitable plan of accommodation may take
place. -- For the salvation of the parent state, as well as of these provinces,
we sincerely hope the measures, with respect to America, adopted by the last
parliament, and pursued with vigor by the ministry, may be essentially altered
by this.

WE hope the rights and liberties of the colonies may be established on a solid
and immovable basis: And that this Town may emerge from its present distressed
and most calamitous state, and be a more prosperous, more rich and happy place
than ever yet it has been.

LET us then humble ourselves before God on account of our sins: Let us reform
whatever is amiss, -- That so God may be pleased to continue to us the
blessings we enjoy, and remove the tokens of his displeasure, by causing
harmony and union to be restored between Great Britain and these Colonies, that
we may again rejoice in the smiles of our sovereign, and the possession of
those privileges which have been transmitted to us, and have the hopeful
prospect that they shall be handed down entire to posterity, under the
protestant succession, in the illustrious House of HANOVER. See the
recommendation from the Provincial Congress for a day of thanksgiving.


Errata. p. 9. l. 8. r. pagan. p. 19. at the bottom r. acquaintance. p. 20, in
the note. r. provin^ial. p. ^8. l. 17. r. object.

FINIS.

