AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH FIFTH, 1774.

AN ORATION; DELIVERED March 5, 1774. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON: TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH 1770.

BY THE HONORABLE JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE

Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potent^m
Imposuit: fixit leges pretio atque refixit.
Non, mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas,
-- possim.
VIRG. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, in QUEEN STREET, M,DCC,LXXIV.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly assembled at Faneuil-Hall, and from thence Adjourned to the
Old-South-Meeting-House, on Saturday the Fifth of MARCH, Anno Domini, 1774.
UPON a Motion made, Voted Unanimously, That the Thanks of the Town be and
hereby are given to the Honorable JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire for the elegant and
spirited ORATION delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the
horrid MASSACRE perpetrated on the Evening of the 5th of March, 1770, by a
Party of Soldiers of the XXIXth Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas
Preston, and that Mr. Samuel Adams, Dr. Joseph Warren, William Phillips, Esquire
Dr. Benjamin Church, John Adams, Esquire Mr. William Molineaux, and Samuel
Pemberton, Esquire
Be a Committee to wait upon Mr. HANCOCK, and, in the Name of the Town, desire
a Copy of the ORATION for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN!
THE unanimous Request of the Town of BOSTON, constrains me, against my private
Inclination, to yield to a Publication of this Performance.

I am, with the utmost Respect, Gentlemen, Your most obliged, and Most obedient
humble Servant, JOHN HANCOCK.
Boston, March 5th, 1774.
AN ORATION.
MEN, BRETHREN, FATHERS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN!
THE attentive gravity, the venerable appearance of this crowded audience, the
dignity which I behold in the countenances of so many in this great Assembly,
the solemnity of the occasion upon which we have met together, joined to a
consideration of the part I am to take in the important business of this day,
fill me with an awe hitherto unknown; and heighten the sense which I have ever
had, of my unworthiness to fill this sacred desk; but, allured by the call of
some of my respected fellow-citizens, with whose request it is always my
greatest pleasure to comply, I almost forgot my want of ability to perform what
they required. In this situation, I find my only support, in assuring myself
that a generous people will not severely censure what they know was well
intended, though it is want of merit, should prevent their being able to applaud
it. And I pray, that my sincere attachment to the interest of my country, and
hearty detestation of every design formed against her liberties, may be
admitted as some apology for my appearance in this place.

I HAVE always from my earliest youth, rejoiced in the felicity of my
Fellow-men, and have ever considered it as the indispensible duty of every
member of society to promote, as far as in him lies, the prosperity of every
individual, but more especially of the community to which he belongs; and also,
as a faithful subject of the state, to use his utmost endeavors to detect, and
having detected, strenuously to oppose every traitorous plot which its enemies
may devise for its destruction. Security to the persons and properties of the
governed, is so obviously the design and end of civil government, that to
attempt a logical proof of it, would be like burning tapers at noonday, to
assist the sun in enlightening the world; and it cannot be either virtuous or
honorable, to attempt to support a government, of which this is not the great
and principal basis; and it is to the last degree vicious and infamous to
attempt to support a government which manifestly tends to render the persons
and properties of the governed insecure. Some boast of being friends to
government; I am a friend to righteous government, to a government founded upon
the principles of reason and justice; but I glory in publicly avowing my
eternal enmity to tyranny. Is the present system which the British
administration have adopted for the government of the colonies, a righteous
government? Or is it tyranny? -- Here suffer me to ask (and would to Heaven
there could be an answer) What tenderness? What regard, respect or
consideration has Great Britain shown in their late transactions for the
security of the persons or properties of the inhabitants of the colonies? or
rather, What have they omitted doing to destroy that security? They have
declared that they have, ever had, and of right ought ever to have, full power
to make laws of sufficient validity to bind the colonies in all cases whatever:
They have exercised this pretended right by imposing a tax upon us without our
consent; and lest we should show some reluctance at parting with our property,
her fleets and armies are sent to enforce their mad pretensions. The town of
Boston, ever faithful to the British Crown, has been invested by a British
fleet: The troops of George the Third have crossed the wide atlantic, not to
engage an enemy, but to assist a band of TRAITORS in trampling on the rights
and liberties of his most loyal subjects in America, -- those rights and
liberties which as a father he ought ever to regard, and as a King he is bound
in honor to defend from violations, even at the risque of his own life.

LET not the history of the illustrious house of Brunswick inform posterity,
that a King descended from that glorious monarch George the second, once sent
his British subjects to conquer and enslave his subjects in America; but be
perpetual infamy entailed upon that villain who dared to advise his Master to
such execrable measures; for it was easy to foresee the consequences which so
naturally followed upon sending troops into America, to enforce obedience to
acts of the British parliament, which neither God nor man ever empowered them
to make. It was reasonable to expect that troops who knew the errand they were
sent upon, would treat the people whom they were to subjugate, with a cruelty
and haughtiness, which too often buries the honorable character of a soldier,
in the disgraceful name of an unfeeling ruffian. The troops upon their first
arrival took possession of our Senate House, and pointed their cannon against
the Judgment-hall, and even continued them there whilst the Supreme Court of
Judicature for this Province was actually sitting to decide upon the lives and
fortunes of the King's subjects. -- Our streets nightly resounded with the
noise of riot and debauchery; our peaceful citizens were hourly exposed to
shameful insults, and often felt the effects of their violence and outrage. But
this was not all: As though they thought it not enough to violate our civil
Rights, they endeavored to deprive us of the enjoyment of our religious
privileges, to viciate our morals, and thereby render us deserving of
destruction. Hence the rude din of arms which broke in upon your solemn
devotions in your temples, on that day hallowed by Heaven, and set apart by God
himself for his peculiar worship. Hence, impious oaths and blasphemies so often
tortured your unaccustomed ear. Hence, all the arts which idleness and luxury
could invent, were used, to betray our youth of one sex into extravagance and
effeminacy, and of the other to infamy and ruin; and did they not succeed but
too well? Did not a reverence for religion sensibly decay? Did not our infants
almost learn to lisp out curses before they knew their horrid import? Did not
our youth forget they were Americans, and regardless of the admonitions of the
wise and aged, servilely copy from their tyrants those vices which (...) must
overthrow the empire of Great Britain? And must I be compelled to acknowledge,
that even the noblest, fairest part of all the lower creation did not entirely
escape the cursed snare? When virtue has once erected her throne within the
female breast, it is upon so solid a basis that nothing is able to expel the
heavenly inhabitant. But have there not been some, few indeed, I hope, whose
youth and inexperience have rendered them a prey to wretches, whom upon the
least reflection, they would have despised and hated as foes to God and their
country? I fear there have been some such unhappy instances; or why have I seen
an honest father clothed with shame? or why a virtuous mother drowned in tears?

BUT I forbear, and come reluctantly to the transactions of that dismal night,
when in such quick succession we felt the extremes of grief, astonishment and
rage; when Heaven in anger, for a dreadful moment, suffered Hell to take the
reins; when Satan with his chosen band opened the sluices of New-England's
blood, and sacrilegiously polluted our land with the dead bodies of her
guiltless sons. Let this sad tale of death never be told without a tear; let
not the heaving bosom cease to burn with a manly indignation at the barbarous
story, through the long tracts of future time: Let every parent tell the shameful
story to his listening children till tears of pity glisten in their eyes, and
boiling passion shakes their tender frames; and whilst the anniversary of that
ill-fated night is kept a jubilee in the grim court of pandaemonium, let all
America join in one common prayer to Heaven, that, the inhuman, unprovoked
murders of the Fifth of March 1770, planned by Hillsborough, and a knot of
treacherous knaves in Boston, and executed by the cruel hand of Preston and his
sanguinary coadjutors, may ever stand on history without a parallel. But what,
my countrymen, withheld the ready arm of vengeance from executing instant
justice on the vile assassins? Perhaps you feared promiscuous carnage might
ensue, and that the innocent might share the fate of those who had performed
the infernal deed. But were not all guilty? Were you not too tender of the
lives of those who came to fix a yoke on your necks? But I must not too
severely blame a fault, which great souls only can commit. May that
magnificence of spirit which scorns the low pursuits of malice, may that
generous compassion which often preserves from ruin, even a guilty villain,
forever actuate the noble bosoms of Americans! -- But let not the miscreant
host vainly imagine that we feared their arms. No; them we despised; we dread
nothing but slavery. Death is the creature of a Poltroon's brains; it is
immortality, to sacrifice ourselves for the salvation of our country. We fear
not death. That gloomy night, the pale faced moon, and the affrighted stars
that hurried through the sky, can witness that we fear not death. -- Our
hearts, which at the recollection glow with a rage that four revolving years
have scarcely taught us to restrain, can witness that we fear not death; and
happy it is for those who dared to insult us, that their naked bones are not now
piled up an everlasting monument of Massachusett's bravery. But they retired,
they fled, and in that flight they found their only safety. We then expected
that the hand of public justice would soon inflict that punishment upon the
murderers, which by the laws of God and man they had incurred. But let the
unbiased pen of a Robinson, or perhaps of some equally famed American, conduct
this trial before the great tribunal of succeeding generations. And though the
murderers may escape the just resentment of an emaged people, though drowsy
justice intoxicated by the poisonous draught prepared for her cup, still nods
upon her rotten feat, yet be assured, such complicated crimes will meet their
due reward. Tell me, ye bloody butchers, ye villains high and low, ye wretches
who contrived, as well as you who executed the inhuman deed, do you not feel
the goads and stings of conscious guilt pierce through your savage bosoms?
Though some of you may think yourselves exalted to a height that bids defiance
to the arms of human justice, and others shroud yourselves beneath the mask of
hypocrisy, and build your hopes of safety on the low arts of cunning, chicanery
and falsehood; yet, do you not sometimes feel the gnawings of that worm which
never dies? Do not the injured shades of Maverick, Gray, Caldwell, Attucks and
Carr, attend you in your solitary walks, arrest you even in the midst of your
debaucheries, and fill even your dreams with terror? But if the unappeased
manes of the dead should not disturb their murderers, yet sorely even your
obdurate hearts must shrink, and your guilty blood must chill within your rigid
veins, when you behold the miserable Monk, the wretched victim of your savage
cruelty. Observe his tottering knees which scarce sustain his wasted body, look
on his haggard eyes, mark well the deathlike paleness on his fallen cheek, and
tell me, does not the sight plant daggers in your souls? Unhappy Monk! Cut off
in the gay morn of manhood from all the joys which sweeten life, doomed to drag
on a pitiful existence without even a hope to taste the pleasures of returning
health! Yet Monk, thou live not in vain; thou live a warning to thy country
which sympathises with thee in thy sufferings; thou live an affecting, an
alarming instance of the unbounded violence which lust of power, assisted by a
standing army, can lead a traitor to commit.

FOR us he bled, and now languishes. The wounds by which he is tortured to a
lingering death were aimed at our country! surely the meek-eyed charity can
never behold such sufferings with indifference. Nor can her lenient hand
forbear to pour oil and wine into these wounds; and to assuage at least, what
it cannot heal.

PATRIOTISM is ever united with humanity and compassion. This noble affection
which impels us to sacrifice every thing (...), even life itself, to our
country, involves in it a common sympathy and tenderness for every citizen, and
must ever have a particular feeling for one who suffers in a public cause.
Thoroughly persuaded of this, I need not add a word to engage your compassion
and bounty toward a fellow citizen, who with long protracted anguish falls a
victim to the relentless rage of our common enemies.

YE dark designing knaves, ye murderers, parricides! how dare you tread upon
the earth, which has drank in the blood of slaughtered innocents shed by your
wicked hands? How dare you breathe that air which wafted to the ear of heaven
the groans of those who fell a sacrifice to your accursed ambition? But if the
laboring earth does not expand her jaws, if the air you breathe is not
commissioned to be the minister of death; yet, hear it, and tremble! the eye of
Heaven penetrates the darkest chambers of the soul, traces the leading clue
through all the labyrinths which your industrious folly has devised; and you,
however you may have screen'd yourselves from human eyes, must be arraigned,
must lift your hands, red with the blood of those whose death you have
procured, at the tremendous bar of God.

BUT I gladly quit the gloomy theme of death, and leave you to improve the
thought of that important day, when our naked Souls must stand before that
Being, from whom nothing can be hid. -- I would not dwell too long upon the
horrid effects which have already followed from quartering regular troops in
this town; let our misfortunes teach posterity to guard against such evils for
the future. Standing armies are sometimes, (I would by no means say generally,
much less universally) composed of persons who have rendered themselves unfit
to live in civil society; who have no other motives of conduct than those which
a desire of the present gratification of their passions suggests; who have no
property in any country; -- Men who have lost or given up their own liberties,
and envy those who enjoy liberty; who are equally indifferent to the glory of a
GEORGE or a Lewis; who for the addition of one penny a day to their wages would
desert from the christian cross, and fight under the crescent of the Turkish
Sultan; from such men as these, what has not a state to fear? With such as
these, usurping Caesar passed the Rubicon; with such as these he humbled mighty
Rome, and forced the mistress of the world to own a master in a traitor. These
are the men whom sceptered robbers now employ to frustrate the designs of God,
and render vain the bounties which his gracious hand pours indiscriminately
upon his creatures. By these the miserable slaves in Turkey, Persia, and many
other extensive countries, are rendered truly wretched, though their air is
salubrious, and their soil luxuriously fertile. -- By these France and Spain,
'tho' blessed by nature with all that administers to the convenience of life,
have been reduced to that contemptible state in which they now appear; and by
these Britain -- But if I was possessed of the gift of prophecy, I dare not,
except by divine command, unfold the leaves on which the destiny of that once
powerful kingdom is inscribed.

BUT since standing armies are so hurtful to a state, perhaps, my countrymen
may demand some substitute, some other means of rendering us secure against the
incursions of a foreign enemy. But can you be one moment at a loss? Will not a
well disciplined militia afford you ample security against foreign foes? We
want not courage; it is discipline alone in which we are exceeded by the most
formidable troops that ever trod the earth. Surely our hearts flutter no more
at the sound of war, than did those of the immortal band of Persia, the
Macedonian phalanx, the invincible Roman legions, the Turkish Janissaries, the
Gens des Arms of France, or the well known Grenadiers of Britain. A well
disciplined militia is a safe, an honorable guard to a community like this,
whose inhabitants are by nature brave, and are laudably tenacious of that
freedom in which they were born. From a well regulated militia we have nothing
to fear; their interest is the same with that of the state. When a country is
invaded, the militia are ready to appear in it is defense; they march into the
field with that fortitude which a consciousness of the justice of their cause
inspires; they do not jeopard their lives for a master who considers them only
as the instruments of his ambition, and whom they regard only as the daily
dispenser of the scanty pittance of bread and water. No, they fight for their
houses, their lands, for their wives, their children, for all who claim the
tenderest names, and are held dearest in their hearts, they fight pro aris and
focis, for their liberty, and for themselves, and for their God. And let it not
offend if I say, that no militia ever appeared in more flourishing condition,
than that of this province now does; and pardon me if I say, -- of this town in
particular. -- I mean not to boast; I would not excite envy, but manly
emulation. We have all one common cause; let it therefore be our only contest,
who shall most contribute to the security of the liberties of America. And may
the same kind providence which has watched over this country from her infant
state, still enable us to defeat our enemies. I cannot here forbear noticing
the signal manner in which the designs of those who wish not well to us have
been discovered. The dark deeds of a treacherous Cabal, have been brought to
public view. You now know the serpents who, whilst cherished in your bosoms,
were darting their envenomed stings into the vitals of the constitution. But
the Representatives of the people have fixed a mark on those ungrateful
monsters, which, though it may not make them so secure as Cain of old, yet
renders them at least as infamous. Indeed it would be affrontive to the tutelar
deity of this country eve^ to despair of saving it from all the snares which
human policy can lay.

TRUE it is, that the British ministry have annexed a salary to the office of
the Governor of this province, to be paid out of a revenue raised in America
without our consent. They have attempted to render our Courts of Justice the
instruments of extending the authority of acts of the British parliament over
his colony, by making the Judges dependent on the British administration for
their support. But this people will never be enslaved with their eyes open. The
moment they knew that the Governor was not such a Governor as the charter of
the province points out, he lost his power of hurting them. They were alarmed;
they suspected him, have guarded against him, and he has found that a wise and
a brave people, when they know their danger, are fruitful in expedients to
escape it.

THE Courts of Judicature also so far lost their dignity by being supposed to
be under an undue influence, that our Representatives thought it absolutely
necessary to Resolve, that they were bound to declare that they would not
receive any other salary besides that which the General Court should grant
them; and if they did not make this declaration, that it would be the duty of
the House to Impeach them.

GREAT expectations were also formed from the artful scheme of allowing the
East India company to export Tea to America upon their own account. This
certainly, had it succeeded, would have effected the purpose of the contrivers,
and gratified the most sanguine wishes of our adversaries. We soon should have
found our trade in the hands of foreigners, and taxes imposed on every thing
which we consumed; nor would it have been strange, if in a few years a company
in London should have purchased an exclusive right of trading to America. --
But their plot was soon discovered. -- The people soon were aware of the poison
which with so much craft and subtilty had been concealed: Loss and disgrace
ensued: and perhaps this long-concerted, masterpiece of policy, may issue in
the total disuse of TEA in this country, which will eventually be the saving of
the lives and the estates of thousands -- Yet while we rejoice that the
adversary has not hitherto prevailed against us, let us by no means put off the
harness. Restless malice, and disappointed ambition will still suggest new
measures to our inveterate enemies. -- Therefore let Us also be ready to take
the field whenever danger calls, let us be united and strengthen the hands of
each other, by promoting a general union among us. -- Much has been done by the
Committtees of Correspondence for this and the other towns of this province
toward uniting the inhabitants; let them still go on and prosper. Much has
been done by the Committees of Correspondence for the Houses of Assembly in
this and our Sister Colonies, for uniting the Inhabitants of the whole
Continent for the security of their common interest. May success ever attend
their generous endeavors. But permit me here to suggest a general Congress of
Deputies from the several Houses of Assembly on the Continent, as the most
effectual method of establishing such an Union as the present posture of our
affairs requires. At such a Congress, a firm foundation may be laid for the
security of our Rights and Liberties; a system may be formed for our common
safety, by a strict adherence to which we shall be able to frustrate any
attempts to overthrow our constitution; restore peace and harmony to America,
and secure honor and wealth to Great Britain, even against the inclinations of
her ministers, whose duty it is to study her welfare; and we shall also free
ourselves from those unmannerly pillagers who impudently tell us, that they are
licenced by an act of the British parliament to thrust their dirty hands into
the pockets of every American. But I trust, the happy time will come, when with
the besom of destruction, these noxious vermin will be swept for ever from the
streets of Boston.

SURELY you never will tamely suffer this country to be a den of thieves.
Remember, my friends, from whom you sprang -- Let not a meanness of spirit,
unknown to those whom you boast of as your Fathers, excite a thought to the
dishonor of your mothers. I conjure you by all that is dear, by all that is
honorable, by all that is sacred, not only that ye pray, but that you act;
that, if necessary, ye fight, and even die for the prosperity of our Jerusalem.
Break in sunder, with noble disdain, the bonds with which the Philistines have
bound you. Suffer not yourselves to be betrayed by the soft arts of luxury and
effeminacy, into the Pit dug for your destruction. Despise the glare of
wealth. That people who pay greater respect to a wealthy villain, than to an
honest upright man in poverty, almost deserve to be enslaved; they plainly show
that wealth, however it may be acquired, is in their esteem, to be preferred to
virtue.

BUT I thank GOD, that America abounds in men who are superior to all
temptation, whom nothing can divert from a steady pursuit of the interest of
their country; who are at once it is ornament and safeguard. And sure I am, I
should not incur your displeasure, if I paid a respect so justly due to their
much honored characters in this public place; but when I name an ADAMS, such a
numerous host of Fellow-patriots rush upon my mind, that I fear it would take
up too much of your time, should I attempt to call over the illustrious roll:
But your grateful hearts will point you to the men; and their revered names, in
all succeeding times, shall grace the annals of America. From them, let us, my
friends, take example; from them let us catch the divine enthusiasm; and feel,
each for himself, the God-like pleasure of diffusing happiness on all around
us; of delivering the oppressed from the iron grasp of tyranny; of changing the
hoarse complaints and bitter moans of wretched slaves, into those cheerful
songs, which freedom and contentment must inspire. There is a heartfelt
satisfaction in reflecting on our exertions for the public weal, which all the
sufferings an enraged tyrant can inflict, will never take away; which the
ingratitude and reproaches of those whom we have saved from ruin cannot rob us
of. The virtuous assertor of the Rights of mankind, merits a reward, which even
a want of success in his endeavors to save his country, the heaviest
misfortune which can befall a genuine Patriot, cannot entirely prevent him from
receiving.

I HAVE the most animating confidence that the present noble struggle for
liberty, will terminate gloriously for America. And let us play the man for our
God, and for the cities of our God; while we are using the means in our power,
let us humbly commit our righteous cause to the great Lord of the universe, who
loves righteousness and hates iniquity. -- And having secured the approbation
of our hearts, by a faithful and unwearied discharge of our duty to our
country, let us joyfully leave her important concerns in the hands of HIM who
raises up and puts down the empires and kingdoms of the world as HE
pleases; and with cheerful submission to HIS sovereign will, devoutly say,
Although the Fig Tree shall not Blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vines;
the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat; the
Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls:
Yet we will rejoice in the LORD, we will joy in the GOD of our Salvation.


