Mr. Lathrop's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Ancient and Honorable ARTILLERY-COMPANY IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 6th 1774. Being the ANNIVERSARY of their ELECTION OF
OFFICERS. BY JOHN LATHROP, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by KNEELAND and DAVIS, for SAMUEL WEBB, in Queen Street. 1774.

AN ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.
ROMANS XII. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all men.
JESUS CHRIST, the author and sinisher of our faith, is styled, the prince of
peace. Isa, ix. 6.
He left the glories of the heavenly state, and assumed our nature, that he
might restore peace on earth.

As the mediator between GOD and a revolted world, he made satisfaction for sin
by his obedience and death: -- Having finished the work which was given him to
do, before he ascended on high, he gave particular orders that the tidings of
peace should be published to every creature; and the ministers of religion in
all generations, are bound by the laws of their divine master, to beseech the
children of men to be reconciled to GOD, and be at peace with one another. --
The disciples of CHRIST are commanded to "follow after the things which make
for peace"; Romans XIV. 12,
and if it be possible, as much as lies in them, to live peaceable with all
men.

THE text supposes indeed there may be cases in which it is impossible, even
for a christian to live peaceably in the present world -- There may be cases in
which the prince of peace himself does not require the subjects of his
government to be quiet, and tamely submit to insults and abuses. -- There may
be cases in which a christian ought to unsheath the sword and resist unto blood.

THE followers of JESUS CHRIST are to be of a forgiving and peaceful temper of
mind: But christians have natural rights as well as other men, and it can be no
less their duty to defend those rights against the encroachments of tyrants and
oppressors, after having professed their subjection to the Son of GOD, than it
was before. The character of a christian then, and that of a soldier are not in
the least inconsistent with each other. -- In this world of disorder and
injustice, a christian may, and ought to learn the art of war.

IN discoursing from the words before us, I intend by divine assistance, to
consider the import of St. Paul's exhortation; -- To point out some cases in
which it is impossible for the disciples of CHRIST to live peaceably with all
men, -- And then show the necessity of preparing for unavoidable war.

FIRST then I am to consider the import of St. Paul's exhortation in the text.

BY this exhortation we are taught, that the professors of christianity are not
to incroach on the rights of their fellow men, or provoke them to war by
injuring them in their name, their person, or estates. And farther, this
exhortation teaches us to be of a patient and forgiving temper of mind, rather
choosing to submit to many inconveniences, than to seek the immediate
destruction of our enemies. -- This selfdenying and pacific disposition was
discovered to great advantage by the Apostle Paul. Although he could assert his
rights and privileges with firmness and resolution on proper occasions, he
made it his general studdy to live in peace, and repeatedly charged his
brethren to be careful in all their behavior, that they gave no just occasion
of offense. -- We may not attempt to deprive our brethren of any of their
rights: -- We may give " none offense". 1 Cor. 2. 32.


AND this doctrine is perfectly agreeable to the dictates of reason. -- I have
naturally as good a right to life and liberty as my neighbor. If he attempts
to deprive me of what I have a right to, unless it be proved I have forfeited
that right he attempts to do me an injury, and unjustly provokes me to war in
my own defense. See Lock on Government, Chap. III. of the state of war.
My neighbor can have no more right to compel me to serve him, or to deprive
me of my possessions because he is furnished with a longer sword, or a stronger
arm, than I have to seek his life in the most insidious manner, or rob him of
his substance when he is under no apprehensions of danger.

THIS reasoning which every one sees the force of when applied to individuals
in a state of nature, holds good with respect to the nations and kingdoms of
the world. -- A strong nation has no more right to oppress a weak one, than a
man of large bones and strong muscels has to beat and abuse his brother, who
happens to be of a more slender make.

IT is then evident that offensive war is unjust. -- That nation which
unprovoked, makes war upon others, only to enlarge its dominions, or increase
its revenues, is a nation of robbers; and it would be as impossible to justify
their conduct by reason or the word of GOD, as it would be to justify the
conduct of a public highway-man, or those Arabs who make it their business to
plunder such unhappy travelers as fall in their way.

How shockingly then have many famous commanders prostituted the art of war,
and polluted their hands with blood! Alexander the great, who carried his arms
through the world, though possessed of uncommon military skill, is a character
which ought to be held in abhorrence. His ambition led him to violate the
plainest rules of Justice: He spread desolation through the finest countries,
and slaughtered vast multitudes who ventured to oppose his arbitrary conduct.
One murder made a villain, "Millions a HERO" -- PORTEUS.


BUT however much some pagan monarchs, and others who have professed the
religion of JESUS may have abused their power to oppress and inslave those
kingdoms which were unable to resist them, it is certain the light of nature,
and the inspired writings teach the children of men to treat one another in a
very different manner.

CHRISTIANITY teaches us to be contented with the allotments of divine
providence, and forbids our looking with an envious eye on the possessions of
others. -- The doctrines of christianity are opposed to those lusts, -- such as
pride, ambition, a desire of large possessions and dominion over others, which
are the source of wars and fightings.

BUT although the gospel breathes the most kind and benevolent spirit, it is
plain from many passages in the new testament, that the sacred writers supposed
it possible, and very probable, that christians may be in such circumstances as
would justify their contending with their enemies. Much to our purpose are
those words of our Lord, Luke xxii. 36. -- "He that has no Sword, let him sell
his garment and buy one".
The conditions of peace proposed to them may be hard and unreasonable. They
may be of such a nature as to render it impossible for them to comply without
transgressing the revealed will of heaven. Hence St. Paul says, as much as
lies in you, live peaceably with all men; plainly supposing it may not be in
our power to live peaceably with some men under some particular circumstances
without offending GOD, or greatly injuring ourselves. -- The enemies of
religion may require us to deny our LORD and Master, or to do other things
which we know are in themselves sinful, as the condition of life, or
deliverance from oppression. In such cases it would not be in our power to live
peaceably; and we should rather choose to risque our fortunes, and all we
possess in a struggle with our enemies, than submit to their pleasure.

BUT what we have now observed will be more fully illustrated as we proceed,
according to what was proposed in the,

SECOND place, to point out some particular cases in which it is impossible,
even for the professors of christianity, to live peaceably with all men.

IN this place it may be well for us to observe, the kingdom of CHRIST is a
kingdom of righteousness, as well as of Peace and Joy of the holy GHOST; Romans
xiv. 17.
and those who expect, either present or everlasting happiness in the
protection and friendship of our glorious Redeemer, must never think of
securing peace with their fellow men, at the expense of truth and Justice. The
righteous LORD loves righteousness, and hates the workers of iniquity: It is
therefore much safer for his people to trust in him for deliverance from their
enemies, than it would be for them to settle a peace on unrighteous terms. --
Keeping this in view, it will no doubt appear to us all, there may be cases, in
which, so far from its being duty to live peaceably with our fellow men, we
ought to enter into war with them.

WERE we in a part of the world, where the laws of society had not obtained, we
might, no doubt fortify our dwellings, and defend our persons and substance
against such as should venture to molest or destroy us. The patriarch Abram
kept up a kind of militia: He had three hundred and eighty trained servants,
who were always ready to defend his family and interest. These faithful troops
he marched against the four kings who had captivated his nephew Lot, and by
managing them in the most advantageous manner, he rescued his kinsman, and slew
his enemies.

THAT GOD approved of Abram's conduct is evident from the blessing of
Melchizedic, who was a priest of the most high GOD. And he blessed him and
said, Blessed be Abram of the most high GOD possessor of heaven and earth. And
blessed be the most high GOD which has delivered thine enemies into thy hand.
Genesis, xiv. 19 and 20.


THIS instance may serve as a sufficient proof that it is right in the sight of
GOD for individuals in a state of nature, or in those parts of the world where
the laws of society are not established, to defend themselves, and make war on
such as attempt to deprive them of their lives and fortunes.

AND as the laws of reason and of GOD would Justify an individual in the case
now supposed, who should defend himself against such neighbors as attempted
essentially to injure him, so is it equally plain, that public Societies,
Provinces and Kingdoms, confederated on any general plan for their safety and
happiness, may and ought to defend themselves; and when their safety requires
it, they may justly make war with the known enemies of their common good,
whether those enemies happen to be foreign or domestic.

WHEN people enter into society the great object they have in view is the
public good, which includes the good of individuals. -- All the laws which they
establish, are, or ought to be calculated for the security of the lives and
properties of the whole community.

WHEN the community therefore is attacked by other powers, or any individuals
of their body are injured in their persons or properties, the laws of society
require them to exert the powers they have for the common safety, and the
safety of individuals.

BUT however Just and equal a right individuals in a state of nature, or
particular Nations and Kingdoms where the laws of society are established, may
have to life, their liberties and properties, it is certain, the rich and
powerful, in all ages, have oppressed and tyrannized over the weak and
defenseless.

So little attention has been paid to the law of righteousness, which was at
first engraven on the human heart, that the monarchs of the earth in general
have not scrupled to seize on the dominions and fortunes of such as were not
able to oppose them. -- Whoever looks over the history of the world, will find
undeniable proof of what we have here asserted.

So I returned, says King Solomon, and considered all the oppressions that are
done under the Sun: And behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no comforter: And on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they
had no comforter. Eccl. iv. 1.


WE can scarcely form a conception of any state more completely wretched, than
that of those unhappy mortals who lie at the mercy of absolute Sovereigns,
whose word is the law, at whose nod the subjects tremble, and who may, when
they please, take the life or property of any who belong to their dominions.

ABSOLUTE dominion should not be sought, or if sought, should not be given to
any descendant of Adam. -- It belongs to the LORD of nature, and to him alone
to rule his creatures with uncontroled sway.

BUT as long experience has effectually taught us, that the sons of men are
constantly seeking to enlarge their power and influence by oppressing their
brethren, it becomes all public bodies, when they enter into society, to
fortify themselves against the encroachments of their neighbors. And whenever
attempts are made on their lives, their properties or liberties, and they find
it is not in their power, on just and honorable terms, to live peaceably, they
may lawfully draw the sword upon their enemies.

How far one nation may punish the insolence and abuses they have received from
another, it is somewhat difficult to say. -- When those who have received
injuries, and were unwillingly provoked to war become conquerors, they show a
greatness of mind in the exercise of mercy. But while they spare the lives of
those who fall into their hands, no doubt they may demand satisfaction for the
injuries they have suffered, and require an assurance of a peaceable behavior
for the time to come.

THERE are two more cases, I would beg leave to mention in which wars may be
justified on equitible terms. -- The first is, when the subjects, or any
considerable number of them rebel against those rulers who act up to the spirit
and original design of the constitution they are under. -- The second is, when
those who are in government violate the laws they had sworn to maintain, and
attempt to oppress and inslave the people whom they had sworn to protect.

IN those parts of the world where civil government is not established, the
inhabitants, no doubt have a right to continue in a state of nature as long as
they please. One individual can have no right to compel another to submit to
his authority. And therefore when men enter into society it must be by
voluntary consent, and they have a right to demand and insist upon the
performance of such conditions, and previous limitations as form an equitable
original Compact. See LOCK on Government. VOTES and PROCEEDINGS of the Town of
Boston 1772.


THIS being the foundation of civil government as distinguished from that
tyrannical dominion which the strong have usurped over the weak, it is evident
the powers of those invested with authority, and the duties of the subjects in
general, must be expressed in the original compacts. -- These compacts which
lie in the foundation of all civil societies, may not be disturbed: A single
article may not be altered but with the consent of the whole body. -- Whoever
makes an alteration in the established constitution, whether he be a subject or
a ruler, is guilty of treason: Treason of the worst kind: Treason against the
state: TREASON. An offense committed against the dignity and majesty of the
commonwealth. -- JOHNSTON'S DICTIONARY.

TREASON is defined to be an offense committed against the security of the King
and Kingdom. -- EVERY MAN HIS OWN LAWYER.

To extend the Governor's right to command, and subject's duty to obey, beyond
the laws of ones country, is treason against the constitution, and treachery to
the society whereof we are members. Glanvil who was a learned lawyer and chief
Justice in Henry the second's days. -- informs us that there was in his time
such a thing as high Treason against the Kingdom. LORD SOMER'S

Gov. Hutchinson in his history of the Massachusetts Bay. Vol. 1. P.442 informs
us, the fathers of this province, in their ancient Body of Laws made conspiracy
to invade their own common wealth, or any treacherous perfidious attempt to
alter and subvers fundamentally the frame of their polity and Government, a
CAPITAL OFFENSE.


For such treason many rulers as well as subjects have lost their heads.

CIVIL Government being founded on compact, those who are invested with
authority, have certain rights which may not be invaded, while they keep within
the limits prescribed them, and are the ministers of GOD for good to the people
who appointed them. -- Such rulers have an undoubted right to an honorable
support. -- As they devote their time to the service of the people, it may
resonably be expected they will make provision for them suitable to their rank.
But it must be remembered the people are to Judge what shall be given; for,
although rulers may think they deserve more than the people seem willing to
grant, less damages would accrue to the public, from their withholding, in some
cases, those grants which they ought to make, than from putting it in the power
of rulers to seize on the property of the subjects at pleasure.

THOSE rulers who take from the people what they please under the notion of a
reward for their services, are tyrants, and the people are Slaves.

AND further, while those who are in government act up to the spirit and design
of the constitution they are under, they have a right to demand obedience: And
when any number of Subjects break their oath of allegiance, and rise in
rebellion against lawful authority, the rulers, assisted by such as adhere to
them and the original constitution, may Justly make war with the rebels, and
endeavor to reduce them.

THIS doctrine is agreeable to the practice of the ancient Jews in their best
and purest state, as well as that of the most enlightened modern nations.

AND the same principles which would justify rulers, assisted by those who
adhere to them in making war upon rebellious subjects, will justify the people
in making war upon rebellious rulers.

It is an undoubted truth that the laws of every well constituted society,
nation, or state, are above Kings, Those who flatter the King that he is above
the law, do most notoriously contradict one of the first axioms of our regal
government, which is, Lex facit Regem; and he has originally subjected himself
to the law by his Coronation Oath. LORD SUMMERS.

The exceeding the bounds of authority is no more a right in a Great, than a
petty officer, no more justifiable in a King than a Constable. But so much the
worse in him as that he has more trust put in him, is supposed from the
advantage of Education and Counselors to have better Knowledge, and less
reason to do it, having already a greater share than the rest of his brethren.
LOCK on Government.

-- A King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King and degenerates
into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his Laws. -- All
Kings that are not Tyrants, or Perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the Limits of their Laws. And they that persuade them to the contrary,
are Vipers, Pests both against them and the commonwealth. KING JAMES'S Speech.
A.D. 1609.


and are designed to hold them in subjection as well as the people. -- Treason
and rebellion therefore may be considered as acts of Violence against the
original compact, the constitution and laws of society, whether the persons
guilty be rulers or subjects.

I AM not insensible this doctrine has been controverted, if it can be said any
thing is controverted, when, without reason or argument it is boldly denied,
and the contrary supported by faggot and sword.

ABOUT a hundred years ago, when the throne of Great Britain was held by
arbitrary Princes, many clergymen, who, we may suppose, set a higher value on
preferments than they did on civil liberty or the rights of conscience,
appeared zealous advocates for passive obedience and non-resistance; and were
wicked enough to denounce the punishment of eternal damnation against those who
ventured to oppose the most tyrannical monarchs. -- But that slavish doctrine
is now generally exploded. -- It is so contrary to reason, and the common sense
of mankind, that it would be but a mispence of time to expose its obsurdity.
See Dr. EDWARDS'S Discourse of Non-Resistance, and passive obedience.


To pretend the precepts of the new testament require us to yield a quiet and
peaceable subjection to the insults of a cruel, ignorant and despotic wretch,
who might possibly make his way to the throne, by murder and rebellion, would
be to blaspheme the word of God; and I believe no man of understanding would be
persuaded to embrace so vile a sentiment even if the evidence of preternatural
events could be adduced in support of it. St. Paul foretold that the coming of
the man of Sin, or that lawless one should be, "after the working of Satan with
all power and signs and lying wonders." -- And the learned BISHOP PATRICK in
his commentary on the xiiith of Deuteronomy, supposes the false Prophet, or
Dreamer of Dreams, might be permitted to work a miracle, in order to seduce the
Israelites from their obedience to the true GOD. -- But whatever unaccountable
events may take place, it must not be supposed a true miracle ever was, or can
be wrought to support an absurd doctrine: And we ought rather to suppose there
is some deception in those events which seem miraculous, than admit them as
evidence in support of nonsense and wickedness. --


THE greatest and wisest nations, and the best of men in all ages, says a fine
writer, LORD SUMMERS.
have reckoned it not only lawful for the people, under the most absolute
governments to do themselves justice in case of oppression, but have thought
the doing of it a duty incumbent on them, and which they owed to themselves and
their posterity: And the chief instruments of the great revolutions or changes
which have happened in the world from slavery to liberty, have always been
accounted as heroes sent by GOD almighty from time to time, for the redemption
of men from misery in this world. They were accordingly honored and respected
whilst they lived, and their memories have been, and will be held in veneration
by all posterity.

HISTORY affords us many instances of tyrants and dispotic rulers who have been
put to an untimely death, or drove from their seats of government by the
people. -- But without going abroad, or examining the records of heathen
states, the practice of our own nation has been sufficient to teach us, that
the wisest of men have judged it lawful, and expedient, to take up arms against
their Kings, when they made dangerous encroachments on their rights and
liberties. If we look into Magna Charta we shall find that KING JOHN made a
solemn agreement with his subjects, that if he, or any of his Officers should
fail to perform the things stipulated, or should break through any of the
articles of peace and security, and neglect or refuse to redress the Grievances
of the Subjects after complaint had been properly made, it should then be
lawful for the Barons, together with the community in general, to destrain and
distress him, in all the ways possible, by seizing on his lands, castles,
possessions, and in any other manner they could, till the Grievance should be
redressed according to their pleasure. See Rapin's History of England




The doctrine of making resistance against Kings when by arbitrary and
tyrannical conduct, they render it impossible for the subjects to live
peaceably under them, is far from being new. It is as old as civil government:
I find something so exactly to our purpose in the ancient constitution of the
Kingdom of ARAGON, that I must beg leave to transcribe it. -- The constitution
of their ancient government was very remarkable: for when they shook off the
Moorish yoke they chose Garcias Xemenes, descended from the ancient Gothic
Kings, to be their Sovereign, on condition that if he or any of his Successors,
broke in upon their laws, they should forfeit their Title, and leave the people
at liberty to choose another. To keep the King to this agreement, they
appointed a Magistrate, entitled Justitia, to observe the actions of the King
and his Officers: And this magistrate was answerable to none for his
administration but the general meeting of the states. They likewise enacted,
that if the King oppressed any of the Subjects, the great men might assemble
and seize upon his Revenues, till he did Justice to the party offended: And
when they enthroned the King he was to kneel down before this Magistrate and to
Swear, -- That he would inviolably preserve their Laws and Privileges. After
which they proclaimed the King in the following words. -- We who are as good
men as yourself, constitute you our King and Governor, on condition that you
maintain us in our rights and properties, otherwise we disown you. -- ALTAS
GEOGRAPHUS.


" It grew up with it: LORD CAMDEN'S Speech.
It is inseperably connected with the Law "of self preservation, which is the
Law of nature." LORD SUMMERS


This doctrine has indeed been opposed by infamous sycophants, and time serving
priests: When despotic monarchs or a few individuals, have attempted to inslave
the people in general, they have usually endeavored to prevail with the clergy
by smiles, and flatteries, and offers of reward, to engage in their base
designs. -- And not a little to the disgrace of the sacred order, many, in ages
past, have lent a hand to assist the tyrant in State, in hopes, herhaps, of
being authorized to play the tyrant in the Church.

The clergy in any country may be supposed to have considerable weight: And in
days of political controversy, all sides no doubt, would be willing to have
their influence. But if their influence cannot be obtained, the contending
parties, at least, will desire their silence. -- Hence, when any of the clergy
venture to mention the duties which rulers owe the people, and give some broad
hints that there is a design to deprive them of their just rights and
liberties, the friends and abbettors of tyranny, have been sometimes heard to
lament with much affected seriousness, that the ministers of religion become
preachers of politics instead of the gospel. -- But it must be owned, some
ministers, in former days, who were distinguished for their piety, and zeal for
religion, thought it their duty to acquaint themselves, and invite their
hearers to look into the nature and design of civil government. -- Nor do I
see, I must confess, how a minister can do his duty in many cases, if he is
ignorant or silent as to these matters.

There are duties which the magistrates owe the people, and there are duties
which the people owe the magistrates: But a minister cannot be faithful, either
to the one, or to the other, unless he is capable of judging for himself,
whether the magistrates answer the design of their appointment, or the people
are disposed to be properly subordinate.

Ministers ought to preach against all breaches of the moral law, and no doubt
injustice, oppression, and tyranny are moral evils, as much as riots, tumults,
and licentiousness.

That ministers ought to give some attention to political matters will farther
appear, when we consider they have an interest in the laws of the land, and are
subjects of civil government as well as other men: And among protestants, where
ministers are allowed to marry, and have families, it must be supposed they
have as tender a concern for posterity, and are as desirous of leaving them
free and happy as any of the community, their rulers not excepted.

In short, when I hear people gravely pretending that the ministers of religion
should never meddle with political matters, I cannot help suspecting they are
engaged in some bad cause which they wish to carry without opposition.


And a feeble opposition is still made to it by persons, who, notwithstanding
their pretentions to loyalty would probably be the first to assist a Roman
Catholic pretender in his way to the throne.

It is astonishing that the advocates for passive-obedience and non-resistence,
can, with any tolerable countenance, profess their loyalty to George the IIId,
since they must know, that by opposing the stuart family, the British crown was
given to the House of Hanover.

But however strange, it is still possible, that some whose nearest connections
were armed and fought against George the IId, can without a blush, charge
others with rebellion, who have ventured their fortunes and lives to defend and
enlarge his Majesty's dominions, -- Who glory in their attachment to the
English constitution and the present reigning family, although they cannot
fully assent to the omnipotence of a British Parliament, or acknowledge their
right to tax millions of good subjects, whose distance from Old-England will
always prevent their being legally represented.

THAT we may and ought, to resist, and even make war against those rulers who
leap the bounds prescribed them by the constitution, and attempt to oppress and
inslave the subjects, is a principle on which alone the great revolutions which
have taken place in our nation can be justified. A principle which has been
supported by the most celebrated Divines This principle was adopted by Luther,
Calvin Malancthon, Zuinglius, Austin, and the reformers in general. St
Chrysostom explains those words of our LORD, Matthew. XXVI, 52. For all they that
take the sword shall perish with the sword, in the following manner: For a man
to take the sword, is to draw it when it is not put into his hands by the laws;
therefore he who offers unjust violence, takes the sword: But on the other
hand, he who uses a just defense does not take the sword, but he draws a sword
which the laws put into his hands. And in his commentary on Romans xiii. 5.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake;
he says, These words do concern not only the Subject, but also the Magistrates
themselves, who when they turn tyrants do overthrow the ordinance of GOD, no
less than the seditious. And therefore their consciences are guilty too,
because they obey not the ordinance of GOD, that is, the laws, which they ought
to obey: Therefore the threatenings which are here set down, do pertain likewise
to them.

The primitive christians resisted Lucinius their Emperor for persecuting them
contrary to law; and Constantine the great joined with them, who, the historian
says, held it his duty to deliver an infinite number of people by cutting of a
few wicked ones, as the pests and plagues of the times.


as well as Civilians. -- He who calls the principle in question gives us
reason to suspect his loyalty: He who rejects it, is an enemy to our present
rightful sovereign. --

THE dispute between Great Britain and the American colonies on the right of
taxation, just now refered to, has become a very serious one; and where it will
end, GOD only knows.

PERHAPS some historian who may flourish less than half a Century hence, will
transmit an account to posterity, not unlike the following.

Soon after the Americans, being assisted by some brave European troops, had
conquered Nova Scotia, Louisburg, all Canada, and the french settlements on the
Lakes, together with the western and southern Indians, some among them, whowere
unfriendly to the popular government established by their fathers, projected a
scheme for an American revenue, intentionally to aggrandize themselves and
their connections, but expressly, for making a more certain and adequate
provision for defreying the charge of the administration of justice and the
support of civil Government.

THIS plan was laid before the Parliament of Great Britain; and although
opposed with great spirit, and the clearest reasons by several illustrious
members of that august assembly, Specimens of the arguments in opposition to
the intention of Parliament to raise a revenue from the Americans may be seen
in MR. PITT's Speech on the stamp act, and LORD CAMBDEN's on the declaratory
Bill. See the Farmer's letters, which will be read with inexpressible pleasure
by the true friends of liberty in every future age of the world.
it was adopted. Several experiments were made to carry this plan into
execution which proved unsuccessful. -- That which bid the fairest was a duty
on the East India Teas: Large quantities were therefore sent out under the
protection of the British Ministry. The fate which this dutied article met with
was different in the different colonies to which it was sent: But the
opposition was general. At Boston, after every possible endeavor was used to
save the property of the East India company, by sending the several cargoes of
tea back which arrived there, and the people found themselves unable to do it,
unknown persons, many of them supposed to be from the neighboring country,
under the cover of night, boarded the ships which had brought in the Teas, and
emptied every Chest into the Sea.

THIS act of violence on the property of the East India company, was so highly
resented by the parliament of Great Britain, that previous to making any demand
on the town or province of satisfaction for the Teas which were destroyed, an
act was suddenly passed to block up the port of Boston, and put an end to their
trade; by which many thousands of innocent people, were immediately deprived of
the means of subsistence, and reduced to the utmost degree of poverty and
distress.

THIS extraordinary act of parliament for blocking up the Port of Boston, by
which most grievous pains and penalties were inflicted on the inhabitants,
before it was possible for them to obtain relief from the crown, even on
supposition of their being ever so humble and compliant, gave an alarm to the
whole continent. -- The cause was considered as a common one. -- A Congress of
the principal inhabitants of all the colonies was held as soon as possible: The
result of which was, a quiet and peaceable suspension of trade to and from
Great Britain. -- Many affluent merchants laid up their ships, and turned their
attention to manufactures; and in a short time the whole continent was well
supplied with every necessary article which had formerly been imported from
Britain, wrought among themselves.

FROM that period we may date the glory of America. The colonies being firmly
united were free and happy. -- They made rapid progress in population, and in
the improvement of every useful art: And by their union, their virtue, and
industry, rose to their present degree of opulence and strength.

OR is it possible for this generation to afford materials for the historian to
write, -- The Americans though naturally fond of liberty, and tenacious of those
rights which former Kings had confirmed to their ancestors, at length Issachar
like, bowed their shoulder to bear, and became servants unto tribute.

THEY had indeed made several noble stands against what they considered as
infringements of their constitutional rights and privileges; but at length
unhappy divisions took place among the Merchants: The leading men could agree
on no plan for the general benefit; and those who expected to reap advantage
from the establishment of a revenue, found means to create fatal jealousies
between the several colonies. -- The friends of liberty who remained in those
days of general corruption and venality, finding themselves unable to stand
against the torrent which bore hard against them, were forced to abandon the
cause; and an opposition to such revenue laws as the parliament of
Great Britain Britain saw fit to enact, was never after attempted.

FROM this time (which we may suppose to be in the 14th year of George the
IIId) the Americans began to lose their virtue, their love of freedom, and
their religion. And being sunk by degrees under burdens, which at last were
intolerable, the body of the people became the most ignorant, stupid and abject
creatures in the world, fit only for slaves to domineering masters whose
interest it is to hold them in absolute subjection. The author has been
informed that some who heard this discourse could have wished the latter part
of this imaginary history had been omitted, as they were fearful it might tend
to dishearten some good people at this time of trial; but he was induced to
place the two pieces in contrast, because he fully thinks that life and death
in a political sense are now set before us; and that the fate of America, for
many generations, depends on the virtue of her sons and daughters at the
present day.


BUT I forbear: -- You command me to cease, and not venture to affront the
present generatition by supposing it possible for them to be guilty of
entailing such wretchedness on millions of unborn posterity. In this day of
uncommon difficulty, the general enquiry seems to be, how shall we preserve our
liberties. -- extricate ourselves from our present troubles, and lay a
foundation for future peace and happiness? -- Perhaps a full answer is
contained in the following maxim, -- SAVE YOUR MONEY, AND YOU SAVE YOUR COUNTRY.

It cannot be deemed treason or rebellion for the Americans to determine they
will not make use of those articles of extravagance and luxury, which for years
past have been poured in upon us from Great Britain. -- It cannot be deemed
treason or rebellion to despise the effeminacy of the present day, and
endeavor to imitate the Patriarchs of this country, in temperance, plainness
of dress, and simplicity of manners. -- If we look into our old colony Laws we
shall find the fathers of New England took prudent care to prevent unnecessary
expenses in dress. If any of the common people wore Gold or Silver lace, or
other costly ornaments which were enumerated, the Select-Men of the towns in
which such offenses were committed, had authority to assess them in the country
rates at two hundred pounds. -- Children or servants under government in
families, who wore any apparel exceeding the condition or quality of their
persons or estates, upon conviction, were, for the first offense, to be
admonished: the second, to pay twenty shillings: the third forty shillings, and
so following as the offenses were multiplied, to pay forty shillings a time to
the treasurer of the county. -- Could those venerable fathers, raise their
heads a moment from their peaceful slumbers, and view their sons and daughters,
many of whom can but poorly afford it, arrayed in costly apparel, or tinsal
finery of fantastic contrivance, methinks, ashamed of a soft and profligate
offspring, they would wish to shrink back into the darkness of death, to hide
from their sight. --

It cannot be deemed treason to make our own clothes, which we can certainly do
in a little time. -- It cannot be deemed treason to save millions sterling
every year. -- The Lord of providence has put a price into our hands, and if we
are not greatly wanting to ourselves, we may be free, we may be rich, we may be
the most powerful people under the heavens.

It is to be wished that societies were formed in all the principal cities and
towns on the continent for the encouragement of agraculture and manufactures.
-- Agriculture must be considered as an honorable employ: Parents must think
more of sending their sons out on farms, or of bringing them up to manufactures
and mechanical employmens, it they would wish to see the country rich and happy.




WE proceed then to the last thing proposed, which was to show the necessity of
preparing for unavoidable war.

SUCH are the lusts and passions of the children of men, and such has been the
state of things from the beginning in our revolted world, that the art of
slaying one another has been studied with care, and he who has best suceeded in
destroying the enemies of his King and country, has received the highest
applause.

To hear the alarm of war, -- to see armies forming in battle array, -- to
observe the whole process of a bloody engagement, and take a survey of the
field after the battle is over, must be shocking to one accustomed to the
sweets of retirement and peace. -- But on what quarter of the globe can we
travel, without seeing either the trophies of war, or the bones of those who
were slain, "whitening in the Sun."? What country is there on earth unable to
furnish us with a story of victories gained, or battles lost? In this American
world our peace has often been disturbed. We have been called to fight the
savages of the wilderness. We have also tried our skill and strength with the
troops of France and Spain.

BUT although the nations which gave us disturbance from the first settlement of
our fathers in this land are now at peace with us, we may not expect that peace
will continue always.

NORTH AMERICA is of great importance. The eyes of Europe are fixed upon us,
and whatever powers on the other side the Atlantic, are, either in alliance
with us, or have the dominion over us, must find our trade or obedience of
unspeakable consequence. As we grow into importance, it is more than probable,
some foreign powers, either through Jealousy of our increasing greatness, -- a
desire to secure the profits of our commerce, or to draw from us a revenue by
duties and taxes, in some future time will make war upon us.

FRANCE and Spain cannot well put up with their losses in America the last war.
-- The moment they think themselves able they will, no doubt, endeavor to take
satisfaction; and perhaps attempt to add this whole continent to their
dominions.

CONSIDERING the restless tempers of the children of men, and the disposition
which the Nations of the world have discovered to encroach on the rights and
liberties of one another, a wise and prudent people, even in a time of peace,
will be laying up stores, erecting places of defense, and using themselves to
arms and discipline.

AMERICA has every natural advantage that can be desired. We have a continent
of three thousand miles in length, and of a breadth as yet unexplored, in which
however it is supposed, there are five millions of people. VOTES and
PROCEEDINGS etc. of the Town of Boston.


North America contains an extent of territory sufficient for much the largest
Empire in the world. If it be three thousand miles long, and two thousand seven
hundred miles in breadth there is room for more than six times as many
ininhabitants as can live in Spain, France. Germany, Italy, England, Scotland,
and Ireland all together. This amazing continent runs through a variety of
climates. -- It has a seacoast from one end to the other. It has a vast number
of fine bays, harbors, and navigable rivers. -- The islands belonging to
North America are very numerous, and some of them large. -- We have every
advantage for husbandry, manufactures, navigation, fishery, and the taking of
furr, -- and in short for every thing useful and ornamental in life that is to
be desired. -- If any quarter of the world can live' independent of the rest,
we may in America. -- "The colonies in North America", says the Bishop of St.
ASAPH in his excellent Sermon preached before the Society in 1773. have not
only taken root and acquired strength; BUT SEEM HASTENING WITH AN ACCELEKATED
PROGRESS TO SUCH A POWERFUL STATE, AS MAY INTRODUCE A NEW AND IMPORTANT CHANGE
IN HUMAN AFFAIRS.
ALTHOUGH, we are not at present able to defend our sea ports against a foreign
invasion, our strength by land is very considerable. Some years ago it was
found our militia amounted to more than eight hundred thousand men. A Letter to
the Earl of Hilsborough printed 1769.
And no doubt Americans are capable of making soldiers. -- We want not courage;
it is discipline alone in which we are exceeded by the most formidable troops
that ever trod the earth. The eligant and spirited oration delivered March 5th
1774. in commemoration of the bloody tragedy of the 5th of March 1770. by the
Honorable JOHN HANCOCK Esquire
-- And from the spirit which of late has greatly revived, being excited by the
example of gentlemen of the first rank and influence, we may venture to say,
our militia will soon be equal to any in the world. -- Such an extensive
country, so filled with inhabitants, united in their exertions against any
common enemy, could not be easily conquered.

THESE american colonies were settled on principles of loyalty and freedom. No
people have ever been more constant in their attachment to the crown of
Great Britain, none more tenacious of the rights and privileges of Englishmen.
Whoever looks into the charters which were granted to the first adventurers
into this country will find, the right of imposing and levying proportionable
and reasonable assessments, rates and taxes is solely and expressly lodged with
the commons of America, represented in their several assemblies. -- And King
Charles the first did promise, and expressly covenant with the proprietors of
one of the American colonies in particular ( Caecilius Baron of Baltimore,)
that after the date of the Charter, neither he nor his heirs or successors
should set or make, or cause to be set, any imposition, custom, or other
taxation, rate or contribution whatsoever, in or upon the dwellers and
inhabitants of the said Province, for their lands, tenements, good or chattles
within the said Province, or to be laden or unladen within the ports or
harbors of the said Province.

The charters first given to the American provinces constituted them "separate
common wealths". They are by their charters strictly independent states, saving
only they are required to acknowledge their faith and allegiance to the
sovereign of Great Britain.

But notwithstanding the rights and privileges of the Americans were so clearly
expressed, and so carefully guarded, by the charters which were given by former
Kings. -- not many years ago, an act was passed, declaring the power of the
British Parliament to bind these colonies, IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER.

Nor did the affair rest in a naked declaration, but duties have been laid on a
variety of articles, for the express purpose of raising a revenue.

At this exercise of parliamentary power, the Americans were alarmed, and a
general murmer was heard from one end of the continent to the other.

We know what our fathers suffered in the land of their nativity: We know how
our fellow subjects in England, in Scotland, and Ireland, are at this day
bowing down under an insupportable burden of taxes: We have not the most
distant expectation of being treated with more tenderness than our fellow
subjects on the other side the Atlantic. -- Should we acknowledge the right
which is claimed by Parliament, we are taught by one of the members of that
House (Mr. R. Rigby) what we may expect. -- When things are returned to a
peaceable state, as a reward for our tameness, we are to be favored with
additional taxes. -- In process of time, if we are quiet and easy, we may
possibly have taxes and duties on our lands, polles, fires, lights; and on
every article of trade and merchandise. -- Then we may see what some have
wished and prayed for: -- English liberties sufficiently abridged; and our
lands divided into Lordships. -- We shall have but two sorts of people, the
rich and the poor: Our husbandmen and mechanics, who now rejoice in the midst
of plenty, will then, we may suppose, be as unable to furnish themselves with
the comforts of life, as multitudes are in Great Britain and Ireland, who,
however industrious, are seldom able to taste a bit of meat.

The turkish slave, or frenchman, hobbling in wooden shoes, cannot be more
wretched, than the inhabitants of any other nation, who are obliged to labor
night and day for those lordly masters, who scarcely leave them enough from
their hard earnings, to support a miserable existence.




OUR fathers, many of whom were possessed of plentiful estates, adventured into
this new world, and braved all the dangers and hardships attending the
settlement of an inhospitable wilderness, that they might enjoy those liberties
and privileges which in those unhappy days were refused them at home.

THEY purchased the soil on which we tread, of the native aboriginal
inhabitants, who alone had a right to dispose of it, or they gained it at the
expense of much treasure and blood. -- I hope their posterity will never suffer
themselves to be deprived of it, at a lower price.

WHEN our fathers had purchased the land we now inhabit, they had an undoubted
right to take up arms in the defense of it, as well as in defense of their
lives and liberties. And as the wars which were carried on first against the
Indians, and afterward against the French and Indians jointly, were defensive,
they may be justified on the purest principles.

AS a nursery for officers to command such troops as it should be judged
necessary to raise from time to time, and employ in the defense of their
country, this ANCIENT COMPANY was formed. -- The event has given full evidence
of the utility and wisdom of the design; and this day the company and
institution both, are declared HONORABLE by the presence of, -- this large
assembly. The Governor, his Majesty's Council, and the Commons house of
assembly, have usally attended on these occasions; but His Excellency GOVERNOR
GAGE, having removed the court to Salem, it was out of their power to give a
general attendance on the exercises of the Day.


ENCOURAGED by an experienced CAPTAIN GENERAL AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF, it is to
be hoped a martial spirit will be more universally defused, and that discipline
which alone is wanting to make the Americans good soldiers, will be carried to
a greater degree of perfection, through the whole continent, than ever yet it
has been.

BUT while we wish to see the art of war cultivated among us, let it be always
remembered the soldiers must be in constant subjection to the laws of the land
-- The soldier may never make use of arms, but when he is ordered by the
constituted guardians of our rights and liberties.

IT is necessary that every State or Kingdom, be able to raise an armed force
at a short warning. Their enemies may suddenly invade them, and the
consequences might be fatal, were they not able to command proper forces for
the common defense.

THAT provision may be made against unexpected emergencies, as well as the more
deliberate attacks of the enemy, the wisest States keep up a disciplined
militia -- A well disciplined militia, consisting of men who have property of
their own, are a much better, and more certain defense to the country they live
in, than it is possible for a standing army, of mercenary troops to be.

MERCENARY troops, who, I may be allowed to say, are not in general possessed
of those sentiments which ennoble human nature, cannot be trusted in a time of
danger, farther than they are influenced by an expectation of plunder, or pay;
or a fear of punishment if they are found attempting to desert their colors.
-- Let them have an assurance of a greater reward, and we may suppose many of
them would be willing to change their livery, and engage in the service of a
different master.

BUT a well disciplined militia, composed of men of fortunes, of education, and
virtue, when called to the field of battle, feel themselves excited to the most
vigorous action, by motives infinitely superior to the expectation of spoils
taken from their enemies, or the wages which the masters of mercenary troops
engage to pay them. -- They fight pro aris and focis: They fight for their
fathers and mothers, -- for their wives and children, -- for their private
property, -- for their liberty, -- their religion, and the honor of their GOD.

ALTHOUGH mercenary troops have been used to answer great purposes, it must
also be acknowledged, they have been the instruments of the greatest tyranny
and oppression. -- A despotic monarch who is able to support a large army of
such troops, may force his subjects to comply with the most arbitrary measures,
and glory in the thought of being absolute in his dominions. A despotic Prince,
who has large armies at his command will find more expeditious ways of raising
money to support them, than by asking a Parliament to grant regular supplies;
For it is as certain that an army will raise money, as that money will raise an
army. -- To limit a Prince with Laws where there is an army, is to bind Sampson
with his locks on. TRANCHARD and GORDON'S tracts.




STANDING armies in general, in a time of peace, have been judged extremely
dangerous to a free state. And when they have been quartered among people, on
whom they had no dependence for their support, the consequences, in many
instances, have been intolerable. The shocking consequences of quartering
troops in this Town a few years ago, are too many to be rehearsed in a marginal
note. -- They came on a most disagreeable business, -- They were taught to
consider us as rebels against the Crown and Government of Great Britain. --
This gave them a kind of license to abuse the inhabitants, which they did, in a
variety of instances, and that with impunity.

The Grand Jury of the county, found a bill against one of the officers, for
advising the negro-slaves to cut their masters throats, and he promised them
protection! but however black the crime was, he was not so much as brought to a
trial! -- Riotous soldiers were apprehended, but rescued by other parties, and
the peace officers were scandalously abused, and insulted, in the execution of
their duty!

Thus matters went on till the evening of the fifth of March 1770. when Captain
Preston led out a party of the 29th Regiment, who, without any orders from a
Magistrate, fired upon a number of unarmed people in the open street, by which,
five of our fellow citizens were barbarously slain, and several others badly
wounded: -- The inhabitants then thought it was time to have the point settled,
whether they, or the troops, should be masters of the town; and it was happy
for both, that the latter peaceably retired to the Castle.




THE nature of military Government is so different from the laws of a popular
civil community, that experience has sufficiently proved, they cannot be well
united together. -- And those princes who have attempted to enforce oppressive
edicts with the point of the sword, have always lost the affections of the
subjects, and provoked them either to resist, or abandon a kind of Government,
to which reason and conscience, forbid them to submit.

As the means of defense are necessary in all kingdoms and states, and the
support of large standing armies in a time of peace is not only attended with a
great expense, but is dangerous to the community in general, care should be
taken to discipline the militia, and prepare them to take the field on the most
sudden emergencies.

THE necessity of preparing for unavoidable war, is sufficiently evident. --

BUT we cannot close the subject without lamenting those moral disorders which
are the source of wars and fightings; and expressing our most ardent wishes for
universal peace. -- And while we are studying the art of war, and endeavoring
to prepare for defense against a common enemy, let us show to all who observe
us, that we are the loyal subjects of CHRIST; and that in obedience to his
precepts, we will never draw our sword in an unrighteous cause, whatever
promises of honor, preferment, or riches, may possibly be made us as a reward.

LET us inlist ourselves under the banner of JESUS, and having fought "the good
fight of faith, and finished our course," GOD grant we may be admitted into his
glorious kingdom, where the laws of righteousness shall never be violated and
the children of peace shall never be disturbed.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 10. l 10 from bot. r study. p. 14. l 8. fr. bot. r. equitable. p.
15. in note l 4 fr. bot. r. defined. p. (...) the note use a *.


