GOD brings about his holy and wise Purpose or Decree, concerning many
particular Events, by using and improving the (...) Dispositions of Mankind in
Order thereto; and often improves the present (...) of Sinners, as the Means to
chastise and punish them for former Wickedness

BRIEFLY ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, Preached at Suffield, December 27, 1773, The
next Sabbath after the Report arrived, that the PEOPLE at Boston had destroyed

A large Quantity of TEA, Belonging to the EAST INDIA COMPANY, Rather than to
submit to PARLIAMENT-ACTS, Which they looked upon Unconstitutional, Tyrannical,
and tending to enslave AMERICA.

PUBLISHED WITH SOME ENLARGEMENTS.

By ISRAEL HOLLY, Preacher of the Gospel in SUFFIELD.

His own Iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with
the Cords of his Sins,
PROVE. v. 21. HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, near the Great-Bridge, 1774.

A SERMON.
1 KINGS, xii. 15. Wherefore the King hearkened not unto the people, for the
cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which the Lord spoke
by Ahijah the Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
SOLOMON, although the wisest of mere men, yet was guilty of much folly, that is,
of sin and wickedness, which is emphatically styled folly in the sacred
scriptures. And especially in the matter relating to his wives, concubines, and
idolatry, was his sin very provoking to the Lord; for we are told Solomon did
evil in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord was angry with Solomon. Hence we
read that the Lord determined not to let his sin go unpunished. I Kings xi. 11,
12. Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon, for as much as this is done of thee,
and thou have not kept my covenant and my statutes which I commanded thee, I
will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant:
Notwithstanding, in thy days I will not do it for David, thy father's sake; but
I will rend it out of the hand of thy son. Hence the prophet, by inspiration,
was ordered to give information thereof to Jeroboam, to whom God determined to
give the kingdom, when he should take it from the son of Solomon. And Ahijah
caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it into twelve pieces; and
said to Jeruboam, take thee ten pieces: For thus says the Lord, the God of
Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give ten tribes unto thee. I Kings, xi. 30, 31. And now, that the purpose of
God, and the prophecy of Ahijah might have their accomplishment, we see what
means the Lord made use of to bring the same about, viz. the corrupt tempers
and wicked dispositions of those very persons be determined to correct and
punish. It was a punishment, and a severe correction to Rehoboam to have ten
tribes taken from his kingdom: and it was a punishment, and a severe correction
to the ten tribes also, to be rent off; and therefore it is expressed that God
determined to rend them off, as a chastisement for their wickedness, and
especially for their sin of idolitry, Because that they have forsaken me, says
the Lord, and worshipped Ashtaroth, etc. Those who are led into sin expose
themselves to punishment, as well as those who lead; although leaders expose
themselves, and merit punishment to a more aggravated degree. Although Solomon
led the people to idolatry, yet idolators deserve punishment, by what means
soever they became such.

And as before hinted, God made use of the corrupt tempers and wicked
dispositions of those he determined to punish, to be the very means to bring it
about; when Rehoboam was to be made king, the people, with Jeroboam, made a
very abrupt demand, and it seems, by the manner of their doing of it, they did
not care much whether he answered it or no: for it seems they had about
determined what to do before hand, and so made their demand in such a manner,
all things considered, that it was not very likely to be granted, but rather
likely to iritate the spirits of an ambitious and aspiring prince. The demand
of the people, in their address to Rehoboam was, Thy father made our yoke
grievous; now therefore make the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us lighter, and we will serve thee. v. 4 of our context;
which seems evidently to carry an imply, If you don't, we will revolt. Upon
this Rehoboam consults with the old men, what answer he had best to return the
people; and they gave him wise and good counsel in state policy, which, if he
had took, and had been condescending, and gave the people good words that day,
as they advised him, he might have established the kingdom to himself, and
himself have been established king over the ten tribes. But Rehoboam was very
unwise, or wisdom was very much hid from the wise through the prevalency of the
corrupt tempers of hisproud and ambitious heart. Therefore he consults with the
young men, brought up with him, and vain like himself, and he follows their
advice, by answering the people roughly, saying, My father made your yoke
heavy, and I will add to your yoke; my fathey also chastised you with whips,
but I will chastise you with Scorpions: v. 14. Here we see, the people demanded
peremptorily, the prince answered tyrannically, which was the means of their
own punishment, mutually. O! the tremendous wisdom and justice of God in his
conduct toward obstinate sinners! He can make sin its own punishment, and
sinners their own executioners and tormenters!

Our text informs us, That the King hearkened not to the people; for the cause
was from the Lord that be might perform his saying, which the Lord spoke by
Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jereboam the son of Nebat.

In these words we may note several things.

1. A purpose or determination in God, to punish such sins in such a manner,
but not a new purpose none suppose.

2. That God had revealed his purpose and intention by the mouth of the prophet
Ahijah.

3. That God does, and will overule things so as that his purposes shall be
brought about. The king hearkened not to the people, for the cause was from the
Lord.

4. That God in his holy providence makes use of the corruptions and wickedness
of men to bring about his righteous purpose and decree, and their own
punishment when ever he pleases. For this we are not to suppose to be a
singular case peculiar to Rehoboam and the ten tribes, for God to make use of
their own corrupt tempers, and wicked dispositions, as the means to bring about
his purpose, and their punishment, but is frequently the case in other
instances, as we may see further confirmed in the sequel. For the present, I
collect and lay down this doctrine, viz.

The Lord may, and often does, bring about his wife, holy and righteous purpose
or decree, concerning particular events, by making use of the corrupt tempers,
and wicked dispositions of mankind, in order thereunto; and often improves
their present corruptions, as the means to punish them for former wickedness.
To illustrate this doctrine, I shall consider the following propositions, viz.

I. That God has a wise, holy and righteous purpose or decree, concerning all
events that ever take place,

II. That in the course of providence God often brings about his purpose or
decree, concerning particular events, by using and improving the wicked
tempers, and corrupt dispositions of mankind.

III. That God may, and often does, improve the present corruptions of sinners,
as the means to chastise and punish them for former wickedness.

I. That God has a wife, holy and righteous purpose or decree, concerning all
events that ever take place. Here I shall consider two things, (I) That God has
a purpose or decree concerning all events that ever take place. (2) That it is a
wife, holy and righteous purpose or decree.

(I) That God has a purpose or decree concerning all events that ever take
place. It may be called an eternal purpose or decree, as God has no new
purposes nor new intentions upon any revolutions or alterations that take place
in any part of the created cystem; which, to suppose he has, would argue
mutability and change. And it may be called a purpose, or decree, in the
singular number, in reference to the act of God which is one, all one
instantaneous act, and not a number of acts in succession one after another, as
acts and purposes take place in finite minds; and yet we may call them purposes
and decrees, in the plural number, refering to events which are manifold, and
the purpose and decree of God reaches them all, that no one event comes to
pass by mere casualty and accident, respecting the Divine Being, or unconnected
with the plan of events settled in the fore-ordination and appointment of God.

I am very sensible that I am fallen upon a point that grates hard on the minds
of many: To assert, that God, for his own glory, has foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass, is looked upon to be a very frightful doctrine, and thought by
many to be sufficiently confuted, by only saying, that if it be so, then God is
the author of sin, and man is not to blame if he does sin. But if this
declaration in our catechism is duly attended to rightly understood and
explained, it will appear to be agreeable, both to scripture and reason, and
that there is nothing more frightful in it than the truth, nor does the
assertion make God the author of sin, nor man a whit the less to blame for sin,
than if there was no decree about it.

Some who deny the doctrine of the divine decrees, will say, that God from all
eternity fore-knew all events, as certain, which ever take place, although he did
not fix their certainty by any decree of his. To this it may be replied, that
the foreknowledge of any future event, as certain, always and necessarily
implies that the same event is certain; because in the nature of things, no
degree of wisdom, whether finite or infinite, can possibly know an event to be
certain which is not so. And if God did from all eternity foreknow all events
as certain that ever do take place, he must know upon what foundation they
became certain; and if their certainty were not founded in and by his own
decree, then it must be something else that established the certainty of
events, and God, as an infinitely ^^se spectator, looking on that which he had
no hand in, saw the certainty of future events in that which fixed their
certainty, and so foreknow all events, and yet not decree them. But I would
fain query, what the something else was, which from all eternity, fixed and
established the certainty of all future events, distinct from the decree of God
himself? Was it fate? Was it any necessity in nature? Or was it the decree of
some other Deity? Or will not it necessarily involve a man in blasphemy against
the true God, to assert any positive cause, establishing the certainty of all
events which from all eternity God saw the certainty of, and at the same time
exclude the decree of God out of the question?

But that the doctrine of the divine decrees, asserting that God, for his own
glory, has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass, is no way absurd, if
rightly understood, and truly explained, I shall here just offer a word
respecting two different kinds of events, and remark how we are to understand
that they are made certain by the decree of God.

1. The first sort of events I shall consider, is such as require the divine
efficiency to produce them, viz. the creation of the world, the creation of man
at first, or his new creation in Christ; the implantation of a principle of
holiness in man, after he had lost it, and the like. Now, if we should say,
that God from all eternity, fore-knew exactly at what period these events would
take place; it is easy to see in this case, he could not foreknow the events,
nor the time precisely when they would take place, but only in his own eternal
and immutable purpose, to exert his own power, on such wise as would infallibly
produce those effects; and that in such a period one, and in such a period
another, and herein absolutely fore-knew the certainty of the event. For these
events could not possibly take place but only by the exertion of the divine
power to produce them, and therefore could not be known to be cettain, but in
knowing the purpose or decree of God, that in reality he was determined to
exert his power so as without fail to bring the event to pass. But,

2. The other sort of events I shall mention, is such as are not produced by
the divine efficiency, viz. the sin of the creature. It Is a blasphemous
doctrine that some have run into to assert that God created sin, and is the
efficient cause of it, as he is of holiness. God is the efficient cause of
holiness, because it is his own nature, and produced, whenever it is found in
any creature, by his own power; but sin is the reverse. For similitude, The sun
is the natural, positive and proper cause of light and heat, but not so of
darkness and the cold; although in point of event darkness and cold do
necessarily take place upon the sun's withdrawing. And if the sun in his daily
and nightly revolutions, was a free and moral agent, and had no other being to
control it, we might say, he bounded, fixed, and limited the hours of
darkness, as well as the hours of light, although he was not the proper cause of
darkness as he is of the light. So, God don't suffer the darkness of sin to
take place at random, but bounds and limits it by his decree; so as the proud
waves of the sea, saying hitherto shall thou come and no further.

But that we may see how the event is made certain, by the purpose, or decree
of God, respecting sin, we must consider, not only that God don't exert any
pos^tive efficacy of his, to produce it: but also, we must consider, that the
decree of God lays no violence upon the freedom of the creature; but it is a
determination in God, to suffer or permit the creature to choose, and act
freely, in that which is sin, and not interpose by his own power so as to
prevent it; in such circumstances as he sees the event will certainly take
place if he don't. As for instance. God, by his infinite understanding and
wisdom, could not but know, that if he made man, Adam, and placed him just as
he did, in that state of trial, Adam would certainly sin, in point of event, if
God did not interpose by his divine power and grace, effectually to prevent it;
and God determining (for wise ends) that he would not by his power prevent it,
the event became fixed and certain in the divine mind, but the certainty of the
event, had no manner of influence upon the mind of the creature in the affair,
any more than if the event was not fixed and certain, for man acted just the
freedom of his own mind, and just as he would do, in the same circumstances,
had there been no decree about it, unless God should have done otherwise than
he has, viz. prevented sin where he has not seen fit to prevent it. And so we
may say concerning the sins of other men, as well as the sin of Adam, that God
perfectly knew, from all eternity, that men under such and such temptations as
they would in time be under, would certainly sin, so and so, just as they do,
unless he should effectually interpose by his power and grace, and prevent it.
But for some wise and glorious ends, God determined he would not effectually
prevent sin, where in reality he now does not; and so the event became fixed
and certain, by the decree of God to permit, or suffer it to take place. And
with the absolute certainty, that those events which relate to sin would take
place, as well as other events, the divine plan stands connected; which we may
see in an instance or two I shall mention as a specimen, viz. Upon the
invariable certainty that Adam would sin, stands inseperably connected, the
scheme of redemption by Jesus Christ, laid in God's eternal counsel of love and
peace. Upon the invariable certainty, that Judas, the Jews and the Romans,
would be wicked enough, with God's decree of permission, to put Christ to
death, stands inseperably connected God's eternal purpose of salvation to
sinners by Christ's death. So, that when the event took place, and they by
their wickedness had actually put Christ to death, the counsel of God was not
frustrated, but fulfilled, as faith the apostle, Acts, ii. 23. Him, being
delivered, by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God, ye have
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. So, upon the invariable
certainty that Pharaoh would be hardened, and wicked as he was, and injure and
oppress Israel as he did, God told Abraham of it, and the event connected with
it, more than four hundred years before hand. Genesis xv. 13, 14. But not to
enlarge, the scripture is express, that God works all things after the
counsel of his own will. Ephesians. i. 11. And that sinful actions, as well as
others, are included, see Acts iv. 27, 28. Against thy holy child Jesus, whom
thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontious Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel determined before to be done. And although there are many devices in
the heart of man, yet we are expressly told, the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand.

2. I am to consider that the purpose or decree of God, establishing the
certainty of all events that ever take place, is wise, holy and righteous. And,

1. This might be argued from the infinite perfections of God: The infinite
perfections will not admit of any purpose in the divine mind, but what is wise,
holy and righteous.

2. This might be largely and fully proved, from the scripture; or the the
scripture character we have of God, given in his holy word.

3. But what I aim for the present to consider and offer as proof, is the
divine conduct. God executes his decrees, and I may say, explains them, in his
Conduct. Many there are, who think it gives a shocking character of the Divine
Being, to say he hate decreed all events, or to say that God has foreordained
whatsoever comes to pass. And yet these very men think they highly approve the
divine conduct; or at least they dare not object a word against it, but will
speak much in favor of it. But if the divine conduct is good, wise, holy and
righteous, then an eternal purpose or decree in God, to do just so, must be
good, wise, holy and righteous also. By way of similitude, for illustration.
Suppose a man has a secret purpose in his heart, which is bad, even to abuse
and injure his fellow men; when that purpose comes to be acted out, the conduct
will appear to be very bad also; and rather more glaringly bad, in the conduct
than in the purpose only. But yet, depraved mortals have often another way of
arguing respecting the Divine Being. They will allow the divine conduct to be
good, but an eternal purpose or decree in God to do just so, they hold to be
shockingly bad. Hence, nothing seems to set some people in a greater ruffle
than to mention the doctrine of election, fore-ordination or decrees; and hence
they will fly therefrom as Moses fled from his rod when it appeared like a
serpent, but when he took it in his hand, it became a staff. So I say, if these
men would but venture to come near these doctrines, with humble enquiry, and
take hold of them with a good understanding of them, they would appear no more
frightful, but as a staff of comfort and support in the hand of faith.

But that I may improve the divine conduct to illustrate and vindicate the
doctrine of the divine decrees, let us consider the divine conduct in reference
to such events which depraved mortals seem most averse to a willingness to own,
are made certain, fixed, and bounded by a decree, viz. such as the fall of
Adam, or the sin of his children, the final impenitency of any, and their
eternal damnation. And on the other hand, that a decree from eternity should
engage, that a certain number of the fallen race, chosen by grace, should, by
the gospel, be effectually and savingly called; in time, receive the blessing
of regenerating grace, and have salvation therewith inseparably connected. I
say, let us briefly, at this time, but truly and faithfully attend to the
scripture account of what the divine conduct is, respecting these points.

And we find by the scripture representation of the divine conduct, that in
fact God did make and place man, Adam, in a state of trial -- did suffer the
temptations to prevail -- did suffer Adam to sin, when he knew he would sin if
he suffered it; and that God does suffer Adam's children to sin is manifestly
evident; and although he restrains them often, and prevents them from acting out
all their heart wickedness, which otherwise they would, yet we see much is
permitted to take place in the world. And under the light of the gospel God
does suffer many to continue in impenitency and unbelief to the last, and die
under the curse, and punishes them with eternal damnation, as they deserve. And
on the other hand, we find by scripture representation, that it is fact that God
does bless the means of grace to some, for their saving good -- makes the
gospel the power of God unto their salvation -- makes them willing in the day
of his power -- does extend to them regenerating grace -- does bestow the gift
of faith, and thereunto inseperably connects eternal life, and in the final end
infallibly bestows it upon them. Now, if the divine conduct in these things is
good and glorious, and must be acknowledged by all, to be wise, holy and
righteous, how is it possible that an eternal purpose or decree in the divine
mind, to conduct just so toward his creatures, should be otherwise than good
and glorious, and ought to be acknowledged by all, to be wise, holy and
righteous. But the divine conduct in these things is represented in the
scripture to be good and glorious, wise, holy and righteous; and for which God
ought to be adored and praised to all eternity, even in his conduct both toward
them who are saved, and them that perish. Concerning the saved, their language
in scripture is, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory. By
grace we are saved. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he has saved us by the washing of regeneration and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Not that we loved God, but he loved us. And they
sung a new song, saying thou art worthy to take the book, and open the seals
thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood --
saying, blessing and honor, and glory and power be unto him that siteth on the
throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever. And concerning them that perish,
the scripture language is, What if God, willing to show his wrath, and make his
power known, endured with all long-suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted to
destruction. The Judge of all the earth will do right. It Is a righteous thing
with God, to recompense tribulation to them even when he shall say, depart, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire. Thou art righteous, O Lord, because thou judge
thus. Amen, Alleluia.

And thus the eternal purpose or decree of God may be vindicated by the divine
conduct, which is the decree acted out; and seeing the conduct is holy and
righteous, which respects every event, the decree cannot be otherwise.

But before I dismiss this head, I will just answer one objection which is
often brought against the doctrine of an eternal decree fixing the certainty of
all events. They say, "this renders the use of means wholly needless." But this
objection is full as strong against the doctrine of God's eternal
foreknowledge of all events as certain, as it is against the decrees of God;
for God's eternal foreknowledge of the certainty of all events, supposes that
the events will come to pass just so, and according as they are known to be
certain. And they might say as well, this renders means useless. But the
objection has its foundation in ignorance and inattention; and if men were
will not to talk so, in worldly affairs, they would be looked upon not much short
of idiots. Let us see this in a familiar representation by way of similitude.
Suppose a very rich and able man has a full purpose and determination to erect
a magnificent building, and to finish it off to the turning of a key in the
space of a year; and he has carpenters, masons and joiners, a competent number,
and other workmen under his control, sufficient to perform the business; and
he has an idea of the building finished in his mind before hand, and rejoices
in prospect as though already accomplished; and on the supposition it is certain
that the man will not be disappointed. Now, for one of that man's neighbors to
tell him, Friend, you may dismiss all your workmen, and send them about their
own business, for you need not employ one of them in going forward with your
building, for the use of means is needless, and it will do no good to use them,
for you have got a firm and settled purpose to finish your building by such a
time, and I am persuaded you are able to do it, and will not be disappointed,
therefore you had as good dismiss all your workmen as not. Now, for a man in
this case to talk thus, would be to make himself ridiculous; for every one
knows that the more firm a man is resolved to finish a building in a certain
space time, and the more certain it is the man will not be disappointed, the
greater necessity there is to use the means by which it is to be brought about.
And indeed, it is the man that is not determined to build, that may dismiss his
workmen, and use no means in order thereto, and not the other. And full as
absurd it is, to talk as many do, that if all things are decreed which ever
take place, then there is no necessity of using means, we had as good fling by
all duties, as reading, preaching and praying, etc. as not, for, say they, it
will not alter the case at all, nor do any good. Whereas to talk so, it is a
self-contradiction: for on the doctrine, that all events are decreed, supposes
the use of means, is one event, that is to take place, and that to be the means
of another; and therefore on this plan, means are made as necessary, as on any
other, and more so; means and end being connected together. As for instance. If
God has ordained, that faith shall come by hearing, and salvation by faith, is
it not necessary that we both hear, and believe too, in order to maintain a
scriptural hope of salvation? But,

II. I proceed to consider the second general head or proposition, viz. That in
the course of providence God often brings about his purpose or decree
concerning particular events, by using and improving the wicked tempers, and
corrupt dispositions of mankind in order thereto. I shall mention a few
scripture instances of this nature, briefly.

1. The affair which our text and context relates unto, may be considered as
one instance, as noted before. God determined to rend the kingdom from
Rehoboam, that is, the ten tribes; this is the event to take place. But how
does God bring it about? why, we see, that in the (...) of providence, God made
use of their wicked dispositions; there was no condescension on the side of the
prince, nor any submission on the side of the people, but contrary dispositions
prevailed, by which means the prediction was fulfilled.

2. Another instance I shall mention is concerning Joseph: God determined that
Joseph, one of the sons or Jacob, should be advanced to great honor and dignity
in Egypt, and be the blessed instrument of laying up corn in store against the
grievous famine. But Joseph was young, lived at a distance, and had no thoughts
of so much as going to Egypt, it is probable. But the scripture tells us that
God sent him there, and what means he made use of in order thereunto, viz. the
wicked tempers and evil dispositions of Joseph's brethren: They hated him, and
sold him, and did barbarously by their brother; they meant it for evil, but God
meant it for good. God made use of their wickedness to be the means bring about
his own holy purpose.

3. When a nation and people have grown ripe for judgments, and the purpose and
determination of God, is to punish them severely, with the heavy calamity of
war, captivity, bondage and slavery, then God is wont to make use of the
corrupt dispositions of some proud, and aspiring momarch, as Nebuchadnezzer of
old, and many others we read of in the bible, to be the instrument, or rod, in
the hand of God, to scourge a wicked and rebellious nation or people: and
although such an one, in one sense, does the will of God, that is, chastises and
scourges a wicked people, an event that God determined, yet, howbeit they meant
not so, neither did their heart think so. But it was in their heart to gratify
their ambition, avarice and revenge. And therefore, when God has used such rods
sufficiently to answer his purpose, he has been wont to break them to pieces,
or burn them. See how this is represented in Isaiah x Once more,

4. The merciful purpose and decree of God was to give his son to die for
sinners, that by his death, they might have life. But what means did God make
use of to bring this astonishing event to pass? Why, the wicked dispositions of
mankind, excited by Satan, as Judas's covetousness, the heart-malice and enmity
of the high priests, etc. But I need not enlarge, nor multiply instances, the
point being plain. Well may we say, the Lord is wonderful in counsel, and
mighty in working! whenever any have behaved themselves proudly against him, he
has evidently been above them; when any rebelliously refuse to obey his
preceptive will, he can make them fulfill his decreetive will, whether they will
or no; he can, and will serve himself, of them that will not serve him.

III. The third thing to be considered is, The Lord may, and often does improve
the present corruptions of sinners, as the means to chastise and punish them
for former wickedness. This is an awful and tremendous way of being punished,
yet the righteous Lord often punishes sinners on this wise. We read in the
first chapter Romans that God punished the Gentile idolators in this manner. That,
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image like to corruptible man. Wherefore God also
gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor
their own bodies between themselves. And Further, Because they changed the
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the
Creator. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, which led them
into abominable, and even unnatural actions. And again, As they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which are not convenient.

And after the same manner we are told that God punished the wicked Israelites,
Psalm lxxxi. 11, 12. My people would not be hearken to my voice, and Israel
would none of me. So I gave them up unto their own heart's lusts, and they
walked in their own counsels.

So God made use of the wicked and corrupt disposition of Pharaoh, to be the
means of his punishment for his former wickedness, and even to be the means of
his destruction. By his former wickedness he had forfeited divine restraints,
and God was pleased to withold restraining grace from him, and let his own
lusts prove his own ruin. Hence his own wicked heart led him into the sea, and
so was the means of his destruction. So God made use of Haman's corruption, as
the means of his destruction. For his proud, ambitious and aspiring mind, was
the means that brought him to his end, on a high gallows, as recorded in the
book of Esther.

Again, in the instance of Judas: by his great wickedness, he had forfeited the
grace of God, even restraining grace; and God determining to punish him in
great severity, withholds restraining grace from him, and leaves him to fall a
prey to his present wicked disposition, as a punishment for his former
wickedness. And his unbelief hurries him to desperation, and his desperation to
the haltar. And even concerning the damned in hell, we may suppose this to be
the case with them, that God makes their present wickedness the means to punish
them for their former wickedness, that is, their own lusts of pride and envy,
their despair hatred of God, and implacable enmity against him are their
continual tormentors.

IMPROVEMENT.
USE I. If, as we have heard, God brings about his holy and wise purpose or
decree concerning many particular events, by using and improving the wicked
dispositions of mankind in order thereto, and often improves the present
corruptions of sinners as the means to chastise and punish them for former
wickedness, then we may hence learn what grounds we have to fear that God is
now about to scourge and chastise, in awful severity, our sinful nation and
land; and as a just punishment for former sins, to make use of the present
corruptions of men to be the means to bring about their own misery? How similar
is the circumstance of our nation and land now, to that of Jeroboam and the
children of Israel, both with respect to ripeness for judgments by former sins,
and ripeness in present corruptions and wicked dispositions discovered, to be
the means to bring mutual ruin upon our own heads, if heaven prevent not.

When people, highly favored of God, will sin against his goodness, and merit
his wrath, God may say in judgment, you may sin, and bring your own ruin. This
was the case of Solomon, Rehoboam, and the children of Israel: they sinned much
against the goodness and mercy of the Lord, and therefore it was but justice
for the Lord to suffer them to sin against themselves, that is, to bring
judgments upon themselves by their sins. So, by way of punishment, God suffered
an unreasonable and tyrannical spirit to prevail in Rehoboam, and a licentious
and rebellious spirit to prevail among the ten tribes; by means of which, they
were mutually chastised, and a train of evils followed; for we are told, there
was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam, all the days of their life, and the
evils did not end with their lives neither.

So by way of punishment God is threatening of us now, and if he should suffer
arbitrary and tyrannical edicts to issue from the highest seat of power in our
nation, tending to abridge the colonies in America of their natural and
constitutional liberties; and the people should refuse to subject thereto, let
the risque be what it will; and if what is begun of this nature, and has
already took place in a degree, should be suffered to increase, what can we
expect but blood shed and ruin? yea, mutual ruin, the ruin of Britain as well
as of the colonies? And if this should be, if this awful event should take
place, we must, and we ought, to acknowledge the hand of God therein, and that
the hand of God therein is righteous, however sinful the instruments may be by
which it is brought about.

Our text tells us the King hearkened not to the people, for the cause was from
the Lord. And if the king of Great Britain will not hearken to the people in
the colonies of America, if he will not hearken to their humble petitions, nor
to their particular demands, the cause is from the Lord; and doubtless for this
cause, viz. because he intends to punish the nation for national sins; and to
make use of the corruptions of those he means to punish, as the means to bring
it about. If a righteous God had not a hand in what this land seems to be
threatened with, as well as unrighteous men, we should have less cause to fear.
If the great King of Heaven did not threaten to punish this land, we should
have less cause to fear the threats of the king of Great Britain. And if there
is no act passed in the court of heaven to punish us, we might hope, some how,
to evade the acts of parliament, passed with that design. But this, alas! this
is what we have reason to fear, that God is now about to chastise, and in great
severity, to punish such a wicked land and nation as our's is, at this day
grown so ripe for ruin. When the wickedness of the old world was great upon the
earth, God sent the deluge and swept them off of the earth; and when the cry of
Sodom, whose wickedness was great, went up to heaven; the Lord whose wrath was
hot, rained down fire and brimstone upon them, out of Heaven. And how can we
expect to escape the severe judgments of God, when there is so much of the sin
of the old world and of Sodom too, to be found in our nation and Land? Britain
and America, especially this part of America, called New England, have been
eminently favored by heaven for a greatwhile, but have not made answerable
returns, but have requited the Lord with evil for his goodness. And will not
the Lord visit for these things, and be avenged on such a nation as this? O!
what a deluge of impiety has overspread Britain, at this day so much drenched
in all manner of debaucheries and wickedness? How does intemperance,
drunkenness and sensualities of all kinds prevail? What profanation the day and
name of the Lord, and contempt of the gospel of Jesus Christ? What licencious
doctrines and damnable herisies are imbibed, while the glorious truths of the
gospel are rejected? Does not arminianism, arianism, deism and infidelities of
the grossest kinds prevail? While truth, and the power of godliness is but
rarely known, in a comparative sense I mean. There is doubtless a few at this
day, and comparatively but a few, eminent ones, like Lot in Sodom, daily have
their righteous souls vexed with the evil deeds and conversation of the wicked
while they live among them. And if we cast our eyes over the American land, and
colonies, and even New England in particular, once renowned for piety, and
purity, and with the apostle should ask the question, are we better than they?
must we not with him answer, no in no wise. Or if in some branches of impiety,
this land has not yet quite equalled her mother country, yet how manifest it
is, that as a people we have been long on the march, and have traveled with
the rapid swiftness, toward as high a pitch of wickedness as was ever
practiced in our mother country, or any other in the universe, And the same
sins in this lands, must be more henious in the sight of God than in some other
countries, by reason of our being more highly exalted in point of privileges,
spiritual privileges especially, with respect to the primitive religion of New
England, the glory is departed, the gold is become dim, and the most fine gold
changed. Do we thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise Have we not
now reason to expect the frowns of Heaven, and a storm of vengeance to be sent
down upon us? And are not the clouds now gathering? And have been for some
time, both thick and dark? And what does this portend but a storm at hand?
People now in New England begin to feel the effects of despotic power, and are
alarmed thereat, but yet entertain hopes to evade the force of it, but whether
they can or no, heaven only knows. How vigilant have many been of late, to
study, assert and vindicate their natural and constitutional liberties and
privileges? And what a loud and just cry they make against that power, or claim
of power that would abridge them of the same? And yet among other sins, is not
New England, the government and authrity of some of the colonies in
New England, guilty of exercising the same arbitrary power, to abridge man, or
their natural and constitutional liberties and privileges? One of the natural
rights of mankind is, a liberty to choose, in matters of religion, that way,
mode, form and worship which a man in his conscience thinks most is agreeable to
the word of God, and most acceptable to God. And the constitution of the gospel
confirms this natural right unto man, by bidding individuals search the
scriptures, etc. And the design of the original constitution of New England was
the same. For our forefathers came into this land, to enjoy and grant liberty
of conscience. But now times and things amongst us are so altered from their
original design in New England, that if a number in point of conscience, reduce
the principles of our forefathers in this land into practice, by adhering to
the Cambridge platform, in forming a church, ordaining a minister, discipline,
etc. it has often so happened in New England, in Connecticut in particular,
that such men must be oppressed by the laws of the colony, and their estates
taken from them one seven years after another, to support another worship than
their own, a worship they have no connection with, but only by living in the
bounds of civil society. And petitions to the general assembly for relief, in
this case, have been often repulsed; and when and where it has been so, how
have particular towns and societies been emboldened, under the patronage of the
legislators of the colony, to vote and take away the estates of their honest
neighbors yearly, when they know in their conscience it is not doing as they
would be done by. But how righteous would it be in God to punish such
lawmakers, and those who are hardy enough to put the same into execution, by
bringing them under arbitrary laws of the same nature? How just would the
retalation be, if God should pay them in their own coin? What if the king of
England should not only send laws and acts of parliament to the colonies to cut
short the liberties and freedom of the people here, which hitherto we have
enjoyed? But what if he should also send snipping, and force by sea sufficient
to enforce them? especially to enforce them on the capital towns and seaport
places, or orders to destroy them? And whether the resolutions already formed
in parliament to subject the colonies to their edicts, will not make even this
probable, especially when the same comes to be iritated and increased by the
news of the late conduct of the people of Boston, destroying such a quantity of
Tea belonging to the East India company, and destroying of it on the very
principle of refusing to subject to parliamentary power, making laws to bind
the colonies. Now, the thing is, whether the next question in parliament will not
be, Who shall submit or yield, we, or the colonies? And whether it will not be
natural for the parliament to think that they have gone too far already to drop
the matter now, consistent with their honor? And whether they will not also think
that the colonies, Boston in particular, have gone too far, in resisting their
authority, to be suffered to go unpunished? And therefore with resolution will
rally all their force, rather than not subject the colonies? And on the other
hand, the colonies seeing the design of parliament acts, to abridge their
liberties, and fearing what is to come of that nature, will doubtless, as they
have already begun, endervour to unite and strengthen themselves by union, to
resist, all they can, the force of those arbitrary acts. But what if this
increasing resolution, and recollecting strength on both sides, should be the
very means of mutual ruin? God can easily make this use of it, and righteously,
on this wise, scourge a wicked nation and sinful land. However, we would gladly
hope heaven will not suffer things to be carried to that extreme; but who can say
there is no danger of it? And have we not reason to fear something very
calamitous of this nature will take place? And perhaps we shall soon see more
distressing times in America, in New England, than ever we saw in all our
northern war, with the French and savage foe.

But what shall the colonies do, or which way shall they turn for relief? Why,
some seem to think that it is easy answered: They say, only let the colonies
unite, and agree firmly that they will not import any more goods from Britain,
till these acts are repealed, and England will soon be obliged to yield. But I
think the proposed remedy a very precarious and uncertain. For there may be
great difficulty in getting the colonies to unite; and doubtless there will be
men of influence in every colony of such a mercenary spirit, that if they view
it probable that their own honor and interest will be advanced by taking the
parliament side, and pleading in favor of their right and power in matters
relating to the present controversy, they will very readily do it; for if, as
we have seen by public accounts given, that a native of the metropolis of
New England, advanced to the highest seat of power in the government, viewing,
as we may reasonably suppose, his honor and interest connected with that side
the question, could not only be willing that there should be some "abridgment
of what is called English liberties," but even court the same; surely we cannot
have much dependence upon men, especially men who are candidates for posts of
honor and preferment. For the psalmist's observation is often a verified truth;
men of low degree are vanity; and men of high degree are a lie; for they often
deceive, as a lie does, to the injury of those who depend upon them. And
besides. Suppose the union of the colonies should not be impeded, or absolutely
hindered, by men who would, sacrifice the public good, to private interest, yet
how do we know, but when the motion, and attempt for such a thing, comes to be
understood or Britain, I say how do we know, but this very thing will be the
means to increase and hasten parliamentary rage and resolution, to be the more
speedy and severe, in order to reduce, to their subjection, the capital towns,
and the first, and chief leaders, in the factions and rebellions of America, as
they call it; and even if it be too much bloodshed, and the total ruin of
valuable, and populous towns; and yet, flatter themselves, that they are doing
their duty in being vigorous in crushing rebellion in the bud, and by being
speedy, answer the end effectually, and shed as little blood as may be and less
than must be if matters are delayed. But say some, our King will not be so unwise,
as really to destroy his own subjects, and weaken his own kingdom, and thereby
expose himself to his neighboring enemies. To this it may be replied. Have we
not often heard, and sometimes seen, that wisdom is sometimes hid from the
wise, and especially, when the time is come, that God is determined to punish
or destroy them. And I look upon it, that the present melancholy appearances of
things, by which the colonies are threatened, the kingdom is also threatened
with ruin. But the question recurs again, what must be done? why, I am apt to
think that it would be wise, and well, for all the colonies to unite, and every
man in each colony, in all warrantable steps under the guidance of wisdom and
prudence, to maintain their threatened rights and liberties, and even for
individuals, in such a day as this, to be willing to sacrifice much of their
private interest for the sake of the public good. But I leave it to others to
plan, in those affairs which relate to state policy, and give my advice in
another character. Therefore to the question, in this distressing day, what
must we do, what mu^^ ^he colonies do?

I answer, The best way is to take the scripture advice, under threatening
judgments. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine eniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. We see the
steps which Ninivah took, when threatened with immediate, destruction, and the
happy effect that followed, God spared the city. Therefore let us all repent of
our sins, and unfeignedly turn to the Lord, that iniquity prove not our ruin.
And this shall be our second use.

USE 2. of exhortation. There is a loud call upon us now, to make God our
friend, and that we may thus do, it is necessary that we be reconciled to him;
that we cast away our weapons of rebellion, and fall in humble submission at
Gods feet, begging for that mercy we have forfeited, and that we may escape
that wrath we have merited. And if our humiliation and repentance be sincere --
universal or general -- accompanied with reformation of all known evils, we may
hope that the Lord will yet appear for us and open some way for our escape even
of those temporal judgments with which this land is now threatened. And to
excite one and all, now forthwith to see and feel the necessity of repentance
and reformation in order warrantably, to hope that God will deliver us from
impending danger, I shall mention one or two things by way of motive.

And, 1. According to God's decree and appointment of events, God has been wont
to connect means and end together. That in a time of danger, if people become
sensible, humble, penitent and reformed, this is wont to be the means, by which
the end is brought about, viz. The deliverence of that people from the
threatened destruction, as in the case of Ninivah, etc. So on the other hand,
when a people are apparently threatened with destruction, and they continue
hardened, impenitent and unreform'd, this is the means, in God's plan
established, to bring about the end, viz. The destruction of that people.

So now, if we desire the end, viz. the deliverence of this land from the awful
judgments with which we are threatened, then let us comply with; and be in the
use of means requisite, that is, let us repent of sin and turn to God. See how
this is represented in Jer. xviii. 7. 8. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it: If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil I though it to do unto them.

Now in such an instance as this we are not to suppose, that there was really
any change or alteration in God, although he condesends to speak after the
manner of men, as tho he repented and altered his purpose; for when men repent,
they do change and alter their purpose; so when God altars his conduct toward
a people, he speaks to men as though he repented. But in reality the change was
in the people, and not in God; and when there became such a change in the
people for the better, the end of the threatening was answered, and it became
meet and suitable that God should change his dispensations toward them; and
this seems to be represented as though he repented, although he is not a man that
he should repent. But this conduct in God, in changing his dispensations
toward people, as they change, either for the better or for the worse, is
entirely agreeable to God's immutable and eternal purpose and decree, because
therein he determined to do just so, connecting means and end together. And
therefore the way of escape is on this wise, now open to us, both by the decree
connecting means and end, and the written word of God, proposing repentance as
the means to escape either national or eternal destruction. And therefore we
ought to see, and feel, the necessity of being in the exercise of the appointed
means of safety. And mankind will be voluntary in that conduct which will be
the means, either to avert or bring ruin. And God in his providence now, as
well as in his word, is setting life and death before us, and is bidding us
choose: and therefore, O, America, O, New England, be wise, and choose life.

2. A second motive to urge all to repentance, and a genuine turning to the
Lord, I shall make use of is, The real straits we are already plunged in, by
things that have operated and took place. Parliament acts have took place, that
is, they exist, are enjoined; opposition and resistance have took place;
resentment and resolutions have took place; and what further will take place,
who can tell? But let the colonies turn which way they will, are they not in an
awful strait? Suppose the colonies, for peace sake, and to prevent the
confusion and distress that is likely to follow, if they should continue to
resist parliament acts; I say, suppose they should submit, and comply with the
claim of parliamentary power in passing acts to bind the colonies, and submit
to all they lay upon us, where will they stop? Who can tell that? Surely we
know not. It may be, that their claims and their authority will not stop at
temporal property; but when they have got the colonies all subjected, and fast
bound as to that, so that they can make but feeble or no resistance at all,
then perhaps our religious privileges and liberties will be called for next,
and in lieu thereof Popery enjoined. For I think that there is such a kindred
and likeness between a despotic power claimed by mortals, arbitrary government,
and Popery, that they who are friendly to the one, cannot be enemies to the
other. But woe to the colonies, woe to New England, if this should ever come to
pass! and who can say we are out of danger? Not only to have temporal property
at the disposal of arbitrary power, but conscience bound by Popish chains,
which, when thoroughly fastened upon us, away must go our bibles, and in lieu
thereof, we must have imposed upon us, the superstitions and damnable heresies
and idolatries of the church of Rome. Then we must pray to the Virgin Mary,
worship images, believe the doctrine of Purgatory, and the Pope's infalibility,
and such like. And last of all, the deepest plot of hell and Rome, the holy
inquisition, must guard the Catholic faith of the church of Rome, and bind us
thereto with all its terrors and cruelty. O! who that is awake, with any
sensibility hereof, had not rather loose their blood and lives too, than leave
posterity in such an awful situation! No wonder then, that men of sense and
honor, no wonder that men of piety and religion, no wonder that men of
conscience and fidelity, are loath to submit to that, which they have reason to
think is leading toward this, and have reason to fear will terminate in this
if submitted to. While the enemies of our liberties would fain have it go that
it is only the faction of mob and rabble that has made any opposition, or that
discovers any reluctance in the affair. And if on the other hand, the colonies
do not yield; if they think they are bound in faithfulness to our native
rights, and English liberties, in faithfulness to themselves, and to unborn
posterity, to resist that claim of power that would enslave them; yet what a
strait are the colonies plunged in, for who can tell how far to carry their
resistance? If resisting by disputing the point would do, a manly resistance
has already been made, by discovering and vindicating our natural and
constitutional libertis; and by dint of argument have, on that wise, won the
field, if we might be allowed to possess the just victory obtained; but we find
that will not do our turn. And now we hear, that at Boston, further resistance has
been made, even to the destruction of property, which, certain it is, nothing
but pure necessity can warrant. When I say nothing but pure necessity can
warrant the destruction of property, referring to the destruction of the tea at
Boston, I mean not absolutely to determine whether there was a real necessity
for it or no; for not having a universal acquaintance with the affair, as to
the grounds, reasons or expediency, I must in some sort suspend my judgment for
the present; although perhaps they were too hasty and rash, as it is natural to
run into extremes, even in the defense of a just cause, But however it were in
this case, I suppose the necessity may be such as will warrant the destruction
of property, and even of lives too, The English liberties are valuable and
precious, and were not obtained but at the expense of much blood; and tamely to
resign them up, whenever arbitrarily demanded, argues more baseness than true
loyalty of spirit.


And what shall the colonies do? Shall they resist further yet? Shall they
resist unto blood, or if they have so done already, shall they resist unto the
shedding of blood as well as the loss of blood? Or, if it should once come to
bloodshed another time, what woeful times must we expect?

So, it appears, I think, evident enough, to all who are not stupidly blind,
that the colonies now, are in a sad and woeful plunge let them turn which way
they will, either submit to or resist these parliament acts; and what adds to
the calamity is, the divided sentiments among us concerning what is right, and
best for us to do, while some take one side the question, and some the other.

And surely we stand in need of help from the Lord, that he would appear in his
kind providence, and deliver us out of this strait. When the children of Israel
were brought into a strait, and could see nothing but destruction, the sea
before them, the Egyptians behind them, and mountains on either side, and
seemed to be shut up unto ruin; yet in the mount and mouth of danger, the Lord
appeared, and opened a way unknown and unthought of by them for their escape.
And as we are now threatened with ruin, and according to the appearance of
things, some awful judgments are nigh. Therefore, let one and all turn to the
Lord, and seek his mercy, before the decree bring forth, in our destruction,
before the days pass as the chaff, that we may be hid in the day of the Lord's
anger; and imitate the Ninivites, when exposed to destruction, who, from the
greatest to the least, humbled themselves before the Lord in sackloth and
ashes, and cried mightily to the Lord, upon this encouragement, Who can tell if
the Lord will turn away his fierce wrath that we perish not.

FINIS,

