THE Other Side of the Question: OR, A DEFENSE OF THE LIBERTIES of
NORTH AMERICA. IN ANSWER TO A LATE FRIENDLY ADDRESS To All Reasonable
Americans, ON THE SUBJECT OF OUR POLITICAL CONFUSIONS.

BY A CITIZEN.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, fronting HANOVER-SQUARE. M,DCC,LXXIV.

THE Other Side of the Question: OR, A DEFENSE OF THE LIBERTIES of
NORTH AMERICA, etc.
A Certain Friendly Address to all reasonable Americans, was just now put into
my hands. Some people perhaps have read it, for I am told it was published six
days ago; wherefore, after perusing, it seems proper to make a short answer to
this performance: not because it is well written, or because there is the least
danger any man will become a proselyte to the doctrines contained in it; but
for the following reasons, which candor obliges me to mention.

FIRST. I answer this pamphlet, for the very purpose which alone the pamphlet
itself is likely to effect, -- to encourage the paper manufactory.

SECONDLY. I answer it for the sake of the Printer, who must be sadly out of
pocket, by publishing such woeful performances: And therefore he is hereby
requested to print this in a large type, and the like, so as to make the most
on it.

THIRDLY. I write, because from the futility of the author's reasoning, no body
else may think it worth the trouble. And if so, why then he would very
naturally conclude that he had written an excellent unanswerable treatise,
which conclusion might inflate the poor creature's vanity, in such manner as to
tempt him into other imprudencies of the same kind. The public thanks therefore
will be my due, for removing, or at least preventing a common nuisance.

LASTLY. I am prompted to this undertaking out of regard to the fair-sex. For
many weak women may be exceedingly frighted by that awful compound of threats,
and texts, and homilies.

Now then, gentle reader, having told thee the origin. I shall next acquaint
thee with the character of this new acquaintance, which my Master James has
introduced to thy hand. -- I will not, as is too common with controversial
people, whether politic, or polemic: I will not, I say, use any acrimonious
expressions, against this unhappy author; for whose weaknesses and wanderings,
I have the utmost pity and compassion. On the contrary, I shall treat him with
the greatest gentleness and respect, owing in some measure to my very great
reverence for the Clergy, one of which he is, as I have been informed. And
truly the frequent quotations from scripture, together with the illiberal
language contained in his pamphlet, will naturally lead folks to believe so.
For it unfortunately happens, that the generality of these Gentlemen, from an
ungain habit they acquire by abusing the poor Devil, are too apt to vilify and
asperse their neighbors. Some exceptions there are, it must be acknowledged,
which may be attributed to this; that a few individuals have kept better
company, and seen more of the polite world, than the rest of their order. But
alack and alas! I fear me our author is not one of these rare birds, for the
household proverbs and tales with which his piece is interlarded, (if I may
venture on something like his own language) make the odds at least a pound to a
penny against him.

And now reader, if by chance thou art a Presbyterian, or Congregationalist, or
other Dissenter from the Episcopalian Church, to which I myself belong; permit
me to a pologize for the rude and opprobrious terms made use of against you by
our author. These things ought in common charity to be forgiven, inasmuch as
they seem to have proceeded from ignorance and the want of better language. --
And do not, I beseech you, conclude too hastily against his brethren, I have
several friends and acquaintance among them, who are really Gentlemen.
Wherefore it is my earnest desire, that if in the hurry of composition (for I
have but three days to write this in the midst of other affairs) if I say any
thing should fall from my pen, which can be construed a reflection on the
Clergy, it is my desire that it should be instantly erazed. -- I honor them
much for their piety, learning, and strictly loyal attachment to our Sovereign.

An old Mathematician (I think they call him Archimedes) had such confidence in
his art and machines, as to declare he would move the earth itself if he could
get a place to stand on. But please your worships, while he was upon the thing
which was to be moved, had he worked his heart out, 'twould not have budged an
inch. -- In imitation of this venerable screw-driver, may we not lay down the
following logical maxim. A man may prove impossibilities if you will concede
his postulata. -- Thus, in order to demonstrate that black is white, or in
other words, that black and white are the same thing, I ask only this
admission; that there is no difference between them.

He who in conversation with half a dozen friends, should in a similar manner
begin any argument whatever, by affirming the thing to be proved, would he not
raise a laugh at his expense? Now, all America contends for rights, which we
aver to have been invaded, violated, destroyed, and a certain writer attempts
to prove this contest, treasonable and rebellious; what shall we think of a
writer, who begins an address on this subject, not to half a dozen, or half a
hundred but to all reasonable Americans, with the following proposition? Of all
the subjects of Great Britain, those who reside in the American colonies, are
and might still be enjoying the benefits of an equitable and free constitution.
As to his quotation from an "excellent writer," it may show the Gentleman's
reading, but can never help his a gument; and therefore I shall pass it over
silence, to the examination of those excellencies, which he himself has
fabricated.

If by the term, subjects of Great Britain, he means subjects to the King of
Great Britain, and subordinate to the Parliament of that Kingdom, it is an
inaccuracy, which, considering what follows, may be easily forgiven. But if
these words are intended to insinuate, that the people of America are subject
to laws made by the Parliament of Great Britain, in all cases whatever, then we
shall find, that the first ground this great Archimedes intends to fix his
reasoning machine on, is what follows. Americans are subject to the will of a
Parliament which they have no vote in choosing, and being so subject, enjoy a
free and equitable constitution. To which I have only two small exceptions:
first, these are the very points to be proved, and secondly, they involve a
flat contradiction. Now then, supposing these things admitted, after all, twist
them and turn them as you please, still must you come back in a circle to the
place from whence you set out; still luckless Philosopher you grovel on the
earth.

Shortly after follows another false proposition. America contributes but a
small proportion to support the public expenses. This for argument sake, I will
grant. I will grant what I suppose he meant; namely, that America contributes
but little to defray the public expenses which other folks support. I am not
captious in my temper, nor do I mean to cavil about words, for then I should
never have done.

Then comes a page about Moses, thunder, blindness, darkness and destruction.
As these things are quite out of my way, I shall not meddle with them; but
proceed to the next, the scope of which seems to be this, Whether parliament
has been right or wrong, we are bound by the laws of Heaven to obey its
mandates. And in quality of good Christians, we must be subject to the
Ministers, be they who they will, for conscience sake. Let who will be King,
our author is Vicar of Bray. To elucidate all which doctrines he observes that
if the greatest tyrant on earth Nero for instance) should usurp and establish a
domination over us, the harshest and most cruel, yet so heinous is the offense
of disturbing an established government, that a due regard for the rights and
liberties of mankind, would prompt us to a peaceable submission. To this
submission we are enjoined, it seems, by the Christian religion; and to disturb
or threaten such a government, is an unpardonable crime, and has been
considered as such, in every age and nation of the world. All which is mighty
reasonable. Wherefore it follows clearly, that those persons who within these
four or five centuries, contended for, and by degrees established our glorious
constitution. A frame of government, says our author, which has always been the
wonder of the world, under the protection of which, the subjects of
Great Britain are the happiest people on earth I say, those persons who have
rendered these British subjects so happy, and transmitted to them all the
rights and privileges they enjoy, those persons, according to the above
doctrine, must be damned to all eternity for their pains. -- This may be
religion, I am sure it is not common sense. But be that matter as it will, I
shall not hesitate to declare, in imitation of honest Sir Toby; I had rather
trust God Almighty with my soul, than the British Parliament with my estate.
Moreover, for the HONOR of the Church of England, I do entreat all other
Sectaries to believe, that very few of its members hold the same creed with
this writer.

However, having introduced Nero, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and the Grand Turk,
in company together; he descends from his pulpit, leaves these dignified
personages to shift for themselves, and opens the design of his pamphlet: which
he tells us, is not religion, but to consider how far the conduct of the
colonies is to be condemned or justified by the maxims of sound policy and
prudence. For it seems pretty well settled even in his idea, that
notwithstanding that same Christian system he talks of our temporal interest
and safety, are considerations which all will regard; in which opinion I do
most heartily concur with him.

After this follows a little more declamation, which you may see if you have
the pamphlet, if not, send for it to the Booksellers, and you will find a sort
of syllogism to show; that resentment is unjustifiable, and complaint
unreasonable, if our legal rights have not been invaded. -- Legal rights, --
and why that term, legal rights? Do you mean, my Reverend Sir, that any right
(that of taxing ourselves for instance, if it be not confirmed by some statute
law, is not a legal right; and therefore an invasion of such right, will
neither justify resentment, nor authorize complaint? I am afraid you do, -- and
yet I hope not; for this also is one point to be proved in support of your
hypothesis In the name of America I deny it. But if you mean to speak fairly,
and if by legal rights you mean what you ought to make your own argument
conclusive, namely, those rights which we are entitled to by the eternal laws
of right reason; then the remainder of your task will be to show, that our
rights have not been invaded, and if that can be done, then to be sure our
complaints are groundless.

Now then let us see what the Friendly Address says upon this subject. Why the
first observation is, that the duty on tea is no tax; for unless we purchase it
we don't pay the duty, therefore it is quite in our option, whether we will pay
it or no. What can be more equitable? -- I remember, about twelve years ago,
there was a madman in the Philadelphia hospital, who imagined himself monarch
of the country thereabouts; and among other wild projects, such as might be
expected from a creature in that situation, he had one to tax the air. But may
it please your Majesty, will such a tax be right? Air was always common and
free, in the time of your Majesty's royal progenitors and predecessors. Will
not your subjects think this an arbitrary law, like the poll tax? Arbitrary!
cried the prince, enraged; and like the poll tax too! What rebels! Why, unless
they breathe, they don't pay the duty, therefore it is quite in their option
whether they will pay it or no. What can be more equitable. I pitied the poor
man because he was mad.

But you say tea is a luxury. In some respects it may be so. And how, and
where, shall we draw a line, between the luxuries and the conveniences of life?
Or by what right can the one be taken away, which will not affect the other?
Those who may rightfully deprive us of luxuries, by the same rule may as
rightfully deprive us of conveniences too. And if in the plenitude of that
power, which our author so apostolically has conferred, they should deign to
leave unto us the necessaries of life, pray by what standard shall we determine
these necessaries?

-- Our basest beggars,
Are in the poorest things superfluous.
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man's life is cheap as beast's.
But to return. -- Our author next supposes, that he is arguing with some
honest American, who should deny the right of Parliament to lay this duty on
tea. To obviate this he quotes precedent. The American is then supposed to
observe, that the precedent itself was wrong, wherefore no right could
originate from it; but that together with other similar wrongs, it ought to be
done away. So is the argument stated by himself. And he then, upon a
supposition that this tea duty is quite distinct from a tax attempts to show,
that Parliament had a right to levy it, merely as a regulation of trade. Pray
read the eighth and and ninth pages -- Have you read them? -- Why now your
honor, I will undertake to confute every thing contained there. I will
undertake to show, that the author's reasoning does not apply to his purpose or
subject, any more than the words Denmark and Russia, which as you see are
printed in large Italicks. -- But what will it signify to take up so much of
your attention; when it is very like you had better be thinking on some other
affair. His consequence may be well supported on rational ground; though, to
his misfortune, he could not discover it. The right of Great Britain to
regulate the trade of the colonies, shall be admitted. But that the duty on tea
is a regulation of trade and not a tax; this is the very matter in controversy.

We are now arrived at the confutation of one of Mr. Locke's arguments; which,
says our author, "appears to me weak and sophist call." -- The argument as
quoted by himself, stands thus: "If parliament has a right to take from us one
penny without our consent, it has a right to strip us of our whole property."
To confute which he observes, "A right to do what is reasonable, implies not a
right to do what is unreasonable." And after a short similitude about father
and son, he says, Cases may happen, in which it would be reasonable for
Parliament to take from us some small matter, though we were unwilling to part
with it; but the case can hardly be supposed, in which it would be reasonable
to take from us every thing, unless we should have forfeited it. And so
concludes, "There can be no right to do wrong." -- And this is the confutation.
-- I was some time puzzled to make any thing of it; but by comparing one part
with another, we may at least guess that he means what follows: By the words,
reasonable to take from us, etc. I presume he intends, a right to take from us.
For, reasonable, in the proper sense of the word, will not answer his purpose
at all; because if we invert the proposition, it will be as reasonable for the
Legislature of this province to take from the people of England, a small matter
without their consent. But that any such right could exist, the author of the
Address would hardly allow. Throughout this admirable confutation therefore,
let us substitute right for reasonable, and wrong for unreasonable, and then it
will stand thus: A right to do what is right, implies not a right to do what is
wrong. To take from us one penny without our consent is right, but to strip us
of our whole property is wrong. Therefore, Parliament may have a right to take
from us one penny, without our consent, which is right; but this right does not
necessarily imply, that Parliament has a right to strip us of our whole
property, which is wrong. Therefore Mr. Locke's argument is confuted. And in
the same way I will undertake to confute Euclid's Elements, from one end to the
other. -- Examine this argument, this fine argument. It rests upon the
assertion, that in some cases Parliament may have a right to take a small
matter from us without our consent, which assertion is the very thing denied.
And so the Gentleman's wits and faculties, after prancing and curveting through
a whole section, bring him not one inch nearer the end of his journey, than he
was when he first set out.

So here again he labors at a distinction between the duty on tea, and a tax.
But as to any difference between them, that you know is quite another affair.
No matter for the difference, provided there be a distinction. May it please
your Reverence, whenever you are at a loss for matter to vamp up into the shape
of another Address; I have a dozen or two such distinctions, which are very
heartily at your Reverence's service, very heartily I do assure you.

Ah! what have we here? Another dissertation on the British right of regulating
American trade? Yes. Here it is, hip and thigh, import and export, back stroke
and fore stroke; blessings on us, I say. What a pity it is, that our author
would not content himself with a simple assertion here, as he has done in those
instances, which really required proof. Most unfortunately, in endeavoring to
establish what we would readily grant; he lays his foundation on arguments,
which would overthrow every principle of American liberty. I declare, reader,
it is not my intention to cheat you, by re-printing quotations from the
Address. But unless you have bought it, I do not know how otherwise to manage
matters.

The same want of penetration, which led our author to imagine Mr. Locke's
argument weak and sophistical, now bewilders him with a Jack O'Lanthorn, in the
shape of the word Englishmen. His drift is to show, we may be bound by laws we
do not consent to, and yet possess all the rights of Englishmen. For, says he,
Englishmen can have no right to be exempted from the authority of an English
Parliament. After this he blunders a little about majority and minority, hints
at virtual representation, and says something of English American ground. To
answer which at once, those who do not immediately perceive the fallacy, are
desired to consider, that the persons who make laws for England, are to be
bound by them when they have done. And that no existence whatever, except
Almighty God, can have a natural right to make laws binding on others, which
the lawmakers is exempt from. True it is such power may be usurped, or through
political necessity conceded. Usurped as the British power of taxing America,
conceded as the power of regulating trade, which after such concession, becomes
a right. Greater rights they cannot have; unless some mode can be invented, to
incorporate us into the grand legislature of the empire, on constitutional
principles. But let us examine his English argument. The word English above, is
printed in Italicks, and separated from the word, men. In reading the sentence,
leave out English and the argument is gone. Now I do aver, and will maintain,
that to consent to laws binding upon us, is one of those rights which we enjoy
as men, and not merely as Englishmen. In quality of rational and free agents,
we enjoy it. A right granted by our Creator, when he formed us of the clod.
That great charter by which he confirmed it, may be read in the human frame: A
charter sealed with the breath of life. To this right every man is and must be
entitled; it is annexed as an inseparable appendage to our existence, and
although the English law has secured it to the English subject, yet a Frenchman
or Turk is as much entitled to it, by the law of nature. That this title has
not been ratified by political institutions, is his misfortune, and I am sorry
for it.

So you see, reader, all this trouble might have been spared, if the poor
creature had not most unluckily laid hold of that said word. English: which
indeed from the face of his performance, he does not appear to understand. The
last part of the argument we are now upon, arises from a fact I am not inclined
to dispute, though I do not believe it. He avers that we have been offered
representatives in the Common's House, if we would send them over. Be this as
it may, I agree with him that we have done wisely in not accepting the offer if
ever it was made. Or in other words, to have accepted it, would have been
folly. Now then hear him. "After refusing it, they have no reason to complain."
That is to say, because we have not committed folly, we have no right to
complain of injustice, Yet this is an Address to all reasonable Americans.

The next attempt of this masterly Address, is to impeach the validity of those
compacts, which several colonies have made with the crown. These compacts can
be considered in no other light, than as covenants by the King, in
consideration of settling the desert; that he would protect the settlers and
their dependants, in the enjoyment of their natural rights. If his Majesty
chooses to withdraw this protection -- be it so. The King can do no wrong. But I
wish there had been a lineal warrantee from his ministers. Some of them are of
noble descent, and I have so high an opinion of the honor of British Peers,
that I believe few of them would infringe such solemn agreements. However,
suppose the King should withdraw this protection, -- Are our rights therefore
annihilated? No. Those rights were conferred by the King of Kings, and no
earthly Potentate can take them away.

Not long since I saw a Letter from a Veteran, to the Officers of the Army at
Boston: I pray the author to receive my thanks, for the great pleasure enjoyed
in the reading of it. I think I could easily perceive in it, the traces of that
manly, generous, brave, and free disposition; which mark the character of the
Soldier and the Gentleman.

If, to his share some little errors fall,
View his kind heart, and you forgive them all.
I am almost afraid to return immediately to the Address, because comparisons
are odious. Make none, gentle reader, I beseech thee; but observe out author
here insinuates, that he has shown, "that in reality no proper right of the
colonies is infringed by the late act of Parliament." Pray now, how has he
shown it? Why by three assertions, neither of which is in the least proved, as
I took occasion to observe before in treating of them respectively. -- The
first is, that the duty on tea is no tax. The second, that if a tax, it is a
small one, and Parliament has a right to take from us a small matter without
our consent. And the third, that a man may be rightfully bound by laws which he
does not, and cannot assent to.

These are the main pillars of this formidable argument; not one of which has
the least solidity: And therefore the provident author, fearful perhaps of
their instability, before he ventures to charge us with sedition, privy
conspiracy and rebellion, to anathematise us for false doctrine, heresy, and
schism; or to reproach us for hardness of heart, and contempt of his word and
command; reverts to his original considerations, about prudence and policy, on
what he calls the supposition, and Americans the fact, that we have been really
injured.

But these considerations, do not seem to be well considered; because he takes
it for granted in the first instance, that the people of Boston were criminal
in destroying the tea. And the word Boston, some how or other fascinating his
imagination, he is hurried away with a torrent of invectives. The destruction
of the tea, says he, was a compound of the grossest injury and insult, an act
of the highest insolence to government, such as mildness itself cannot overlook
or forgive. The only fault of all this and some more of the same kind is, that
it is rather misplaced; for it would answer tolerably well in a sermon against
blasphemy.

Let me entreat the reader's attention to a simple tale: Those who are inclined
to doubt it, will find unquestionable evidence in a pamphlet, called, A true
State of the Proceedings in the Parliament of Great Britain, and in the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, etc.

In the year 1761, 1762, 1763, the duteous conduct of the Massachusetts, was
exemplary and acknowledged. -- In 1764, the stamp act was threatened, and a
duty imposed for raising a revenue in America. The House of Representatives
resolved, that it is unconstitutional, to take their money without their
consent. In 1765, the several Assemblies petitioned against the stamp act;
which they had no right to do, because -- it was a Money Bill: consequently the
petitions were disregarded, and the bill was passed. The Massachusetts then
proposed a Congress of Delegates from the several Assemblies; and the Congress
petitioned the King: but the Congress was an unconstitutional body; wherefore
our gracious master (that year) was afflicted with a great deafness. In 1766,
the Assembly petitioned against their Governor, one Francis Bernard, for
assuming, with his Council, the powers of legislation. This accusation was very
just, and therefore to make it was very impertinent. A Non-importation in
America, opened the ears of the Parliament in England; and in 1766, the Stamp
Act was repealed. In 1767, another revenue act passed; whereupon the Assembly
of that province presented a petition at the foot of the throne; and wrote to
the other Assemblies to join in it, which was a piece of great presumption. In
1768, the Assembly was ordered to rescind the resolve, by which those letters
had been written, on pain of dissolution; which peremptory mandate produced a
petition, and also a letter to the secretary of state. -- About the same time
some seamen were pressed contrary to an act of parliament; the people of Boston
petitioned their governor on this affair; but his Excellency had no business to
interfere in the Admiral's department. A vessel also was seized in a manner
which irritated the mob, and they were such scoundrels as to resent the insult;
consequently they were guilty of treason and rebellion, for drubbing the worthy
collector. An army was sent there immediately, but then there was an act of
parliament against quartering them on the people, therefore the governor issued
his commission, to dispense with the act, for a royal martyr had done so before
him. The people then petitioned the governor to call an assembly; this was
refused, for business could better be done without one. Disappointed in this,
they appointed a convention, the members whereof irritated by what they called
their wrongs, presented another humble petition to the King; wherefore in 1769,
the troops, out of a just contempt for their pusilanimity, shot three brace by
way of starting the covey. But it was impossible his Majesty's troops could
have been the aggressors; therefore there must have been an insurrection of the
people. This was clearly the case also from judge Oliver's narration; yet near
an hundred credible witnesses, had the impudence to swear, that his narration
was false. Consequently to repair the breach in his character, it was necessary
that he should be appointed Lieutenant Governor, which happened accordingly. In
1769, the Assembly presented another petition, against their governor Bernard.
He prorogued the Assembly, went to England immediately, obtained an order for a
hearing on the petition upon the 28th of February, and got the prorogation of
the Assembly continued until the 14th of March. Notwithstanding all this, the
Assembly never supported their charge with any proof; because the prorogations
rendered it impossible; consequently the petition was groundless, vexatious and
scandalous, as every body will easily see. In the year 1772, 1773, the Assembly
took the liberty to petition again, which was at least forward and ill-bred,
wherefore no notice was taken of what they alleged. In December 1773, the
dutiable Tea arrived. I have during the course of this story, omitted many
things which were thought very grievous by the people of the Massachusetts bay,
for the sake of brevity, and because the recital of all their complaints might
possibly inflame men's minds at this dangerous juncture; a thing I would wish to
avoid, for I have great respect for the clergy.

In December 1773, the dutiable Tea arrived at Boston. It was evident that if
this commodity was landed, there would be many purchasers among the governors
creatures. Prudence therefore required, that it ought to be sent back. The
governor would not permit this, and the necessity was then clear, either that
the Tea must be destroyed, or the act submitted to. Wearied out with long
oppression, and driven to desperation by repeated insults, a few daring men
went disguised to the ship and destroyed the Tea. -- Upon this tale I shall
make no comment, it needs none. But to relieve the reader's attention, I will
mention an incident of a more lively complexion: -- Two young gentlemen found a
cat sitting peaceably in one corner of the parlour: She was a gentle animal,
and a good mouser. Young men love fun, so they shut the door and windows, and
ferreted her about, till she and they were heartily tired: At length, in a
violent leap from her persecutors, the cat fell in the midst of an elegant set
of china: to lose a China cup and sawcer, by means of a vile cat, was too much
to be patiently borne, and poor puss was murdered for not scampering up the
chimney.

Now after this digression, let us return to the pamphlet, and see what is said
about the punishment of this crime, which mildness itself could neither
overlook nor forgive. A very mild punishment says he, for it was only shutting
up the port. Now shutting up the port, was, as we all know, only destroying the
trade; and that is only a trifle, as we shall see by and by. Surely, (cries our
author) none who have as high a sense of public guilt as of private, can think
this punishment too severe for the crime, considered under all its
aggravations. For no people are entitled to the use of any advantage, which
they wantonly abuse to the injury of others. These observations are calculated
to show the equity of the port bill; let us see then, whether our author has
fortunately stumbled upon sound reason in this instance, after failing so
often. -- The advantage which the Bostonians are deprived of, is their trade;
and therefore their trade must be the thing which they wantonly abused. Now, by
what figure of speech, the destruction of the Tea can be called a matter of
trade, or what kind of trade it is, I am at a loss to conceive. -- Do not say,
that this is a verbal criticism. Such things I reserve for authors of greater
perspicuity. The equity of every punishment depends of its relation to the
crime. Now allowing, that the destroyers of the Tea, were guilty of a violent
outrageous riot; I shall be glad to know, what kind of relation there is in the
nature of things, between a riot committed by thirty or forty men, and the ruin
of many honest tradesmen, by a total supension of that commerce on which they
subsist. Yet this is a MILD and a JUST punishment. I have heartily exhibited
the delinquencies of this people; were I to give them a name, nothing but that
love of peace which sanctifies every means to obtain it, nothing but that
should prevent me, from branding their conduct as a tameness under insults
which provoke them.

The next attempt of our worthy pamphleteer is to show, that the punishment of
the Bostonians, was not hasty and precipitate. He reasons thus: In common
cases, a criminal ought to be heard; but this is an uncommon case; courts of
justice ought not to condemn unheard, but the legislature may. Now let us
scrutinize the intrinsic value of these suggestions. A fellow steals a sheep,
or a horse, or ravishes your wife, or murders your father. Justice holds up on
high her equal scales; she cries out aloud to the human heart, let him be heard
in his defense; rather ninety-nine guilty escape, than one innocent perish: but
should a man burn the tooth-pick of a court mistress, or prevent the prime
minister from pissing in his pocket, or destroy some musty Tea, to save his
estate; in such uncommon case, especially if ninety-nine innocent are to
suffer, lest one guilty escape; in such uncommon case the maxim is, let them
not be heard. Do you ask why? The answer is plain: If suffered to make a
defense, they cannot be convicted. -- So much for the case: Now for the
tribunal. -- If a man commits any of the crimes first mentioned against the
known laws of the land, subject to a certain penalty, the maxim is, let him be
heard. But as to the last sort, punishable by a new law, in a new mode, both
framed after the fact committed, policy is of opinion, that they should not be
heard, lest the varlets should except to her mode of proceedings against them.
All which is addressed to the reasonable Americans.

But (says he in the next paragraph) to involve the innocent with the guilty,
is an inconvenience which always necessarily attends punishments inflicted on a
people, whether by God or man. And again, it was politically impossible to
select the innocent of Boston from the guilty. We all remember the story of
Sodom and Gomorrah. It is an excellent lesson to the Princes of the earth. The
inhabitants of these cities, infamous by their vices to the last degree, became
so obnoxious to the Supreme Being, that in anger, he resolved to destroy them.
Yet had there been five men, only five men, who walked uprightly before God;
had only five such men dwelt in Sodom and Gomorrah, no fire had descended from
Heaven to consume them. But alas! Because among thirty thousand souls in
Boston, thirty have offended; in vain shall the multitude plead innocence, as
an exemption from ruin. Blush Humanity! This is thy political necessity, which
must hereafter justify the laying that defenseless town in ashes, and drenching
it in the blood of its inhabitants.

-- Merciful Heaven!
Thou rather with thy sharp, and sulfurous bolt,
Split'st the unwedgeable, and gnarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle. Yea, but man, proud man!
Dressed in a little brief authority;
Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
His glassy essence: Like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high Heaven,
As makes the Angels weep.
Because thirty have offended, a whole colony is punished. And for what
offense? An offense so small, so disproportionately punished, that the general
voice of the continent has declared, that they suffer in the cause of American
liberty. Here our author begins to leave the paths of logic, and to enter the
alleys of Billingsgate. Beneath his forming hand, American liberty starts forth
a monster of licentiousness. And in his idea, to screen our miserable
fellow creatures from that PUBLIC JUSTICE which has been created for them; is
giving shelter to the raving enthusiast, who has murdered his prince. -- Bold
metaphors and florid language, are the magnificent trappings of reason and
truth; and when falsehood or folly is thus arrayed, it provokes at once our
indignation and contempt.

But neither bold metaphors, nor yet bold language, serve some causes so well
as bold assertions. I have heard of lawyers, who by the assistance of that
invincible front which is the prescriptive privilege of their profession, frame
evidence as they go along, and speak fluently on facts which never existed. In
like manner and in humble imitation, to evince the propriety of the act, for
new modelling the government of Massachusetts; our author scruples not to
affirm, that no privileges are curtailed by the act, but such as had been
abused and forfeited, over and over, to the great injury and disturbance of
that province, as well as to the dishonor and reproach of the nation. The
institutions of this act, as to their matter I do not object to; for it has
long been my opinion, that the government of that colony was in its form and
complexion, too like a Republic, for the true spirit of our constitution. But
as to the manner; even supposing these regulations to be a decree substantially
just, and made by a court having proper jurisdiction, still there is manifest
impropriety. -- It is, and while I have existence, it shall be my sentiment;
that no man, no body of men, in any cause, before any tribunal, can be legally
affected by any determination, where an opportunity is not given, for making a
defense. Had this been done in the present instance, perhaps his Majesty's
Ministers would not have deemed them so criminal, as they now do. But waving
this idea, I am sure the author of the Address at least, after the pointed
assertions he has made, ought in common justice to have shown, how the
privileges he speaks of had been abused and forfeited. This, however he thought
it prudent to omit. --

That Administration is irritated with Boston, that it has cause to be
irritated, I freely acknowledge: And this is the cause of the anger they feel,
and the revenge they have taken. The people of that town, and the colony it
belongs to, have been forward and active, in stating and demanding, their
rights and liberties; they have addressed, petitioned, and remonstrated to
Ministers, Parliament, and King; they have sounded the alarm, when the enemy
attacked our privileges; and they have been the grand obstacle to an American
tyranny. If to do thus is a forfeiture of privileges; if to do thus is an abuse
of them, who would hold such privileges on such tenure? Most readily do I
grant, that it was a dishonor and a reproach to the nation, and its rulers
too; that they so often made use of their right to petition and to remonstrate.
Great was the cause, or such frequent complaints would not have been obtruded.
For this was their guilt, this was their impertinence; -- suffering they
complained.

We come now to the Quebec Act. On this subject I shall not minutely follow our
author, for the substance of what he says, being levelled at the following
propositions of the Congress; that the government of Canada is rendered
arbitrary, that the people are deprived of trial by jury, and that the Roman
Catholic religion is established; if I shall be able to show that these
propositions are true, then what he has said to the contrary, will be of no
avail. And first, what can be more arbitrary than this? A Governor and Council
appointed by, and dependent on the Crown, are the legislature of a whole
region. They may sit at home, and frame edicts for the extremest parts of that
vast province, without any one check from the people. They may tax the colony
as they please, or hand it over to be fleeced by the British Commons. They may
invent new crimes, and affix to them such new penalties, and make them
cognizable before such new Courts, as they shall think meet at their sovereign
will and pleasure, they may seize and imprison any member of the community; or
else more certainly and entirely, to ruin and oppress him, they may cause some
minion of power to institute an action for his whole substance, and try him and
condemn him, by the arbitrary principles, and more arbitrary judges of the
civil law. For, in the second place, it is clear to a demonstration, that
trials by jury cannot be had there now; and it is equally clear that they never
can exist hereafter, unless the Governor and Council choose to risk and diminish
their power, by introducing this free and generous branch of English
jurisprudence. How probable it is that they will thus put a curb on their own
wantonness, I leave any man in his senses to determine. But thirdly, it is not
civil tyranny alone, which is planted in Quebec, to overshadow that immense
country. From the same poisonous root, arises the most horrible religious
tyranny, that my mind is capable of conceiving. -- What establishment can any
religion have in any country on earth, unless it be a legal provision for the
support of its clergy? Look through Europe. See if Popery is in any other manner
established in any one country, than by payment of tithes, and protection of
Priests. Is not this an establishment? Is it not more? Is it not an
encouragement? He who would go farther, must resort to fire and sword; the
arguments of those barbarous ages and nations, whose annals disgust humanity.
But the objection is, that when any man is converted, his Majesty may if he
pleases, encourage the Protestant Clergy as he pleases, out of the tithes paid
before to the Roman Priest. Allowing this argument to have weight, which indeed
it has not; pray what likelihood is there that any man will be converted?
Protestantism is the tender child of freedom and science: How then can it exist
in the bold bosom of ignorant despotism? Without the patronage of one earthly
friend. Without a single rag to cover its nakedness. In ancient days the Romish
Church was a firm barrier against the encroachments of Royal prerogative. The
Clergy dependent on the Pope as their universal head, defied the menaces of
kingly power. Thus were popular privileges in those times frequently protected
by popular superstition. Our Ministers by a refinement of modern policy, have
adopted the Church of Rome as a twin-sister to the Church of England. Our
subtle Ministers have placed the King of England in the same situation with the
Roman pontiff Every dignitary of the Church is dependent on him, besides which
he has full power to appoint such Ecclesiastical Courts, with such
jurisdictions as he shall think meet. Thus, all the bigotry, all the
superstition of a religion abounding in both, beyond any which the world has
beheld; all, all is in his Royal hand to be used at his Royal will and
pleasure. To this full supremacy over their souls, are joined the fullest
temporal powers, both legislative and judicial; so that like the ancient
Patriarchs, he is King, Priest and Prophet. To finish the dreadful system, add
all the executive powers of the State, and encircle the whole with a standing
army, it is then complete. These are facts? And whenever a wicked monarch in
vengeance shall arise; then shall we behold him, the civil and religious
tyrant, of a province which extends over half the Continent of America. Such is
the tendency of the Canada Bill. View it, consider it, ponder upon it, in the
coolest, most temporate disposition; behold its consequences, and the mild eye
of reason will be clouded with a tear.

The next part of the Address is to show, that the other Colonies need not
trouble their heads about Boston or Quebec. As to what he says about Quebec. I
believe with him, that there is no intention of introducing Popery into the
other colonies. Our Ministers, or rather Masters, have more understanding than
to entertain so wild an opinion. Nor would I persuade mankind to become Knights
Errant, and wantonly undertake the quarrels, and fight the battles of other
people. But I will leave it to any man, nay, I would almost appeal to the
author of the address himself, to determine; whether a country has not great
reason to fear the loss of its liberties, when surrounded by a multitude of
slaves; especially when those slaves are inbued with principles inimical to it,
and united together in one common interest, profession and faith, under one
common head, and supported by all the weight of a large empire. Does not
experience give additional force to every solicitous apprehension?

His ideas about Boston amount to this: that we should act like wise foxes, for
fear of being docked: or, in plain English, view with unconcern the destruction
of that capital, without daring to interpose for its preservation. I beg pardon
for repeating a vulgar story: A Scotchman upon his arrival at an inn filled
with travelers, crept into bed between an Englishman and an Irishman: toward
the morning the Englishman was awaked by an inundation from his new bedfellow,
zounds, says he, what are you about? Hoot, hoot, mon, cried the politic Scot,
lie down quiet; I have done worse to him behind me.

But the author of the address tells us: the dispute with Great Britain is de
lana caprina. I learnt a little Latin at school, so with the help of my
scholarship, and from what follows, I conjecture that this means goats wool: --
That this to say, all the grievances America has labored under for a dozen
years past, amount to a mere trifle; which is so shockingly absurd, that it
would be ridiculous to honor it with the ceremony of a confutation.

As to the thought of establishing a republic in America, breaking off our
connection with Great Britain, and becoming independent: I consider it as the
most vain, empty, shallow, and ridiculous project, that could possibly enter
into the heart of man. I do not believe there are five hundred on the
continent, who have the least pretensions to common sense, and who would not
risque their dearest blood, to prevent such measures: This supposition,
therefore, and what relates to it, I consider merely as an introduction to his
censures on the Congress. These censures seem to be the main business and
intention of the pamphlet. If therefore in the avowed purpose of it (a
consideration of the opposition in America on principles of prudence and
policy) I shall be able to show; that the author is much mistaken in condemning
those measures which the Congress has adopted; then all his declamation upon
that subject, will be as the idle wind, which passes away and is heard no more.

The first reflections he casts on this respectable body, are far adopting the
Suffolk resolves. The asperity and bitterness which appears in this part of the
pamphlet, are to be attributed to the great warmth of the reverend composer.
Reproaches from an angry man are easily forgiven; and that meekness of
disposition which attends the ministers of peace, will I hope moderate the
unchristian transports of our authors zeal, as soon as his mistakes are
discovered. By a member of the Congress, whose honor and veracity stand
unimpeached, I am authorized to declare, that the Congress did not adopt the
Suffolk resolves. That these resolves were never so much as read for debate;
and that upon the common reading, the sense of that body was, that it was
proper to recommend moderate and pacific conduct, supported by firmness and
resolution. The language of the Congress, in consequence of this determination*
is as follows:

Resolved unanimously,

That we thoroughly approve the wisdom and fortitude, with which opposition has
been hitherto conducted; and earnestly recommend a perseverance in the same
firm and temperate conduct, as expressed in the resolution etc. Now then I
appeal to the world, whether this is the cordial approbation of an independent
government. Whether it is a transport of joy on the news of revolt. Whether it
is a league with the worst enemies of America, surely it is not. The fair
reputation of those Gentlemen who composed the Congress, render such
imputations almost unpardonable. It is a duty therefore incumbent on the author
of the Address, to make some public acknowledgement; many did indeed expect
that some constitution would have been pointed out, to secure and establish the
freedom of America, and the sovereignty of that supreme legislature, which
ought certainly to govern the whole empire. This is a consummation devoutly to
be wished for, but it is not the work of a moment. Besides, it might have been
thought presumptuous in them to undertake what is properly the business of the
British Parliament, and the respective legislatures of the Continent. Why then
are those persons, who have generously devoted their services to the Public,
why are they to be censured, for a sin of omission; which at any rate is
pardonable on the score of human infirmity?

Much paper is consumed in the Address, to paint those horrors which await on
civil war. To this I have no objection. For there is not a creature living, to
whom such a prospect is more terrible than myself. And I dare say, a candid
description of my own feelings on the subject, would convey as genuine marks of
detestation for that horrible catastrophe, as the labored periods of the
author before us. But I see no reasons for such apprehensions. Neither do I
think that man a friend to either country, who speaks of war between them
except in the style of contempt. To imagine that America can cope with Great
Britain, is the excess of stupidity. And even if we were capable of the
contest, were we certain of obtaining victory, I should pray that the hand in
which I hold my pen, might wither ever it drew the sword. -- But let not the
dread of power, draw off our attention from the pursuit of freedom. Let us in
every instance follow that example which our author recommends. In imitation of
the inhabitants of Rye; whenever either duty to the mother country, or
enthusiasm in the cause of humanity, shall hurry us beyond the true line, of
patriotism or obedience, let us take the earliest opportunity to retract our
errors, and acknowledge our mistakes. -- Resistance against oppression, is the
undoubted privilege of mankind; but civil resistance alone, is justifiable in
civil society.

I come now to what our author has said of the non-importation agreement. --
This he likens to the cutting off an arm, for a sore on one of the fingers.
Similies are very agreeable and proper, where they tend to throw light on the
subject. -- Now, if a man has a sore on his finger, he will naturally put a
plaster to it. If the finger grows worse, and he grows timid, he sends for a
surgeon. If the topical applications of the surgeon are inefficacious, and a
gangrene ensues, the parts are scarified, and the bone cleansed. If this fails
of success, and corruption spreads along the limb, and threatens the vitals,
the only hope which remains is from amputation. True it is, the patient may
loose much blood by the incision of his arteries, and death itself may be the
consequence. But by undergoing it he has a chance for life, and otherwise his
case is desperate. As an encouragement in such difficult emergencies, the
scriptures tell us, if thy member offends thee, cut it off, and cast it away.

Now, reader, let me entreat your patience a little while longer. Pray observe.
The liberties of this country have been infringed in an article of trade.
Common sense informs us, that if one imposition is admitted, another will
follow. Petitions and remonstrances, have been presented in vain. When we
refused the dutiable commodity, it was almost forced upon our acceptance. No
hope therefore remains from common efforts. And the question is reduced to this
short alternative: Which is most advantageous, commerce or freedom? One or the
other, we must forego. The one for a time, or the other forever. I will wave
the common observation, which is level to the lowest capacity, that without
freedom trade cannot flourish. But I must beg leave to examine, from reason and
experience, Whether a cessation of trade will not procure us relief?

Nothing is more evident, than that the trade between Britain and the northern
colonies, brings yearly very large sums of money to the latter. That the
balance of all the other trade she enjoys, is on the whole against her. And
that her annual expenses amount to an enormous sum, great part whereof is paid
into foreign countries, as interest for the national debt Is it not then
equally evident, that a suspension of her commerce with us, must greatly
distress her? And to heighten this distress, what can be more effectual than to
embarrass her trade with the islands? Every good heart would wish to avoid
this, and it is not our smallest misfortune, that to make men reason, we must
make them feel. Happy would it be if the authors of our misery, were the only
sufferers. To effect this desirable purpose we had but one way, which was to
injure the revenue, in such manner as to hold them up to the resentment of the
nation; and this has been done. -- The wisest measures may fail, but these at
least promise success. -- Great Britain may indeed very easily put an entire
step to all our commerce. But this (if we may believe the Address) is a mild
punishment on Boston. And if so, why cannot we all undergo it? No, says he,
inflicted on all of us, it would be very severe. It would so, but I trust not
lasting. Will a stoppage of our trade, pay the debts we owe in England? Will
shutting up our ports, breed sailors for the navy of Britain? Millions in
Europe are fed by the American plough; while bread can be purchased on this
continent will they starve? Will the Monarchs of France and Spain see their
subjects perish, that Americans may be reduced to slavery? All these things may
happen, and after all, this country is capable of supporting its inhabitants.

Great are the difficulties we labor under, and many are the obstacles we must
surmount. For the road to freedom and virtue, is not strewed with flowers, but
sprinkled with thorns. Perhaps our fortitude is not equal to the task, if so,
we deserve the consequences. But remember, that the mother country must suffer
with her colonies: Remember, that a Non-Importation has once procured a redress
of our grievances. Remember that Concord is the parent of success. Remember,
that the worst which can possibly befall us, even at the last, is that very
slavery which we must now resist or submit to. O AMERICANS! these
considerations are submitted to you. Attend, and way the God of wisdom, who
foreknoweth all human events, so direct you, as is most comformable to the
mysterious intentions of his Divine Providence. For the good of his creatures,
must be the will of him who is infinite goodness.

POSTSCRIPT.
I thought it right to meet the author on his own ground, and therefore no
notice is taken in the foregoing sheets, of that very equitable Bill, which
makes offenses in the colonies, triable in England. A Bill by which the most
criminal partizan of government may be screened from punishment. A Bill by
which any poor man in America, may be torn from all the tenderest connections
of life; dragged in chains across the Atlantic Ocean, and left there friendless
and forlorn, with the blessed alternative to starve or hang. This also is
public justice -- mild punishment -- and political necessity.

FINIS.
In the Press, and speedily will be published, in FOUR beautiful POCKET
VOLUMES, Price Three Dollars bound, (Printed on a Paper equal in COLOR and
QUALITY to WRITING-PAPER.)

THE ELEGANT LETTERS WRITTEN BY THE LATE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP DORMER
STANHOPE, Earl of CHESTERFIELD, TO HIS SON, PHILIP STANHOPE, Esquire Late Envoy
Extraordinary at the Court of DRESDEN:

TOGETHER WITH SEVERAL OTHER PIECES ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

Gentlemen disposed to subscribe to the above are desired to send their Names
as soon as convenient, that they may be inserted in the List to be printed in
the first Volume.


