THE Arians and Socinians MONITOR, BEING A VISION THAT A Young SOCINIAN Teacher
lately had, In which he saw, in the most exquisite Torment, his Tutor, who died
some Years ago; and had from his own Mouth the fearful Relation of what befell
him at and after his death. Together with many instructions relating to the
Socinian Errors; by all which he is turned to the Faith of the Gospel, and
subcribeth his Name, ANTISOCINUS.

The FOURTH EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED. BOSTON: Reprinted And Sold by WILLIAM M'ALPINE, in
Marlborough-Street. M,DCCLXXIV.

THE ARIANS and SOCINIANS MONITOR.
INURED to self-deceptions from my youth up, I laughed at the fantastical whims
of enthusiastic whigs, the dreams of Anabaptists, and cunning inventions of
mercenary Priests; or cranumian phantasms of weak and unstable men; for by such
names I was pleased to call the glorious doctrines of the everlasting gospel.
The doctrine of the trinity in unity I contemned, purely because I could not
fully comprehend it.

Reason, says I, is the touchstone of every truth; the even balance in which
revelation must be weighed. The oracle of GOD must be hushed in silence, till
reason, adorable reason is free to speak her mind: Even then it is at the peril
of revelation to utter, one word that is beyond the reach of our Godlike
reason. Every thing that is divinely mysterious I am wont to treat with
derision and contempt. Mysteries in religion! says I, mere nonsense! There is
nothing mysterious in it, nothing mysterious required to be believed. Reason
alone, that noble principle, must give the sanction to every truth divine. If
illustrious reason will not condescend to sign a certificate for truth, let her
wander as a vagabond upon the face of the earth; no reasonable christian, sure
will venture to receive her.

Let fanatics and enthusiasts receive and rely on what they call holy
mysteries, for my own part I am determined that my reason shall act supreme
with me, both in matters of faith and practice.

Thus elevated with a high opinion of my rational faculties, and pregnated with
the strongest resolutions never to admit of any other rule but the dictates of
my own reason, one evening lately I walked abroad into the fields to meditate
on the happy estate of mankind, as being capable of meriting, at the hands of
the omnipotent, a right to every divine donation, every eternal blessing.

The road which I took led me into a pleasant avenue, on the one hand decorated
with an uniform row of well grown oaks, extending their spreading arms almost
to the opposite side of the verdant path, and clasped with the supple branches
of yielding elms, which ^n an even row decorated the hedge on the left, a
grassy turf, barely sheered by the n^mble teeth of the bleating sheep, spread
the fl^or of the evenue ten yards in breadth; every sullying excrement was
carefully swept up by the yielding broom of the industrious shepherd, who
watchfully followed the fleecy innocents.

Thus alone, secluded from the noise of mankind I began to improve what I
beheld in this pleasant but lonesome avenue.

How beautifully, thought I, do these stately oaks, with their straight and
solid, their smooth and massy trunks, extended arms, and clothed branches,
represent the man, the happy man, that is fixed in rational ideas and guided
only by the dictates of his reason. See how the penetrating roots dig deep into
the bosom, and with their forked talons clasp the entrails of their mother
earth; the grizly stem smiles at the angry rage of stormy gusts which wreak
their vengeance against it. It stands unmoved. It mocks the fury of the most
violent storm. Just so is the man who makes reason his only rule. Nothing moves
him. He smiles at the gusts of enthusiastic zeal. He laughs at the dreams of
fanatics, and mocks at the mysteries of Luther and Calvin. His mind lays deep
hold of directing reason, and he stands in his paradisaical rectitude.

These dwarfish shrubs (continued I) are the lively types of pedantick bigots,
who are blindly carried away with enthusiastic fancies to believe in irrational
mysteries, called by them the doctrines of grace, but which really are the
subtle inventions of designing men; as the shrub is diminutive when compared
with the stately oak, so are those men when compared with these who are the
happy disciples of reason.

As I thus continued pleasing myself with this improvement of my evening
solitude, and blessing GOD that I was not as other men, even as these fanatics
and irrational christians are, but believed and acted according to the dictates
of my own reason, I came near to the end of the avenue, and the path became
extremely dark and narrow. The opposite trees did so interweave their branches
with each other, that no gleam of light could penetrate through the shade.

It would now have appeared wisdom to have turned my face toward home; but by
some unseen power I was seized with a perfect suspension of thought, and
heedlesly, walked forward, till at last I found I had got out of the avenue,
and a dusky light appearing, discovered to me a variety of frightful objects.
The place into which I was now got bore the grizly aspect of a forest devoured
by fire: No blooming flower nor verdant leaf was to be seen in all its vast
extent. Only desolation and destruction. All, all was devastation.

I attended occasionally to the fearful noise, that as I thought were, and
afterward proved to be, subterraneous. Sometimes I heard, like the noise of
many waters, the tempestuous roaring of foaming billows, in fury dashing
themselves against the scornful rocks. Anon, I heard the clinking of chains,
the clangor of weapons, and the hideous yellings of persons in exquisite
torments. Great was the surprise was now in; my hair stood erect, and the blood
in my veins became cold as the northern ice, my flesh shuddered on my bones, an
unusual tremor invaded my once courageous heart, and ghastly fear sat trembling
on my astonished countenance. My nerves became lax, and in my apprehension, the
joints of my limbs were unhinged, and dewy sweat issued forth from every pore
of my skin. I had neither courage to stand the shock, nor strength to fly from
the awful appearances of imminent danger. I would gladly have found the avenue
through which I entered this solitary waste; but to no purpose did I look for
it, now it was hid from my sight.

In vain I wished that my rambling fancy had been better guarded, and not
exposed me to these nocturnal dangers. Long ever now the radient sun having
quenched his fiery beams in the western depths, and left the earth enveloped in
darkness, which glooming sat on every beclouded object. Nor did the Heavens
above my head bear a more pleasant aspect; every luminous body having hid its
refulgent face in the bosom of a sable extended cloud. All these circumstances
concurring to display the horrors of the place, made me conclude that I was
certainly got into the gloomy regions of inexorable Pluto; but whether I was
dead or alive I knew not. In the mean while I wished, I earnestly wished myself
at home, and resolved that if ever I reached my peaceful habitation, I would
henceforth correct my wanderings, and regulate them by the judicious rules of
safety.

As I was turning over these resolves, I heard a terrible subterraneous noise,
infinitely mote horrible than that fabulously, ascribed ^o Vulcan's smiths, in
the convulsive bowels of the mounts Aetna and Vesuvius. -- Anon, the earth
opened her jaws close by the place on which I trembling stood, and belched
forth an hedious quantity of curling smoke and stricked fire intermingled with
squalid specter, the firey smoke lifted up its grizly summit, like the
towering head of a cloud-piercing pyramid. When the specter had reached the
middle path of the aerial regions they sunk downward, and plunged into the
belching throat that had just now disgorged them. Still it continued with
hideous roarings to vomit up brimstone, smoke and coals of fire, mingled with
the howling ghosts of the accursed to these abysmal flames, Notwithstanding this
fearful phenomenon was enough to have spread distraction over all my reasonable
faculties, I found myself, to my own amazement, in the perfect use of my mind,
frightened although I was.

Moveless I stood on the dangerous brink of the issuing pit, nor had power to
turn me to the right hand or left. One step forward would have plunged me into
these devouring (...) which proceeded from the unquenchable burnings beneath.
Here I stood trembling with fear of the dire event. The eruption beginning to
abate; I heard, as I thought, human voices more distinctly, all was howling and
sorrowful complaint. Dreadful was the yell that filled my ears. All which I
looked on as the most perfect indications of inexpressible torments. Weepings
and wailings which I heard, I concluded were the sure diagnostics of consummate
pain.

The eruption being now over, I thought I heard a voice which was familiar to
me, and which expressed the most intolerable anguish. Being by this time
somewhat inured to this prodigy, I at last ventured to look down to make what
discoveries I could. O horrible! here was a discovery that quashed reason
itself. Amazement chills my blood even now when I relate it.

I looked down into this frightful cave: But what did I see? No gilded
beauties, but the stupendous arches of dread perdition. O! shall the direful
idea ever be erased from my mind? A rolling flood of flaming liquid did play in
these sable, these frightful vaults. Every revolving billows turned up to the
inflammatory surface an innumerable company of floating specter, and at the
same time with its sinking front immerged a number equal to that it turned up.
Dreadful was the howl, inexpressible were their direful yellings! I saw
likewise standing on this burning lake a numberless company of squalid
infernals, armed with flaming instruments of death, with which they exercised
the most unaccountable cruelty on the unhappy worldings, who had involved
themselves into unspeakable torment, inextricable ruin.

In the midst of all, I behold one person who stood for some time on the
sulphurous billows, surrounded by an enraged company, who with red hot irons
kept pushing against him. He stood aghast, and fearfully stared at me. He
looked as if he would fain have spoken, but I perceived that his torments
prevented him. He waved his hand to his tormentors, as I took it, begging for
respite.

Deep despair and wild distraction lowered on his condemned countenance. He
raved! he foamed! he wrestled! and then sunk down in silent despair; sullen and
pensive, whilst the direful floods of omnipotent vengeance rolled upon him.

In this place I perceived no intermission of the incessant floods that rolled
along in one continued circle, ever running, but never at an end. These
discoveries, I trust, will make me ever fearful of landing in this place of
torment.

At last he lift himself up from the flaming bed, waved his hand, and called me
by my name; and fixing my eye intently upon him, I knew him to be the learned
Doctor -- with whom I had lived as a pupil, who died some few years ago.

Amazed to see my venerable tutor in such a deplorable condition, I cried out,
"O horrible! what do I see! my learned, my pious tutor in hell! Am I not
asleep, deceived by my deluding fancy? It cannot be he! A man, whose doctrine
and conversation was so governed by the dictates of reason, cannot be in hell.
No, it can never be! Thou tormented ghost, I adjure thee by the greatest of
names to undeceive me! Art thou he! Am I in a dream or not? Is that! -- but I
cannot doubt it. -- Tell me, is that the receptacle of the damned?"

To which the ghost replied. "Deceived mortal, I see you are surprised to find
a person in hell, who in life you esteemed as highly as an apostle. You see I
am not, as you vainly fancied, in the heavenly mansions of eternal felicity;
but, after all my pretensions to sanctity, am swallowed up unhappily, I am
plunged into the unfathomable abyss of divine indignation, from whence, alas!
there is no redemption. No, it cease now! It cease for ever. Ten thousand
worlds, if I had them now, for one twelve-months respite. But oh! there is no
respite; no intermission of these intolerable pains. Oh! piercing, piercing
pain! more violent far than fire, than burning coals of juniper. Here the keen
arrows of incensed justice, the irresistible wrath of a holy God do pierce me
through with unspeakable sorrows. Oh! that I had never been born! O that I had
never been a deceiver! O that I had been a husbandman, a ploughman, or any
thing but a preacher. Alas! a preacher, a false preacher, endures a double
hell! Oh! unhappy, wretched preacher, that is rewarded in this fiery gulf!

Ye deluded spirits, who by my fallacious deceit have been blinded, and are
hither got before me, forbear, O forbear to throw your flaming darts against
me. Why, O why do you thus torment me? Have not I torment enough already? Sure
I have affliction enough in sustaining the shocks of omnipotent vengeance,
without your malicious piercing arrows being pointed at me. Woeful day! accursed
hour! that ever I denied the Lord, the omnipotent Savior.

Bear with me thou deceived mortal, for my pains force words from me, words
that are unknown on earth. Oh for a few moments respite whilst I speak to a
friendly mortal, and make known to him the horrors of this place! Ye my
tormentors, allow me time only, so much time, as to recite the journal of one
twenty-four hours of my unhappy being; grant me this small favor, it may be
the last I shall request of you through the revolving ages of a never ending
eternity. An hour's intermission, O my tormentors! it cannot in any wise
prejudice you, whereas to me it may be of great advantage.

Hold! do hold, your hands, whilst I declare unto others what has befallen a
Socinian apostle.

Thus you see Mr. --, I cannot, by the most pressing entreaties, obtain so long
a respite from my torment as to communicate to you what has befallen me; but
in the midst of unspeakable sorrow am obliged to converse with you, for my
tormentors are inexorable.

I lived as you know to advanced years amongst you, and your general opinion
was, that I was gathered to my people in a good old age. Oh, the fatal mistake!
an old age indeed, but alas! a bad old age it has proved. When the harbinger of
my death began to visit me, my anxious pupils ministered unwearied attendance.
My fellow-teachers duly paid their most tender regard, by praying for and
conversing with me. Both they and I, were apprehensive that my sickness was
unto death, my dissolution near approaching.

All proper means were used for my relief, but all in vain. No lengthening out
of our days beyond the limits of God's decree; no, for he has numbered our
days, and our months are with him; he has set bounds to our habitation that we
cannot pass over it. Physic affording no relief, my pupils were disconsolate;
they thought I was the most apostolic teacher in the world, and if death should
cruelly bereave them of me, they knew not how to repair their loss, nor who was
worthy to supply my place, when as they thought, I should be employed in the
more immediate presence of the infinite JEHOVAH.

My friends miserably comforted me with my supposed good works. O sir! say
they, how comfortably may you die, when you consider the great deliverances you
have wrought for the church. You have relieved her reasonable members from the
irrational doctrines of Calvinism, overturned original sin, and the doctrine of
imputed righteousness by your valuable books, which no man but yourself could
have wrote. Therein you showed most excellently, how that man is capable to
atone for his own sins, and to work out his own salvation from sin and wrath.

As they said, so I foolishly believed, that these antichristian heresies were
meritorious in the sight of God. I depended greatly on the opinions of men, and
thought that my humility, self-denial, and charity, would be a prevalent plea
before the throne of the Almighty. -- I thought on my deathbed that I felt a
great deal of joy and comfort on looking back and viewing a well spent life, as
mine at that time appeared to be. I trusted in my own holiness, and the mercy
of God; but alas! I have since learned that I had none of the former, and that
the latter does not flow in the channel I sought for it in.

In my latter hours I enjoyed composure of mind, from an expectation that my
pure nature would soon be translated to the ethereal climate, where nothing but
holiness can dwell. Not in the least mistrusting a false treacherous heart,
that has undone me, but vainly fancied I stood in paradisaical rectitude. O the
deceit! O the fallacy of my hope, which lulled me asleep in delusive fancies.
My soul conceived such elevated notions of the divine reward, which I thought I
had merited by my labors, that she longed for the dissolving moment of
separation, trusting in the clemency of the gospel lawgiver, who I thought
would bend his law and justice to suit the circumstances of his reasonable
creatures. O dreadful! how shall I relate it? the hour! the appointed hour, the
destined moment of separation drew nigh. -- My solicitous soul entreated the
pale, the ghastly messenger, to cut short his work, and make a speedy
dissolution of the mortal union. Reluctant nature struggled against the
fermenting poison of the cankered arrow of nature's destroyer.

Convulsive pangs invaded the nervous fabric, and half persuaded the weary
heart to forbear to throb. Anon, nature, which just before seemed to be
vanquished by the prevalency of the fever, recruits its strength and mustereth
all its powers to resist, as long as might be, the unfrustrable rage of
rapacious death. But alas! the time the unhappy moment arrives! Vanquished
nature does at last submit, yields to the superior power of all conquering
death. -- Here -- the dreadful surprise! the unexpected, unhappy turn! My
deceived ghost came smiling forth, in full expectation of the righteous reward.
But soon alas! too soon was she convinced of her fatal mistake. No sooner
arrived she at the pale portal of the lifeless lips, but she beheld -- Oh! how
shall I name it! -- She beheld -- O horrible! she beheld a company of devils in
the chamber waiting to carry her hence. -- Precipitately back she turned to
seek for sanctuary in the deserted body -- but now alas! the gates of mortality
were shut, the body refused to receive its former tenant. She looked to the
right hand and to the left for a way to escape, but no avenue was open for
retreat. She looked up to heaven, but could not stand the shock. Oh dreadful!
she beheld the Omnipotent loosing his engines, and beginning to play his
direful vengeance upon her. To avoid this horrible calamity she looked downward
and beheld tempestuous destruction from beneath moved to meet her at her coming.

In the midst of all her hurry and unspeakable confusion -- the sly, seducing
fiends, who had attended me incognito, and administered false instructions and
comfort to me during life, with inconceivable fury, like so many ferocious
panthers, leaped upon and seized me with their scorching talons; whose
tormenting touch diffuseth hell through the whole being of the unhappy prisoner.

No longer do they act in disguise: having made sure work of my destruction,
they threw off every mask, and appeared devils indeed! Now a tremendous scene
was unfolded! The merciless furies forcibly dragged me to appear before the
dreadful, the flaming throne

Infinite amazement, horrible astonishment seized me, when I beheld the same
Savior whom I had denied on earth, now filling the majestic, the judgment
seat, filled with all the fullness of uncreated deity, the whole fullness of the
God head dwelling bodily in him. Infinite numbers of glorious spirits were
placed around the refulgent throne, casting their crowns at the feet of him who
sat on the throne, and singing holy, holy, holy Lord GOD Almighty, etc. every
one clothed with the righteousness of GOD which is by faith in Jesus Christ.
The terrible Judge addressed himself to me, and said, Friend, how came thou
hither not having on a wedding garment. Alas! now my boasted reason failed, and
horrible guilt surrounded me; dread confusion environed me on every hand.
Self-convicted and self condemned I could not answer a word. All my artful
evasions of truth, my contempt of the person and righteousness of Christ,
perverting the sacred scriptures to establish my accursed heresies, and the
despite I had done to the grace, doctrines, and servants of GOD, all appeared
as dreadful witnesses and advocates against me. I lived in hopes of being
judged by a mild judge, according to a yielding law, but alas! I found an
inflexible law and an inexorable judge. No allowance was made for mine
infirmities, no abatement would the law admit of. No! not in the least, either
eternal and perfect obedience, or perfect and eternal sufferings.

The imperial Judge, who filled the majestic seat, with stern vengeance
frowning on his irreconcilable countenance, and dire displeasure lowering on
his tremendous brow, pronounced on me the dread, the irrevocable sentence, the
unchangeable doom of a wolf in a sheep's clothing; saying, Thou
flock-destroying ravager, thou grace-despising, and God-denying sinner, where
is now the God thou trusted in? If reason is thy God why does she not deliver
from under my vengeful hand? Go learn accursed spirit, go learn whether the
torments of hell are infinite and of never-ending duration or not! Feel,
wretched being! feel! endure all the ponderous weight of my falling vengeance.
Hence, apostate! to the destined place of thy eternal abode! Here devils,
receive your charge -- away with the miscreant to utter darkness.

This said, the spouts of omnipotent vengeance were opened, and the issuing
indignation of an angry GOD falling and breaking upon my head, (accursed,
devoted to destruction) as a stream of flaming brimstone, did pierce me through
with infinite sorrows.

The obedient infernals no sooner received, but obeyed the charge, seized, and
fettered me, with chains of all others the most dreadful, chains made of my own
doctrines, from the pulpit and press, interdicted by the great law-giving GOD.
O! amazing! that all my heretical opinions should be so interlaced, as to
become a chain stronger than iron, and, harder than steel; but so it is, and I
shall never, never, be able to break it.

Being fettered and chained, the loathsome spirits, who had attended me during
life, and at death dragged me before the awful tribunal to receive the
condemning sentence, did now shoulder and bear me away, through the dreary
passage, to this dark abode. In the lonesome avenue that leads from the gates
of heaven to the bottomless gulf of perdition, I was frequently met by
detached parties of patrolling goblins, who seemed to rejoice to see their
companions bringing home to their gloomy abode the learned the holy Doctor as
in derision they called me. At last, unhappy moment! We arrived at the iron
gates which opened of their own accord to receive their frightened prey.

In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, was I seized by the devouring jaws,
and swallowed into the craving womb, of abysmal hell, where the worm dies not,
and where the fire is not quenched.

No sooner was I within these frightful mansions, but Arius and Socinus were
apprised of my coming, by fresh bolts of divine indignation being thundered
against their apostate heads.

The moment I entered, I was environed by a numerous body of ghastly specter,
who, by my preaching and writing, had been hardened against the truth, and
heedlesly drowned in everlasting despair, they railed against my fallacy, and
cursed my indefatigable diligence in destroying of them, and in fury
unspeakable, plunged me into the bosom of a flaming billow; still they
continued their hellish reproach and dragged my intoxicated ghost through the
reeking liquid. And the more fiercely the wrath of the Almighty does beat upon
themselves, the more intent are they in renewing my torments. Always,
incessantly, does the breath of JEHOVAH, as a stream of brimstone, with ardour
intense, continue to burn within me? Myriads of skilful fiends seem to employ
all their wisdom, contriving how to aggravate my pain.

This alas! is the unalterable state of your revered apostle, whom you supposed
was ranged in heaven near the choir of the ancient evangelists. Believe me, Mr.
--, hell is not a fiction, as mistaking mortals may dream. The wrath of God is
something more than a bare separation from his joyful presence The pains of
hell are not, as you believe, the dream of fanatics and enthusiasts, but real
real, inexpressible pain! insupportable anguish! increasing daily as more souls
arrive."

As he had thus spoke, a flaming billow rolled upon, and overwhelmed him, and
it was a considerable time before I saw him again. O! thought I, if it is thus
with the tutor, how will it be in the end with the pupils? If the leader has
fallen into the ditch, certainly the followers must, if they walk in his ways
and are governed by his directions. If I am not in a dream, or trance, for my
own part, if ever I reach home again, I will examine my BIBLE better, that I
may know for myself truth from error; for it is a fearful thing thus to fall
into the avenging hands of a denied GOD. I cannot, no! I cannot endure
devouring flames, nor dwell with unquenchable burnings. But I hope it is only a
dream. O if it may prove only a dream, I should be exceeding glad. But I was
awake when I came from home, awake when I entered this horrible place. No, no,
it cannot be a dream, it must be even as I see it. Oh amazing! my tutor, so
highly esteemed in life, in this condition; it is surely he, I know his voice.
Yes, yes, it is he.

As I was thus reasoning concerning what I heard and saw, my tutor was brought
up to the surface; and after he recovered himself a little, he stood erect, and
said,

"Unhappy soul, to whom, whilst I lived, my mouth was an oracle, and gained
your credence and attention sooner than the voice of GOD in the scriptures of
truth, as you hold my memory venerable, hearken to what I say unto you. You
seem greatly to question the truth of the vision which you now behold, but you
may know of a truth that it is even too true, too real indeed! and that it
cannot be otherwise, you will plainly see before you depart from hence.
Wretched pupil, you, and your Socinian brethren, may know that it is not love
to all, or any of you, that prompts me thus to expose to the world what has
befallen me. No! there is no love, no tenderness and compassion in the smoky
regions of the damned. -- Rage, hatred, envy, and malice fill every breast, and
pensive lower on every beclouded brow. But my reason is this, and none other.
When I arrived in these horrible mansions, I lift up my eyes, being in
exquisite torment, and beheld troops of my disciples posting after me to the
same pit of destruction. Right well knowing that their arrival would greatly
add to my already insupportable anguish, with the rich libertine in the gospel,
I raise my voice from the belly of this bottomless abyss, and speak in the
language of horrid despair, if by any means I may prevent the arrival of my
brethren in falseshood, and the souls by me deceived in hell, to my unspeakable
sorrow. I have already more than I can bear, but bear it I must, and I am
fearful of its increase, for I see you and your brethren speeding to this
dreadful goal. O why, why will you follow me, ye deluded ones? As for me, my
state is unalterably fixed, the dye is cast, my loss is irreparable, and my
afflictions remediless; for there is neither work nor device in the grave. The
irrevocable doom is past, my tree is fallen, and in hell it must lie, burning,
but never to be consumed! dying yet never dead! But for you, you are yet in a
land of hope, on the acting side of death, on the mortal side of Jordan, not
out of the reach of mercy, and the light of the gospel of truth shining around
you. Cast off then your errors, and cleave to the truths of the Bible, the
verbal report of which, as rational creatures, you are capable of receiving:
and it will be your condemnation if you do it not. For I can tell you, if ever
salvation do reach your unhappy souls, it must come through the same truths
that I taught you to deny, but am myself, though too late, alas! convinced of.
Oh! that I had owned them in time, but now my owning them is only forced, and
by no means acceptable. -- But that you may avoid the horrible destruction into
which I am involved, hearken to the word of admonition.

Consider your destructive error relating to the Godhead; You talk as I did,
when I lived amongst you, of an uncreated, supreme, and eternal God; two who
are created and subordinate. You say that the first person of the deity created
the second, and the second created the third. You say that the deity of Christ
is subordinate; but believe me, if ever you are so unhappy as to see him in the
terrible manner in which I beheld him on the judgment seat, you will have done
with talking of subordinacy in the Godhead. His terrors, the awful terrors of
omnipotence, will pierce you through with infinite sorrow. His tremendous
majesty will frighten you! will make the strongest heart amongst you to wax
feeble, and the ruddiest face to gather blackness.

Is not this infinite vengeance that I sustain? Is not this Almighty wrath that
rolls incessant floods upon me? yet this is the very wrath and vengeance of the
Savior whom I denied. Nothing less than Omnipotence could thus torment, and
along with the torment, convey sustaining strength. Is he a creature? no!
verily this is uncreated indignation that falls upon me. Oh besotted! befooled!
as I was. Consider how irrational it is to talk of a created God. Nothing can
be God but infinity; but the highest creature is only a finite being, therefore
not God. -- Was yonder being who pronounced my decisive doom only a creature?
Why then did the terrors of Godhead strike me, before the tremendous throne.
Could creature terrors thus pierce me through with infinite torment! racking
sorrow! Is he only a creature, under whose vengeful hand all the infernal
myriads do sprawl in the utmost horror and agony?

Deep infatuation! false reason, that denies the supremacy of the Son. Your
reason, were it not grossly perverted, would readily see in the sacred volume
that the Father is supreme, the Son supreme, and the Holy Ghost supreme, and
that these three are so inseparably united, as to be only ONE everliving and
supreme GOD. Blinded creatures! O my disciples! will you believe nothing but
what your reason can comprehend? Is your reason finite or infinite? If it is
but finite, as you know it is, how can you think thereby to grasp infinity? But
the light of your reason is only darkness, therefore it conceives irrational
ideas of the deep things of GOD.

Be you assured, that when you land in these intolerable mansions, you will
then, if not before, repent that you gave the testimony of reason the
preference to that of the divine oracles. O! what will you do, wretched men,
when your reason bears testimony against you? It is a dreadful thing for a man
to be witnessed against by his own reasonable faculties. Yet so it must be when
you die, if you hearken not to the voice of truth, whose invariable dictates
instruct the most enlightened reason to submit itself to revelation.

For my own part, I confess to you that I am condemned as a wilful idolater:
and it will fare no better with you, if you recant not in time, for you are all
wilful idolaters. You knowingly worship a being whom you believe only to be a
dignified creature: now know, that the worship of any being who is not
essentially GOD, how great soever that being is, is only rank idolatry. You
know likewise that our Arian and Socinian sect does, contrary to the law of GOD
and right reason itself, introduce more Gods than one: What is this but
paganism? The truth is, we, who were of the Socinian tribe whilst on earth, now
we are in hell, are sunk lower in the bottomless abyss, and endure far higher
degrees of torment than the infidels who worshipped the sun, moon, and stars,
and all the host of heaven. O blind and perverted reason, that by trusting to
thy false dictates I have despised the truth and unhappily destroyed myself. O
cruelty never to be forgot! Treachery, never to be forgiven! Through
self-deception, cruel in its nature, I have lost, ruined myself!

Unhappy men, when you come to view your tenets in the light of eternity, as
your teacher and fellow-heresiarch now unhappily does, you will see that the
professed atheists and we do stand on a level. They deny the being of GOD in
terms that are obvious and direct, we deny the same being in a subtle indirect
manner: For in denying the divinity of the Son, the whole deity is denied; for
the God head of the Father, of the Son, and of the Spirit, is one and the self
same Godhead, differing only in the manner of subsistence; therefore in denying
one of the divine subsistence, strictly speaking, you deny all the three. But
as for my disciples, you deny two of these divine subsistences, and ascribe
unto them some kind of unscriptural super-angelic qualities. Pray what do you
call this? Is it not real atheism? Cease from following me, I desire you. Burn,
O burn my books against the truth, and forget my irrational heresies. Cease, I
say! cease from following after me, before you are swallowed, to my unspeakable
distraction, in the same perdition with me. Believe what the scriptures say of
him whom you deny. If any man believe not that JESUS is the ETERNAL I AM, he
shall die in his sins.

A second sentiment of yours which I advertise you of, and warn you to recant,
is, the good opinion you have of your supposed inherent purity, in opposition
to the voice of religion and the dictates of common sense. O that I had never
maligned the truth by asserting that the doctrine of original sin is a fallacy?
Alas! though my repentance is sincere, it is now too late! is not that
predominant pride which is peculiar to the tribes of the Deists, Socinians, and
Arians, a strong demonstration of our original depravity. Is it not pride that
swells our haughty reason to that degree, that it not only vyes with, but
even supercedes everlation. We are wont to say that we will believe nothing but
what our reason can comprehend. The native meining of this declaration is, that
the word of GOD may err, but reason is infallible. What is this better than
Popish pride, Infidel blindness, and Turkish arrogance. Believe me, my
followers, if you choose to be governed by the dictates of carnal reason,
rather than divine revelation, you will find that yours will do by you as mine
has done by me; It will plunge you into hell in the end. Consider, my deluded
followers, that if we by our reason had been capable of knowing the whole mind
of GOD, there had been no need of revelation, no need of the Holy Ghost being
sent down from heaven to lead his people into all truth; to reprove the world
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.

Does not your inconsistency in preaching, sometimes contradicting one day what
you advanced the other, plainly prove the insufficiency of reason to grasp
infinite mysteries. Ah! my disciples! how can you think to escape the damnation
of hell? seeing, though you profess to hearken to the voice of reason, you only
listen partially to her.

Reason tells you that it is irrational to preach and unpreach, to contradict
in one sermon what you preached in another. But how can you do otherwise, if
you adhere not to the voice of revelation, which is perfectly uniform, as
reason also does allow. But you and I are wont to charge the scriptures with
contradiction; I am now convinced indeed. that they are one chain of uniform
truth. But alas! you remain unconvinced; and lo! I see you posting after me to
the paths of perdition. Woe is me, for they will not stop till they be in hell,
notwithstanding all my admonitions.

Unhappy disciples! are you not guilty of self-contradictions every day? Do not
you declare that you will believe nothing but what your reason can comprehend?
And notwithstanding this declaration, you believe that you are possessed of
rational immortal spirits, and you cannot comprehend how, or in what manner,
these spirits dwell in you. Your reason tells you, that no creature is, or
ought to be an object of religious adoration; but, contrary to the dictates of
common sense, you worship Jesus Christ, whom you are taught to call a creature.
Your reason tells you that GOD must be an infinite, uncreated, supreme being:
but, contrary to all reason, you and I are wont to talk of a finite, created,
and subordinate GOD. Witness heaven and earth, if these and many other glaring
contradictions are not so many plain symptoms of natural depravity and darkness!

As long as you believe yourselves exempt from natural defilement, and in no
danger by sin; as long as you cry up your own inherent power and worth, so long
are you in a state of condemnation, from which nothing can save you but the
attoning blood of Christ, which sacrifice I taught you to despise. Blindness as
to your own wants and danger being a certain testimony of your depravity, and
of the hardness of your hearts against GOD.

Remember, that as long as you continue in that good opinion you have of
yourselves, so long you are enemies to the cross of Christ, blasphemous
contradictors of GOD's holy word, that has judiciously concluded all men under
sin, and declared them dead in trespasses and sins, children of wrath, etc. O
that I had preached thus while I lived! then had not my hell been so hot as
alas! I find it. If you are so unhappy as to follow me to this place of
torment, you will soon be convinced, that your boasted natural light is only
darkness, that your virtue so much talked of is only painted vice, your
strength imbecility; and that your pretended humility is none other but pride
in disguise. Oh! the Socinians hell is hot, seven times hotter than that of the
professed Pagans.

A third evil of a damning nature which attends your heretical tribes is,
denying the imputation of Christ's righteousness for justification, for pardon
and acceptance; a doctrine of GOD's word which none ever died in the denial of,
and escaped the damnation of hell. Consider, my unhappy followers, that I,
having seen the mysteries of eternity, must be allowed capable of teaching you
lessons that you, in a state of mortality are utter strangers unto: and if you
submitted yourselves to my instruction when I lived on earth, with far more
reason you ought to attend to me now, when my knowledge is refined by the
flames of hell.

In denying the imputation of Christ's righteousness for the sinner's pardon
and acceptance, you in effect deny the justice and truth of Jehovah. Justice
has said the soul that sins shall die, truth is engaged to see the decree
executed. Now, either the sinner must die in himself, or in some other person
who stands in the relation of surety for him: If the sinner die in himself,
then is there salvation for none, for all have sinned; but if he die in his
surety, or if his surety die for him, then what his surety did for him must be
imputed to him for his acceptance. But as I taught you, so you say, that he
died not in his surety, neither needs he to die in him self -- as a just
consequence of this, the mercy and truth of God do both fall to the ground.
Now, if both the justice and truth of God be denied, God himself is denied, and
you commence ATHEISTS on the spot.

Let not you and your brethren strive to evade my arguments, and think
yourselves somewhat better than ATHEISTS; for I can assure you, that the
professed ATHEISTS and we, do compose only one canton in these infernal regions.
Is the imputation of Christ's righteousness contrary to reason? surely no! Do
not you sir, remember that affair between your two neighbors, Messrs.
Austerity and Falshort, that happened about seven years ago, a little before I
died.

Mr. Falshort stood charged in Mr. Austerity's Books with the sum of a thousand
pounds. Austerity called on him once and again for his money, but meeting with
nothing but good words and fair promises instead of satisfactory payment, he
resolved to have Mr. Falshort's circumstances tried; and upon trial found that
he was not worth a thousand pence. Austerity enraged at the disappointment,
immediately arrested Falshort and laid him in goal, where he lay in a helpless
and hopeless condition, often soliciting Mr. Austerity for a release. But
Austerity obstinately persisted in his demands, either payment of the whole
sum, or imprisonment during life.

Mr. Goodwill, a neighboring gentleman, and relation to Mr. Falshort, moved
with pity and compassion toward his unfortunate friend, and being a man of
substance and honor, went to Mr. Austerity unknown to Mr. Falshort, and
resolved to deliver his, poor, insolvent friend out of prison, but scorning to
have it said that Austerity should be a loser by his friend Falshort, he paid
down cheerfully the whole sum, to the satisfaction of the creditor and
deliverance of the insolvent: on which payment he obtained a discharge in full
of all demands on the account of Mr. Falshort. Now the quere is, did Austerity
impute unto Falshort the payment of Mr. Goodwill, and account it the same as if
Falshort himself had paid the debt. You know he did. Ah! my disciples, your
abused, yet boasted reason, if you recant not, will be a terrible devil to
torment you when you arrive in these intolerable mansions, as my reason, alas!
is the greatest of all my tormentors.

But you say you have no need of the righteousness of another, because you have
power of yourselves to do that which is well pleasing in the sight of GOD, and
sufficiently work out your own salvation. Now if you could do so, you would at
once stop my mouth. Ah! poor deluded mortals, you little know what it is to
keep the law of God! The commandment is exceeding broad!

Does there never a vain thought pass through your mind? Does there never an
idle word issue from your mouth? Do you in all things do unto others as you
would that they should do unto you? Unless you can answer the two first queries
in the negative, and the latter in the affirmative, never boast of strength,
but be mortified for want of will to keep either all or any precept of the
moral law perfectly. Remember what the apostle Paul said of himself, to will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. Can the
damned to these dark regions extricate themselves out of the inconceivable
anguish into which they are involved? Just as much power have you to work out
your own salvation. You can as soon deliver yourselves from the torments of
hell if once you are swallowed up in it, as to deliver yourselves from the
slavish bands of your pride and ignorance. Bewitched Socinians, let right
reason have its course, and it will teach you to submit to revelation. O! how
it pains me to find that your blood is required at my hands! and to see you and
your fellows seeking death in the grossest of heresies. Oh! my disciples, this
is our condemnation, that light is come into the world, and we have loved
darkness rather than light because our deeds are, and have been evil"

As the Doctor had thus spoke, he was surrounded by a number of merciless
furies, seized, and plunged into the flaming abyss, so that for some time I
lost sight of him, and the smoke of his torment ascended up to heaven,
darkening the air in its passage.

After the space of about half an hour, I perceived him cast up at the farther
side of a rolling billow, and after some violent strugglings he stood erect,
and in horrid distraction said. -- "Damnation! ah me! is this the Damnation I
was so often threatened with by the Calvinists, and as often laughed at it as a
fanatic's dream? Is this the hell I so often heard of, and so fallaciously
concluded to consist barely in a separation from the blissful presence of GOD!
Alas! alas! these floods of vengeance that incessantly keep pouring in upon me,
are something more than a bare separation. Blinded teacher who had, and blinded
disciples who have, such diminutive notions of the torments of the damned.

Wretched creatures, as I lift up my tormented eyes, I behold them posting
onward toward the dreadful goal. If they arrive, my torment, though already
inexpressible, will be greatly aggravated. -- Let me once more try what effect
the eloquence of despair may have upon them. Who knows but it may retard their
march!

Still! still do you pursue your course! O my deluded followers? Still will ye
remain tenacious of your errors, notwithstanding I plainly tell you to what
dismal distraction they have reduced me! into what unalterable anguish they
have plunged me! You persevere in your errors, therefore I must persevere in
admonishing you. Hearken sir! hearken Mr. -- while I speak to you, and I charge
you to tell your brethren what I say.

Your denying the efficacy of divine grace in regeneration and sanctification
is justly ranked among your damnable errors, and is one of the greatest
heresies that ever I taught you. -- Had I experimentally known the influences
of efficacious grace, I had never come to this place of torment, but had been
joining yonder assembly, yonder glorious church of the firstborn, which I see
afar off written in heaven, beautified with all the luster of grace, both
imputed and imparted, clothed with all the radiance of undecaying glory,
filled with the inexpressible pleasures that issue from the throne of sovereign
love and goodness. Alas, I never saw the need of the operations of unfrustrable
grace till I arrived in eternity, and now too late I repent my denial thereof.
-- The flames of hell give a lasting and full conviction of the truth of all
the doctrines of the gospel, and at the same time that we, the spirits
accursed, have no share in their salutary report and influence.

When I lived on earth amongst you, I taught you to attend to the voice of
carnal corrupted reason; now I am in hell, I advise you to hearken to the voice
of right reason compared with the word of GOD.

In the word of GOD conversion is accounted a quickening or rising from the
dead: and reason tells you, that you cannot quicken or bring to life again the
dearest, the most beloved object which death has bereaved you of; nor can they
quicken themselves, or they would never suffer their delicate bodies to become
nauseously putrified in the devouring womb of the hungry grave. For my own
part, I find I cannot quicken my body again, or I would not lie here broiling
in these flames. -- Some of you have hair of an unlovely color of which you
are ashamed, why do you not change its color agreeable to your minds? Others
of you my disciples have legs or shoulders not shaped, eyes and temples not set
to your liking, why do you not mend the matter and alter the proportion of your
parts? Your own reason tells you, you cannot so much as alter the color of a
single hair of your head.

But the quickening of the soul is an infinitely greater work. And is it
reasonable to pretend to do the greater, when you are convinced you cannot do
the less? O my disciples! how have I your blind leader darkened your
understanding by my falsehoods. Woe is me! for my followers are at the point of
falling into this horrible ditch.

Again, the work of conversion is a creation of the soul anew. Now if divine
grace is not the efficient in this soul creation, you yourselves must be the
efficient therein. Can you do it? You profess you can. First try your creating
hand on a lesser job before you proceed to the greater. Can you create riches
and honor? You love them well enough; if you have power to create them why do
so many of you go destitute of both? Can you create peace in the midst of
trouble? Joy in the midst of sorrow? Ease in the midst of pain? Light in the
time and place of darkness? Beauty instead of deformity? You know you cannot.
But to create the soul in Christ Jesus to good works is a task by far more
difficult. If you cannot, as your consciences confess, do the least, is it not
then a great degree of madness to pretend to do the greatest, even a work that
requires Omnipotence to perform.

Hearken ye blinded mortals, hearken to the voice of him who has condemned me!
It is not effected by works of righteousness which we have done, but by the
walling of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Again, inconsistent creature that you are, (says he to me) if you can create
yourself anew, why do you not do it? Why are you so long ever you begin the
work? If you must perform the work with your own single hand, you will be long
in finishing it: Most likely you may spend all your life time before you are
half gone through with you work, then all your creating labor will be lost. Is
it not highly unreasonable when a man hears that he must be born again, created
anew, quickened together with Christ, etc. and at the some time believes that
the renewing power is in himself, that he should sit down contented in an
unrenewed condition, not knowing but death may seize him every moment?"

Here I was cut to the heart, to see that instead of being guided wholly by
reason, that in many things I both believed and acted contrary to reason. The
old Doctor, perceiving my confusion, continued:

"Consider that if you deny the operations of the comforter, you deny the
author of the bible, who is the very GOD that made you. Here you may see that I
taught you Atheism in various forms. Oh! that you repented your receiving my
instructions as sincerely as I repent teaching them! then would not my torment
be increased by your arrival in hell. I do assure you I recant all these
blasphemous errors, though now alas! it is too late. You may recant in time as
you are yet on the mortal side of the gulf! Oh! that you might all recant in
time! I dread your arrival in this fiery tophet! because it will bring
additional torment to me.

Miserable teacher that I was, I taught you to deny the operations of the Holy
Ghost, and in doing so to deny the truth of God, which in fact is the same as
to deny GOD himself. O! what spirit accursed can stand up under the fury of a
denied God! Alas if you do not heartily sign your recantation in time, you must
needs stand the shock, the dreadful shock of his fiery indignation to all
eternity.

Another destructive error by which you treasure up unto yourselves wrath
against the day of wrath, is the trust you have in a mild, yielding law, and
flexible justice of God the judge.

You may fancy what you will; but for my part, when I trembling stood before
the awful throne, I found no condescension in, no abatements made by, the rigid
law, not the least in divine justice! All was stern, all was severe, beyond all
possibility of mitigation. I then found, though never before, that the council
of the most high does stand, and that his word is as invariable as himself. O!
if you had seen as much of the immutability of the law as I have! you would
have done with talking as you do about abatement of its rigorous demands, or
that justice does make allowances for sins, however supposed venal. This error
of yours does directly wound both the mercy and justice of God: for if God is
just, then must his law be fulfilled according to the tenor thereof; if God is
merciful, his mercy must be unbounded: but if, as in effect you say, he in part
forgives and in part receives, his mercy is limited by the circumstances of the
object. One man requires a greater, another requires a less degree of mercy. Is
not this as great an indignity as you can offer to the mercy of God? As for me,
I now see in the light of eternity, that where ever salvation comes, it comes
wholly, fully and freely, without money and without price, without any works of
righteousness on the part of man.

Likewise, I now see that God's justice is infinite, which it could not
possibly be, if it could in any ways pass by the least sin unpunished. Foolish
dreamers that we were! to think that God would drown his justice in the flood
of his mercy, would prejudice one attribute of his incomprehensible nature, to
the honor of another, and all for the sake of creatures who are less than
nothing, in his sight altogether vanity. Folly in perfection indeed! That being
who is GOD must be infinitely holy and just as well as infinitely merciful. If
he is infinitely holy, than he can make no allowance for sin. If infinitely
just, then his mercy can be extended to none, but to the honor of his justice.
But if his justice can pass over some sins, why not all sin? and then there
would be no need of a Savior; for verily if salvation could have come by the
holiness of the creature, Christ has died in vain. Have not you an equal right
to a penny which one man may owe you, as to a pound which another may? Such is
the rigor of the law, (and that soon you will find) that he who offends in one
point, though it were but in a single thought, is guilty of the whole, -- GOD
will by no means clear the guilty, -- there is no release from his law's
arrest, -- no appeal from the tribunal of his justice! O faithless and
unbelieving, as I was, will you not open your eyes to see the light of
instruction? Will you ever shut your ears against the voice of truth?

I know you say, that when you come to be tried at the divine bar, that your
vices must be put in one scale, and your virtues in the other, and if there
happen to be an equilibrium in the balance, that God will put in so much of his
divine clemency, as will make your virtues overweigh your vices. Alas! alas! I
can look back to the time that I had such a foolish notion, which greatly
facilitated my ruin. But when I came to be weighed, all my deeds were accounted
evil; my virtues, which I formerly thought I had store of, were, when weighed
in the balance of the sanctuary, lighter than nothing, vanity itself. You will
find that unless Christ be put in the balance with you, you will be sound
wanting as I was. How should it be otherwise, when without faith it is
impossible to please GOD, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin? Why then will
faithless mortals pretend to do that which is well pleasing in the sight of
GOD? When I expected my virtues to appear as my wedding garment, I was struck
as with a thunderbolt, and when I heard the Judge, the holy GOD to say, Let
his filthy rags be burned with him, both he and they are an abomination to me,
from this time forward I will rejoice over him to do him evil.

Ah my disciples, you will find that the first touch of the flames beneath will
at once consume all your supposed virtue. The law admits not of composition,
and the justice of GOD cannot be bribed with imperfect virtues, rather the
appearance of virtue. If you must stand in your own righteousness, alas! you
must bear the whole weight of JEHOVAH's vengeance, as I do at this day. O that
I had been wise, and had understood this in time, then had not my latter end
been so terribly dreadful. Ah me! these complaints are now too late!

Another error whereby your hands are strengthened in wickedness, is your vain
imaginations concerning the torments of the damned. You say that the torments
of hell consists only in a separation from the joys of heaven, the blissful
presence of GOD: If that indeed were all -- it were no hell to souls whose
natural language is, -- depart from me, O Lord, I desire not the knowledge of
thee. All the heaven unregenerate men desire, is an utter separation from GOD.
But I can tell you from woeful experience, that exclusion from the mercy of GOD
is inseparable from enduring his wrath. Separation from the joy of heaven, in
eternity, is immediately connected with the most exquisite pain. Can the
eloquence of angels persuade me that I feel not the most intolerable anguish?
Are the flaming billows, that roll incessantly upon me, nothing but bare
separation? Are these streams of vengeance, that issue continually from the
spouts of omnipotent wrath, nothing but separation? Does this noisome smell,
arising from the flaming sulphur, impart no torment to the damned? Does these
dismal howlings of souls in unutterable agonies -- these direful yellings of
hideous ghosts, cutting their flight through the tremendous arches of the
expansive tophet, -- yield no degree of torment to the damned ear? Or the sight
of millions of frightful ghosts floating upon the surface of the burning lake?
All the serpentine breed in their most ghastly dimensions, with all the
swelling floods of JEHOVAH's vengeance, rolling in continually on us: can these
be beheld with a peaceful eye! And all this within view of the overflowing joys
of the righteous, whom on earth we accounted fanatics, enthusiasts, etc. -- Is
all this, and infinitely more than human heart in a state of mortality can form
any idea of, no more than a bare separation from GOD? Now I will reveal a
mystery unto you. You say that the damned are separate from GOD: but verily it
is a mistake! He is as fully manifested in these dreadful mansions, as he is in
heaven. There he is manifested in his love, grace, mercy, truth, and holiness.
Here he is manifested in his holiness, truth, justice, and wrath. If this
manifestation of GOD does not create a hell of infinite torment, I know not
what possibly can.

But you say that despair constitutes hell. I ask you, did you ever sensibly
know what is meant by despair? If you felt the awful torment, caused by that
gnawing worm, for the space of one minute, you would dread it as long as you
lived. Know of a truth that hell is intolerable! Flatter not yourselves that
your punishment will consist in a separation from the person whom you hate. If
you are so unhappy as to persist in your heresies till the last, you will find
that one hour in this dark abode will convince you of their fallacy.

But to make the best of a bad bargain, you have got a notion, that in some
future period there shall be a general release from the torments of hell. This
is a flat denial of the oracles of God, an insult on the author, and crafty
method of hardening sinners in their sins. When I lived on the earth I was of
the same mind with Mr. Bourn; but now I am in hell, and am convinced of its
eternity. -- Alas! my conviction adds greatly to my torment. Could we who are
confined to this gloomy dungeon but once think of a release, it would in a
great measure alleviate our distress. But such a thought does not so much as
once enter into our minds. No, never will whilst eternity endures. O eternity!
eternity! To think of eternity is a galling thought. Any torment is to be
chosen, rather than an eternity of torment. Eternal inevitably it must be! Woe
is me, I am lost! Eternally lost! beyond all remedy!

Bewitched man, to measure eternity by the divisions of time. Here we have no
years, months, weeks, and days! But eternity is eternity, that is all you
mortals can know of it. Insufferable insolence! thus to assault the truths of
JEHOVAH, and give the lie to the God of eternal veracity. Should you treat the
law of an earthly prince with equal contempt, would he calmly and patiently
suffer it? Is it possible that such daring impiety can go unpunished! surely
no! I charge you Mr. --, that you write down and publish to the world all that
you have heard and seen, if by that means any of my deceived followers may be
persuaded to believe the truth, and escape this direful misery into which I am
plunged. Tell them I heartily recant all the doctrines whereby I have
supplanted the truths of the gospel. Tell them I, sleeping, dreamed all the
days of my life, and never awoke till vengeance laid hold of me. -- Tell them,
that if I had liberty to come on earth, and there remain for one twelvemonth's
space, I would openly acknowledge all mine errors, publicly recant all my
heresies. -- Speak, speak to them, and do not spare. -- Tell them, that if here
they arrive, their blood will be as oil in the flames of my torments that now
blaze all around me. Regard not my memory. Let it be cut off from the face of
the earth! -- O that the earth were also cut off from my mind! But alas! I have
the lively images of all my past transactions intimately present with me. --
The sound of my heresies for ever ring in my tormented ears. -- After all,
remember what I told you at first. It is not love either to you or them, that
makes me thus solicitously concerned for the welfare of you all, but a slavish
fear that my already intolerable pains will be increased on your arrival in
this bottomless abyss. Mercy and love are for ever banished from amongst us. --

As the doctor had thus spoke, I beheld him surrounded by a squadron of black
infernals, who cut their way swifter than the wind through the smoky arches of
dreadful Tophet. They surrounded, seized, and carried him away, as I supposed,
to renewed torments, by reason of his hideous shrieks, that reached up unto
heaven, and even now fill my afflicted ears as I write the story. -- They
carried him off, and I saw him no more. --

Amazed I stood on this dangerous precipice, revolving in my mind what I had
heard and seen, astonished to find myself so clearly convicted of infidelity;
fearful lest I should share the same end with my unhappy tutor; and partly,
wondering that I was not indeed with him already, because I had hitherto so
closely followed his doctrines. As I was meditating on these things, I heard a
noise equally frightful with that which I heard at the beginning: I trembling
stood, expecting a second eruption, fearful least thereby I should be
overwhelmed with certain destruction. As I thus stood dreading the consequence,
the noise waxed louder and louder, like many rolling thunders concentring in
one: all the noise seemed to come from the bowels of the earth. Anon the earth
began to tremble, at last to shake in an uncommon manner; and by and by the pit
in which I had seen such wonders closed its lips, and ceased further to belch
froth from its fiery entrails either fire, smoke, or hideous specter. This
done the earth regained her stability, and all nature appeared serene.

Not knowing into what place of the world I was got, I judged it safest to
abide where I was, and wait for the wished for morn, the welcome harbinger of
day already appearing in the East. -- When fair Aurora had spread her broidered
skirts over all the oriental world, and darted her pleasant smiles toward the
West, I found in her light, that I was got to the middle of the common on the
south side of the town. Now knowing right well the place on which I stood, I
began with the light of day to search for the burned forest I had seen
overnight; but could see nothing but what was usual on the common. I gladly
would once more have viewed that pleasant, but solitary avenue, through which I
passed the night before; but no avenue was to be seen; I sought it, but could
not find it. This made me conclude, that both the forest and avenue were only
visionary.

I dreaded going home, expecting to find my wife and children buried in the
ruins made by the earthquakes; but to my joyful surprise, I gladly found them
all in perfect health, and my wife told me, that though the slept none in the
night, by reason of my absence, yet she had heard no uncommon noise, nor felt
the least shock of an earthquake; making further enquiry among my neighbors,
they answered in like manner: nor indeed was there to be seen about all the
town the least appearance of a past earthquake: All which tended to astonish me
more and more.

I knew not what to think of the vision -- Certainly, thought I, it cannot be a
dream! But I feared least my brain was distempered, and in the midst of its
distraction painted out such apparitions to me. However, two things I resolved
on; 1st, Utterly to cast off all Arian and Socinian errors, and embrace the
orthodox faith, which I had despised the day before; but I judged it prudent
heartily to examine the doctor's books by the scriptures of truth, before I
committed them to the flames.

2dly, I resolved to keep all these things which I had seen and heard a
profound secret. The regard I had for the doctor's memory had great influence
upon me.

That very day I began to take a scriptural view of the works of my unhappy
tutor; and in the conclusion, found them very worthy of the fire, which
accordingly in due time they fed.

Still I was resolved to hide the vision in my heart, till one night in my
sleep I dreamt that the doctor appeared to me in all the ghastly deformities of
a damned spirit, charged me with ingratitude to that God who had in so uncommon
a manner delivered me from the dangerous heresies I had imbibed from my tutor;
and want of love to my fellow creatures, in that, having got the knowledge of
the truth myself, I did not study to reclaim others from error. He said I had
no true regard either for his person or memory, or I would publish unto mankind
what might in part, prevent the increase of his torments. And withal told me,
if I would not resolve to publish what I had heard and seen, that he would
haunt me every night in my sleep, to my unspeakable mortification.

Self-preservation has in it a persuasive eloquence; rather than be troubled
every night with the ghost of my unhappy tutor, I have prevailed with myself to
obey him; though for my pains, I expect to be called a madman by one, a fanatic
by another, an enthusiast by a third, and perhaps by a fourth a malicious
person.

But I rest myself content, that the notable day will show who is the wisest
disciple of reason, or the maddest enthusiast; who uses and who abuses right
reason: whether they that despise my vision, or their humble servant, whose
name henceforth is

ANTISOCINUS.

FINIS.

