OBSERVATIONS ON THE ACT OF PARLIAMENT COMMONLY CALLED THE BOSTON PORT-BILL;
WITH THOUGHTS ON CIVIL SOCIETY AND STANDING ARMIES.

BY JOSIAH QUINCY, JUN'R.

BRITONS arise!
And show you have the Virtue to be moved.
POPE. NULLA FIDES, pietasque viris, qui CASTRA sequuntur,
VENALESQUE MANUS: ibi fas, ubi maxima merce^.
LUCAN. Our necks are under PERSECUTION. LAM. v. 5. What MAN can do against
them, not afraid,
Though to THE DEATH; against such CRUELTIES
With inward consolation recompensed:
And often supported so, as shall amaze
Their PROUDEST PERSECUTORS.
MILTON. They that be slain by THE SWORD are better than they that be slain
with hunger. LAM. iv. 9. BOSTON: N.E. PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY EDES AND GILL, IN
QUEEN STREET, 1774.

To the FREEHOLDERS and YEOMANRY of my Country.
THE virtue, strength and fortitude of a state generally reside in the
FREEHOLDERS of the Nation. In you, Gentlemen, as the LANDED INTEREST of the
Country, do I place my confidence, under GOD, at this Day.

To you, Gentlemen, therefore, I dedicate THIS temporary WORK, as a testimony
of that great respect and warm affection, with which,

I am, Your Friend and Countryman, JOSIAH QUINCY, jun.
Boston, May 14, 1774.
PREFACE
THE Statute of the 14th Geo^ge 3d, received in the last Ships from London,
(entitled An Act to discontinue, in such Manner, and for such Time as are
therein mentioned, the landing and discharging, the lading or shipping of
Goods, Wares, Merchandise, at the Town, and within the Harbor of Boston, in
the Province of Ma^^achus^tts-Bay, in North America,) gave rise to the
following OBSERVATIONS: -- They will appear thrown together in haste; and as
the Writer was out of Town on business, almost every day, the Sheets were
printing off, no doubt many Errors of the Press escaped correction.

The Inaccuracies of a sudden Production from one of infirm health, perplexed
with various avocations, will receive a mild censure: more material faults,
FRIENDS may be prone to forgive; but from Enemies -- public or private -- we
are never to expect indulgence or favor.

JOSIAH QUINCY, Junr.
Boston, May 14, 1774.
ERRATA.
PAGE 6, line 13, for "was" read were -- page 8, line 25, for "popular" read
populous -- page 13, line 20, for lawers, read lawyers -- page 21, line 27, for
"pay" read make. -- Dele the word "king" in the 8th Page 4th line from the
bottom.

OBSERVATIONS etc.
IN times of public calamity, it is the duty of a good citizen to consider. If
his opportunities or advantages, for knowledge and reflection, are greater than
those of mankind in general, his whole duty will remain undischarged, while he
confines his thoughts to the compass of his own mind. But if danger is added to
the calamity of the times, he who shall communicate his sentiments on public
affairs with decency and frankness, merits attention and indulgence, if he may
not aspire to approbation and praise.

Whoever attends to the tenor and design of the late act of the British
Parliament for the BLOCKADE OF this HARBOR, and duly considers the extensive
confusion and distress this measure must inevitably produce; whoever shall
reflect upon the justice; policy and humanity of legislators, who could
deliberately give their sanction to such a proceedure -- must be satisfied,
that the man, who shall OPENLY dare to expose their conduct, hazards fatal
consequences. -- Legislators, who could condemn a whole town unheard, nay
uncited to answer; who could involve thousands in ruin and misery, without
suggestion of any crime by them committed; and who could so construct their
law, as that enormous pains and penalties would inevitably ensue,
NOTWITHSTANDING THE MOST PERFECT OBEDIENCE TO IT IS INJUNCTIONS; I say, that
legislators, thus formed as MEN, thus principled as STATESMEN, would
undoubtedly imagine the attainder and death of a private individual, for his
public animadversions, a less extraordinary act of power. Since this treatise
was advertised in the public papers, as being in the press, the author has
received, from the British Coffee-House, an anonymous Let^ter, in which he is
represented as being "in eminent hazard of THE LOSS OF LIFE and confiscation of
estate:" It is said, that I shall very probably get into the hands of a power,
from which no power I can call to will be able to deliver me. -- There is (says
the writer) but one expedient left to save me: -- Employ, for GOD's sake, those
rare talents, with which (faith the artful flatterer) he has blessed you, in
convincing THE PEOPLE that they have nothing to do, but to SUBMIT, and make
their peace WITH GOVERNMENT: -- You may, (continues be) by this means probably
make your peace, and ward off the punishment that hangs over your head. It is
(...) possible, THAT GOVERNMENT may still continue IT IS GREAT LENITY, and
overlook your offenses. The Reader is left to his own Reflections.
But all exertions of duty have their hazard: -- if dread of Parliamentary
extravagance is to deter from public energies, the safety of the common wealth
will soon be despaired of; and when once a sentiment of that kind prevails, the
excesses of present enormities so rapidly increase, that strides, at first
appearance, exorbitant, will soon be found -- but the beginning of evils. We
therefore consider it as a just observation, that the weight and velocity of
public oppressions are ever in a ratio proportionate to private despondency and
public despair.

He who shall go about to treat of important and perilous concerns, and
conceals himself behind the curtain of a feigned signature, gives an advantage
to his adversaries; who will not fail to stigmatize his thoughts, as the
notions of an unknown writer, afraid or ashamed to avow his sentiments; and
hence they are deemed unworthy of notice and refutation. Therefore I give to
the world both my sentiments and name upon the present occasion, and shall hear
with patience him, who will decently refute what is advanced, and shall submit
with temper to that correction and chastisement which my errors deserve.

The act now under consideration opens with a recital, that dangerous
commotions and insurrections have been fomented and raised in Boston -- by
diverse ill-affected persons, to the subversion of his Majesty's Government, and
to the utter destruction of the public peace, and good order of the said town;
in which commotions and insurrections certain valuable cargoes of Teas, being
the property of the East India Company, and on board certain vessels lying
within the bay or harbor of Boston, were seized and destroyed: and in the
present condition of said town and harbor, the commerce of his Majesty's
subjects cannot be safely carried on there, nor the customs payable to his
Majesty be duly collected.

Two questions naturally arise out of this preamble: The first, whether the
facts set forth are true; and Secondly, whether upon a supposition of their
truth, they are a sufficient foundation for the subsequent parts of the
statute, or will warrant the disabilities, forfeitures, pains and penalties,
enacted and inflicted on the subject? -- Both inquiries seem intimately to
concern the honor and justice of the British legislature. And however
unimportant the judgment of Americans may now appear to that august body -- yet
surely the judgment of Europe and future ages is not unworthy their high
consideration. Removed from the eye of royalty, the piety of a Sovereign may
cease to pity miseries it does not behold; remote from the cries of public
justice and the efforts of popular despair, Lords and Commons may remain
unaffected, for a season, with American convulsions; yet justice and humanity
must soon excite those operations in America and Europe, which hereafter will
move even the senate of Britain. True knowledge and real virtue perhaps was
never more diffused than on this northern continent; refined humanity ('it is
boasted) was never more predominant than in Europe at this day: -- Can it be
supposed, that this virtue will be discordant and inactive; that this knowledge
will omit to unfold public wrongs, or that such humanity will cease to
interpose?

That commotions were in Boston; that EastIndia tea was destroyed, are facts
not controverted. But that such commotions were natural to be expected; that
they were such as statesmen must have foreseen and A FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, who
foresaw, would prevent, rather than punish, is equally true. The sentiments of
all Americans relative to the Tea act are no secret, their fervor in the COMMON
CAUSE equally known; and their probable intemperance in consequence of the
arrival of India teas, it required no profound skill in men and politics to
predict. Nay the British papers were full, and the senate echoed, with the
predictions similar to those which are now fulfilled. It was not difficult for
Englishmen in Britain to tell how Englishmen in America would conduct on such
occasions. What shall we then say? Shall we impute to those, who are dignified
as "the wisest and most august" the barbarous projection -- deliberately to
ensnare, that they might superlatively punish? The calm deliberation of
premeditated malice seems rather more characteristick of a private bosom, than
a public body. But Governor Hutchinson (the representative of his Majesty in
this Province) when treating upon an act of the Massachusetts Government
imposing a tax or duty upon goods of the inhabitants of other colonies, has
assured us, that in all ages and countries, by bodies and communities of men
such deeds have been done as most of the individuals of which such communities
consisted, acting separately, would have been ashamed of. 2 Vol. Mass. Hist.
page 156.
An observation that his Excellency might have imbibed, from that prince of
historians, Dr. Robertson. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative
error, are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals, has, on some occasions,
offered to TRUTH; but from ANY SOCIETY of men, no such effort can be expected.
The corruptions of society, recommended by common utility, and justified by
universal practice, are viewed by it is members, without shame or horror; and
reformation never proceeds from themselves, but is always FORCED upon them by
some FOREIGN hand. Hist. Scotland, 1 Vol. page 167.
Caesar, Lepidus and Antony, says Plutarch, show, that no beast is more savage
than man, when possessed of power equal to his passion. If the sentiments of
Dr. Robertson are just, have we not cause to fear from very powerful states and
legislators an equal ferocity?

And it is an observation of the illustrious Lord Clarendon, that it is the
nature of man, rather to commit two errors, than retract one. When elevated
characters commit a second error, it carries the air of an intended discovery,
how little they feel for the first, how much they despise the people, how much
they are above shame, fear and amendment. But to heighten cruelty by
wantonness, to render it more pungent by insult, are such exorbitances, as
seldom disgrace the records of mankind. But whenever such instances occur, they
strikingly verify that eternal truth recorded in the House of Lords -- it is
much easier to restrain liberty from running into licenciousness than POWER
from swelling into tyranny and oppression. 2 Vol. Lord's Prot. Edit. 1767. p.
141. Anno 1736.
Can it add dignity to this noble sentiment, or weight to this important truth,
to say, that among the illustrious personages who subscribed it with their
hands and transmitted it to posterity, we find a "Chesterfield" and "Cobbam", a
"Strafford" and a "Bathurst" a "Haversham" and "Gower"?

But to return. Are popular commotions peculiar to Boston? Has not every
maritime town in England been repeatedly affected by them? Are they not
incident to every commercial and popular city? -- whence, then, is it, that
BOSTON is devoted to such unexampled treatment? But it may be said, Boston, as
a town, has aided, abeted, and participated in these tumults. Where is the
evidence of it? I presume the King, Lords and Commons of Great Britain had
none; for they do not suggest it: I presume they did not believe it, because
they have not intimated it. And had they been furnished with such evidence, had
they believed the fact, surely it is an imputation unworthy of their dignity,
to say, that they would not have given that matter in the preamble of the
statute, as the ground of their extraordinary proceedure. But the records of
Boston, and known facts prove that the inhabitants discountenanced and
disavowed all riot and disorder. I am thus warranted in saying, that the mere
occurrences expressed in the act, is that matter which the British legislature
have judged worthy the most unparallelled penal severities. Whether this
judgment be right, is a subject interesting to a citizen of the town to
enquire; it is a subject on which a man will speak feelingly; on which AN
ENGLISHMAN will speak freely and openly.

Previous to further observations, it may be necessary to say, that the town of
Boston had as a town cautiously and wisely conducted, not only without tumult,
but with studied regard to established law. This the rolls of the town verify,
and a hundred witnesses can confirm.

At the last town-meeting relative to the EastIndia tea and it is consignees, it
was largely debated, whether it should be an instruction to the committee, who
were appointed to wait on those Gentlemen, to insist on their preremptory
answer; -- Whether they would send back the Tea: and after long debate on the
question, it passed by a very large majority in the negative. And the greatest
enemy of the country cannot point out any one step of the Town of Boston, in
the progress of this matter, that was tumultuous, disorderly and against law.
This also is an additional reason, why we must conclude that the mere temporary
events which took place in Boston, without any illegal proceedure of the town,
in the matter of the tea, is in the judgment of the British senate an adequate
foundation for the last act received from that powerful body.

The first enacting clause of the statute now in view, annihilates all
commercial transactions within two certain points of the harbor of Boston,
upon pain of the FORFEITURE of goods, wares and merchandise, and of boat,
lighter, ship, vessel, or other bottom; -- and of the guns, ammunition, tackle,
furniture and stores, in or belonging to the same: and of any barge, hoy,
lighter, wherry, or boat into which any goods etc. are laden, etc.

The next paragraph, in case any wharfinger, etc. or any of their servants
shall take up or land, or knowingly suffer to be taken up or landed, or shall
ship off, or suffer to be water-born, at or from any of their said wharves,
etc. goods etc. enacts a FORFEITURE and LOSS of such goods etc. and TREBLE the
value thereof, to be computed, at the highest price of such sort of goods, etc.
together with the vessels and boats, and all the horses, cattle, and carriages,
whatsoever made use of in the shipping, unshipping, landing, removing,
carriage, or conveyance of any of the aforesaid goods. and c.

The next clause provides, that if any ship and c. shall be moored or lie at
anchor, or be seen hovering within said bay, and c. or within one league from
the said bay, and c. it shall and may be lawful for any Admiral, or
commissioned officer of his Majesty's fleet or ships of war, or for ANY OFFICER
OF HIS MAJESTY'S CUSTOMS, to compel such ship or vessel to depart to SOME OTHER
port or harbor, or to SUCH STATION AS THE SAID OFFICER SHALL APPOINT and to
use SUCH FORCE for that purpose as shall be found necessary: And if such ship
or vessel shall not depart accordingly, WITHIN SIX HOURS after notice for that
purpose given by such person as aforesaid, such ship or vessel, together with
all the goods laden on board thereon, and all the guns, ammunition, tackle and
furniture shall be forfeited and lost, WHETHER BULK SHALL HAVE BEEN BROKEN OR
NOT.

Let us here pause for a moment; -- let us give time for one single reflection;
let us give space for one pulse of the veins -- one emotion of the heart. And
who can think, but those exalted characters and that generous prince, styled
THE FATHER OF all HIS PEOPLE -- who united to this terrible act had many
reflections, many feelings of humanity, while they were solemnly consigning
thousands -- if not millions -- to ruin, misery and desperation?

The persons in whom this authority is vested, are not confined to the ports or
harbors on this continent: the vessel and cargo may be ordered to what
harbor, port or station of the whole world, the officer pleases -- if he
appoint a continental station, it is grace and favor; -- and what may be the
price of that purchase, who can tell! what scope for malice and ill will; for
pride and haughtiness; for avarice and power to wanton and insult, till the one
is satiated and the other wearied!

Who are the persons to whom such unbounded, such enormous power is entrusted?
Power is known to be intoxicating in it is nature, and in proportion to it is
extent, is ever prone to wantoness: power and authority, says Plutarch, awaken
every passion, and discover every latent vice: -- what a cogent temptation is
here placed to ensnare the most virtuous? But if there be one depraved passion
in the bosom, as power gives scope and opportunity, how soon will it be called
forth into licentious exercise? Shall I be thought going too far; shall I
trespass upon the bounds of truth and decency, if I say, that SOME of his
Majesty's commissioned officers, in his fleet, or ships of war; SOME officers
of his customs are not altogether worthy of such high confidence and trust? Are
there not inferior commissioned officers in the King's ships; are there not
many of the LOWER officers of the customs, who have neither strength of
understanding or integrity of heart to weild such a mighty power? Nay, may not
I add, that SOME FEW (into whose hands peradventure the estate of a good
subject and opulent merchant may chance to fall) are destitute of all sense,
mental and humane? While contemplating this subject, -- while the mind is
active, and heart warm -- how apt are we to forget, that the illustrious
Houses, who gave their sanction to this astonishing law, are dignified as
learned and venerable; -- and the Prince that gave his fiat, denominated --
"THE WISEST AND BEST OF KINGS"?

Deelining an entrance upon matters heretofore discussed by abler heads, I have
omitted all observation on the right and policy of the claims and laws of
Great Britain over the colonies; upon the same principle, I waive entering that
copious field which is presented, by that part of the present act, which
provides for the recovery of all forfeitures and (...) in the courts of
admiralty -- whose extended jurisdiction has been matter of very great
grievance, heart-burnings and complaint; whose judges hold their commissions by
the tenure of will and pleasure; and whose large salaries are a most powerful
incentive to the desire of -- well-pleasing ALL on whom they depend.

Another passage in this statute makes utterly void ALL CONTRACTS, for
consigning, shipping, or carrying any goods, etc. to or from the harbor of
Boston, which HAVE BEEN made or entered into, or which shall be made or entered
into, so long as the act continues in force, relating to any ship which shall
arrive at said town or harbor after the first day of June.

Jurisprudents and the sages of the law for centuries have taught, that
retrospective or post facto statutes, were not only militant with the
principles of found morals, but those also of political wisdom. But the
Parliament, who by the bold figure of common lawers, are styled omnipotent,
here enforces a different doctrine. The english colonist, replete with loyalty
to his sovereign; the descendant from Britain, animated by love for a
mother country, represses the excursions of his understanding and passions: but
the subject or native of another state will feel no such restraint. He has
contracted to send his merchandise to this port, expects his returns in the
commodities of the country -- in compliance with his obligations, his treasures
are moving with hazard upon the ocean, with hopes warm for gain. The ship (in
which peradventure he has risqued his life as well as fortune) after many a
toil and jeopardy, reaches the (...) port. But how are his hopes baffled -- how
will be rage and exclaim? vast has been his expenses to prepare for his
adventure, and equally great his expectations from the Boston merchant. What
guilt has he contracted, what crime has he committed, that he also should be
involved in the calamitous consequences of this unexampled statute? Bouyed up
for a moment, perhaps, with a vain expectation, that he may have a remedy on
his contract against the merchant here; -- how will this supposed foreigner
sink with a ten-fold despondency, how will be rise again with adequate
indignation, when he discovers all remedy gone; -- his contract declared by the
law, "utterly void, to ALL INTENTS AND PURPOSES WHATSOEVER?" -- Here again,
love for a parent-country, love for a parent-king checks the current of reason,
and restrains the career of passion.

Having taken this view, before we proceed further, it is natural once more to
ask, whence arose this extraordinary stride of legislation; what is it, that
the town of Boston has done? what new and unheard of crime have the
inhabitants committed to justify enacting of such disabilities, forfeitures,
pains and penalties? punishments that descend indiscriminately on all ought to
have the sanction of unerring wisdom, and almighty power, or it will be
questioned, if not opposed: -- The present vengeance falls indiscriminately on
the acknowledged innocent, as well as the supposed guilty. Surely the evil is
of a very malignant and terrible nature that can require such an extraordinary
remedy. Admit for a moment, that the inhabitants of Boston were charged as high
criminals; the highest criminals are not punishable, till arraigned before
disinterested judges, heard in defense, and found guilty of the charge. But so
far from all this, a whole people are accused, prosecuted by they know not
whom; tried they know not when; proved guilty they know not how; and sentenced
in a mode, which for number of calamities, extent and duration of severity,
exceeds the annals of past ages, and we presume, in pity to mankind, will not
mark any future Era in the story of the world.

What will be the real consequences of this astonishing measure, and what those
intended and expected by the planners of it are very different considerations.
A MACHIAVEL may plan, and his schemes prove abortive; and ALVA may be sent to
execute, and his army be defeated. The circle of the arts and sciences, like
the ball of empire, has held a western course. From Chaldea and Egypt to
Greece and Rome, soon after in Italy, and thence to the western provinces of
Europe. Chaldea and Egypt had their Magi, their lawgivers and heroes, when
Greece and Rome swarmed with petty feudatories and barbarians; Greece and Rome
flourished in literature, when Gaul, Germany, and Britain were uncivilized,
rude and ignorant. Wife and sagacious politicians have not been able to stay
the rotation of this revolving scientific circle, any more than mighty
potentates to repel the velocity of the flying ball of empire: -- superior to
human powers, like blazing stars, they hold their destined course, and play
their corruscations as they run their race.

The expectations of those who were the fautors of the present measures, must
have been to bring down superlative distress, discord, confusion, despair, and
perdition upon a multitude. How then will our amazement increase, when we shall
hear that the hard fate of this multitude cannot be avoided? Let the
inhabitants comply with the requisitions of the statute, let them be implicitly
obedient to it is injunctions: -- what is the evil they will escape? what is the
boon they may hope to attain? hope and fear are said to be the hinges of
government. Legislators have therefore considered it as sound policy, never to
drive the subject into acts of despair, by causing punishments to appear as
inevitable, on the first promulgation of a law. When a legislative body
ordains penalties to take place in cases of performance or nonperformance of
particular matters, they surely will take due care, that sufficient notice is
given of their public will and sufficient time to comply with their mandates;
so that obedience may not only proceed from principles of regard to the
lawmakers, but motives of personal safety to the subject himself. This seems
not more consonant to political wisdom, than to nature and equity. -- But let
us now suppose, that upon the first intimations of the present law, Boston had
been as prone to obey the edict of a British Court, as the Turk to comply with
the mandate of the Divan; let us imagine them as servile, as fawning as a court
dependant to a minister of state; -- nay, if there be any thing in nature, yet
more humble and more base, let Boston (in idea for a short moment) be that
humble, servile base and fawning something: What does it all avail? The first
time the inhabitants of this town had any intimation, of the will of the
British Parliament, was on the tenth of may, and the act is to take place on
the first of June; and thence to continue in full force, until it shall
sufficiently appear to his Majesty that full satisfaction has been made by or
on behalf of the inhabitants of the said town of Boston to the united company
of merchants of England trading to the East Indies, for the damage sustained by
the said company by the destruction of their goods sent to the said town of
Boston, on board certain ships or vessels as aforesaid; AND UNTIL IT SHALL BE
CERTIFIED TO HIS MAJESTY in council BY THE GOVERNOR, or LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, of
the said province, that reasonable satisfaction has been made to the officers
of his Majesty's revenue and OTHERS, WHO SUFFERED BY THE RIOTS AND
INSURRECTIONS ABOVE MENTIONED, in the months of November and December in the
year 1773, and in the month of January in the year 1774.

Satisfaction could not be made to the East India company, if all Boston had
the WILL and POWER to do it, till the town had time and opportunity to call a
meeting, assemble, consult and determine upon the measure: great bodies are not
calculated for speedy decision, any more than velocity of motion. The
resolution formed; time must be given for dispatches to England, application to
the East India company, an adjustment with them upon the nice point of "full
satisfaction": -- that accomplished; time must be given for making the matter "
sufficiently appear to his Majesty." -- Let any one consider but for a moment,
what a length of time must inevitably elapse before all this can be
accomplished: nay, may it not well be questioned, considering the parties and
all persons concerned and the circumstances of this affair, whether such
accomplishment be practicable? But is this all that is to be done and effected
before relief can be given to this destressed land? Far otherwise. The Governor
or Lieutenant Governor, must also first certify to his Majesty, in Council,
that reasonable satisfaction has been made to the officers of his Majesty's
revenue, and OTHERS, who SUFFER^D by the riots and insurrections above
mentioned.. No person is particularly designated to be the judge between the
subject, and the officers of his Majesty's revenue: No provision being
expressly made, touching this point, how probable that litigation might arise
concerning it? If we say that the Governor, or Lieutenant Governor, is the
implied judge of this matter: How is the question to be brought before him, how
tried, and how adjusted? These also are points not settled in a moment: Long
indeed would be the period before the subject in Boston will be capable to
ascertain and make such satisfaction, as that the person here pointed out,
would make his certificate, that it was plenary and reasonable. Governor
Bernard lately filled the chair of government, while Mr. Hutchinson was second
in command: Governor Hutchinson now fills the chair, and the office of
Lieutenant Governor is vacant. How long would it be before the inhabitants of
Boston would acquiesce in the decision of either of these gentlemen? How little
probability is there, considering the sentiments, the past and present conduct
of these gentlemen, that they would speedily give the required certificate? --
If it has been found difficult to touch the tender feelings of the American
and Native, how long would it take to excite generous sentiments in the Briton
and Stranger?

But these are all preparatories to the obtaining any ease or relief from the
pressure of this penal law. The prerequisites to the restoration of public
felicity are here not only improbable, but when considered altogether and in
the present crisis of public affairs are they not impracticable? But yet worse,
being accomplished, it could in no way prevent the misery and calamities of
this British edict. The space given for the subject to stay this torrent of
evils is so short, that it is impossible for him, exerting his utmost energies,
to prevent being overwhelmed. (But what mortals are unable to prevent -- HEAVEN
may stay or divert.)

An avenue seems to be opened by the benignity of our British fathers; but when
attempted, affords no way of escape. My veneration for Britain is so great,
that I will not suppose the great council of the nation intended to flatter
with a false hope, that cruel disappointment might heighten the poignancy of
suffering -- the anguish of despair. But sure the fathers of a people will
consider, what are like to be the sentiments and conduct of men driven to
distraction by a multitude of inevitable evils, and consigned to despair from
the terms of their deliverance?

Wonder was excited on the first view of the present law; our astonishment has
been increasing in the progress of our survey. A period is not yet put to our
admiration. The faculties of sensation are yet to be further stretched.

The civilian and statesman, the moralist and sage had heretofore delivered
those maxims of truth and those rules of government, which wise legislators
have ever observed, and the bulk of mankind yet honor and revere. -- To know
the laws of the land already in force, previous to the publication of a new
code, or in the technical phraseology of a common lawyer "to know how the law
stood before we make a new statute", has been considered as an indispensable
accomplishment of a good legislator. But that illustrious Parliament, whose
power is distinguished, with the appellation of "omnipotent", seem not to have
exercised this important knowledge; -- though we do not hence rashly infer, that
they are destitute of information, because all who are vested with omnipotence
of power are ever inspired with proportionate wisdom.

It must again be noticed, that no relief is to be had, "until full
satisfaction has been made BY or ON behalf of the inhabitants of said town of
Boston". Now to suppose that any in England or Europe would make satisfaction "
on behalf" of said Inhabitants was unnatural, if not absurd; but what is more
to the point, it was certainly unparliamentary. The remaining alternative is
that satisfaction must be made by Boston.

Every person knows, that towns in this Province cannot raise or appropriate
any moneys, but by the express provisions and direct authority of law: it is a
matter of equal notoriety that all town assessments of money are expressly
confined, by the 4 Wm. and Mar. c 13. to the maintenance and support of the
ministry, schools, the poor, and defraying of other necessary TOWN CHARGES. A
law which received the royal approbation, almost a century agone.

Will any now say, that the moneys appointed to be paid to the East India house
come within the words of " necessary town charges"? When did the town contract
the debt, or how are they subject to the payment of it? Had the Parliament seen
sit to enact, that moneys requisite to satisfy the India merchants, should be
so considered; two questions (not of quick decision) might then have arisen;
the one touching the validity and obligatory force of the statute; the other,
whether it would then come within the intent and design of the Province law.
For past doubt, our Provincial legislators had no such charge (as the one here
supposed) in view, when they made the law of Wm. and Mary; and in this way
therefore the matter could not be brought within it is provision. Parliament
must then make a new act to enable and empower Boston to pay the India company,
before the town can comply with the terms of relief of their trade. In the mean
while, what is to be the situation of Boston and the inhabitants of the globe
with whom they have such extensive connections? -- But, it is very apparent,
that the Parliament have not as yet enacted the payment of this satisfaction as
a town charge. They have only placed it in the option of the town to make that
payment, or submit to the consequences. That payment, we affirm, they cannot
pay, without breach of the law of the land. -- New and unheard of therefore is
the state of this people. They must sustain the severest afflictions, they must
stand the issue of distracting remedies -- or -- violate one of the most known
and practiced laws of the land! -- Let us search the history of the world; --
let us inspect the records of a Spanish inquisition; let us enter the recesses
of an Ottoman court; -- nay, let us traverse the regions of romance and fable
-- where shall we find a parallel?

When the Hungarians were called REBELS first, they were called so for no other
reason than this (says the elegant Ld. Bolingbroke) that they would not be
SLAVES. But for BRITONS, when they would not venture to call their CHILDREN,
rebels, that they should treat them as worse than REBELS, was reserved to
distinguish an age of vaunted light, humanity and knowledge -- the Era of a
King, who prides himself as born and bred a Briton!

To complain of the enormities of power, to expostulate with overgrown
oppressors, has in all ages been denominated sedition and faction; and to turn
upon tyrants, treason and rebellion. But tyrants are rebels against the first
laws of Heaven and Society: -- to oppose their ravages is an instinct of nature
-- the inspiration of GOD in the heart of man. In the noble resistance which
mankind make to exorbitant ambition and power, they always feel that divine
afflatus, which, paramount every thing human, causes them to consider the LORD
OF HOSTS as their leader, and his angels as fellow soldiers: -- trumpets are to
them joyful founds, and the ensigns of war, the banners of GOD; -- their wounds
are bound up in the oil of a good cause, and their blood flows into the veins
of a Savior; sudden death is to them present martyrdom, and funeral obsequies
resurrections to eternal honor and glory: -- their widows and babes, being
received into the arms of a compassionate GOD, and their names enrolled among
DAVID'S WORTHIESS -- greatest losses are to them greatest gains; for they leave
the troubles of their warfare to lie down on beds of eternal rest and felicity.

There are other parts of the act now before us, which merit notice:
particularly that, relative to the prosecution of suits in the ordinary courts
of law, "for any thing done in pursuance of the act"; by which the defendant is
enable to plead the general issue, and give the act, and the general matter, in
evidence: whereupon it follows, that "if it shall appear so to have been done,
the jury SHALL find for the defendant"; who, by an after clause, is to "recover
treble costs". From this passage some have been lead to conclude, that the
appearance of this matter was to be to the Judge; and that if it had that
appearance to him, and he should direct the jury accordingly; however it might
appear to the jury, they must follow the directions of the Judge, and acquit
the defendant. But this is a construction, which as the words do not
necessarily carry that meaning, I will not permit myself to suppose the design
of the law. However the late donations of large salaries by the crown, to the
justices of our superior Courts, who are nominated by the Governor, and hold
their commission, durante been placito, have not a little contributed to the
preceding apprehension.

Another passage makes provision for assigning and appointing such and so many
open places, quays and wharfs, within the said harbor, creeks, havens and
islands, for the landing, discharging, lading and shipping of goods, as his
Majesty, his heirs or successors, shall judge necessary and expedient; and also
for appointing such and so many officers of the customs therein, as his Majesty
shall think sit; after which it shall be lawful for any person or persons to
lade or put off from, or to discharge and land upon, such wharfs, quays, and
places, so appointed within the said harbor, AND NONE OTHER, any goods, wares
and merchandise whatsoever. By which the property of many private individuals
is to be rendered useless, and worse than useless; as the possession of a
thing, aggravates the misfortune of those who are deprived of a capacity to
enjoy. But if the property of some few is to be rendered nothing worth, so that
of many others is to be openly invaded: -- But why should we dwell upon private
wrongs, while those of the multitude call for all our attention?

If any should now say -- we are a commercial people -- commercial plans can
only save us. If any think that the ideas of the merchant are at this day to
give spring to our nerves and vigor to our actions; if any say, that empire in
this age of the world, is only founded in commerce: -- let him show me the
people emancipated from oppression by commercial principles and measures: let
him point me, that unexplored land, where trade and slavery flourish together.
Till then, I must hold a different creed; and believe -- that though commercial
views may not be altogether unprofitable; that though commercial plans may do
much, they never can do ALL. With regard then, to how much the merchant, the
artificer, the citizen and the husbandman may do, let us no longer differ. But
let every one apply his strength and abilities to that mighty burden, which
unless removed, must crush US ALL. AMERICANS have one COMMON INTEREST to unite
them; that interest must cement them. Natural allies, they have published to
the world professions of reciprocal esteem and confidence, aid and assistance;
they have pledged their faith of mutual friendship and alliance. Not only
common danger, bondage, and disgrace; but national truth and honor conspire to
make THE COLONISTS resolve -- TO STAND OR FALL TOGETHER.

Americans never were destitute of discernmen they have never been grossly
deficient in virtue a small share of sagacity is now needful to discover^ the
insidious art of our enemies; the smallest spark of virtue will on this
occasion kindle into flame.

Will the little temporary advantage held forth for delusion, seduce them from
their duty^ Will they not evidence at this time, how much they despise the
commercial bribe of a British ministry; and testify to the world that they do
not vail to the most glorious of the ancients, in love of freedom and. sterness
of virtue? But as to THE INHABITANTS OF THIS PROVINCE, how great are the
number, how weighty the considerations to actuate their conduct? Not a town in
this colony, but have breathed the warmest declarations of attachment to their
rights, union in their defense, and perseverance to the end. Should any ONE
maritime town (for more than ONE I will not believe there can be) allured by
the expectations of gain, refuse to lend their aid; -- entertaining the base
idea of building themselves upon the ruins of this metropolis -- and in the
chain of future events, on the destruction of ALL AMERICA, -- what shall we
say? -- hours of bitter reflection will come, when their own feelings shall
excite consideration; when remembrance of the past, and expectation of the
future shall fill up the measure of their sorrow and anguish. -- But I turn
from the idea, which blasts my country with infamy -- my species with disgrace.

The intelligent reader must have noticed, that (...) the whole of the act of
Parliament, there (...) suggestion that the East India company had (...) any
demand for damage done to their property: -- if the company supposed they had
re^^^ted injury, it does not appear whom they consider as guilty, and much
less, that they had alleged any charge against the town of Boston. But I
presume that if that company were entitled to receive a recompense from the
town until they prosecuted their demand they are supposed to wave it. And we
cannot but imagine, that this is the first instance, where Parliament has
ordered one subject to pay a satisfaction to another, when the party aggrieved
did not appear to make his regular claim; and much more uncommon is it, for
such recompense to be ordered without ascertaining the amount to which the
satisfaction shall extend.

But if the East India company were now made easy, and Boston reduced to
perfect silence and humiliation; -- how many "OTHERS" are they, who would
suggest, that they "SUFFERED by the riots and insurrections abovementioned" and
demand " reasonable satisfaction" therefore. -- The singular texture,
uncertainty, looseness and ambiguity of this phrase in the statute seems so
calculated for dispute such an eternal bar to a full compliance with the
requisitions of the act, and of course to render permanent it is evils, that I
cannot speak upon the subject without trespassing upon those bounds of respect
and decency, within the circle of which I have (...) to move.

Here waiving further particular consideration of that subject which gave
origin to this performance; I shall proceed to an equally interesting subject
-- that of STANDING ARMIES and CIVIL SOCIETY.

THE faculty of intelligence may be considered as the first gift of GOD: it is
due exercise is the happiness and honor of man; it is abuse his (...) and
disgrace. The most trifling duty is not properly discharged without the
exertion of this noble faculty; yet how often does it lie dormant, while the
highest concernments are in issue? Believe me (my countrymen) the labor of
examining for ourselves, or great imposition, must be submitted to; there is no
other alternative: and unless we weigh and consider what we examine, little
benefit will result from research. We are at this extraordinary crisis called
to view the most melancholy events of our day: the scene is unpleasant to the
eye, but it is contemplation will be useful; if our thoughts terminate with
judgment, resolution and spirit.

If at this period of public affairs, we do not think, deliberate, and
determine like men -- men of minds to conceive, hearts to feel, and virtue to
act -- what are we to do? -- to gaze upon our bondage? while our enemies throw
about firebrarnds, arrows and death, and play their tricks of desperation with
the gambols of sport and wantonness.

The proper object of society and civil institutions is the advancement of "
the greatest happiness of the greatest number". The people (as a body, being
never interested to injure themselves and uniformly desirous of the general
welfare) have ever made this collective felicity the object of their wishes
and pursuit. But strange, as it may seem, what the many through successive ages
have desired and sought, the few have found means to baffle and defeat. The
necessity of the acquisition has been conspicuous to the rudest mind; but man,
inconsiderate, that, in every society, there is an effort constantly tending to
confer on one part the height of power, and to reduce the other to the extreme
of weakness and misery, Marq: Beccaria.
has abandoned the most important concerns of civil society to the caprice and
control of those, whose elevation caused them to forget their pristine
equality, and whose interest urged them to degrade the best and most useful
below the worst and most unprofitable of the species. The modes of government
which have been imposed on credulous man, have been not only deficient in
producing the just ends of government; viz. the full and impartial security of
the rights of nature; but also, have been rather formidable and dangerous
cabals against the peace, happiness and dignity of society. Macaulay's
observations on Burke's thoughts, etc. Edit. 5. P. 10.
Against this exertion, and the principle which originates it, no vigilance can
be too sharp, no determination too severe.

But alas! -- as if born to delude and be deluled -- to believe whatever is
taught, and bear all that is imposed -- successive impositions, wrongs and
insults awaken neither the sense of injury or spirit of revenge. Fascinations
and enchantments, chains and setters bind in adamant the understanding and
passions of the human race. Ages follow ages, pointing the way to study wisdom
-- but the charm continues.

Sanctified by authority and armed with power, error and usurpation bid
defiance to truth and right, while the bulk of mankind sit gazing at the
monster of their own creation: -- a monster, This (standing army) is a monster,
that will devour all your liberties and properties -- there is a time for all
men to speak, and now, when our liberties are at stake, duty to GOD, our Prince
and country forbid to be silent. Sir John Hotham's speech in Parliament 1673.
Grey's debates 2 vol. page 391.
to which their follies and vices gave origin, and their depravity and
cowardice continue in existence.

" The greatest happiness of the greatest number" being the object and bond of
society, the establishment of truth and justice, ought to be the basis of civil
policy and jurisprudence. But this capital establishment can never be attained
in a state where there exists a power superior to the civil magistrate and
sufficient to control the authority of the laws. Whenever, therefore, the
profession of arms becomes a distinct order in the state, and a standing army
part of the constitution, we are not scrupulous to affirm, that the end of the
social compact is defeated, and the nation called to act upon the grand
question consequent upon such an event.

The people who compose the society (for whose security the labor of it is
institution was performed, and of the toils it is preservation daily sustained)
THE PEOPLE, I say, are the only competent judges of their own welfare, and,
therefore, are the only suitable authority to determine touching the great end
of their subjection and their sacrifices. This position leads us to two others,
not impertinent on this occasion, because of much importance to Amemericans: --

That the legislative body of the commonwealth ought to deliberate, determine
and make their decrees in places where the legislators may easily know from
their own observation the wants and exigences, the sentiments and will, the
good and happiness of the people; and the people as easily know the
deliberations, motives, designs and conduct of their legislators, before their
statutes and ordinances actually go forth and take effect: --

That every member of the legislature ought himself to be so far subject in his
person and property to the laws of the state, as to immediately and effectually
feel every mischief and inconvenience resulting from all and every act of
legislation.

The science of man and society, being the most extended in it is nature, and
the most important in it is consequences of any in the circle of ^^^dition,
ought to be an object of universal attention and study. Was it made so, the
rights of mankind would not remain buried for ages, under systems of civil and
priestly hierarchy, not social fe^^city overwhelmed by lawless domination.

Under appearances the most vencrable and institutious the most revered; under
the sanctity of religion, the dignity of government, and the smiles of
benef^^^nce, do the subtle and ambitious make their first encroachments upon
their species. Watch and oppose ought therefore to be the motto of mankind. A
nation in it is best estate -- guarded by good laws, fraught with public virtue,
and steeled with martial courage -- may resemble Achilles: but Achilles was
wounded in the heel. The least point left unguarded, to foe enters: -- latent
evils are the most dangerous -- for we often receive the mortal wound, while we
are flattered with security.

The experience of all ages shows that mankind are inattentive to the
calamities of other careless of admonition, and with difficulty roused to repel
the most injurious invasions. I perceive (said the great patriot Cicero to his
countrymen) an inclination for tyranny in all Caesar projects and executes.
Plut. Life of Caesar.
Notwithstanding this friendly caution, not till it was too late did the people
find out, that no beginnings, however small, are to be neglected. Ib.
For that Caesar, who at first attacked the commonwealth with mines very soon
opened his batteries. ^ Ib.
-- Encroachments upon the rights and property of the citizen are like the
rollings of mighty waters over the breach of ancient mounds: slow and
unalarming at the beginning; rapid and terrible in the current; a deluge and
devastation at the end. -- Behold the oak, which stretches itself to the
mountains, and overshadows the valleys, was once an acorn in the bowels of the
earth: -- Slavery (my friends) which was yesterday engrafted among you, already
overspreads the land, extending its arms to the ocean, and it is limbs to the
rivers. -- Unclean and voracious animals under it is covert, find protection and
food, -- but the shade blasteth the green herb, and the root thereof poisoneth
the dry ground, while the winds which wave its branches scatter pestilence and
death.

Regular government is necessary to the preservation of private property and
personal security. Without these, men will descend into barbarism, or at best
become adepts in humiliation and servility; but they will never make a progress
in literature or the useful arts. Surely a proficiency in arts and sciences is
of some value to mankind, and deserves some consideration. -- What regular
government can America enjoy with a legislative a thousand leagues distant,
unacquainted with her exigencies, militant in interest, and unfeeling of her
calamities,? What protection of property -- when ministers under this authority
shall overrun the land with mercenary legions? What personal safety when a
British administration -- (such as it now is, and corrupt as it may be) -- pour
armies into the capital and senate house, -- point their artillery against the
tribunal of justice, and plant weapons of death at the posts of our doors? All
this, and much more, has Boston been witness to.


Thus exposed to the power, and insulted by the arms of Britain -- STANDING
ARMIES become an object of serious attention. And as the history of mankind
affords no instance of successful and confirmed tyranny, without the aid of
military forces, we shall not wonder to find them the desiderata of princes,
and the grand object of modern policy. -- What, though they subdue every generous
passion and extinguish every spark of virtue -- all this must be done, before
empires will submit to be exhausted by tribute and plundered with impunity.

Amidst all the devices of man to the prejudice of his species, the institution
of which we treat has proved the most extensively fatal to religion, morals
and social happiness. Founded in the most malevolent dispositions of the human
breast, disguised by the policy of state, supported by the lusts of ambition,
THE SWORD has spread hav^^k and misery throughout the world. By the aid of
mercenary troops, the sinews of war, the property of the subject, the life of
the commonwealth have been committed to the hands of hirelings, whose interest
and very existence, depend on an abuse of their power. In the lower class of
life, STANDING ARMIES have introduced brutal debauchery and real cowardice; in
the higher orders of state, venal haughtiness and extravagant dissipation. In
short whatever are the concommitants of despotism; whatever the appendages of
oppression, this ARMED MONSTER has spawned or nurtured, protected or
established; -- monuments and scourges of the folly and turpitude of man.

Review the armament of modern princes: -- what sentiments actuate the military
body? what characters compose it? Is there a private sentinel of all the
innumerable troops that make so brilliant a figure, who would not for want of
property have been driven from a Roman cohort, when soldiers were the defenders
of liberty? See Roussea^'s Social Comp. 202.


Booty and blind submission is the science of the camp. When lust, rapacity, or
resentment incite whole battallions proceed to outrage. Do their leaders
command -- obedience must follow. Private soldiers (said Tiberius Grac^hus from
the Roman rostrum) fight and die to advance the wealth and luxury of the great.
Plut. Life Tib. Grac.
"Soldiers (said an eminent Puritan in his sermon preached in this country more
than 130 years ago) are commonly men who fight themselves fearlessly into the
mouth of hell for revenge, a booty, or a little revenue: -- a cay of battle is
a day of harvest for the devil". Soldiers, like men, are much the same in every
age and country.

Heroes are much the same, the point's agreed,
From Macedonia's madman to the Sweed.
What will they not fight for -- whom will they not fight against? -- Are these
men, who take up arms with a view to defend their country and its laws? Do the
ideas or the feelings of the citizen actuate a British private on entering the
camp? See 1 Ela. Com. p.(...)
Excitements, generous and noble like these are f^r from being the stimuli of a
modern phalanx. The general of an army, habituated to uncontrouled command,
feels himself absolute: he forgets his superiors, "It is grown a principle
among the army (an ill oursery for young men) that Parliaments are roots of
rebellion. Sir John Hotham in the house of commons 1673. Grey's debates in
Parliament 2 vol. 203.
or rather despises that civil authority, which is destitute of an energy to
compel his obedience. His soldiers (who look up to him as their fovereign, and
to their officers as magistrates) loose the sentiments of the citizen and
contemn the laws. Thus a will and a power to tyranize become united; and the
effects are as inevitable and fatal in the political, as the moral world.

The soldiers of Great Britain are by the mutiny act deprived of those legal
rights which belong to the meanest of their fellow subjects, and even to the
vilest malefactor. See 1 vol Lds. Prot. 280. Anno 1717.
Thus divested of those fights and privileges which render Britons the envy of
all other nations, and liable to such hardships and punishments as the limits
and mercy of our known laws utterlly disallow; it may well be thought they are
persons best prepared and most easily tempted to strip others of their rights,
having already lost their own. Ib. 283.
Excluded, therefore, from the enjoyments which others possess, like Eunuchs of
an Eastern seraglio, they envy and hate the rest of the community, and indulge
a malignant pleasure in destroying those privlleges to which they can never be
admitted. Montesq. Sp. Laws, 15. 12. and 1 Bla. Com. 416.
How eminently does modern observation verify that sentiment of Baron
Montesquieu -- a slave living among freemen will soon become a beast. See Sp.
Laws 348, 2 Edit.


A very small knowledge of the human breast, and a little consideration of the
ends for which we form into societies and commonwealths discover the
impropriety and danger of admiting such an order of men to obtain an
establishment in the state: the annals and experience or every age show; that
it is not only absurdity and folly -- distraction and madness. But we in this
region of the earth have not only to dread and struggle with the natural and
common calamities resulting from such military bodies, but the combined dangers
arising from AN ARMY of FOREIGNERS, stationed in the very bowels of the land.
Infatuated Britons have been told -- and as often deceived, that an army of
natives would never oppress their own countrymen. But Caesar and Cromwell, and
an hundred others have enslaved their country with such kind of forces. And who
does not know that subalterns are implicitly obedient to their officers; -- who
when they become obnoxious are easily changed, as armies to serve the purposes
of ambition and power are soon new modelled. But as to America, the armies
which infest her shores, are in every view FOREIGNERS, disconnected with her in
interest, kindred and other social alliances; who have nothing to lose, but
every thing to gain by butchering and oppressing her inhabitants. -- But yet
worse: -- their inroads are to be paliated, their outrages are to receive a
sanction and defense from a Parliament whose claims and decrees are as
unrighteous, as the Administration is corrupt; -- as boundless as their
ambition, and as terrible as their power. The usurpation and tyranny of the
Decemvi^i of Rome are represented as singularly odious and oppressive: but
eventhey never assumed what Britain in the face of all mankind has avowed and
exercised over the Colonies: -- the power of passing aws merely on her own
authority. Nothing that we propose (said they to the people) can pass into a
law without your consent. Be yourselves, ye romans, the authors of those LAWS
ON WHICH YOUR HAPPINESS DEPENDS.

The dominion of all great empires degrades and debases the human species. See
1 Dr. Robertson's hift. Charl 5. P. 3.
The dominion of Britain is that of a mighty empire. Her laws waste our
substance, her placemen corrupt our morals, and her armies are to break our
spirits. -- Yes, are they not to do more? To spoil, to slaughter and to commit
every kind of violence; and then to call the manaeuvre by a lying name --
GOVERNMENT; and when they have spread a general devastation, call it PEACE.
Part of a noble speech recorded by Tacitus (vita Agrie:) of an old Briton to
his followers, exciting them to free their country, them a Province of Rome,
from the yoke of bondage.
In the barbarous Massacres of France, in the 16th century, the very hangmen
refused obedience to the cruel mandates of the French monarch, saying they were
legal officers, and only executed those the laws condemned. Yet history hears
testimony that the soldiers performed the office which the hangman refused. See
the life of Theod. Arip. D'Aubigne. p. 38.
Who then can be at a loss for the views of those who were so fond of
introducing and tenacious of obtaining similar peace-officers in this obnoxious
capital? Whoever wants information of the spirit, cruelty and rapine of
soldiers quartered in popular cities, let them peruse the first book of the
ele^ant and instructive history, written by the masterly hand of Tacitus,
But let all such -- yes, let Great Britain consider the nature of mankind: let
her examine carefully the history of past events, and attend to the voice of
experience.

In the same age we have just mentioned, the Low Countries, then subject to the
crown of Spain, being persecuted by the court and church of that kingdom rose
up to resist their oppreslors. Upon which, in the year 1567, the Duke of Alva
was sent, and entered the country with a well-appointed army, ten thousand
strong; in order to quell and punish the insurgents. Terrisied with these
martial operations, the towns suffered the open breach of their charters, and
the people submitted to the most humiliating infraction of their liberties;
while Alva, being invested with the government, erected the court of twelve,
called the council of blood, and caused great numbers to be condemned and
executed on account of the insurrections. Universal complaints insued on this
disuse of the ordinary courts of law and the introduction of the army: but
complaints were in vain, and all murmurs despised. The people became enraged;
but without a leader, they were overawed. "The army (says Sir William Temple)
was fierce and brave, and desirous of nothing so much as a rebellion of the
country." All was seizure and process, confiscation and imprisonment, blood and
horror, insolence and dejection, punishments executed and meditated revenge.
But though the multitude threatened vengeance, the threats of a broken and
unarmed people excited contempt and not fear. Alva redoubled his impositions
and ravages, his edicts were published for raising moneys without the consent
of the state, and his soldiers were called to levy the exactions by force. --
But the event showed, that the timidity and tameness of mankind, like every
thing human, will have a period. The patience of the miserable sufferers came
to an end; and those commotions began which deluged great part of Europe with
blood, and finally freed THE UNITED PROVINCES from the yoke of Spain and the
inquisition. -- What conflicts too sharp -- what horrors too dreadful to endure
for such a happy deliverance -- such a glorious issue? Thus "the first period
of the low country troubles (says the same ingenious writer) proved to king
Philip (of Spain) a ^ear experience, how little the boldest armies and best
conduct are able to withstand the torrent of a stubborn and enraged people,
which ever bears all down before it, till it be divided into different channels
by arts, or by chance; or till the springs, which are the humors that fed it,
come to be spent, or dry up of themselves." See Temple's obs. upon the united
Provinces p. (...). 17. 19.


During several centuries, history informs us, that no monarch in Europe was
either so bold, or so powerful as to venture on any steps toward the
introduction of regular troops. At last, Charles the 7th of France, seizing a
favorable opportunity in 1445, executed that which his predecessors durst not
attempt, and established the first standing army known in Europe. Lewis the
11th, son, and successor of Charles, finding himself at the head of his
father's forces, was naturally excited to extend the limits of his ancestors,
in the levies of money and men. Charles had not been able to raise upon his
subjects two millions, but the army he left his successor enabled him to levy
near five, The father established an army of about seventeen hundred, which he
kept in good order and placed for the defense of the realm; but this army,
though thus disciplined and stationed, enabled the son to maintain in continual
pay a terrible band of men of arms, which gave the realm (says the Historian
Phillip de Commines) a cruel wound of which it bled many years. Sixth Book of
the (...). of Ph: De Commines p. 206. London Edit. 1614.
How regular, correspondent and uniform are the rise and progression of
military calamities in all ages! How replete with instruction -- how full of
admonition are the memorials of distant times -- especially when contracted
into the view, and held up in comparison with the present.

Charles and Lewis having set the example, all the neighboring crowned heads
soon followed, and mercenary troops were introduced into all the considerable
kingdoms of the continent. They gradually became the only military force that
was employed or trusted. It has long been (says the learned Dr. Robertson) the
chief object of policy to increase and support them, and the great aim of
Princes or ministers to discredit and to annibilate all other means of national
activity or defense. Hist. Charl. 5. 1 vol. p. 95. See also 2 McCaulay's Hist,
of England p. 165. Sir John Phillip's Speech in the British house of Commons,
1744. Debates of the Commons 2 vol p. 61.
Who will wonder at this, who reflect, that absolute monarchies are
established, and can only be supported by mercenary forces? Who can be
surprised, that princes and their subalterns discourage a martial spirit among
the people, and endeavor to render useless and contemptible the militia, when
this institution is the natural strength, and only stable safeguard, of a free
country? Our trained bands are the truest and most proper strength of a free
nation. Eikenokla^^es of John Milton.
Without it, it is folly to think any free government will ever have security
and stability. Hume 278.
A standing army in quarters will grow effeminate and dissolute; while a
militia, uniformly exercised with hard labor, are naturally firm and robust.
Thus an army in peace is worse than a militia; and in war, a militia will soon
become disciplined and martial. But when the sword is in the hands of a single
person -- as in our constitution -- be will always (says the ingenious Hume)
neglect to discipline the militia, Of a like opinion was Sir Thomas Lee in
Charles the 2d's reign. See Grey's debates 2 vol. 391. In order to discourage
the train bands in Charles the first's time, the court found means to enhance
the price of powder; and it was accordinly complained of in Parliament as "a
great grievance" See Rush. Coll. vol. 1 p. 33. -- Let us not be surprised, if
any like artifice should be practiced in our day.
in order to have a pretext for keeping up a standing army. IT IS EVIDENT, (says
the same great character) that this is a mortal distemper in the BRITISH
government; of which it must at last inevitably perish. Hume 279.
What a deformed monster is a standing army in a free nation? Free, did I say?
what people are truly free, whose monarch has a numerous body of armed
mercenaries at his heels? who is already absolute in his power -- or by the
breath of his nostrils may in an instant make himself so?

No free government was ever founded or ever preserved it is liberty without
uniting the characters of citizen and soldier in those destined for defense of
the state. The sword should never be in the hands of any, but those who have an
interest in the safety of the community, who fight for their religion and their
offspring; -- and repel invaders that they may return to their private affairs
and the enjoyment of freedom and good order. Such are a well regulated militia
composed of the freeholders, citizen and husbandman, who take up arms to
preserve their property as individuals, and their rights as freemen Such is the
policy of a truly wise nation, and such was the wisdom of the ancient Britons.
The primitive constitution of a state in a few centuries falls to decay: --
errors and corruptions creep gradually into the administration of government --
'till posterity forget or disregard the institutions of their remote ancestors.
In ancient time, THE MILITIA of England was raised officered and conducted by
common consent. It Is militia was the ornament of the realm in peace and for
ages continued the only and sure defense in war. Was the king himself general
of an army -- it was by the consent of his people. Thus when the Romans visited
the island of Britain, Caffibelan was the Prince and chief commander in war;
but it was by the election of the great Common Council, Summa belli (says
Caesar) COMMUNI CONCILIO, Cassibelano traditur. Nor will this seem strange,
when we consider that it was the first state maxim with the Druids ne loqui de
republica, nisi per conci^ium -- not even to speak upon a matter of state but
in council. Nor is it to be wondered that such politicians informed Caesar,
that they had been so long accustomed to liberty, that they knew not the
meaning of tribute and slavery; and sent him word, that they had as good blood
as he, and from the same fountain. Surely a message that was received by a
Roman, may be sent to a British Caesar. These were those v^nerable Druids, who
had inspired the Gauls, of whom Caesar reports this memorable boast; We can
call or appeal to such a Great Common Council, as all the world cannot resist.
Tacitus, speaking of our Saxon ancestors, relates, Reges ex nobilitate, Duces
ex virtute in iisdem conciliis eliguntur. The great council, or the parliament
of the state, had, not only the appointment of the principes militia, but the
conduct of all military forces, from the first erection of the standard to it is
lodgment in the Citidel; for as the same noble writer informs, it was their
general custom -- not to entrust any man with the bearing of arms, antequam
CIVITAS suffecturum prob^verit. Such was the security of the people from the
calamities of a standing army: -- happy indeed if their successors could boast
a similar provision. -- Britain would not now be groaning under oppression --
nor her distant children struggling for their freedom.

A spirited nation thus embodied in a well disciplined militia will soon become
warlike, and such a people more fitted for action than debate, always hasten to
a conclusion on the subject of grievances and public wrongs, and bring their
deliberations to the shortest issue. With them it is the work of but one day,
to examine and resolve the nice question, concerning the behavior of subjects
toward a ruler who abuses his power. See (...) Robertson's Hist. of Scotland.
1 vol. p. 204,5.


Artful dissemblings and plausible pretenses are always adopted in order to
introduce regular troops. Dyonysius became the tyrant of Syracuse, the most
opulent of all the Grecian cities, by feigning a solicitude for the people and
a fear of his own person. He humbly prayed only a guard for his protection:
they easily granted, what he readily took -- the power of plundering by
military force and entailing his sovereignty by a devise of his sword.
Agathocles, a successor to the Dyonysian family and to the command of the army,
continued the military tyranny, and butchered the enslaved people by centuries.

Cardinal Ximenes, who made the first innovation of this kind in Spain,
disguised the measure under the pious and popular appearance of resisting the
progress of the Infidels. The Nobles saw his views and excited opposition in
the chief towns of the kingdom. But by dexterously using terror and entreaty,
force and forbearance, the refractory cities were brought to compliance. The
nobles thus, driven to desperate resolutions by the Cardinal's military
movements, at a personal interview were warm and intemperate. When the
Arch-prelate insensibly led them toward a balcony from which they had a view
of a large body of troops under arms, and a formidable train^ of artillery.
Behold, says he, pointing to these and raising his voice, the powers which I
have recieved from his Catholic majesty. "With these I govern Castile and with
these I will govern it". Nobles and people discovered it was now too late for
resistance: -- to regret past folly and dread future calamities was the
remaining fate of the wretched Castilians. After the Romans quitted the island
of Britain, the first appearance of a standing army was under Richard the
second. The suppression of his enemies in Ireland calling him out of England,
his subjects, seized the opportunity and dethroned him.

Henry the 7th, a character odious for rapacity and fraud, was the first King
of England who obtained a permanent military band in that kingdom. It was only
2 band of fifty archers: -- with the harmless appellation of Yeomen of the
guards. This apparently trivial institution was a precedent for the greatest
political evil that ever infested the inhabitants of Britain. The ostensible
pretext was the dignity of government -- "the grandeur of majesty": -- See
Rapin.
the alteration of the constitution and an increase of power was the aim of the
prince. An early "oppugnation of the King's authority", though no doubt his
favorite subalterns would have styled it "ILL-TIMED", See the late Gover,
Bernard's Speeches.
had easily effected that disbanding of the new-raised forces, which being a
little while delayed, no subsequent struggles have accomplished. The wisdom of
resistance at the beginning has been repeatedly inculcated, by the wise and
liberal-minded of all nations, and the experience of every age has confirmed
their instruction. But no Precept or example can make the bulk of mankind wise
for themselves. Though cautioned (as we have seen) See before p. 31
against the projects of Caesar, the smiles of his benignity deceived the Roman
Commonwealth, till the increase of his power bid defiance to opposition.
Celebrated for his generosity and magnificence, his complacency and compassion,
See Sallust.
the complaisant courtier made his way into the hearts of his countrymen. They
would not believe, though admonished by the best of men and first of patriots, M
T Cic^ro. See Plut. Life of Caesar.
that the smiling Caesar would filch away their liberties, that a native --
born and bred a Roman -- would enslave his country -- the land of his fathers
-- the land of his birth -- the land of his posterity. A similar infatuation
has, oftener than once, prevailed in this Province: an instance of which we
have in the time of Governor Dudley. This Gentleman after he had been agent for
the Country, tacked about, and joined with the instruments that overthrew the
charter, and accepted an illegal and arbitrary Commission from King James, by
which he held the Government, until the arrival of Sir Edmund Andross; and then
was, (as president of the Council, and Chief Judge of the territory,) a chief
tool of all the ensuing, barbarous and infamous administration. After his
appointment to the Government, his conduct was of the same texture with his
former life: (it was his Son Paul, who wrote to England, that this Country
would never be worth living in, for lawyers and Gentlemen, till THE CHARTER IS
TAKEN AWAY.) -- yet such was the dulusion at that day, Some of the Council
would firmly believe charitably of him because his family and interest
werehere, and therefore thought it unreasonable to believe he would do any
thing that should hurt his Country. See a Book published in London, about 1708,
entitled The deplorable slate of New England, by reason of a coveteous and
treacherous Governor and pusillanimous Counselors. P. 3 and 9. etc.
But the ambitious Caesar aiming at authority, and Caesar armed and intoxicated
with power, appear in very different characters. He who appeared with the
mildness of a fine gentleman, in his primaeval state, in an advanced station
conducted with the sterness of a tyrant. Opposed by a tribune of the people in
taking money out of the public treasury against the laws, Caesar WITH AN ARMY
AT HIS HEELS, proclaimed "arms and laws do not flourish together." If you are
not pleased, (added the usurper) with what I am about, you have nothing to do
but to withdraw. Indeed war will not bear much liberty of speech. When I say
this I am departing from my own right. For you and all I have found exciting a
spirit of faction Justice was faction in ancient Rome as well as modern
Britain. See Mc Cauley's hist. 405. Montagu's rise and fall of the ancient
Repub. 275.
against me are at my disposal. Saying this, he approached the doors of the
treasury, as the keys were not produced, he sent his workmen to break them
open. Plut. Life of Caesar.
This is the complaisant Caesar -- renowned for his amiable qualities: by his
easy address he deceived and by his arts inslaved his countrymen -- and
prepared the way for a succeeding Nero to spoil and slaughter them. -- Singular
and very remarkable have been the interpositions of Providence in favor of
New England: -- the permission of an early carnage in our streets,
peradventure, was to awaken us from the danger; -- of being politely beguiled
into security and fraudfully drawn into bondage: -- a state that sooner or
later ends in rapine and blood; -- Shall we be too enthusiastic, if we
attribute to the Divine influence, that unexpected good which hat^ so often in
our day been brought out of premeditated evil? Few, comparatively, of the many
mischiefs aimed against us, but what have terminated in some advantage, or are
now verging to some happy issue. -- If the dexterity of veteran troops have not
excited envy, if their outrage has not provoked revenge, their military
discipline has set a well-timed example, and their savage fury been a
well-improved incentive. The lusts of an enemy may touch a sensibility of mind
and his very pride pique the virtue of the heart.

Fleets which appeared formidable, and armies which threatened destruction have
either vapoured away with empty parade, or executed their mischievous designs
with rashness and folly. To compensate the insult and repair the injury,
Providence has caused these armaments to scatter much wealth and diffuse
abroad a martial passion: -- a passion, which has proved so contagious, that
our MILITIA are advanced a century, at least, in discipline and improvements.
Where are the people who can compose a militia of better men, more expert in
the use of arms, and the conduct of the field, than we can now call forth into
action? A militia who a few years ago, knew near as much of the science of
Algebra, as of the art military. Thus hostile invasions have roused among us
the GENIUS of War: -- that Genius, which under GOD, will conduct us with safety
and honor -- with triumph and glory.

Surely we may say of our adversaries; -- in the net, which they hid, is their
own foot taken, and they are snared in the wickedness of their own hands. --
Our enemies the last ten years, have been employed to weave a spiders web and
hatch the eggs of a Cocatrice: -- consuming their own bowels by what they have
weaved; and destroyed by what they have brought forth. -- Thus Goliath is killed
with his own sword, Haman hanged upon his own gallows. Thus also the Bishop of
Verdun, who was the modern contriver of a new species of State-prison (for
which, many have cursed him) was by the righteous dispensation of providence,
first put into it himself and confined "in the cruel prison" fourteen years.
Phil: De Com. Hist. p. 216.
Mavelous were the doings of GOD in the eyes of our fathers; -- nor less
astonishing are his works in the days of their progeny. It was an observation
applied by the first settlers of New England to their great consolation, that
when wicked men are nearest their hopes, godly men are furthest from their
fears, because the insolence and cowardice of the wicked usually engage GOD to
defeat their design.


Charles the 2d. told his Parliament, their jealousy, that the forces he had
raised were designed to control law and property, was weak and frivolous
Speech to both Houses February 1672. ^and 7 Grey's Deb. in Parliat. p. 26.
The cajolement took for a season, but his subjects having been abused by
repeated violations of his most solemn vows, at last rouzed from their
lethargy; and the King began to dread the severity of their vengeance. He
therefore kept up a standing army, not only against law, but the repeated
resolutions of every Parliament of his reign. He found that corruption without
force could not confirm him a tyrant, and therefore cherished and augmented his
troops to the destruction of his people and the terror of his senators. " There
go our masters" Johnson's Works, p. 312.
Was a common saying among the members of Parliament, "No law can restrain
these people; houses are taken from us, our lives are in danger" (said one
member in Parliament.) Without betraying our trust, (said Russel) we must vote
these standing forces a grievance. There are designs, about the King, to ruin
religion and property. Public business is the least of their concern. A few
upstart people, making hay while the sun shines, set up an army to establish
their interest: I would have care taken for the future, that no army be raised
for a cabal-interest. A Gentleman said the last session, that this war was made
rather for the army, than the army for the war. This government, with a
standing army, can NEVER BE SAFE: We cannot be secure in this house; and some
of us may have our heads taken off. Grey's Debates, 2 vol. p. 219. 393.


Patriots harrangued in vain -- the Commons voted the Keeping up the army
illegal and a grieveance -- but while they thus did, they openly betrayed a
dread of that army. I would not give an alarm to those who have arms in their
hands said one member; "I cannot but observe that the House of Commons is now
in fear of the army", said another. 7 Grey's Debates, in Parl. p. 71, 2, 3.
Plain as it was for what end the army was kept up, the people slumbered.

The exigences of the times called for something more than votes and
paper-resolutions. What was the consequence of this national cowardice and
inactivity? "England saw herself engaged in the expense of 600,000 Pounds
sterling, to pay an army and fleet, which certainly (says Rapin) had not been
prepared TO make war with France OR FOR THE SECURITY OF ENGLAND". -- Spirited
resolves may please the ear; senatorial eloquence may charm the eye, but these
are not the weapons with which to combat standing armies: these was not those,
which freed this Capital from stationed regiments; -- they are not those, which
will ultimately -- But I forbear: time will unfold, what I may not foretell.

The British Court, never destitute of plausibilities to deceive, or inventions
to enthrall the nation, appropriated moneys, raised by Parliament for the
purpose of disbanding the army, to their continuance, See. King's Speech
October 1678.
and uniformly pursued similar measures, till in the year 1684, "the King in
order to make his people sensible of their new slavery, affected to muster his
troops, which amounted to 4000 wellarmed and disciplined." Rapin.
If Rapin denominated so small an armament, the slavery of the subject under
Charles the 2d: -- what would he call the state of Britons under George the
third? With 4000 troops the kingdom it seems was reduced to servitude: but the
spirit of the nation soon after rose. In 1685 complaint was made in Parliament,
"that the country was weary of the oppression, and plunder of the soldiers";
the army (it was said) debauched the manners of all the people, their wives,
daughters and servants. 8 vol. Grey's Debates 36^,6.
The grievance became intolerable -- and what was happy, it was not too mighty
for opposition. James the second, had only 14, or 15,000 troops, -- and no riot
act. The barbarities of a Kirk, and the campaign of a Jefferies, could not pass
with impunity. THE REVOLUTION succeeded and James abdicated his throne. -- Such
was the fate of one, who vainly affected to play the despot with about fifteen
regiments: had be been encircled with an hundred, no doubt, he had reigned an
applauded tyrant -- flattered in his day, with that lying appellation -- "the
wisest and the best of Kings." Patriae Patri, Regum optimo was part of an
inscription on the marble statue erected to Charles the second, as worthless
and odious a Prince as any in the history of England. See Rapin 734. Fol. Edit.
-- Even Richard (the third) generally represented, both as a monster in person
and disposition, has however had panegvrists who affirm, that he was
remarkably genteel, and the best of Kings. See Barrington's Obs. on the more
ancient statutes. p. 392,3. Thus that insolent tyrant, Hen. 8th. who disgraced
his species by repeated violations of his most solemn vows and the practice of
open debau^^ery and riot; a despot, who, lost to the common feelings of
humanity made his laws more bloody than those of Draco or Diony^ius, and caused
a greater number of executions, than any other King of England, is
characterized on the Journals of the house of Lords, as a Prince of wondrous
goodness and wisdom. See the same Observations 461, 2 and 472. Surely He who
calls the REIGNING MONARCH. " the wisest and best of Kings" ought always to be
suspected of burlesque and sarcasm, or something worse.


The army of the present king of great Britain is larger than that with which
Alexander subdued the East, or Caesar conquered Gaul. If the army, we now keep
up (said Sr. John Phillips 30 Years ago, in the House of Commons) should once
be as much attached to the Crown as Julius Caesar's army was to him, I should
be glad to know where we could find a force superior to that army. See 2 vol.
Debates in the ^ouse of Commons. p. 56,7,8.
Is there no such attachment now existing? By a numerous army and a severe riot
act, you may indeed prevent mobs and riots among the people; but if this method
be pursued for a long time, you will make your ministers tyrants and your
people slaves. Sir John Bernard's speech in the British house of Commons, 1744
2 vol. Debat. p. 118. Qu. If this method has not been thus pursued? and Qu.
Whether the prophecy is fulfilling, or already accomplished in Great Britain?
Surely the liberties of England, if not held at will, are holden by a very
precarious tenure.

The supreme power is ever possessed by those who have arms in their hands and
are disciplined to the use of them. When the Archives conscious of a good title
disputed with Lysander about boundaries, the Lacedemonian showed his sword, and
vauntingly cried out he that is master of this can best plead about boundaries.
Plu. Life of Lysander
The Marmotines of Messina declined appearance at the tribunal of Pompey, to
acknowledge his jurisdiction, alleging in excuse, ancient privileges, granted
them by the Romans -- Will you never have done (exclaimed Pompey) with citing
laws and privileges to men who wear swords. Plu. Life of (...)
What boundaries will they set to their passions, who have no limits to their
power? Unlimited oppression and wantoness are the never-failing attendants of
unbounded authority. Such power a veteran army always acquire, and being able
to riot in mischief with impunity, they always do it with licentiousness.

Regular soldiers, embodied for the purpose of originating oppression or
extending dominion, ever compass the control of the Magistrate. The same force
which preserves a despotism immutable, may change the despot every day. Power
is soon felt by those who possess it, and they who can command will never
servilely obey. The leaders of the army, having become masters of the person of
their Sovereign, degrade or exalt him at will. Whoever uses a (...) army (says
the great Ld. Chancellor Bacon) though he may spread his feath^^^ for a time, he
will mew them soon after; and raise them with what design you please, ye^, like
the West India dogs, in Boccaline, in a little time, they will certainly turn
sheep-biters.
Obvious as these truths may seem, and confirmed as they are by all history,
See Dr. Sullivan's lectures on the laws of England. p. 56.
yet a weak or wicked Prince is easily persuaded, by the creatures who surround
him to act the tyrant. A character so odious to subjects, must necessarily be
timid and jealous. Afraid of the wise and good, he must support his dignity by
the assistance of the worthless and wicked. Standing armies are therefore
raised by the infatuated Prince No sooner established, than the defenseless
multitude are their first prey. Mere power is wanton and cruel: the army grow
licentious and the people grow desperate. Dreadful alternative to the
infatuated monarch! In constant j^opardy of losing the regalia of empire, till
the caprice of an armed B^nditti degrade him from sovereignty, Sir Robert
Atkins (afterward Ld. Chapter Justice of the Common Pleas in England) said in
Parliament, (anno 1667.) -- Six Emperors in five years had their heads tumbled
down by a military government. Grey's debates in Parl, 1 vol. p. 23.
or the enraged people wreak an indiscriminate and righteous vengeance. Alas!
when will Kings learn wisdom, and mighty men have understanding?

A further review of the progress of armies in our parent-state will be a
useful, though not a pleasant employ. No particular reason or occasion was so
much as suggested in the bill which passed the Parliament in 1717, for keeping
on foot a standing army of 30,000 men in time of peace: (a number since
amazingly increased.) An act justly recorded in the Lord's Journal to be a
precedent for keeping the same army at all times, and which the protest of that
day foretold MUST INEVITABLY subvert the ancient constitution of the realm, and
subject the subjects to arbitrary power. See Ld's Protest. 273. vol. 3.
To borrow the pointed turn of a modern orator -- what was once prophecy, is
now history.

The powers given by the mutiny act which is now constantly passed every year
was repeatedly in former times opposed and condemned by Parliament as repugnant
to MAGNA-CHARTA, and inconsistent with the fundamental rights and liberties of
a free people. See same Book p. 279
In this statute no provision is made for securing the obedience of the
military to the civil power, on which the preservation of our constitution
depends. A great number of armed men governed by martial law, A law unknown to
our constitution, destructive of our liberties, not endured by our ancestors,
and never mentioned in any of our statutes, but in order to condemn it, 2 vol.
Lord's Prot. 283.
having it in their power, are naturally inclined not only to disobey, but to
insult the civil Magistrate: Very notable instances of this have been seen in
this Province -- which will be recorded to the eternal infamy of those who
brooked the insult.
The experience of what has happened in England, as well as the memorials of
all ages and nations have made it sufficiently apparent, that wherever an
effectual provision is not made to secure the obedience of soldiers to the laws
of their country, the military has constantly subverted and swallowed up the
civil power. -- What provision of this ^ind can the several Continental
legislatures make against British troops stationed in the Colonies? Nay, if the
virtue of one branch of government attempted the salutary measure, would the
first branch ever give it is consent? A Governor must -- he will obey his
master: the alternative is obvious. The armies quartered among us must be
removed, or they will in the end overturn and trample on all that we ought to
hold valuable and sacred.

We have authority, to affirm, that the regular forces of Great Britain consist
of a greater number than are necessary for the guard of the King's person and
the defense of government, and therefore dangerous to the constitution of the
kingdom. What then do these armaments, when established here, threaten to our
laws and liberties? Well might the illustrious members of the house (...)
Peers, In 1722, hold forth the danger of a total alteration of the frame of our
constitution from a legal and limited monarchy to a despotick: and declare,
they were induced to be of this judgment, as well from the nature of armies,
and the inconsistency of great military power and martial law with civil
authority, as from the known and universal experience of other countries in
Europe, which, by the influence and power of standing armies, in time of peace,
have from limited monarchies, like ours, been changed into absolute. See 1 vol.
Lord's Prot. 377,8
The taxes necessary to maintain a standing army, ^rain and impoverish the
land. Thus exhausted by tribute, the people gradually become spiritless, and
fall an easy sacrifice to the reigning power.

Spirits, like Britons, naturally fierce and independent are not easily awed or
suddenly vanquished by the sword. Hence an augmentation of forces has been
pushed, when there was no design of bringing them into action against
Englishmen in an open field. New forces have oftener than once been raised in
England more for civil than military service; and as elections for a new
parliament have approached, this door has been opened to introduce a large body
of commissioned Pensioners. See 2 vol. Ld's Protest. p. 162.
What has been the consequence? A constant majority of placemen meeting under
the name of a Parliament, to establish grievances instead of redressing them --
to approve implicitly the measures of a court without information -- to support
and screen ministers they ought to control or punish -- to grant money without
right and expend it without discretion? Have these been the baneful
consequences? Are these solemn truths? Alas! we tremble to think: -- but we may
venture to say, that when this is true of that legislative authority, which not
only claims, (but exercises) full power and authority to make laws and statutes
to bind the colonies and people of America IN ALL CASES whatsoever; See the
declarative act of the British Parliament Anno 1766. From that period (Sir
Robert Walpole's day) to the present time (1762) has proved a very remarkable
one in the history of the British constitution: -- no one instance can be
produced in which the royal business has been retarded, through the
scrupulousness of the people's representatives. Political essays concerning the
present state of the British Empire. From the revolution to this day (1762) the
measures of the crown have UNIVERSALLY been the measures of Parliament. Ib. p.
46.
-- the FORMS of our constitution, creating a fatal delusion, will become our
greatest grievance.

The FORMALITIES of a free and the ends of a despotic state have often
subsisted together. Thus deceived was the Republic of Rome: -- Officers and
Magistrates retained their old names: -- the FORMS of the ancient government
being kept up, the fundamental laws of the Commonwealth were violated with
impunity, and it is once free constitution utterly annihilated. See hereafter.
He who gave Augustus Caesar the advice that to the officers of state the same
names, pomp and ornaments, should be continued, with all the appearances of
authority, without the power, Eadem Magistratum vocabula, sua consulibus, sua
praetoribus species.
discovered an intimate acquaintance with mankind. The advice was followed, and
Caesar soon became Senate, magistracy and laws. Is not Britain to America, what
Caesar was to Rome?

It is curious to observe the various acts of imposition, which are alternately
practiced by the great and subtle of this world on their subordinate and
simple-minded brethren. Are a people free, new oppressions are introduced or
shrouded under old names; -- are they in present bondage, and begin to grow
turbulent; new appellations must be adopted to disguise old burdens. A notable
instance of this latter kind we find in the Parliament of Great Britain, (in 36
Edw: 3 ch: 2) upwards of four hundred years ago. The royal prerogative, called
purveyance, having been in vain regulated by many preceding statutes, still
continued so intolerably grievous, that fresh murmurs and complaints called for
a more adequate or better adapted provision. The British legislature, for this
valuable purpose, therefore passed this very remarkable law; which by way of
remedy, enacted as follows, viz. -- "That the hateful NAME of purveyor, shall
be changed into that of Acator." Thus the nation were to be made to believe,
that the oppression ceased, because, the name was altered. -- For the honor of
government, as well as mankind, it is devoutly to be wished, that our laws and
history contained no other record of such disgraceful practices. -- If any
late acts of the British parliament carry strong marks of a similar policy, it
is surely, not altogether unworthy the consideration of the members of that
august body; -- how far, such disingenuous practices are consistant with the
honor of their private characters, or the dignity of their public station.

The magic of sounds and appellations has not ceased, and they work as much
deception and abuse as ever. What valuable purpose does a wholly subordinate
legislative serve, (except to amuse with the shadow, while the substance is
departed) if a remote state may legislate for and bind us " in all cases" ^ To
what end does an American house of Representatives go through the forms of
granting away moneys, if another power, full as familiar with our pockets, may
annihilate all they do; and afterward, with a modern dexterity, take
possession of our purses without ceremony, and dispose of the contents without
modesty; -- without control, and without account? If the king could at
pleasure levy the necessary sums of money (for the expenses of government etc.)
he being sole Judge of the necessity, both as to measure and quantity, as
Charles the first claimed, in the case of ship money, the state of the subjects
would be precarious, and the king would be as absolute a monarch as the present
king of France or Spain. Dr. Sullivan's lectures on the laws of England 189.
What is it to America, whether the King or the Parliament of Great- Britain, or
any other body natural or political is absolute master ^ver her^ -- and where
is the difference between French, Spanish, and English Dragooning? -- In the
reign of Charles the 2d. a wooden shoe, such as the Peasants wear, in France,
was laid near the chair of the Speaker of the Commons-house: -- the arms of
England drawn at one end of it, and those of France at the other, with these
words in the interval, utrum horum mavis accipe, 2 Grey's debates, 223..


It is curious and instructive to attend the course of debate in the British
Commons for keeping up the army. At first even the highest courtiers would
argue -- that a standing army, in time of peace, was never attempted; See Sir.
Robert Carr's Harangue in Parliament: 1673. Grey's debates, 2 vol 220.
Soon after the Court-speakers urged for continuance of a numerous army for one
year longer. At the end of several years after, the Gentlemen throw aside the
mask, and boldly declare such a number of troops must always be kept up. In
short, the army must be continued till it becomes part of the constitution, and
in later times members of the house have ventured to harangue for measures,
none would have dared to lisp a few years before. The wise foresaw this, and
the honest foretold it. If we continue the army but a little while longer (said
a celebrated member upwards of forty years ago,) it may be in the power of some
Gentleman to talk in this house Commons of Great Britain.
in terms that will be no way agreeable to the constitution or liberties of our
country. To tell us, that the same number of forces must be always kept up, is
a proposition full-fraught with innumerable evils, and more particularly with
this, that it may make wicked ministers more audacious than otherwise they
would be in projecting and propagating schemes which may be inconsistent with
the liberties, destructive of the trade, and burdensome on the people of this
nation. In countries governed by standing armies, the inclinations of the
people are but little minded, the ministers place their security in the army,
the humors of the army they only consult, with them they divide the spoils,
and the wretched people are plundered by both. -- Who that now reconsider; this
prophetic language, in conjunction with the events of his own time, but will
cry out -- the speaker felt the impulse of inspiration!

Whoever (says the justly celebrated Dr. Blackstone) will attentively consider
the English history may observe, that the flagrant abuse of any power, by the
crown or it is ministers, has always been productive of a struggle, which either
discovers the exercise of that power to be contrary to law, or (if legal)
restrains it for the future. 3 Bla. Com. 135.


The ingenious commentator seems here to have particular reference to periods
prior to the revolution. But will the learned judge say, that, since that era
there have been no flagrant abuses of power by the crown or its ministers? Have
not repeated struggles arose in consequence of such abuses, which did not
terminate in the happy issue so characteristic of Englishmen? Let any one
peruse the journals of parliament, especially those of the house of peers: let
him carefully review the British and American annals, of the present century,
and answer truly to those questions. -- The natural enquiry will be -- whence
then is it -- that such abuses have become so numerous and flagrant, and the
struggles of Britons so unsuccessful? Will not the question receive an ample
solution in the words of the same great lawyer? -- There is a newly acquired
branch of (royal) power; and that not the influence only, but THE FORCE OF A
DISCIPLINED ARMY, paid indeed ultimately by the people, but immediately by the
crown; raised by the crown, officered by the crown, commanded by the crown. 1
Bla. Com. 336,7.


We are told, by the same learned author, that whenever the unconstitutional
oppressions, even of the SOVEREIGN POWER, advance with gigantic strides and
threaten desolation to a state, mankind will not be reasoned out of the
feelings of humanity, nor will sacrifice their liberty by a scrupulous
adherence to those political maxims, which were established to preserve it. 1
Blae. Com. 245.
-- But those who cannot be reasoned out of their feelings, are easily
repressed by the terror of arms from giving tokens of their sensibility; and
states ancient and modern -- (yes Britain will bear me witness!) -- who would
disdain to sacrifice their freedom to political institutions have tremblingly
stood, alooff, while it was dragged to the altar under the banners of a royal
army.

The policy and refinements of men clothed with authority often deceive those
who are subject to it is control; and thus a people are often induced to waive
their rights, and relinquish the barriers of their safety. The fraud, however,
must at last be discovered, and the nation will resume their ancient liberties,
if there be no force sufficient to screen the usurper and defend his
domination. The sword alone is sufficient to subdue that spirit which compells
rulers to their duty, and tyrants to their senses. Hence, then, though a
numerous standing army may not be absolutely requisite to depress a kingdom
into servitude, they are indispensably necessary to confirm an usurpation.

A large army and revenue are not easily and at once forced upon a free people.
By flow degrees and plausible pretenses, as we have seen in England, the end is
accomplished. But when once a numerous body of revenue and military men,
entirely dependant on the crown, are incorporated, they are regardless of any
thing but it is will: and where that will centers and what such power can effect
is a matter of no doubtful disputation.

The present army of a prince is always composed of men of honor, and
integrity, as the reignning monarch is ever the best of kings. In such an army,
it is said, you may trust your liberties with safety: in such a king you may
put your confidence without reserve: -- the good man has not a wish beyond the
happiness of his subjects! Yet let it be remembered, that under the best of
kings, we ought to seize the fleeting opportunity, and provide against the
worst. But admitting that from this rare character -- a wise and good monarch
-- a nation have nothing to fear; -- yet they have every thing to dread from
those who would cloth him with authority, and invest him with powers
incompatible with all political freedom and social security. Galba had the
greatest integrity of heart: but in the court of Galba appeared all the
extortion of Nero's reign: -- and as the rapacity and other excesses of his
ministers were imputed to him, Galba was no less hated, than if he had
committed them himself. Plut. life of Galba. -- See also to the same point
Gord. Dise: on Tacitus, 3 vol. 19 35. 38. 79. A Monarch justly dignified with
the appellation -- "of the wisest and best of kings" -- will surely receive
some advantage by attentively contemplating an instance so (...) with
instruction.
France, Spain, Denmark, and Sweden, in modern times, have felt the baneful
effects of this fatal policy. Though the latter state are said to have this
excellent institution; that the commissions to their military officers all run
quam diu s^ been gesserint: a regulation which ought to be the tenure of all
offices of public trust and may be of singular utility in states which have
incorporated a standing army as part of the constitution of government.

An invasion and conquest by mere strangers and foreigners are neither so
formidable or disgraceful as the establishment of a standing army under color
of the municipal law of the land. Thus Roman armies were more terrible to the
Roman colonies, than an "enemy's army." See Gordon's Disc. on Sallust 6. ss. 3.
p. 128.
Valor has scope for action against an open enemy, but the most precious
liberties of a kingdom are massacred in cold blood by the disciplined
Janissaries of the state, and there is little hope of a general resistance. The
natural inherent right of the conquered is to throw off the yoke, as soon as
they are able; but subjects enslaved by the military forces of their own
sovereign, become spiritless and despondent; and scaffolds and axes, the gibbet
and the halter, too often terrify them from those noble exertions which would
end in their deliverance by a glorious victory or an illustrious death.

Yet in full peace without any just apprehensions of insurrections at home or
invasions from abroad, it was the mischievous policy of the English ministry,
in 1717, to procure an allowance of near double the forces to what had ever
before been established by the sanction of parliament in times of public
tranquillity. Well might many of the nobility of Britain conceive, that as so
many forces were no ways necessary to support, they had reason to fear danger
to the constitution, which way never entirely subverted but by a standing army.
1 vol. Ld's Prot. 282.
The English military bands have since been much augmented; -- and whether this
disgraceful subversion has already taken place, or is still verging to it is
accomplishment, may be resolved, after a further inspection into memorials of
the present age.

More than half a century since, the discerning members of the house of Lords
discovered the tendency of these extraordinary armaments to be no other, than
to overthrow the civil power of the kingdom, and to turn it into a military
government. See 1. vol. Ld's Prot. 315. Anno 1721.
A very short period after this, many of the same noble house, bore open
testimony, that they were justly jealous from the experience of former times,
that the crown itself, as well as the liberties of the people might be found at
the disposal of a standing army at home. See 2. vol. Ld's Prot. 80.


But as if one standing army was not enough to ruin a nation of Englishmen, a
new kind of forces was raised against the Commonwealth. The officers employed
in the customs, excise, in other branches of the revenue, and other parts of
public service compose in effect A SECOND STANDING ARMY in England, and in some
respects are more dangerous, than that body of men properly so called. The
influence which this order have in the elections of members to serve in
parliament, has been too often felt in Great Britain to be denied. And we have
good authority to say, that examples are not hard to find, where the military
forces have withdrawn to create an appearance of a free election, and the
standing CIVIL forces of this kind have been sent to take that freedom away.
See 2 vol.. Ld's Prot. 83.
-- Is a house of commons thus chosen the representative of the people, -- or
of the administration, -- or of a single minister? See same Book and page, the
Reader is desired to read again p. 56 and the note at p. 57: See also hereafter
p. 68


As Lewis, the xith of France, was the first monarch in Europe, who reduced
corruption to a system, so the ^ra of it is establishment in England may be
fixed at the reign of Charles the second. Britain, then for the first time, saw
CORRUPTION, like a destroying angel, walking at noonday. -- Charles pensioned
his Parliament, and by it extinguished not only the spirit of freedom, but the
sentiments of honor and the feelings of shame. Since the age of Charles, the
science of bribery and corruption has made amazing progress. Patriots of the
last century told their countrymen what it threatened -- the Worthies of this
day ought rather to tell what has been effected.

Near fifty years ago, there were more than two hundred persons holding offices
or employments under the crown in the house of commons. See Lrd's Prot. p. 66.
Anno 1729.
Since that time this body like the military (and for the same purposes) have
received very notable additions. -- Is it to be wondered, then, as we verge
nearer to our own times, we should hear the most august assembly in the kingdom
declaring to the whole world that the influence of the crown is almost
irresistible, being already overgrown and yet increasing. See Ld's Prot. 8 Feb.
1760. (...) to (...) Prot. p. 9.
-- that the most valuable rights of the nation are subverted by arbitrary and
illegal proceedings: -- See same book p. 12. Jan. 1772.
that a flagrant usurpation (is made upon the subject) as highly repugnant to
every principle of the constitution, AS THE CLAIM OF SHIP MONEY BY KING CHARLES
THE FIRST, or that of the dispensing power by king James the second.? Same book
p. 22,3. Feb. 1770.
Finally, considering all that we have seen in the course of our review, could
any thing else be expected, than what forty of the house of Lords openly
protest they have seen with great uneasiness, -- a plan for a long (...)
SYSTEMATICALLY carried on, FOR LOWERING (...), THE CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS OF THE
KINGDOM, rendering the house of Commons (...), and the house of (...)? See
(...) to Ld's prot. p. 29. Anno. 1770.


Here let us pause (my fellow citizens) and consider: -- has the execrable
plan thus (...) and for a long time pursued, at last taken effect? Are all the
constitutional powers of Great Britain so lowered in the estimation of the
people, that their representatives are detested, and their nobility despised?
is their King possessed of power sufficient to make fear, a substitute for
love? has he an army at his absolute command, with which no force in his empire
is able to (...)? -- judge ye, my countrymen, of these questions, upon which I
(...) not decide: -- judge, for yourselves, of the political state of that
kingdom, which claims a right of disposing of OUR ALL; -- a right of laying
every burden that power can impose; It will be proper to lay on the Americans
EVERY (...) which the hand of power can impose, if they should attempt to
become manufacturers. Conduct of Administration examined, 1767. p. 62. -- THUS
Americans are (...) for an attempt only to do, what is their duty as soon as
possible to effect, and what no Power on earth can certain without violating
the laws of God and nature.
-- a right of overrunning (...) soil and freeholds with mercenary legions,
and still more mercenary placemen and dependants. Thus luxury and riot,
debauchery and havo^k are to become the order and peace of our cities, and the
stability and honor of our times. To this and like hopeful purposes -- we find
the fullest directions sent to the several officers of the revenue, that all
the produce of the American duties, arising or to arise, by virtue of any
British act of Parliament, should from time to time, be paid to the deputy
play master in America to desrey the subsistence of the troops, and any military
expenses incurred in the Colonies. 2 vol. Ld's Prot. p. 291. 1766. By the Lords
who entered their protest against the repeal of the American stamp act.
Highly favored Americans! you are to be wasted with taxes and impositions in
order to satisfy the charges of those armaments which are to blast your country
with the most terrible of all evils -- universal corruption, and a military
government. Englishmen in the reign of Henry the 4th had the virtue and courage
to "declare it in Parliament as the und^^bted right of the Kingdom, not to be
charged with ought, for the defense of the realm, or safeguard of the seas, but
by their own will and consent in Parliament". The rights of the kingdom p. 146.
edit. 1682. Had Britons in the age of Geo. 3d. been as considerate of the
spirit of their laws and constitution, or attentive to that old rule -- to do
(...) you would be done by -- they would not have charged America with a large
revenue for "the subsistence of troops and military expenses" without
consulting it is local Parliaments, and against the will of it is Commons; more
especially since it was the position of that able, though most arbitrary prince,
Edward the first of England, touching martial affairs -- Qued (...), ab ^mnitus
opprobetur.


The reigns of past and present great monarchs when compared, often present a
striking similitude. The Emperor Charles the fifth, having exalted the royal
prerogative (or the influence of the crown) on the ruins of the privileges of
the Castilians, allowed the name of the Cortes (or the Parliament) to remain;
and the formality See before p. 56,7 65.
of holding it thus continued, he reduced it is authority and jurisdiction to
nothing, and modelled it in such a manner, that it became (says Dr. Robertson)
rather a junto of the servants of the crown, than an assembly of the
representatives of the people. 3. vol. hist. of Charles ^. p. 434. See also
before p. 56,7 And the note there -- and also p. 65.
The success of Charles in abolishing the privileges of the commons, and in
breaking the power of the nobles of Castile, encouraged an invasion of the
liberties of Aragon, which were yet more extensive.

Attend Americans! reflect on the situation of your mother country, and
consider the late Conduct of your Brethren in Britain toward this Continent.
The Castilians (once high spirited and brave in the cause of freedom)
accustomed to subjection themselves, ASSISTED (says the same illustrious
historian) IN IMPOSING THE YOKE on their more happy and independent neighbors.
Hist. (...). 5. 3 vol. p. 434.
-- Has not Britain ( fallen from her pristine freedom and glory) treated
America, as Castile did Aragon? have not Britons imposed on our necks the same
yoke which the Castilians imposed on the happy Aragonese? Yes! -- I speak it
with grief -- I speak it with anguish -- Britons are our oppressors: -- I speak
it with shame -- "I speak it with indignation -- WE ARE SLAVES."

As force first fixes the chains of vassalage, so cowardice restrains an
inslaved people from bursting in funder their bands. But the case perhaps is
not desperate till the yoke has been so long borne, that the understanding and
the spirits of the people are sunk into ignorance and barbarism, supineness and
perfect inactivity. Such, I yet trust, is not the deplorable (...) of the land
of my nativity. How soon it may be -- we shall tremble, when we reflect that
the progress of thraldom is secret and its effects incredibly rapid, and
dreadful. The loss of liberty (says that sagacious politician Tacitus) is ever
accompanied with the loss of spirit and magnanimity.
Hence we see nations once the freest and most high spirited in Europe, abject
in the most humlliating condition. The oath of allegiance to their king,
exhibits the true standard of all just subjection, to government, and testifies
a (...) sense and spirit. We, who are each of us as good, and who are
altogether more powerful than you, promise obedience to your government, IF YOU
MAINTAIN OUR RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES; IF NOT, NOT. Dr. Robertson's hist. Chal. 5.
1 vol. 153. Vita Agric:
When a people, endowed with such understanding, sentiments and virtue have
fallen into a disgraceful vassalage -- what have WE in this land, at this time,
reason to fear? -- The same Athenians who insulted and bid defiance to a
Phillip of Macedon crouched and cowled at the feet of an Alexander. ROMANS who
with righteous indignation expelled royalty and the ^arquins bore with infamy
and shame the ravages of succeeding kings and emperors ENGLISHMEN who rose with
a divine enthusiasm against the first Charles, disgracefully submitted to the
usurpation of a Cromwell, and then with unexampled folly and madness restored
that odious and execrable race of tyrants, the house of Stewart. Examples, like
these, ought to excite the deepest concern; -- at this (...) they ought to do
more -- to inspire fortitude and action.

Providence from the beginning has exercised this country with singular
trials. In the earliest periods of our history, New England is seen surrounded
with adversaries, and alternately vexed with foes foreign and domestic. Pierce
as her enemies were from abroad and savage as the Natives of America were
within -- her worst enemies will be ^ound those of her own household. --

Our fathers left their native country with the strongest assurance that they
and their po^^^rity should enjoy the privileges of free natural born English
subjects. See Hutch. hist. 1 vol. Pref. p. 4.
Depending upon these assurances, they sustained hard-ships scarcely parrelled
in the annals of the world. See same hist. p. 19. 45. (...) p. 538.
yet compassion natural to the human breast did not restrain internal foes from
involving them in new calamities, nor did that disgrace and contempt which
suddenly fell upon the conspirators damp the ardour of their malignity.

So early as 1633, (not fourteen years after the first arrival at Plymouth) the
new settlers were in perils from their own countrymen. Same hist. p. 31.
In this, the infant state of the country, while exposed to innumerable
hardships, vexed with hostilities from Europe and the depredations of savages,
there existed men, who "beheld the Massachusetts with an envious eye:" ^^. p.
31.
The characteristicks of the first conspirators against this province were
secre^y and industry: they had effected the mischief before the people knew of
their danger. Morton in his letter to Jefferies of the first of may 1634,
writes, that the Massachusetts patent by an order of Council was brought in
view and the privileges well scanned. 1 Hutch. p. 31.
But by whom? very like some of more modern same: An archbishop, and the privy
council of Charles the first! Excellent essay-masters, for New England
privileges, -- most renowned judges of the rights and liberties of mankind! --
They first discover the Charter ("to be void," Same page
and then no doubt advise to the issuing of the commission found by my Lord
Barrington in the 31st. vol. of Mr. Petyt's Manuscript, a commission directed
to the archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord chancellor, and other Lords of the
privy council, by which they are empowered to prepare laws, for the better
government of the Colonies, which were afterward to be enforced by THE KING'S
PROCLAMATION. Bar: obs: on the more ant: Statutes p. 146. note.


This was considered as a master-stroke of policy, and the public conspirators
of the day displayed the plumage of triumph with that spirit and oftentation
See Morton's Let: before cited.
which have descended to their successors. But how easy is it, with Providence,
to disappoint the projects and humble the pride of man! Laud and his master in
the subsequent periods of history are found too busied with their own concerns,
to attend much to those of others. Hence this extraordinary Commission was
never executed and the plan set on foot within three years after, "for revoking
the patent of the Massachusetts," 1 Hutch: hist. p. 48 and 51.
proved abortive. Literary correspondencies inimical to the Province, commenced
with Archbishop Laud, Laud was the favorite character selected for a
correspondent by the American letter-writers of the last century; in the next
age mankind will be as well acquainted with the genius and spirit of some more
modern British correspondents, as they now are with the temper of that renowned
prelate.
in 1638. 1 Hutch: hist. p. 86.
But in the pious language of our fathers, "the LORD delivered them from the
oppressor," Morton's Memo. p. 15.
against all men's expectations they were encouraged, and much blame and
disgrace fell upon their adversaries. Same book 35. See also Collect. of orig.
papers etc. p. 52.
Yet notwithstanding, a spirit full of malignity against the country (not very
long after) much endangered both it is civil and religious liberties. Morton's
memo. 96. 187.


More than a century agone, the great privileges of New England were matter of
envy, Hutch: hist. 194.
and accordingly complaints multiplied to Cromwell, Ib. 192. 194.
no doubt for the benevolent purpose of abridging (what were called) English
Liberties. All attempts to the prejudice of the colony being to no purpose Ib.
194.
with the Protector, the adversaries of the province were despondent, until
the restoration of Charles the 2d. gave new hopes; when petitions and
complaints were prefered against the Colony to the king in council, and to the
Parliament. Ib. 211.


"False friends and open enemies" now became the terror of the country, Hutch.
hist. p.220.
while now foes brought new charges to render it obnoxious. Ib. 224,5.
The great men and (...) of the country, made their complaints also to the
king. Appen. Hutch: hist. No. 15. Another native of ^New-England^ (...) (we
have seen (...)) the year 1705, wrote to England, that this country, would
never be worth living in for Lawyers, and Gentlemen, until the CHARTER was
taken away.
-- The consequences were such as might be expected. Four persons were sent
over from England, one of them (...) known and prosessed (...) of the (...)
with such extraordinary powers (that OU^ ancestors with (...) complain) they
were to be subjected to the arbitrary power of strangers proceeding riot by any
established law, but their own (...). Huth. hist. 232.
-- How astonishingly uniform, how cruelly consistent has been the conduct of
Britain from that day to the present?

Amid all these severe trials, the inhabitants of New England, conducted with a
virtue and piety worthy remembrance and imitation. They appealed to GOD, they
came not into this wilderness to seek great things for themselves, but for the
sake of a poor and quiet life -- they testified to their Sovereign that: their
liberties were dearer to them than their lives. Ib. 232,3. Appen. No 16. p. 542.
Evil minded men continue (however) to misrepresent them, See same hist. 242,3.
and what is almost incredible, the distresses of the Colony, during a war,
which excited compassion in some, yet those very distresses were improved by
others to render the Colony more obnoxious. (...) hist. 313. Anno 1676.


Although this is certain, that as the Colony was at first settled, so it was
preserved from ruin without any charge to the mother country; Ib. 310. See also
in confirmation of the above: same hist. 93. -- 114. 2 vol. 130. 204
yet in the height of the distress of war, and whilst the authority of the
Colony was contending with the natives for the possession of the soil;
complaints were making in England which struck at the powers of government. Ib.
310. 31^.. The dominion of the crown over this country before the arrival (...)
our pr^de^esson was merely ideal. Their removal hither realized that dominion,
and has made the country valuable both to the Crown and Nation, without any
cost to either of them from that time to this. EVEN IN THE MOST DISTRESSED
STATE of our Predecessors, when they expected to be destroyed by a general
conspiracy and in^^^sion of the Indian natives THEY HAD NO ASSISTANCE FROM
THEM. The answer of the Council of the Province to Governor Hutchinson's Speech
25th of Jan. 1773.
With what ferocity have Americans been pursued from the earliest times? That
Demon of malevolence, which went forth at the beginning, still spirits up our
adversaries and persecutes the country with unabated malice.

Randolph, who, the people of New England said, went up and down seeking to
devour them, Hutch: hist. p. 319.
was the next active emisary against the province. He was incessant and open in
endeavoring the alteration of the constitution. Ib. 335,6
In his open enmity, he appears far less odious; than those who have been
equally inimical and equally indefatigable to the same purpose, with more
cowardice, dissimulation, and hypocrisy. Eight voyages were made across the
Atlantic in the course of nine years by this inveterate spirit, with hostile
intentions to the government. Hutch: hist. 329.
Nor will it be surprising to find him thus expose his life upon the ocean,
when such services acquired "new powers". Ib. 329.
Have we not seen in our own day, a similar policy adopted, and the same object
operating as a motive to the like execrable conduct? Such has been the strange,
though unhappily consistent, conduct of our mother country, that she has laid
temptations and given rewards and stipends to those who have slandered and
betrayed her own children. Incited probably by the same motive. Cranfield rose
up as in league with Randolph, and "infaniously represented the colony as
^^gties and rebels." Ib. 337.


Libels and conspiracies of this nature called for the interposition of
authority: express laws were enacted for the prevention of like treasonable
practices for the future and death being deemed the proper punishment for an
enemy to his country, traitors to the constitution were to suffer that penalty.
Thus a conspiracy to invade the commonwealth, or any treacherous attempt to
alter and subvert fundamentally the frame of policy and government was made a
capital offense. ib 442. See p. 295, 336.
Did our laws now contain a like provision, public conspirators and elevated
parricides would tremble for their heads, who do not shudder at the enormity of
their crimes. There are characters in society to devoid of virtue and endued
with ferocity, that nothing but sanguinary laws can restrain their wickedness.
Even the distress and cries of their native country excite no compassion:
reverence for fathers and affection for children cause no reluctance at
measures which stain the glorious lineage of their ancestors with infamy, and
blast their spreading progeny with oppression. -- that emanation from the Deity
which creates them intelligents, seems to cease it is operation, and the
tremendous idea of a GOD and futurity, excites neither repentance or
reformation.

Thus may countrymen, from the days of Gardener and Moreton, Hutch: hist. 31,2.
Anno 1632.
Gorges and Mason, Ib. 51. Anno 1636.
Randolph and Cranfield Ib. 337. And Collect of (...) papers, etc. p. 477. etc.
down to the present day, the inhabitants of this Northern region have
constantly been in danger and troubles from foes open and secret, abroad and in
their bosom. Our freedom has been the object of envy, and to make void the
charter of our Liberties the work and labor of an undiminished race of
villains. One cabal having failed of success, new conspirators have rose, and
what the first, could not make "void", the next "humbly desired to revoke." Ib.
31. 2. 5.
To this purpose one falsehood after another has been fabricated and spread
abroad with equal turpitude and equal effrontery. That minute detail which
would present actors now on the stage is the province of HISTORY: -- She,
inexorably severe toward the eminently guilty, will delineate their characters
with the point of a diamond: -- and thus blazoned in the face of day, the
abhorrence and execrations of mankind will consign them to an infamous
immortality. So great has been the credulity of the British Court, from the
beginning, or such has been the activity of false brethren, that no tale
inimical to the Northern Colonies, however false or absurd, but what has found
credit with administration, and operated to the prejudice of the Country. Thus
it was told, and believed in England, that we were not in earnest in the
expedition against Canada at the beginning of this century, and that the
country did every thing in its power to defeat the success of it, and that the
misfortune of that attempt ought to be wholly attributed to the northern
colonies. While nothing could be more obvious, than that New England had
exhausted her youngest blood and all her treasures in the undertaking; and that
every motive of self-preservation, happiness and safety must have operated to
excite these provinces to the most spirited and persevering measures against
Canada. See Jer. Dummers Letter to a Noble Lord Edit. 1712. p. 12^ 13 etc.


The people who are attacked by bad men have a testimony of their merit, as the
constitution which is invaded by powerful men, has an evidence of it is value.
The path of our duty needs no minute delineation: -- it lies level to the eye.
Let us apply then, like men sensible of it is importance and determined on it is
fulfillment. The inroads upon our public liberty call for reparation: The
wrongs we have sustained call for -- justice. That reparation and that justice
may yet be obtained by union, spirit and firmness. But to divide and conquer
was the maxim of the Devil in the garden of Eden -- and to disunite and inslave
has been the principle of all his votaries from that period to the present.
The crimes of the guilty are to them the cords of association, and dread of
punishment, the indissoluble bond of union. The combinations, of public
robbers ought, therefore, to cement patriots and heroes: and as the former
plot, and conspire to undermine and destroy the commonwealth, the latter ought
to form a compact for opposition -- a band of vengeance.

What insidious arts, and what deteitable practices have been used to deceive,
disunite and enslave the good people of this Continent? The mystical
appellations of loyalty and allegiance, the venerable names of government and
good order, and the sacred ones of piety and public virtue have been
alternately prostituted to that abominable purpose. All the windings and
guises, subterfuges and doublings, of which the human soul is susceptible, have
been displayed on the occasion. But secrets which were thought impenetrable are
no longer hid; characters deeply disguised are openly revealed: the discovery
of gross impostors has generally pr^ceeded, but a short time, their utter
extirpation.

Be not again, my country men, EASILY captivated with the appearances ONLY of
wisdom and piety -- professions of a regard to liberty and of a strong
attachment to the public interest. Hutch: hist. 1 vol. p. 53.
Your fathers have been explicitly charged with this folly by one of their
posterity. Avoid this and all similar errors. Be cautious against the deception
of appearances. By their fruits ye shall know them, was the saying of ONE who
perfectly knew the human heart. Judge of affairs which concern social happiness
by facts: -- Judge of man by his deeds. For it is very certain, that pious zeal
for days and times, for mint and cummin has, often, been pretended by those
who were infidels at bottom; and it is as certain, that attachment to the
dignity of Government, and the King's service, has often flowed from the
mouths of men who harbored the darkest machinations against the true end of
the former, and were destitute of every right principle of loyalty to the
latter. Hence then, care and circumspection are necessary branches of political
duty. And as it is much easier to restrain liberty from running into
licentiousness, than power from swelling into tyranny and oppression, 2 vol.
Lords Prot. p. 141. Anno 1736.
so much more caution and resistance are required against the over-bearing of
rulers, than the extravagance of the people.

To give no more authority to any order of state and to place no greater public
confidence in any man, than is necessary for the general welfare, may be
considered by the people as an important point of policy. But though craft and
hypocrisy are prevalent, yet piety and virtue have a real existence: duplicity
and political imposture abound, yet benevolence and public spirit are not
altogether banished the world. As wolves will appear in sheep's-cloathing, so
superlative knaves and parricides will assume the vesture of the man of virtue
and patriotism.

These things are permitted BY PROVIDENCE, no doubt, for wise and good reasons.
Man was created a rational, and was designed for an active being. His faculties
of intelligence and force were given him for use. When the wolf, therefore, is
found devouring the flock, no hierarchy forbids a seizure of the victim for
sacrifice; so also, when dignified impostors are caught destroying those, whom
their arts deceived and their stations destined them to protect, -- the sabre
of justice flashes righteousness at the stroke of execution.

Yet be not amused, my Countrymen! -- the extirpation of bondage, and the
reestablishment of freedom are not of easy acquisition. The worst passions of
the human heart, and the most subtle projects of the human mind are leagued
against you; and principalities and power have acceded to the combination.
Trials and conflicts you must, therefore, endure; -- hazards and jeopardies --
of life and fortune -- will attend the struggle. Such is the (...) of all noble
exertions for public liberty and social happiness. -- Enter not the lists
without thought and consideration, left you arm with timidity and combat with
irresolution. Having engaged in the conflict, let nothing discourage your
vigor, or repel your perseverance: -- Remember, that submission to the yoke of
bondage is the worst that can befall a people after the most fierce and
unsuccessful resistance. What can the misfortune of vanquishment take away,
which despotism and rapine would spare? It had been easy (said the great
lawgiver Solon to the Athenians,) Plut: Life of Solon.
to repress the advances of tyranny, and prevent it is establishment, but now it
is established and grown to some height it would be MORE GLORIOUS to demolish
it. But nothing glorious is accomplished, nothing great is attained, nothing
valuable is secured without magnanimity of mind and devotion of heart to the
service. -- BRUTUSLIKE, therefore, dedicate yourselves at this day to to the
service of your Country; and henceforth live A LIFE OF LIBERTY AND GLORY. -- On
the ides of March (said the great and good man to his friend Cassius just
before the battle of Philippi) On the ides of march I DEVOTED MY LIFE to my
Country, and since that time, I have lived A LIFE OF LIBERTY AND GLORY.

Inspired with public virtue, touched with the wrongs and indignant at the
insults offered his Country, the high-spirited Cassius exhibits an heroic
example: -- "Resolved as we are", (replied the hero to his friend) resolved as
we are, let us march against the enemy, for though we should not conquer, we have
nothing to fear Plut. Life of Brutus.


SPIRITS and GENII, like these, rose in Rome -- and have since adorned Britain:
such also will one day make glorious this more Western world. AMERICA has in
store her BRUTI and CASSII -- her Hampdens and Sydneys -- Patriots and Heroes,
who will form a BAND OF BROTHERS: -- men who will have memories and feelings --
courage and swords: -- courage, that shall inflame their ardent bosoms, till
their hands cleave to their swords -- and their SWORDS to their Enemies hearts.

FINIS.
The Author has felt exquisitely while writing upon the subjects of his
consideration; and the multitude and perplexity of his private business have
denied him sufficient time to revise this publication. Under these
circumstances, (and being also several years on this side the meridian of the
age of man) there will be found, no doubt, many indiscretions and faults for
those of riper years and cooler judgment to correct and censure. -- The great
Lord Chan. Bacon has told us of wise legislators who have made their law upon
the spur of the occasion; -- a good citizen, deeply pricked by the spur of the
times, is very (...) to start with an overhasty speed. -- The only excuse of
the writer is; -- that as he at first assumed his pen from the (...) of his
Conscience, so he now publishes his sentiments from a sense of duty to GOD and
his Country.


