SALVATION BY GRACE through FAITH, Illustrated and Confirmed, IN EIGHT SERMONS
Preached at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND.

By E. PEMBERTON, D. D.

For we preach, not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. -- For the Preaching
of the Cross is to them that perish, Foolishness; but to us that are saved, it
is the Power of God. ST. PAUL. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND JOHN
FLEET, 1774.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The SALVATION revealed in the GOSPEL described. Ephesians II. 8. For
by Grace are ye SAVED, through Faith. Page 1. SERMON II. SALVATION by GRACE. From
the same Text. P. 16. SERMON III. Of the Nature of FAITH. From the same Text.
P. 35. SERMON IV. FAITH the appointed Way of SALVATION. From the same Text. P.
54. SERMON V. Faith the GIFT of GOD. Ephesians II. 8. -- And that not of
yourselves: IT IS THE GIFT OF GOD. P. 73. SERMON VI. The Salvation we receive
by Faith, UNSPEAKABLY GREAT. Hebrews II. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect
so GREAT Salvation? P. 91. SERMON VII. Those who neglect this Great Salvation
must inevitably perish. From the same Text. P. 111. SERMON VIII. The JOY of
FAITH. 1 Peter I. 8. Whom having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see
Him not, YET BELIEVING YE REJOICE with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. P.
127.
SERMON I. The SALVATION revealed in the GOSPEL described.
EPHESIANS II. 8. For by Grace are ye SAVED.
IT was the Privilege of Adam, immediately on his first Creation, to be placed
in the delightful Garden of Eden. No sooner did he receive his Existence, but
he became an Inhabitant of Paradise. He entered into a World finished with the
most exquisite Art, and furnished with every Thing that could contribute to his
Happiness. -- But the Children of the second Adam, enter into Being in very
different Circumstances: Our Natures are deeply corrupted, we inhabit a dark
and disordered World, we are born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward. -- Even
after we are in some Measure recovered from the Ruins of the Apostasy, and
readmitted into the Family of Heaven, it is by slow Degrees that we attain to
a State of Felicity and Glory. We must pass through a tedious Pilgrimage,
before we arrive at our destined Home: We must endure many sufferings upon
Earth, before we enter into celestial Joy.

THIS is the Appointment of God, and founded in the Nature of Men, for the best
of Saints upon Earth, are sanctified but in part: Upon this Account their
Happiness is far from complete: These Tabernacles of Clay must suffer a
Dissolution, before we shall be prepared for the Vision and Enjoyment of an
holy God. When we take Farewell of Sin, we shall bid an eternal Adieu to Sorrow.

IN the mean Time, the most extensive Proposals of Salvation are made to
Mankind: Those who cordially accept of this Salvation, are made partakers of
its important Blessings: These are the interesting Truths contained in that
Passage of Scripture, which has now been read unto you, and which by Divine
Permission, will be the Subject of several Discourses. -- The Design of my
present Discourse, is to explain the Nature of that Salvation which is revealed
in the Gospel -- and the whole will be comprehended under the following Heads.
--

THE Salvation revealed in the Gospel implies, that those who are made
Partakers of it were in a State of Guilt and Misery. -- THEIR Recovery is begun
in this Life. -- THEIR Happiness shall be completed, in a future World.
FIRST, It implies, that those who are made Partakers of this Salvation, were
in a State of Guilt and Misery.
TO save, in strict Propriety of Speech, is to rescue a Person from a Danger to
which he is exposed; or deliver him from a Calamity in which he is involved --
Upon this Account the Eternal SON OF GOD, when He appeared upon Earth in the
Fashion of a Man, assumed the Character of a SAVIOR -- His Name was called
JESUS, because He come to save His People from their Sins -- He assures us the
Design of his Mission, was, so seek and save them that were lost.

ANGELS are perfectly happy, but never mentioned among the Number of the saved;
because they never violated the Purity of their Nature, but always maintained
their primitive Innocence. Adorned with the Robes of unstained Righteousness,
they feel no Guilt, fear no Danger; but taste unmingled Felicity and Joy. --
But Man is fallen from his original Excellence, and plunged into an Abyss of
Misery. Having departed from God, he is deprived of the amiable Image of the
Deity; and become a Prey to the most infamous Appetites. A deluded
Understanding leads him into endless Mazes of Error and Folly: He pursues a
vanishing Shadow, and despises the true Felicity of his Nature: Captivated with
the Charms of Sense, he neglects the Purity and Perfection of his immortal
Spirit: Dazzled with a gav Appearance, he follows every glittering Phantom:
Corrupted in his moral Taste, he rushes into the Embraces of the most polluting
Pleasures: Unmindful of his heavenly Birth, his Affections are chained down to
the Enjoyments of this inferior Earth: Seduced by flattering Dreams, he sleeps
on securely, till the Light of Eternity discovers the fatal Mistake -- So
strong is the Deception while Men remain under the Power of depraved Nature,
that we imagine ourselves free, even when we are the most passive Slaves. We
hug our Chains, as if they were the noblest Ornaments. With thoughtless Gaiety,
we tread the beaten Road that leads to Death and Hell. -- To finish our
Unhappiness, our Maker is offended; his Wrath is revealed from Heaven against
us; the Sentence of his righteous Law condemns us to eternal Death. -- To what
Sanctuary shall we fly in this lost and desperate State? -- Can we bribe
inexorable Justice -- Can we resist an omnipotent Arm? -- Can we be concealed
from that Being whose all-penetrating Eyes survey all Nature with a single
Glance? -- Can we escape beyond the Bounds of his universal Empire? -- Or can
we support the Terrors of his avenging Wrath? -- Who can thunder with an Arm
like God? -- Who can abide the Day of his Indignation? -- Our Consciences
accuse us of innumerable Crimes; the Law pronounces it is awful Curses against
every Transgressor: We live only to increase the Number of our Offenses, and
die to become the Victims of divine Justice.

IN this melancholy Situation, a Reprieve must be acknowledged a Favor; a
Mitigation of our Punishment an unmerited Mercy; but the glad Tidings of
Deliverance, one would think, must be received with Transports of Gratitude. --
To publish this Good News is the Design of the Gospel; and the whole Number of
the saved attend to the consolatory Message with an humble Faith. -- As a
necessary Consequence of this --

SECONDLY, Their Recovery is begun in this Life.
YE are saved, says St. Paul to the believing Ephesians. He speaks of their
Salvation, not as a future Event, but as a present Privilege. He does not say,
Ye shall be saved in the Hour of Death -- in the Morning of the Resurrection --
at the illustrious Day of the Restitution of all Things; but describes it as an
Happiness, which in some good Degree, they then enjoyed.

BUT how can this be? -- Do not true Believers inhabit a World of Sorrow? Are
they not defiled with innumerable Corruptions? Is not Satan continually
disturbing their Peace? Does not the World with it is treacherous Smiles,
frequently betray Men into Sin? Do they not groan under the Burden of various
Afflictions? Must they not submit to the Empire of Death? Are not their Bodies,
the Workmanship of the Almighty, by an irrevocable Decree, condemned to become
the Food of Worms? -- Are these the Advantages which the Son of God has
purchased for his favorite People? -- Is this the Salvation described with such
Pomp and Magnificence in the Gospel? --

I GRANT, my Brethren, upon Earth we do not receive our perfect Consummation in
Bliss. This Event will not take Place till the Day of Christ's second
Appearance, in the Glory and Grandeur of an incarnate God; in the Character of
Universal Judge of Angels and Men. -- Then our adorable Redeemer will manifest
the Fullness of his saving Power, complete the Designs of his almighty Love, and
establish his People in a State of immutable Felicity and Glory. -- But, upon
Earth, we receive the first Fruits of this joyful Harvest: We are favored with
delightful Foretastes of those Rivers of transporting Pleasure, which flow in
the Paradise above: We view at a Distance the immortal Glories of that Kingdom,
where the Saints shall live and reign with God forever and ever.

THE faithful Disciples of Christ, were appointed to this Salvation, in the
eternal Counsels of God. In the Fullness of Time. JESUS the Savior paid the
Price of their Redemption to the uttermost Farthing. By his all sufficient
Merits, he purchased for them the Honor and Happiness of the Sons of God. As an
Evidence of this -- He has sent his Spirit into their Hearts; to turn them
from Darkness to Light; from the Follies of Vice, to the Wisdom of the Just;
from the Labyrinths of Error and Delusion, to the Paths of Holiness and
Happiness, -- By this we know, that we are passed from Death unto Life -- are
united to the Son of God, and interested in his immaculate Righteousness: -- In
consequence of this, we have now the Forgiveness of our Sins, and shall shortly
receive an Inheritance among those that are sanctified. We are no more
considered as Aliens and Strangers, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of
the Household of God.

HOW divine a Change have these happy Souls experienced! Well may they rejoice
in their inestimable Privileges. If we are of this happy Number, Salvation is
ours by an unfailing Title; shortly we shall possess all it is extensive
Blessings. We need not tremble at the condemning Sentence of the Law, but may
rejoice in the Hope of immortal Glory. Christ has endured the Punishment due
to our Crimes; and wrought out a perfect Righteousness in the Character of our
Surety. By this we are justified at the Tribunal of God, and declared Heirs of
the Kingdom of Heaven. -- We shall be preserved from the World and it is
deceitful Temptations. For the great Captain of our Salvation has overcome
this dangerous Enemy. He will preserve us from being fatally seduced by its
Terrors or Allurements: Every Christian has his Conversation in Heaven, while
here upon Earth; and is every Day aspiring after a more exact Conformity to the
Maxims and Manners of that blessed World. -- We shall not be destroyed by the
prevalency of corrupted Nature: For an immortal Principle of Life has quickened
us who were dead in Trespasses and Sins: We have a divine Assurance that Sin,
the worst of Evils, shall no more have the Dominion over us. Under the Conduct
of almighty Grace, it is Influence is continually diminishing; the Path of the
Just, like the Morning Light, shines more and more unto the perfect Day. -- We
shall be delivered from the Policy and Power of Satan, though described as a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Our BLESSED LORD has triumphed over
this inveterate Opposer of God and Goodness, and will not suffer him finally to
prevail against those who are committed to his Care: He may disturb their
Peace, by his malignant Suggestions, but not destroy their Safety: He may tempt
them by the most artful Methods, but shall not be able to reduce them to a
Subjection to his detested Empire. They are under the Protection of One, who is
able to save unto the uttermost, and may depend on his faithful Promise, that
none shall pluck them out of his Hands. -- We are indeed exposed to the Arrests
of the King of Terrors, and must, at the appointed Time, enter the dark
Dominions of the Grave. But fear not, O Christian! the divine Presence will
irradiate your Passage through the gloomy Vale of Death: Guards of Angels will
safely escort you through the Territories of the Prince of Darkness: The Lord
of Life bears the Keys of the invisible World; and Death cannot remove us beyond
the Limits of his extensive Jurisdiction. It indeed closes our Eyes upon the
Beauties of this material System, but introduces us to the unutterable Glories
of Heaven. It translates us from this obscure Corner of the Creation, to the
Place of the Divine Residence, the Seat of his eternal Empire. -- But the
Illustration of this Point naturally falls under

THE THIRD Part of my Discourse, which is to show that the Recovery of the
People of God, which is begun in this Life, shall be completed in a future
World.
THE Argument of St. Paul is strictly just and must give full Conviction to
every attentive Mind: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, shall he not with Him freely give us all Things. The Love of God, in
delivering up his Son to Sufferings and Death, for miserable Mortals is one of
the most astonishing Mysteries of Faith, and will be the perpetual Admiration
of the sublime Intelligences of Heaven. But when we are convinced of this
fundamental Truth by the divine Testimony, we may easily conceive that the most
excellent Favors will be bestowed upon those, for whom he made so costly a
Sacrifice. -- Accordingly Christians are adorned with the most honorable
Titles, invested with the most extensive Privileges, and assured of complete
and eternal Happiness.

BUT what is their Condition while they reside upon Earth? -- Do they appear in
the proper Dignity of the Sons of God? -- in the genuine Character of those who
are appointed to inherit all Things? -- No -- They are often defiled with Sin,
disturbed with Fears, disfigured with Reproach, oppressed with a Variety of
Temptations and Trials. -- But the Hour of Darkness is short, very soon the
heavenly Light will arise: The Night of Affliction will quickly come to an End
and be succeeded with perpetual and unclouded Day. Then they shall be freed
from every Sorrow, purified from every Blemish, and be made KINGS and PRIESTS
unto God.

IN the present Dispensation; the Ways of Providence are mysterious; the Equity
and Goodness of the divine Government is, in a great Measure, concealed from
the most diligent Enquirers: Vice often receives the Rewards of Virtue; and
Virtue is condemned to the Punishment of Vice: JESUS CHRIST is confined to a
Manger, an impious Herod is advanced to the Throne of Israel: St. Paul is a
Prisoner in Chains, a bloody Nero sways the Scepter of the Roman Empire: The
best of Men are trampled under Foot as the Offscouring of all Things; and the
vilest Monsters of human Nature are attended with Applause, and ride upon the
High Places of the Earth. -- But in the Day of the Restitution of all Things,
Vice shall appear in it is naked Deformity, and be punished with righteous
Severity: Virtue shall be publicly applauded at the supreme Tribunal. and
receive a Crown of incorruptible Glory: The laves of Satan shall be confined in
Chains of everlasting Darkness -- while the Servants of Christ shine as the
Brightness of the Firmament forever.

HOW poor and imperfect is the Happiness, which the Saints enjoy upon Earth, in
comparison of the magnificent Promises which are made unto them in the Word of
God! -- In their best Estate -- their happiest Hours -- they are far from that
Purity and Perfection, to which they ardently aspire. But the Day of their
Redemption is swiftly approaching, when they shall awake, arrayed in the
Redeemer's Righteousness, adorned with the Beauties of the divine Image, and
receive the full Satisfaction of all their Desires. The everlasting Love of God
to his People, will appear in its richest Glory; and the Designs of redeeming
Grace receive their final Accomplishment -- Then we shall no longer prostrate
ourselves before an invisible God, but approach the Throne of his Glory, behold
His unveiled face, and triumph in the Joys of His immediate Presence. -- We
shall no longer worship Him in Temples made with Hands, in Company with sinful
and miserable Mortals; but enter the undefiled Sanctuary above, and unite our
Voices with Angels and Archangels, in the triumphant Hallelujahs of Heaven. --
We shall no longer be confined to a few refreshing Tastes of the divine
Benignity, but have free Access to the Tree of Life, which stands in the Midst
of the Paradise of God; and quench our Thirst after Happiness, at the original
Fountain of all Good.

I CONCLUDE, with one or two Reflections.

I. WHAT Obligations are we under to the Son of God, who has purchased this
Salvation for the Heirs of Guilt and Misery.
No sooner had the Great Creator, introduced Man into a State of Existence, but
the Prince of Darkness assaulted his Innocence, and contrived his ruin. He
filled the Minds of our first Parents, with false Apprehensions of the blessed
God; and by this Means betrayed them into a voluntary Disobedience to the
divine Law -- Immediately the human Nature was degraded and defiled; the
Favorites of Heaven became confederates with the Spirits of Hell -- As we were
Partakers of their Crimes, we were condemned to suffer their Punishment.

BUT the Son of God descended from Heaven, that He might destroy the Works of
the Devil. He assumed our Nature, with its Innocent Infirmities; fulfilled the
Law which we had violated; submitted to the Punishment which was the just
Demerit of our Crimes -- In consequence of this, Salvation is preached to all
Nations; the greatest Sinners are invited to return to their offended Maker:
Free Access is opened to the Throne of Grace, and the humble Penitent is
assured of Audience and Acceptance.

THEY who improve these happy Advantages, and confide in this all-sufficient
Savior, immediately experience the Compassions of his Heart, and the Power of
his Hands. He abolishes their Guilt, and constitutes them Heirs of the Kingdom
of God. He inspires them with his blessed Spirit, which conquers their native
Corruption, and forms them to a divine and heavenly Life. He gives them the
Peace of God which passes all Understanding; refreshes them under their various
Afflictions, with the Visits of his Love; and sometimes gives them transporting
Earnests of the Happiness reserved for them in a future World -- ^hortly He
will descend in all his Mediatorial Glory -- and ascend the Throne of Judgment.
This Flesh and Blood, which is hastening to the silent Grave, shall hear his
animating Voice, shake off the Sleep of Death, and arise Glorious and immortal:
Our whole Man shall partake of his Triumphs, and rejoice forever in his Love.

AND now, my Brethren, who of us does not say -- May I be of the happy Number
-- May my Portion be with the Nations of the Redeemed -- May I, O adorable
SAVIOR, see the Good of thy chosen, and rejoice with the Gladness of thine
Inheritance.

IS this our Language -- then,

II. To obtain this Happiness, ought to be our principal Care.
TO be happy, is the universal Desire of all Mankind. There are two Kinds of
Happiness that present themselves to our View and court our Affections: The one
consists in the Enjoyment of the Pomps and Pleasures of this Life, the other in
the Dignity and Privileges of the Children of God. The Men who have their
Portion in this Life, choose their Happiness in a World that groans under the
Wrath of indignant Heaven: The Men who embrace the Salvation of the Gospel,
place their Felicity in a World that is filled with the Loving Kindness of God.
This world is the melancholy Abode of Darkness and Disorder; the future is
perpetually illuminated with the Rays of the divine Glory. Every Thing here
below is subject to continual Change, but the Felicity of the Saints above is
free from all Vicissitudes. The Earth with all its Splendors, must perish in
the Flames, but Heaven, the Throne of God, endures for ever.

DETACH, therefore, O Professors of the Gospel, your Affections from this Scene
of Vanity, fix your Desires on a better Country, which is reserved in Heaven:
Why should we amuse ourselves with Dreams of Happiness, in these Regions of
Darkness, when Christ has purchased for us a World of Light and Joy? --
Encompassed with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, who have finished their Course
with Joy, we should run with Patience the Race which is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith. AMEN.

SERMON II. SALVATION by GRACE.
EPHESIANS II. 8. For by GRACE are ye saved.
PRIDE introduced the Apostasy of our first Parents, and in all Ages proves the
Destruction of Multitudes. -- This animates Princes to unsheath the Sword of
War, and Millions are sacrificed to their aspiring Views. -- This sows the
Seeds of Contention in Churches and Commonwealths, the public Safety is
endangered to gratify the Pride and Resentment of a few Individuals. -- This
destroys the Peace and good Order of private Families, and renders those that
were united in the tenderest Bonds, Enemies to each other.

BUT the melancholy Consequences of an arrogant and ambitious Mind are not
confined to the present Life, they extend to a future State, and exclude
Mankind from the only Way of Salvation that is provided for a guilty World.
Vain Man would be wiser than God and attempts to regain his forfeited Felicity
by his own Strength. Instead of acknowledging his Dependence on sovereign
Grace, he seeks for Something in Himself, that shall placate his offended
Maker. Unwilling to ascribe the entire Glory of his Salvation to God, he
aspires to be, in some Degree, the Author of his own Recovery and Happiness.

THIS was the fatal Mistake of the Jewish Zealots and the Pagan Philosophers.
This influenced them to oppose the Progress of the Gospel from it is first
Appearance, and persecute it is Professors with inflexible Severity.

THE Jews intoxicated with an Opinion of their own Righteousness, expected to
be saved by their Obedience to the Law. The Pagan Moralists, puffed up with a
vain Conceit of their superior Wisdom, imagined their Happiness was in their
own Hands, independent of any foreign Assistance. -- Happy would it be for the
Christian Church, if this Presumption had not entered it is sacred Enclosure,
and infected the Minds of those who call themselves the Disciples of a
crucified Savior.

BUT every imagination of this Nature is fully overthrown by the inspired St.
Paul in the Words of my Text. -- If there were no other Passage in Scripture
but this, it would be sufficient to destroy the Pretentions of human Vanity,
and direct Mankind from whence they must expect all their Happiness and Safety.
-- By Grace are ye Saved.

EVERY impartial Observer, must be immediately sensible, that these Words
plainly declare that the Salvation of Mankind is not the Effect of their own
Policy or Power, but an undeserved Favor: That it cannot be obtained by the
Improvement of our natural Abilities, but descends from the Father of Lights,
the Giver of every good Gift.

IN discoursing on this Point, I shall enquire what is intended by Grace -- How
it appears that the Salvation of Sinners is entirely of Grace.

FIRST. WHAT is intended by GRACE.
GRACE signifies a free Favor, not granted to Merit -- not founded on superior
Excellence -- but flowing from unpurchased Benevolence. That Angels are adorned
with the noble Perfections of their Nature, placed in the heavenly Sanctuary,
preserved in their primitive Integrity, and made the favorite Ministers of
Divine Providence, must be ascribed to unmerited Grace. No Creature can
challenge any Thing of the Creator: All their Excellencies flow from his
disinterested Goodness.

ADAM was made an Inhabitant of Paradise, advanced to the Government of this
lower World, by the same free Favor. All the Privileges of his Nature, and the
Advantages of his Situation, were the Effects of pure Goodness. -- But when Man
lost the Glory of his Innocence and became a guilty Criminal -- then the
Triumphs of Grace appeared in the most illustrious Point of Light. -- Innocent
Man had nothing to claim from his Maker, but what flowed from his gracious
Promise -- and sinful Man had every Thing to fea^ from his offended Sovereign,
whose Favors he had abused. -- When, therefore, God delivers us from the
Punishment we had deserved, and restores us to the Privileges we had forfeited,
it is not only Grace, but the Riches of Grace. He bestows his Favors on those
who are so far from having any Excellency to recommend them, that their Guilt
justly exposes them to his severest Displeasure.

THIS is that GRACE, which the Apostle celebrates in the Words of my Text --
This rescues us from the Tyranny of Satan -- the Dominion of Sin -- the
Punishment of Death. -- This restores guilty Criminals to the Favor of Heaven,
and gives them a Title to the Happiness of Life eternal. I am now to enquire,

SECONDLY, How it appears that the Salvation of Sinners is entirely of Grace.
IF we examine the various Parts of this Salvation -- if we survey it is
different Degrees -- if we pursue it is Progress in all the Periods of the
present Life, and through the unceasing Ages of Eternity, we shall be
immediately convinced -- That it cannot be challenged as a Claim of Justice --
it cannot be acquired by the Powers of unregenerate Nature -- nor are we
introduced into this happy State as the Reward of our good Works.

I. IT cannot be challenged as a Claim of Justice.
IF the revolted Posterity of Adam were to appear at the Tribunal of Justice,
they must be covered with the greatest Confusion, and inevitably receive the
Sentence of eternal Death. If God should enter into Judgment with Sinners, all
must be condemned to remediless Destruction. The Honor of the divine Government
requires that the Transgression of the Law be punished with impartial Severity.
The infinite Perfection of the Deity renders Sin the Object of his immutable
Aversion: This He will ^or^rv^ discover to the View of the whole intelligent
Creation. If therefore Almighty Grace had not contrived a Way to answer the
Demands of Justice, every Sinner of the human Race must have fallen a Sacrifice
to it is righteous Claims. -- That Justice which expelled the apostate Angels
from the Happiness of Heaven, would have condemned rebellious Man to the
Torments of Hell -- Angels and Men united to reject the Authority of the Great
God, and deserved the same Punishment. -- That Men are Prisoners of Hope, and
fallen Angels delivered over to final Despair, is not the Claim of Justice, but
the Work of distinguishing Grace. -- This pities Criminals condemned to Death,
freely forgives their Offenses, and restores them to Favor.

II. As Salvation is not a Claim of Justice; neither can it be acquired by the
Powers of unregenerate Nature.
FOR Human Nature in it is present degenerate State is deeply and universally
corrupted: Not only averse to that which is spiritually good, but fatally
inclined to that which is evil -- When God descended from Heaven to survey the
State of the moral World -- This is the melancholy Report -- The Thoughts and
Imaginations of Men's Hearts are evil, only evil, and that continually. -- In
conformity to this divine Testimony St. Paul, who learnt his Divinity in the
School of Heaven, declares that of ourselves we are insufficient for so much as
a good Thought -- If insufficient to think a good Thought, then certainly
incapable to perform a good Action. Our BLESSED SAVIOR assures us, that a bad
Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit; nor a corrupt Fountain send forth salutary
Streams.

UPON this Plan the most enlightened Teachers of the Christian Church have
always maintained, that the Performances of unregenerate Sinners don't
recommend them to the especial Favor of God, nor give them a Claim to the
saving Gifts of his Holy Spirit. A diligent Cultivation of our rational Powers
-- a Life conducted by the Precepts of moral Virtue, adorn the Characters of
Men and render them Blessings to Civil Society: But they cannot be acceptable
to God, when they flow from a carnal Mind, which an inspired Apostle declares
is Enmity to God.

MEN who are favored with divine Revelation certainly enjoy Advantages superior
to those who have no other Instructor than the Light of Nature; -- but these
will be ineffectual to our Salvation, if not accompanied with the internal
Operations of the Spirit. The Word of God may sound in our Ears, and not
penetrate our Hearts. -- Let the Law proclaim it is formidable Curses, we shall
be deaf to it is alarming Voice -- Let the Gospel publish it is gracious
Invitations, we shall be unaffected with it is delightful Sound -- Let the
Ministers of CHRIST lift up their Voices like Trumpets, and address their
Hearers with all the Charms of Celestial Eloquence, they labor in vain, and
spend their Strength for naught, if these Means are not attended with a divine
Influence. It is the Prerogative of Omnipotent Grace to open the Eyes of the
Blind, unstop the Ears of the Deaf -- communicate a Principle of Life to those
who are dead in Trespasses and Sins, and incline them to walk in the Way that
leads to eternal Salvation.

WITHOUT this, the Light of Nature with all it is Improvements; the Law with all
it is Precepts; the Gospel with all it is transporting Discoveries; will be a
Savor of Death unto Death: We shall remain under the Dominion of Sin: The
Advantages we enjoy will only serve to increase our Guilt and render us
inexcusable at the Tribunal of Justice.

IF the Improvement of our natural Powers, or the Advantages of external
Revelation were sufficient for our Salvation -- why was the Spirit sent down to
inlighten the Minds of Men, and sanctify their Souls? -- We must then certainly
conclude, the Powers of human Nature are too weak, and all external Advantages
insufficient, to produce any saving Effect. The Grace of God must triumph over
the Weakness of Men, or Sinners would perish in their Corruption and Misery. I
add,

III. WE are not made Partakers of this Salvation as the Reward of our good
Works.
MANY profess an high Esteem for the inspired Scriptures, and acknowledge that
Grace is a necessary Assistant to frail and fallible Man: But they depend on
the Sincerity of their Hearts, the Purity of their Intentions, the Regularity
of their Lives, to recommend them to this important Blessing. They compliment
God as the Author of their Salvation; but think their own virtuous Dispositions
are essential Qualifications to prepare them for the Reception of so great a
Good. -- Thus they form a Scheme plausible to human Reason -- soothing to the
natural Vanity of our Minds -- but subversive of the established Order of
Salvation.

IT is universally allowed, that all who are saved, are created anew in CHRIST
JESUS unto good Works, and diligently endeavor to walk in the Practice of them.
-- But then this is a certain Consequence, not a previous Condition, of an
Interest in the Salvation of the Gospel. We must be delivered from the Dominion
of Sin, before we can perform the Duties of acceptable Obedience. Jesus saves
us from the Hands of Sin and Satan, our spiritual Enemies, that we may be
qualified to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness. The Giver of all Good
will not alter his Plan, to gratify the Pride of unhumbled Nature, and
accommodate Himself to the Schemes of human Invention. -- The only Question to
be decided is this -- Is an Interest in Christ and his Salvation freely given
-- or conferred as the Reward of some antecedent Goodness? -- Our Master has
determined the Poin^, and methinks his Authority should silence all Disputes --
Let us hear the unerring Teacher of the Christian Church and submit to his
sacred Dictates. As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of itself except it abide in
the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. To abide in Christ must
certainly imply that we are united to him, and that this Union remains
undissolved. This we are assured is a requisite Preparation to our bringing
forth Fruit, or performing any good Work. If it were needful to add any thing
further, I might adduce the express Testimony of St. Paul, Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the Washing of Regeneration and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost.

I SHALL conclude my Discourse with a few Reflections.

WHAT we have heard affords us a Test, by which we may examine the Truth of the
Doctrines we receive -- It also gives us a Rule, by which we may determine the
Value of the Duties we practice -- It points out to us the only Way to secure
our future Welfare.

I. WE have a Test by which we may examine the Truth of the Doctrines we
receive.
THE great Design of God, in the Salvation of Sinners, is to display the Glory
of his Grace. He has made us to sit down together in heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus, that He might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his Kindness
toward us through Christ Jesus. To diminish this Grace, is to darken the Glory
of the Gospel, and deprive the blessed God of that Tribute of Praise He expects
from all his redeemed People.

EVERY Opinion which exalts the Powers of human Nature in it is present
degenerate State, undermines the Foundation of the Christian Faith, and
prevents us from that Resignation to divine Sovereignty, which becomes the
Character of apostate Creatures. That Doctrine which ascribes the entire Glory
of our Salvation to God bears the Stamp of Divinity, and will ever recommend
itself to those who have been taught in the School of a crucified Savior.

IT has always been the Stratagem of Satan, to employ the Powers of Wit and
Learning, to support the Fabric of human Pride and render Men vain in their
own Imaginations: But it is the constant Work of the Spirit to humble the
Sinner in the Dust; convince him that he is absolutely lost; that there is no
Possibility of his Recovery, but by a Grace to which he has no Claim, which he
has forfeited a thousand Ways. -- Unilluminated Minds may approach the Throne
of God with a long Catalogue of their good Works: But those who are acquainted
with their own true Character, will come before the Divine Majesty with no
other Plea than that of the penitent Publican -- God be merciful to me a
Sinner. -- This is the only Method to glorify God, and consult our own Safety.

IF this Doctrine which teaches us to renounce all Dependence upon our selves,
in every Form -- to place our entire Trust on sovereign and unmerited Grace, is
a Mistake, it is a perfectly innocent one. -- It cannot be attended with any
dangerous Consequences -- it will not be displeasing to that Being who assures
us He gives Grace to the Humble. -- What is my Crime? -- It can only be this
-- I entertain too mean an Opinion of myself; I degrade apostate Nature too
low; I form too favorable Sentiments of the Riches of divine Grace, when I
suppose God bestows Salvation as a free Gift, and that He confers his choicest
Favors without Money and without Price. -- Is this my Error? -- Is this the
Fault I am charged with? -- I am persuaded I shall not be ashamed of it at the
Supreme Tribunal, however I may be reproached by the polite Reasoners of the
Day: I shall not repent of it in Heaven, whatever Inconveniences I may suffer
upon Earth: Men may ridicule my Weakness, but God will approve of every Attempt
to advance the Honor of his Grace.

THIS is the only Revenue He receives from all the stupendous Designs of his
Love; all Endeavors to deprive Him of this will be condemned as the highest
Sacrilege and punished with the severest Vengeance. -- I run no Risk, when I
acknowledge my extreme Indigence and Misery: But I incur the greatest Danger,
when I do not adore God as the Author of all Good. This is the Language of the
inspired Oracles -- O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself, but in Me is thy
Help. -- Upon every amiable Disposition we possess -- upon every virtuous
Action we perform, we should engrave this humble Inscription -- This is not of
ourselves, it is the Gift of God. If there is any real Good in us, it is
planted by the Hand of our heavenly Father, watered by his Grace, and
flourishes by the Influences of his Holy Spirit. -- Were I, like St. Paul,
advanced to the Dignity of an Apostle, transported to Paradise, and favored
with the Visions of Glory; with him I desire to be sensible I am the Chief of
Sinners, and acknowledge that all tiie Privileges which distinguish me from the
vilest of Men, are the Gifts of God.

II. WE have a Rule by which we may determine the Value of the Duties we
practice.
A great Part of Mankind cast off all Reverence of the Deity, are insensible of
their immortal interests, and neglect the Service they owe to the supreme Lord
and Lawgiver. -- Among many who make a more plausible Profession of Religion, a
Fear of the divine Displeasure, a Dread of future Punishment, is the only
Motive of Obedience. -- But if by Grace we are saved, then it is a Discovery of
this Grace that encourages us to engage in the Service of God; a Dependence on
it is constant Assistance, that animates us in all the Duties of the Christian
Life.

To serve God only from a Principle of Fear, is not the Disposition of his
Children, but the Character of a Slave. In this Frame of Mind all our
Performances are constrained; we abstain from Sin with Reluctance: We should
indulge every vicious Appetite with Pleasure if we were not afraid of eternal
Misery. These Services therefore, though performed to the greatest exactness,
cannot be acceptable to God: For He demands the Obedience of the Heart, and
receives none but a willing People: All his Servants are convinced of the
Excellency and Glory of his Character, they are captivated with the Discoveries
of his free Grace which is tendered to the greatest of Sinners: They admire
that Wisdom and Love which has provided Salvation for those who have no
recommending Qualities to establish a Claim to this Blessing* They therefore
bow down the Head and adore this disinterested Goodness -- with Transports of
Joy, they accept of the Gift of a SAVIOR. -- Looking up to Him for Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and eternal Redemption.

THIS astonishing Grace inclines them to renounce with Detestation the Practice
of Vice, and with Pleasure to engage in the Service of so amiable a Master. His
Commandments are not a disagreeable Task, but their daily Business and Delight.
-- He loved them when they were nothing but Guilt and Misery, and shall they
not love Him, who is worthy of their undivided Affection! -- He has delivered
them from the Terrors of Death, and shall they not devote their future Lives to
the Glory of their great Benefactor!

III. The Doctrine of my Text points out unto us the only Way to secure our
future Welfare.
IT is the most interesting Inquiry of all Mankind, wherewith shall I come
before God, or bow myself before the MOST HIGH? -- How shall I appear with
Safety at the Tribunal of infinite Purity, and obtain that Salvation which is
provided for the People of God? -- If by Grace we are saved, then we must apply
to this Grace as our only Resource -- If it is the Gift of God, then we can
only obtain it by an humble and grateful Reception.

THIS Way, though appointed by infinite Wisdom, is often esteemed Foolishness
by Men -- though revealed in almost every Page of the Gospel, is ridiculed by
the Disputers of this World -- But all that are taught of God are made to
renounce every Claim, and receive Salvation in it is Beginning, Progress, and
Completion, as the free Gift of God through Jesus Christ. If we reject this
there is no sure Foundation, on which we can build our Hopes of eternal
Happiness. We must live in perpetual Doubt, and if our Consciences are not
stupefied, die in distressing Agonies.

WHATEVER vain Men may pretend, the Testimony of their own Hearts convinces
them that they have sinned against that God with whom is terrible Majesty; that
they have no Righteousness which can stand the critical Examination of the
supreme Tribunal: -- They may put on a gay Appearance in the Days of their
Health, and silence the Reproaches of their own Minds, when surrounded with the
Smiles and Flatteries of the World -- But when the King of Terrors approaches,
and a mortal Distemper summons them to appear before their Almighty Judge --
When the Skill of Physicians fails, and their Friends stand round their dying
Beds, with an unavailing Pity -- When the immortal Spirit is just ready to take
it is Flight into the invisible World -- When a few Moments must determine their
eternal Destiny -- If now they have no Hope, but what arises from the Purity of
their Hearts, and the Righteousness of their Lives -- What Visions of Wrath
will present themselves to their guilty Minds! -- What Fears of future
Vengeance disturb and distract the departing Hour!

BUT if in the happy Days of Health we humbly accept the Proposals of divine
Grace, and fly to that Refuge which astonishing Goodness has prepared for the
Security of Sinners -- We have a sure Foundation for Comfort in Life and Hope
in Death -- We may now possess that Peace of God, which passes all
Understanding; and rejoice in the certain Prospect of future Felicity and Glory
-- We may look down on the Splendors of this World with a calm Disdain; knowing
we have a nobler Portion reserved for us in Heaven. We may stand upon the
utmost Verge of the present Life, with untrembling Hearts, and welcome the
happy Day which lands us on the immortal Shore.

AND now, my Brethren, who of us does not think this Happiness worthy to be
desired with Ardor, to be embraced with Raptures of Gratitude.

BEHOLD. I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy. -- This Happiness will be the
Portion of ALL who receive it as the free Gift of God, through the Merits and
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST.

I am sensible, this is a Doctine hard to be believed; and when believed is
perpetually opposed by the Pride and Prejudices of human Nature. -- Though it
forms the brightest Glory of the Gospel and gives the greatest Encouragement to
indigent and perishing Sinners. -- Though it contains a Truth, sufficient to
make every Heart leap for Joy, and every Tongue celebrate the Praises of God --
Yet Nothing is more contrary to the prevailing Sentiments of Mankind -- Nothing
has occasioned warmer Disputes in the Church of God. -- Our natural
Dispositions are as averse to receive Salvation by free Grace, as to submit to
the Laws of the divine Government. -- We seek for some recommending Qualities
which shall render us proper Objects of the divine Favor, and give us some Kind
of Title to the Blessings of his Grace. We cannot think we have a Right to
trust in Christ for Privileges so incomparably excellent; which will make us
happy in Time and Eternity, till we are possessed of some previous
Righteousness to secure us a welcome Reception.

THUS, by a proud Pretense of Humility, we refuse to give to God the Glory of
the Riches of his Grace -- By an evil Heart of Unbelief, we keep at a Distance
from the Fountain of all Good -- We seek to obtain that in ourselves, which can
only be obtained from the Fullness that is in Christ.

TURN a deaf Ear, O my Brethren, to the Dictates of corrupt Reason -- Hearken
to the SON OF GOD, who descended from the Bosom of the FATHER, to instruct a
misguided World in the Way to Happiness. -- To whom did He dispatch his
commissioned Messengers? -- To those whose Dignity commanded Respect -- whose
Wealth recommended them to Favor -- whose good Qualities required they should
be treated with Distinction? -- No -- They were sent to those who were in the
most forlorn, destitute and miserable Circumstances -- who had Nothing to
invite the Esteem, but every Thing which might provoke the Aversion of their
generous Benefactor.

WHAT is the Message these Ministers of Heaven are commanded to deliver? --
That all Things are ready. Every Thing that is necessary to free them from the
Guilt -- cleanse them from the Pollution of Sin -- to justify them at the
Tribunal of infinite Purity, and prepare them for the Enjoyment of heavenly
Happiness.

THE Demands of Justice are satisfied -- the Price of your Salvation is paid --
You are freely invited to receive the Justification of your Persons -- the
Sanctification of your Nature and complete Happiness.

IS this the Language of our adorable Redeemer? -- Then surely it becomes us
not to question his Fidelity, or diminish the Riches of his Grace. -- Does he
call us? -- It is not Presumption but a Duty to obey his Voice, and accept his
kind Invitation. The inestimable Privileges purchased by his Blood are not the
Sale but the Gift of God. They who receive them in the appointed Way -- freely
-- give Glory to God and secure their immortal Welfare.

SERMON III. The Nature of FAITH.
EPHESIANS II. 8. By Grace are ye saved THROUGH FAITH.
THERE is in many Respects a surprising Correspondence, between the Means by
which we were betrayed into Ruin, and the Methods which infinite Wisdom employs
for our Recovery. -- By the Rebellion of the first Adam, we are made Sinners;
by the Obedience of the second, we are constituted Righteous -- In consequence
of our Relation to the primitive Transgressor, our Natures are universally
corrupted and defiled; by an Union to our divine Redeemer, we are sanctified in
Spirit, Soul and Body -- We lost the Glory of our Innocence by hearkening to
the Father of Lies; we are restored to the Favor and Image of God, by giving
Credit to the Word of Truth -- By trusting to Satan we became miserable; by
believing in Him who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, we recover our
forfeited Happiness -- This is that sublime Truth which is taught us in the
Words of my Text -- By Grace are ye saved through Faith.

IN my following Discourse I shall endeavor to explain the Nature of that FAITH
by which we are saved -- and conclude with some IMPROVEMENT.

THERE is a Faith which is common to the Children of God and the Servants of
Sin. Faith is often mentioned as the distinguishing Character of the Saints,
and sometimes is ascribed to the worst of Beings. It formed the brightest Glory
of Abraham the Friend of God -- and inspires the apostate Spirits with Fear and
Trembling. There must then, be an essential Difference between that Faith by
which we are saved and that which may accompany us to eternal Damnation.

FAITH considered in a religious Sense is an Assurance of those Truths, which
are revealed in the inspired Scriptures -- It is founded, not on the
Conjectures of human Reason, but on the Authority of God the Revealer. Every
Thing which God has revealed or promised; every Thing which is contained in the
Volumes of the Old and New Testament; is the proper Object of Faith. But the
especial Object of that Faith, which is the distinguishing Characteristic of
the real Christian, is JESUS CHRIST -- the eternal SON OF GOD -- the appointed
SAVIOR of a revolted World -- He offered up himself a Sacrifice to divine
Justice, that we might not be condemned at it is awful Bar -- He fulfilled all
Righteousness, that we might have a valid Title to the Reward of Life eternal
-- He is proposed in the Gospel in all the Glories of an allsufficient and
condescending SAVIOR, to be received as the Gift of God, to be trusted in by
all those who are sensible of their Guilt and Misery, and desire to obtain the
Blessings of Salvation. -- Faith is a Persuasion, that it is the sole
Prerogative of this adorable Person to restore our lapsed Race to the Favor of
God; -- or to express myself in the Language of Inspiration, Neither is there
Salvation in any other, for there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men
whereby we must be saved. Acts iv. 12.

THIS Faith is often described in the Gospel to be a firm Belief -- THAT JESUS
IS THE SON OF GOD -- the promised MESSIAH. -- Consequently, that his Doctrine
is divine -- His Promises certain -- which shall infallibly be accomplished in
their appointed Order. -- We believe what the sacred Historians have recorded
of His miraculous Birth -- His unspotted Life -- His wonderful Works -- His
meritorious Death -- His glorious Resurrection -- His triumphant Ascension into
Heaven -- His prevalent Intercession at the Right Hand of the Father.

THESE Truths are received as faithful Sayings, not because they could be
discovered by human Reason, but because they are authenticated by a divine
Testimony.

WHEN the Son of God commands us to receive Him as a Messenger from Heaven, He
gives the most unquestionable Evidences of the Divinity of his Mission. He
declares that He is a Teacher sent from God, and discovers his Claim to this
Character by the Demonstration of the Spirit, and by Power -- He practiced the
most heroic Virtues in every Period of his Residence among Men -- He confirmed
his Doctrine by Miracles which could only be performed by an omnipotent Arm --
He appears to be the Prince of Life, when expiring in the Agonies of Death --
He disposes of the Joys of Paradise, when suffering as a condemned Malefactor.

IN this critical Moment, Nature through all her Works declares his Dignity and
Glory; -- even the Inhabitants of the Grave arise to do Honor to Him who has
the Keys of the invisible World -- He entered the Grave, not by Necessity of
Nature, but voluntary Consent. -- He triumphed over the King of Terrors in his
own Dominions, and ascended like an invincible Conqueror to immortal Life. --
This set the Seal of Heaven to the Truth of his Mission, justified his highest
Pretensions, and in the most solemn Manner declared that He was exalted to be a
PRINCE and a SAVIOR.

THEY who yield an unfeigned Assent to these Truths are frequently said to
Believe. But when this Faith only floats in the Understanding, and does not
descend into the Heart, captivate the Affections and regulate the Conduct of
Mankind, it will not evidence that we are true Disciples of Christ, or secure
us a Title to the Privileges which he has purchased for his People. Simon Magus
was made a Proselyte by the Preaching of Philip -- he was baptized into the
Faith of the Gospel, and it is said that he also believed. -- Yet we have the
Testimony of an inspired Apostle, that his Heart was not right with God: He was
in the Gall of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity. Daily Experience teaches us,
that Men's Judgments may be convinced, and the Will remain obstinate and
perverse. We may give Credit to the Truth of a Doctrine, and our Heart rise up
in Opposition against it.

BUT this Faith, instead of being acceptable to God, increases His Displeasure
-- So far from being beneficial to Men it adds to their Guilt and Misery. A
professed Infidel is not so odious a Character as a perfidious Traitor. -- It
therefore necessarily follows, that the Faith which is the distinguishing
Character of the Children of God, must be of a more excellent Kind than that
which we have now been describing.

THE Faith which saves us always engages us -- unfeignedly to approve the Way
of Salvation by Jesus Christ -- cheerfully to accept of Him as our only
complete and eternal Savior -- humbly to confide in Him for all the promised
Blessings which He confers on his People. -- These are the inseparable
Attendants on a true Faith -- and distinguish it from the most specious
Counterfeits. -- I shall explain them in their Order.

I. A TRUE Faith engages us to an unfeigned Approbation of the Way of Salvation
by Jesus Christ.
MEN who have been educated in the Principles of the Christian Faith, often
receive them as true, without any Hesitation. When convinced of their Guilt,
they acknowledge the Necessity of an Interest in Christ to deliver them from
the Punishment they have deserved. Animated with a Dread of future Misery,
inspired with the Hope of heavenly Happiness, they attempt to give up
themselves to Jesus Christ. But all is forced -- their only Motive is to remove
the Grounds of their present Disquietude -- when their Distress vanishes they
soon return to their former Sins, or satisfy themselves with a Round of
religious Performances, and a Conversation outwardly inoffensive and regular.
The Name of Jesus is heard with Indifference. -- Persons of this Character
often prove the greatest Opposers of the unadulterated Doctrines of Grace.

TO form Faith in the Heart, a supernatural Light must be communicated to us
from above, to convince us not only of the Truth but Excellency and Glory of
the Plan of Salvation revealed in the Gospel. We view it not only as divinely
true but supremely good. -- This conquers our Prejudices, captivates our
Hearts, produces a cheerful Acquiescence in the Designs of redeeming Love. --
We admire this Method of Salvation, as the Contrivance of infinite Wisdom, the
Product of amazing Benevolence. -- We behold the Character of the Deity
displayed in it is brightest Glory, and the richest Grace discovered to
perishing Sinners. -- Awful Justice maintains the Authority of the Law; and
Mercy triumphs in the Recovery of a lapsed World. -- Sin is severely punished,
and the Sinner received to Favor -- Our Surety dies to fulfill the Penalty of
the Law -- and in his Obedience unto Death accomplishes a perfect Righteousness
in behalf of his People.

IN Compliance with this mavelous Plan, the glad Tidings of a Savior are
preached to rebellious Men, and all Nations are invited to accept Salvation
through his Merits and Mediation. -- When this is clearly discovered to the
Mind, it puts a final Period to all our former Contrivances to recommend
ourselves to the Favor of God: We come to a fixed Determination to seek for
Happiness only through the Grace and Righteousness of our adorable Redeemer. We
believe it to be not only a faithful Saying, but worthy of all Acceptance,
that Christ came into the World to save the Chief of Sinners.

INCREDULOUS Men may form a thousand Objections against that Way of Salvation,
which strips the Sinner of all preparatory Goodness, brings him as a convicted
Criminal to the Footstool of Sovereign Grace, to expect all his Blessedness
from the Merit and Obedience of another. -- Yet this very View (which is so
great an Offense to the Pride of unhumbled Nature) attracts the Admiration and
Gratitude of every enlightened Mind. They adore a crucified Savior as the Wisdom
and Power of God. -- This is the Language of their enraptured Hearts -- This is
a Scheme which secures the Honor of the Supreme Governor of the Universe, and
provides for the Safety of self-destroyed Man -- God appears encompassed with
the most awful and amiable Glory -- the Pride of all Flesh is humbled in the
Dust -- the Believer is rescued from deserved Misery and raised to immortal
Happiness. -- This reveals a Savior, exactly adapted to the Circumstances of
destitute condemned MalefactorS, who have no good Qualities to recommend them;
who have Nothing but the most abject Wretchedness to move the divine
Compassions.

HAPPY they who are interested in this adorable JESUS! They are delivered from
their Guilt and all it is melancholy Consequences. To obtain this Blessing is my
most ardent Desire -- the Center of my Hopes: -- If destitute of it -- not all
the Treasures of Earth, or Glories of Heaven, can give me any solid
Satisfaction. THUS the Heart of Man is brought to delight in the Gospel
Salvation. -- These Views prepare us,

II. CHEERFULLY to accept of Christ as our complete and eternal Savior.
THE Revelation of the Gospel discovers to me an allsufficient Savior; the
Illuminations of the Spirit represent this Savior as incomparably excellent --
the most desirable Good -- a Treasure which will enrich me to Eternity. -- The
next Question which naturally arises in an awakened Mind, is this -- May I hope
for an Interest in this inestimable Blessing? -- Will this illustrious Person
accept an ungrateful Rebel? -- Will he bestow Life and Salvation on me, who
deserve Nothing but Death and Damnation?

THESE Objections are in a great Measure removed by the Views I described under
the last Head of my Discourse. -- For the Freedom and Riches of divine Grace,
to the greatest of Sinners, is an essential Part of the Glory which is
displayed in the Gospel. But we are naturally slow of Heart to believe: A
self-righteous Spirit appears in a Variety of Forms to obstruct our Approaches
to God through Jesus Christ.

THEREFORE, the Word of God abounds with universal, unlimited Invitations to
Sinners of every Order, Character and Degree, to accept of the Blessings of
Salvation without Money and without Price. These are bestowed, not on those who
have any previous Virtues to authorize their Claim, but on polluted,
impoverished, and necessitous Bankrupts: They are to be received as a free
Donation, and are the unfailing Portion of all that highly esteem and
thankfully accept them.

THIS good News to a guilty World is not contained in a few obscure Texts,
tortured by the Arts of Criticism to serve a favorite System, but is the
uniform Language of Inspiration, clothed in a Variety of Expressions, repeated
with the most affectionate Tenderness. -- When THE SON OF GOD opened his divine
Commission, with what Meekness, with what Condescension did He address his
Hearers! -- The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He has appointed Me to
preach the Gospel to the Poor, to proclaim Deliverance to Captives.

IN the public Course of his Ministry, He declares his compassionate Designs in
the most expressive Terms; to remove every Doubt, to dissipate every Fear that
might arise in the Breasts of Sinners and assure them of a welcome Reception.
-- He stands in a promiscuous Multitude, incircled with Numbers of his
inveterate Enemies, and cries with a loud Voice, with affectionate Vehemence,
If any Man thirst let him come to me and drink: Though involved in the deepest
Guilt, covered with the most loathsome Deformity, if he earnestly desires the
Blessings of Salvation, let him repair to Me; I will supply all his Wants,
deliver him from all his Distresses, and quench his Thirst after Happiness with
Fountains of living Waters.

WHEN our blessed Lord had finished His Work upon Earth, and ascended on high
in Majesty Triumph, He received the most inestimable Gifts, to be conferred
not on the virtuous and deserving, but for the disobedient and rebellious.
Therefore from his exalted Throne in Glory, He declares the generous Intentions
of his Heart, and closes the Canon of the Sacred Scriptures with this Royal
Proclamation, Whosoever will, let him come to the Waters of Life freely.

ANIMATED by these kind Invitations, supported by th^se reiterated Assurances
of Success, the Believer bows down at the Feet of JESUS, and thankfully accepts
the offers of His (...)* He does not derive his Encouragement from any Good he
observes in himself; but from the free, universal Tenders of divine Grace to
all, without any exclusive Clause, to prevent the most indigent and wretched,
from a Participation of these incomparable Benefits -- The good will of God --
the Merits of CHRIST are the only Foundation of his Hope -- Thus he addresses
himself to the adorable Jesus in the Language of humble Faith -- O! Thou
condescending Savior! I acknowledge that by Sin I am become a Child of Wrath,
justly condemned to suffer the Pains of eternal Death. I renounce all Hopes of
Deliverance from any created Wisdom or Power; but Thou art the Son of God, and
by the Appointment of the Father the commissioned Savior of an apostate World;
I therefore commit my Soul into thy Hands, as One every way qualified to
provide for its Welfare in Time and Eternity. -- O! Thou heavenly Prophet!
remove the Vail from my Understanding, enlighten me in the Knowledge of the
Truth, conduct me by thy Word and Spirit, in the Way that leads to thy eternal
Kingdom. -- O! Thou great High Priest! sensible that I am a guilty Criminal, I
fly to the atoning Merits of thy Blood, to save me from the Punishment I have
deserved, and plead thy all-perfect Righteousness that I may be justified at
the Tribunal of God. -- O! Thou Immortal King! I bow to the Scepter of thy
Grace, and cordially desire that every Passion and Inclination may be banished
from my Breast, which opposes the Laws of thy Government. -- O! Thou Captain of
our Salvation! I trust to thy victorious Arm, to defend me from the Power and
Malice of my spiritual Enemies, to subdue the native Corruptions of my Heart,
to preserve me faithful to thy Cause, and finally introduce me to the Happiness
Thou have appointed for thy People. -- Had not astonishing Grace allowed, nay
commanded me, to receive Thee as the Gift of God, to accomplish these important
Purposes, I might justly suspect that my present Address would be rejected with
Disdain: -- But since Almighty Love has provided a Savior for perishing
Sinners -- Since unlimited Goodness has commanded the most unworthy to look
unto Him that they may be saved -- To receive this Gift, to accept this
Goodwill is not unwarranted Presumption, but a commanded Duty. I add,

III. THIS Acceptance of Christ as our Savior is accompanied with an entire
Dependence upon Him, for all the promised Blessings which He bestows on his
People.
THIS naturally follows, from what I have already declared of the Nature and
Operations of saving Faith. -- If I assent to the Way of Salvation revealed in
the Gospel, as divinely (...) -- If I approve it as the most excellent Way --
If an Almighty Savior is offered to every Sinner without Distinction -- If I
have been enabled to accept this blessed Tender -- Then I may safely conclude
He will exert his saving Power in my Favor, and bring me to see the Good of his
Chosen. For this is only to believe He will maintain the Honor of his Word, and
fulfill his sacred Engagements to his People. We have a Testimony from Heaven,
that God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in Him should not perish, but have everlasting Life: It is written
with an immortal Pen, that whosoever comes to the blessed Jesus, He will in no
wise cast out. -- If therefore my Eyes have been opened to discern his
Excellency -- If my Heart has been persuaded to acquiesce in the Designs of his
redeeming Love -- If it is the Top of my Ambition to be found in Him, clothed
with his Righteousness, a Monument of his Grace -- The Inference is just -- the
Conclusion unfailing -- He is and will be made of God unto me Wisdom and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

THESE Heavens shall vanish as a Scroll, this Earth shall be dissolved by Fire,
and all the Beauties of this lower Creation expire in Smoke; but not the
minutest Article of the divine Promise fail of a punctual Accomplishment.

JESUS is the only Hope of the Saints in the present Age -- Nations yet unborn
shall be the future Triumphs of his Love -- Nor will He lay aside the endearing
Character of a Savior, till the Empire of Sin and Satan is destroyed, and all
that place their Trust in Him are fixed in immutable Felicity and Glory.

IMPROVEMENT.
I. LET us examine, whether we have that Faith, which is the unfailing
Character of the People of God -- a certain Evidence that we are made Partakers
of the blessings of Salvation.
HAVE I been made sensible of my Sinfulness and Misery; the Corruptions of my
Heart, as well as the numberless Pollutions of my Life; of the infinite Evil as
well as destructive Consequences of Sin? -- Men may talk of free Grace with
seraphic Eloquence, and flatter themselves with a pleasing Dream, that they are
the Favorites of Heaven; but till they perceive the condemning Power of the
Law, and subscribe to the Justice of that Sentence which is pronounced against
every Transgressor, they continue under the Dominion of Sin, and see no Beauty
and Loveliness in the Savior.

HAVE I been convinced of my utter Inability to deliver myself from this
Misery? Have I seen the Vanity of all Dependence upon the Uprightness of my
Intentions, the Regularity of my Conduct, my humblest Confessions, or deepest
Humiliations, to expiate the Guilt of Sin, and satisfy the Justice of offended
Heaven? -- Without this, I shall inevitably trust to my Prayers, Tears and
Amendments to recommend me to the Favor of God -- I shall neglect the only
Sacrifice which has made complete Atonement for the Sins of Men.

HAVE I accepted the Proposals of the Gospel? The Gospel reveals an Almighty
Savior to a ruined World, and by the most persuasive Arguments invites us to
receive Him in that amiable Character. Have I heard the joyful Sound with
Gratitude, and been made willing to be saved by Christ in his own appointed
Way? -- Is this the unfeigned Language of my Soul -- Lift up your Heads ye
everlasting Gates, let the KING OF GLORY descend and take the full Possession
of all my Powers? -- Do I not only depend on his justifying Righteousness; but
welcome the sanctifying Influences of his Spirit? -- Is He precious in my
Esteem, not only as an atoning Priest, but a commanding King; -- to mortify my
dearest Lusts, as well as to deliver me from the Miseries of Hell; -- to form
me to an entire Subjection to his Laws, as well as dignify me with the
Privileges of his People?

IN fine, is JESUS, in all his sacred Offices, the supreme Object of my
Affection? Do I prefer Him to all the Honors and Advantages of this Life? Do I
count all Things but Loss that I may win Him? -- If these Dispositions are
implanted in us by the Spirit of God, they are Fruits of distinguishing Grace,
and will terminate in the Harvest of Glory.

II. THEY who pour Contempt on the Love of God manifested by Jesus Christ,
neglect their most important Interests.
INTEREST is the grand Spring of human Actions. They who are deaf to the Calls
of Duty, insensible of the Obligations of Gratitude, are generally influenced
by what they imagine to be their Interest. -- But it is the Infelicity of
Mankind, that they often confine their Views to the present Moment; and
disregard future Consequences: They fix their Eyes on Things which are seen and
temporal, but are blind to the Excellence and Beauty of Things unseen and
eternal.

WE see Men engaged in a perpetual Hurry, disquieted with perplexing Fears. --
Ask them, what is the Matter? -- My Honor or Interest is at Stake. -- This
awakens their sollicitous Concern -- and engages them to incessant Activity and
Diligence. -- Allow me, my Brethren, to enquire, is it not your Honor and
Interest, to be delivered from the Wrath of God, and the unutterable Torments
of Hell -- to be admitted into the Family of Heaven and secure a Title to the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light? I must rank you among the Number of
abandoned Infidels, or degrade you from the Character of rational Creatures, to
suppose you can hesitate one Moment, in deciding this important Question. --
None can be indifferent whether they live with God, or are eternal Exiles from
his blissful Presence -- Whether they spend unceasing Ages in the triumphant
Joys of Heaven, or the excruciating Pains of Hell.

WHENCE then is it, that future Happiness is so generally neglected? Whence is
it, that Men who discover the most exquisite Sagacity, in securing the
Interests of this Life, are so infatuated as to pay little or no Attention to
the momentous Affairs of the World to come? -- Is it because the supreme
Happiness of their Nature is placed out of their Reach? -- Is it because there
is no Prospect of Success, though they employ their utmost Diligence? --
Blessed be God, this is not the Case -- Are you excluded from the Hope of the
Gospel? -- Is the inevitable Sentence passed upon you? -- Are you not invited
to return to your offended Sovereign? -- Does not the Son of God call you by
his Word and Spirit to come to Him that you may have Life? -- If then you are
excluded from future Happiness, it is by your own Obstinacy and Perverseness.
-- If eternal Damnation be your Portion, it is because you prefer your Sins
before your Savior, the Pleasures of the World before the Privileges of the
People of God. Every Argument of Terror and Endearment are employed to persuade
you not to receive the Grace of God in vain.

THE compassionate Father of Mercies sollicits your Compliance with his
Demands, as if his own Honor and Interest were connected with your Happiness.
The great Creator becomes a Supplicant to his Creature Man -- and beseeches us
with Bowels of Pity to be reconciled to Him. He swears by his own unutterable
Name, that He seeks not our Destruction, but delights in our Happiness. As I
live (says the Lord) I take no Pleasure in the Death of the Sinner, but that
he repent and live, turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?

IF you reject these moving Addresses -- upon what can you depend! This World
-- it is Glories are swiftly passing away! Upon your own Goodness -- the Defects
of your Duties will forever condemn you! Upon your present Health and Strength
-- your Life is a Vapor which vanishes in a Moment! Every Hope will deceive
you but that which is built on Jesus Christ. Place your entire Dependence on
Him, He will give you Grace, Glory, and every desirable Good. To Him be Glory
forever and ever. AMEN.

SERMON IV. FAITH the appointed Way of SALVATION.
EPHESIANS II. 8. For by Grace are ye saved THROUGH FAITH.
TO glorify God, the great Author of our Being, ought to be the uninterrupted
Employment of every intelligent Creature. For this we were formed by His
Almighty Hand, and redeemed by His mavelous Grace. The First Creation
proclaims the Existence of an all-wise and powerful Deity; the New Creation
discovers the Wonders of his Love to his apostate Creatures.

THEREFORE, when the SON OF GOD descended from the Bosom of the FATHER, to
tabernacle in human Flesh, a Multitude of the heavenly Host sang Glory to God
in the Highest, Peace upon-Earth and Goodwill to Men. The Design of this
mysterious Dispensation was to place the Benignity of the Divine Nature in the
most amiable and attracting Point of Light: -- That the innumerable Orders of
Angels might admire the Riches of his Grace -- and all the Nations of the
Redeemed might pay an eternal Tribute of Praise to Him, who delivered them from
the Abyss of Misery, and made them Heirs of celestial Glory. Upon this Account
the whole Scheme of Redemption is wisely contrived, to subdue the Pride of Man,
to advance the Honor of the MOST HIGH GOD. Therefore in the eternal Counsels of
his Will, he determined, not only that our Salvation should be of Grace -- but
through Faith.

IN a former Discourse, I explained the Nature of Faith -- I shall now endeavor
to show, in what Sense we are said to be saved through Faith -- and then
enquire into the Reasons of this divine Constitution.

FIRST, In what Sense are we said to be saved through Faith.
EVERY Man must be justified by Law, or saved by Grace -- or perish forever. --
If I expect to be justified by Law, my Obedience must be perfect, without the
smallest Blemish; -- universal, without the least Exception; -- persevering
without a Moment's Interruption. We appear before the Throne of infinite
Purity, and challenge impartial Justice to find any thing in us worthy of
Condemnation and Death.

BUT the Man who expects to be saved by Grace acknowledges himself a guilty
Criminal, worthy of the severest Punishment: -- He is sensible that his best
Performances, if examined according to the Purity and Extent of the Law, must
be turned into Articles of Indictment against him: -- He therefore appeals from
the Bar of Justice to the Throne of Grace; humbly confessing that if God should
be strict to mark Iniquity, he must be eternally condemned: -- He pleads the
pardoning Mercy of God through the Mediation of Jesus Christ: -- The only
Foundation of his Hope is -- that the Supreme Lawgiver will not deal with him
according to his personal Demerits, but consider him as united to his dear SON,
whom he cordially accepts as his SAVIOR and LORD: -- Through Him -- though
condemned by the Law, he expects to be relieved by the Gospel -- though
deserving the Miseries of Hell, he hopes to enjoy the Felicities of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Christ and He only has purchased our Salvation, by his infinite
Merits; -- in his Righteousness we must appear, if we are accepted at the
Tribunal of God. If Christ had not died for our Offenses, and risen again for
our Justification, in vain should we bewail our Sins, reform our Lives, employ
our most assiduous Endeavors to recover our Innocence and Happiness. Every well
instructed Mind will therefore say with St. Paul, God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of Christ.

Of Consequence, when we are said to be saved through Faith, it cannot intend
that Faith merits our Salvation; or that God gives us eternal Happiness to
reward the Excellency and Goodness of our Faith: But it is the appointed
Method, in which we are made Partakers of the Blessings which Christ has
purchased with his Blood -- In this Sense, and no other, is Faith the Condition
of our Salvation. This the Gospel testifies through all its inspired Pages. --
If thou shall confess with thy Mouth (says St. Paul) the Lord Jesus Christ,
and shall believe in thy Heart, that God has raised Him from the Dead, thou
shall be saved. -- When the awakened Jailor makes the solemn Enquiry -- What
shall I do to be saved? -- This is the Answer given by the Ambassadors of
Heaven -- Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved -- Nor have
the Refinements of later Ages found a directer Entrance into the Kingdom of God.

FAITH is that Grace which unites us to the SON OF GOD, the SAVIOR OF THE
WORLD: By this Union, we become Partakers of all his Benefits. "Our Guilt is
transferred to Him. -- His Righteousness is imputed to us." -- To express
myself in Language dictated by the HOLY GHOST, He was made to be Sin for us,
who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in Him.

LET us place this Truth in another Point of Light, and make it as intelligible
as may be to the meanest Understanding. Salvation is frequently represented as
the Gift of God: Now we all know, that there is a wide Distinction between that
which is bestowed as a free Gift, and that which is obtained as the Reward of
Services performed: To establish our Claim to the promised Reward, we must
accomplish our Task -- finish the appointed Work, and punctually comply with
all the Articles specified in the Agreement: -- But to enjoy a Gift, Nothing is
requisite, but to realize the Kindness of our Benefactor, and receive his
generous Offer with Gratitude.

THE Difference is as great, as between a Workman who is employed on Wages, and
an indigent Beggar who lives upon Charity: The Labourer has no Title to the
stipulated Wages, till he has completed the Service expressed in the Contract;
but the poor Mendicant only receives the Alms which are generously presented to
him. -- The Bounty of the Donor authorizes his Claim -- his grateful Acceptance
puts him in Possession of the Benefit.

THIS gives us a perspicuous View of the Method, in which we are made Partakers
of the Salvation revealed in the Gospel. -- Salvation is not bestowed upon us
as the Reward of our good Services: -- We cannot challenge it as a Debt from
the Hand of Justice; -- it is the Gift of unpurchased Bounty: -- Our only Part
is to accept the Goodwill of our heavenly Father, and ascribe all our Happiness
to the Riches of redeeming Love.

THUS we are saved by Faith -- Faith accepts the condescending Offers of a
Savior, and gives God the Glory of that Grace, which He designed to magnify in
the Recovery of an apostate World. -- What is it to believe? -- To give Credit
to the Report of the Gospel; -- to receive that Savior who is freely tendered
to us; -- to depend on his Righteousness, to give us a Title to the Favor of
God; -- to resign ourselves to his Spirit, to prepare us for the Enjoyment of
Life eternal.

UPON this Foundation, all Pretenses to Merit are destroyed; all Claims
established on personal Worthiness are disallowed. God gives -- and Faith
receives a Title to the Dignity and Privileges of the Sons of God. There is no
Merit in receiving a Gift, though it be necessary to enjoying the Good which is
tendered to me. -- Thus Faith does not give me an Interest in Christ, on the
Foot of Desert; but by Virtue of a Divine Constitution. The Wisdom of the Deity
did not see sit, that those should have a Title to this Salvation, who were
insensible of their Want of it, or unwilling to receive it: -- They are forever
excluded, by an irreversible Decree, who obstinately despise, and ungratefully
trample under their Feet, the inestimable Blessing. -- I am now prepared,

SECONDLY, To enquire into the Reasons of this Divine Constitution.
THE Design of Man's Redemption flowed from the eternal Counsels of Heaven.
Before this Universe existed, the Deity foresaw, that many of the free
Intelligences He designed to create, would violate the established Orders of
his Government and fall from their original Dignity. -- His unbounded
Benevolence inclined Him to devise a Method of Recovery, for many of his
rebellious Subjects. -- The sinning Angels, the first Transgressors, are
excluded all Hopes of Mercy; -- while the sinful Posterity of Adam are
appointed to be the Objects of distinguishing Favors.

INFINITE Wisdom determined, that without vindicating the Honor of the Law,
there should be no Remission of Sin -- This the Son of God undertook, and
voluntarily engaged to save a guilty World. -- He exhibits Himself in the
Gospel in the Character of a Savior, and gives us the highest Assurance, that
all who believe in Him shall experience the blessed Effects of his Power and
Grace. -- But if Men wilfully refuse the kind Hand that is extended for their
Deliverance, there is Nothing remains but that they perish in their Sins.

THIS is the immutable Appointment, not only of the Sovereignty but Wisdom of
Heaven -- Faith is the appropriated Way to Life -- because it brings nothing
with it, but receives all from the Fullness of Christ -- It pleads guilty before
God, and implores a free Pardon -- It acknowledges the Sinner's Inability to
all spiritual Good, and supplicates that Grace which must perform all our Works
in us. -- Thus God alone is exalted, and human Vanity prostrate in the Dust:
All Self-dependance is renounced and Holiness and Happiness received as a
Communication from Christ: The Crown is placed upon the Head of our incarnate
God, and the entire Glory of our Salvation is ascribed to free Grace. -- This
forms the Excellency of Faith, and discovers it to be a fit Method to save
those who are utterly ruined in themselves. Upon this Account St. Paul having
declared that we are saved through Faith, in the next Verse excludes Works, and
gives this Reason -- lest any Man should boast.

METHINKS I hear some say -- How can Works be excluded; are they not necessary
to Salvation? -- I acknowledge the Faith that saves us is a vital Principle of
universal Holiness. Faith is essentially defective, if it does not produce good
Works. -- I further acknowledge, that, Purity of Heart and an uniform Obedience
to the divine Commandments, are necessary Ingredients in the Character of
those, who shall be finally saved. -- It is the irrevocable Constitution of
Heaven, that without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord.

THE only Controversy between us and those that in this Article differ from us
is this -- Whether good Works are the Consequences of our Union with Christ and
an Interest in his Salvation; or whether they are antecedent Conditions of our
obtaining this invaluable Blessing? -- We assert the first; and think we are
supported, not only by the Authority of St. Paul, in the Words of my Text, but
by the uniform Tenor of the inspired Writings. Grace and Works are frequently
put in a direct and formal Opposition to each other: -- That Purity of Heart --
that Sanctity of Life -- that Victory of Corruption -- that unreserved
Devotedness to God -- which are the grand Essentials of the Christian Life, are
not Virtues we bring with us in our first Approaches to the Savior; but
Blessings He bestows on them that come to Him by an humble Faith.

THIS will be uncontroulably evident, if we consider -- That our most specious
Performances, before we are brought into this sacred Union, are corrupt and
vicious -- Without Faith, says the Author to the Hebrews, it is impossible to
please God. -- Without me, says the Faithful and True Witness, ye ^an do
nothing.

By Faith then are we saved and not by Works -- For this Salvation is begun,
before we can perform any Works that may be truly denominated Good. We receive
Jesus the Savior -- We become Members of his mystical Body -- By virtue of this
-- His Righteousness is imputed to us -- His Spirit resides in us -- This leads
us into all Truth -- inclines us to all Good -- enables us to walk in the Way
that will finally conduct us to consummate Purity and Blessedness.

I pass to the Application of my Subject.

I. THIS instructs us in the Difference between the Law and the Gospel.
THE Law demands perfect and perpetual Obedience, as the Condition of Life; the
Gospel requires humble Faith, as the appointed Means of Safety and Happiness:
According to the Tenor of the Law, we must have a complete and personal
Righteousness, to escape its damnatory Sentence; according to the condescending
Terms of the Gospel, the Righteousness of our Surety delivers us from Death,
and gives us a Title to Life Eternal. -- This is the unalterable Voice of the
Law, do these Things and thou shall live: -- This the alluring Language of the
Gospel, believe and thou shall be saved.

THE different Terms are wisely adapted to the different States and
Circumstances of Mankind. The Law was delivered to Man when in a State of
unblemished Innocence, in all the Perfection of his Nature, when he had
Strength to perform his entire Duty, without Defect or Deviation: But the
Gospel considers Man as fallen from his primitive Integrity, destitute of
Ability or Inclination to do that which is Good. It is appointed for his Rescue
from the Condemnation of the Law and the tyrannical Dominion of Sin --
Therefore it does not call him to purchase Life by his Obedience; but to
receive that Grace which alone can enable him to will and to do: -- Not to
expect Happiness from his own Virtue and Goodness, but by an humble Affiance in
the Grace and Righteousness of an all sufficient Savior.

EVERY one who does not submit to the Law of Faith, must stand or fall by the
Law of Works. This infallibly condemns all the Posterity of Adam without
Distinction, whether Gentile, Jew, or Christian. All have violated it is
righteous Precepts and incurred it is dreadful Penalty. -- How terrible is that
Dispensation to an awakened Mind, which denounces Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish on every Soul that does Evil! -- How admirable that
Grace, which reveals JESUS the Wisdom and Power of God, to the Salvation of
every one that believes! -- How alarming that Sentence, which curses every
one, that continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law to do
them! -- How reviving that Voice which declares that Christ Jesus delivers us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, and assures us that as
many as receive Him have Power to become the Sons of God!

II. WHAT Reason have we to rejoice in the Light and Advantages of the Gospel.
IN this Dispensation, the Grace of God appears in it is brightest Splendour,
it is unlimited Freeness; to attract the Attention of perishing Sinners, -- The
Divine Majesty is seated on a Throne of Grace, and we are invited to touch the
Scepter of Mercy and live: Angels are commissioned to publish the Goodwill of
God to Men: Ministers are appointed to preach Peace by Jesus Christ, to them
that are afar off and to them that are near. The Condition of our
Reconciliation with an offended Deity, is not indefective Holiness, which must
sink us into the deepest Despair, but an humble Faith, which receives All, from
the overflowing Fountain of all Good.

HAPPY are we, my Brethren, though ruined in Adam, who have a Way of Recovery
revealed by Jesus Christ.

WHAT gloomy Fears must arise in the Breast of an uninstructed Pagan, when
Conscience accuses him of numberless Violations of the Law of Nature? -- If he
looks up, he beholds the Heavens darkened with Clouds of Wrath, and Thunders
prepared by divine Justice, ready to be discharged on his guilty Head -- If he
casts his Eyes down upon the Earth, he sees the Grave prepared to receive him,
and has just Reason to fear that the Pains of a temporal will transmit him to
the Miseries of eternal Death.

To whom shall he apply in this melancholy Situation? -- To the Altars of his
Gods? -- Alas! the superstitious Rites, the uninstituted Sacrifices, with which
they are approached instead of effacing his Guilt, serve only to increase the
Number of his Crimes. -- Shall he implore Mercy of the Idols he absurdly
worshipeth? -- Alas! they have no Eyes to see, no Ears to hear, no Tongues to
speak, nor Hearts to pity his Distress.

WHICH Way soever he turns, he finds no Ray of Light to scatter the Gloom that
surrounds him on every Side -- No friendly Director to show him the Path of
Peace and Safety. -- The Light of Nature discovers his Guilt, but can give no
Assurance of the divine Favor and Forgiveness -- This is the distinguishing
Glory of the Gospel. Those who hearken to it is indulgent Voice, and trust in
it is faithful Promises, may be freed from all disquieting Doubts, and enjoy
that Peace of God, which passes all Understanding.

IN CHRIST we behold -- God reconciled -- Guilt abolished -- the Law fulfilled
-- Death disarmed -- the Fire of Hell extinguished -- the Joys of Heaven
purchased for all that believe and obey Him. These happy Souls may, in the full
Assurance of Faith, adopt the triumphant Challenge of St. Paul, Who shall lay
any Thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies; who shall
condemn? It is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again, who is even at
the Right Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us.

O GOD! How kind are thy Dealings unto the Children of Men! How boundless thy
Compassions to ungrateful Rebels! How adapted are the Methods of thy Grace to
thy destitute Creatures! -- Thou know the Frailty and Inconstancy of our
Natures, therefore command us to commit the Keeping of our Souls to an
Almighty Savior, who is the same Yesterday, Today, and forever.

III. WHILE the Gospel establishes Salvation by Faith, it takes the most
effectual Care to engage us in the Practice of universal Holiness.
TRU^ Faith infallibly disposes the Mind to an impartial Obedience to the
divine Commandments. If it has not this Influence, St. James pronounces it a
dead Faith; and it is the grossest Absurdity to suppose a dead Faith can bring
us to the Happiness of eternal Life. Faith subdues the Heart to a chosen
Conformity to the Nature and Design of the Gospel -- What is the Design of the
Gospel? -- Every one must acknowledge -- not only to publish an Act of
Indemnity in Favor of condemned Rebels, but to deliver them from the Dominion
of their Lusts: -- Not only to dignify them with the Title of Sons, but enable
them to walk as becomes the obedient Children of God.

CONSEQUENTLY, to rely on Christ to deliver us from the Miseries of Hell, and
not also to save us from the Service of Sin and Satan, is not the Faith of the
Gospel; but a vain Imagination. -- Instead of introducing us into the Way of
Life, it opens a spacious but dangerous Road, which betrays us to the Chambers
of Death. The Faith so highly recommended in the Oracles of God, is always
attended with the Influences of the Holy Spirit: This Divine Agent resides in
the Heart of the true Believer, dissolves his Attachment to every Sin, causes
him to delight in the Law of God after the inward Man: The Fruits of the Spirit
are Love, and the various Graces which constitute the Christian Life. They who
have not this Spirit of Christ, are positively declared to be none of His.

NONE believe in Christ, who are not previously convinced of the Corruption of
their Nature, their Exposedness to the Wrath of God, by their innumerable
Violations of his Laws. When brought to acquiesce in the Designs of redeeming
Love, we receive the blessed Jesus to save us from Sin, as well as Wrath. -- We
ardently desire to be made holy, as well as happy. An essential Part of that
Salvation which He bestows on his People, is an Heart purified from the Love of
Sin, unfeignedly devoted to the Service of Heaven. He delivers us out of the
Hands of our Enemies, that we might serve Him without Fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of our Life.

IV. THEY who perish in their Sins under the Light of the Gospel are of all Men
the most inexcuseable.
WHO would not suppose a guilty World would receive the Declarations of divine
Grace with Raptures of Joy, and with the deepest Submission accept the offered
Favor: But constant Experience teaches us that Multitudes are inattentive to
the joyful Sound, while others treat it with a profane Contempt. -- Whence
arises this infatuated Conduct? -- A secret Infidelity is, doubtless, the
Source of that fatal Security which prevails among Mankind. A wavering Assent
to the Truths of the Gospel, prevents their cheerful Compliance with it is
benevolent Design.

WERE the Doctrines of Religion built on the vain Imaginations of Men -- Were
the sublime Hopes of the Christian unsupported with divine Credentials -- No
wonder the wise and considerate Part of Mankind, should treat it with
indifference: Why should we pursue the flattering Illusions of a credulous
Mind? Why should we be captivated with airy Prospects, which will probably
disappoint our Expectations?

BUT Salvation by Faith is a Doctrine revealed by the God of Truth, supported
by every Kind of Evidence that can be desired by a reasonable, unprejudiced
Mind. St. Paul tells us, that this Salvation at first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard Him, God also bearing them
Witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according to his own Will.

THE SON OF GOD, descended from Heaven, clothed himself with the Infirmities
of human Flesh, to reveal these glad Tidings to a revolted World. He evidenced
his Mission by astonishing Miracles, which bear the Character of infinite
Wisdom and resistless Power. These wonderful Works were not done in a Corner --
in a private Retirement -- among a few selected Friends -- No -- but in the
Streets of Jerusalem, in the Presence of Multitudes, in the View of His
Enemies. -- As the LORD of Nature, the Winds and Sea obey His Voice -- the most
inveterate Diseases fly at His Approach -- His Commands are heard in the awful
Mansions of the Dead, the Inhabitants of the Grave, answer to His Call, and
rise to Life and Vigor. -- He Dies -- the Heavens are darkened, the Earth
trembles, the Rocks are rent. -- He raises Himself from the Dead; Angels
descend from Heaven to pay Him Homage, His timorous Disciples acknowledge their
Master and Lord. -- At length He takes Farewell of this Earth, ascends up to
Heaven in the public View of his Followers, the Spirit descends on His Apostles
in visible Forms; they are immediately endowed with the Supernatural Gift of
Tongues -- they also perform illustrious Miracles, in the Name of their
ascended Master.

THESE were public and visible Facts -- acknowledged by the incredulous Jews,
allowed by the most inveterate Enemies of the Christian Faith, in the early
Days of the Church -- Authorized by these divine Credentials, the Apostles
propagated the Religion of JESUS, with surprising Success. -- Without Power to
awe -- without Wealth to bribe -- without Eloquence to persuade -- They
triumphed over the Prejudices of the Vulgar, the Reasonings of the
Philosophers, the long established Idolatry of all Nations. Though the Princes
of the Roman Empire endeavored to stop the Progress of the Gospel: -- Though
Priests and Politicians made use of all their Art and Address, to expose it to
Contempt: -- Though the Fires of Persecution consumed it is Professors, for
three hundred Years -- it took deep Root, spread far and wide, and filled the
whole Earth with it is salutary Influences.

WAS ever a Doctrine confirmed with such illustrious Attestations? What could
support it, amidst so many Dangers; but the Divine Protection? What further
Evidence can Men desire, that the Gospel is a Revelation from Heaven, and
consequently, that Salvation may be obtained by Faith.

IF Men continue in Unbelief, it is to be ascribed to the corrupt Disposition
of their Hearts, a fond Attachment to their criminal Delights. -- A perpetual
Engagement in the Business and Amusements of Life, prevents their receiving the
Truth in the Love of it. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost,
in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should
shine unto them.

FROM this most terrible of all Judgments may God of his infinite Mercy deliver
us. -- To Him be Glory forever and ever. AMEN.

SERMON V. Faith the GIFT of GOD.
EPHESIANS II. 8. -- And that not of yourselves: IT IS THE GIFT OF GOD.
WHEN the Posterity of Jacob were rescued from the Bondage of Egypt; it was a
Type, of the more important Deliverance which God grants to His People from the
Hands of their spiritual Enemies: -- When the Tribes of Israel, departed in
Triumph, from the Land of their Oppressors; It was not in Consequence of the
Battles they fought or the Victories they obtained: The LORD OF HOSTS marched
at the Head of their Armies; an invisible Hand destroyed the Power of their
Enemies: -- When they passed through the Red Sea, they had neither Boats or
Bridges to convey them to the opposite Shore; but God opened to them a Passage
through the Bosom of the Deep; the fluid Element contrary to the established
Laws of Nature, was a Defense to them, and proved the Destruction of their
Assailants: -- When they traveled for forty Years in an unhospitable Desert,
they did not cultivate the Earth, or gather in a Harvest; they were fed with
the Bread of Angels; Manna descended daily around their Camp, and the Rock
poured out Water for their Refreshment: -- When to punish their Murmuring, God
sent fiery Serpents among them, their deadly Wounds were healed, not by the
Skill of Physicians, or the Virtue of Antidotes; a brazen Serpent was erected
by divine Command; they look to the appointed Signal, and the Camp was restored
to Health and Vigor: -- When they crossed the River Jordan, they had no
Conveniences to secure their Passage; the mysterious Ark, the Symbol of the
Divine Presence, arrested the Waters in their Course, the numerous Host passed
over on dry Ground, and entered the Borders of the promised Canaan. -- When
they obtained the peaceable Possession of that happy Land, it was not by their
own Swords and Bows; but the Captain of the Lord's Host fought their Battles
for them, inspired them with Conduct and Courage, and crowned them with Victory
and Success.

THIS is a lively Representation of the Conduct of Heaven toward his spiritual
Israel, in all Ages of the Church. -- As God's ancient People could not ascribe
their Triumphs to the Number of their Armies, the Greatness of their Exploits,
or their own Policy and Power: but to an Almighty Arm, which caused all
Opposition to fall before them: -- So the Redemption of the New Testament
Saints from the Slavery of Satan, cannot be attributed to the Powers of Nature,
the Success of their own Endeavors; but to the Aids of supernatural Grace,
which subdues the Strength of their ghostly Adversaries, and leads them on from
conquering to conquer.

THEREFORE, the Apostle having asserted, that by Grace we are saved through
Faith, to remove all Ground of Boasting tells us in the Words now read -- that
this Faith is not of ourselves, it is the Gift of God. I am sensible these
Words are referred by some to Salvation in general; which they acknowledge is
not of ourselves but the Gift of God: But I think it is plainly the Design of
the Apostle to apply these Words particularly to Faith. He had before
established the Honor of divine Grace, in giving Salvation to Mankind, and
declared that Faith was the Means of obtaining an Interest in it. -- Now, to
destroy all Pretentions to Pride, he teaches us, that this Faith is not a Grace
that grows in the Garden of Nature, but is the Production of God. -- This is
evidently the Doctrine of Religion. -- A Divine Power opened the Heart of
Lydia, to believe the Preaching of St. Paul. When St. Peter acknowledges Jesus
to be the SON OF GOD, our Lord immediately replies, Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-jona, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. These Texts, with many others which might be mentioned,
establish beyond Dispute the Doctrine I am considering -- That Faith is the
Gift of God.

IN my following Discourse I shall show -- in what Sense Faith is the Gift of
God -- and then mention a few Particulars which illustrate and confirm this
important Truth.

FIRST, I AM to show in what Sense Faith is the Gift of God.
MANY profess their Assent to this Proposition -- that Faith is the Gift of God
-- but mean no more, than that God gives a general and sufficient Grace to all
Mankind, by virtue of which they may believe if they please, but are equally
free to remain in Unbelief and Rebellion. According to this Scheme, Ability to
believe comes from God, but actual Faith is properly to be ascribed to Man.
After all the Influences with which he is favored, he determines himself with a
sovereign and independent Freedom. This destroys the Divinity of St. Paul, and
supports the Fabric of human Pride: It makes Man, after all the Compliments
paid to Grace, the final Architect of his own Happiness. -- But those who are
taught in the School of Christ are inspired with different Sentiments. They are
convinced that not only the Ability, but the inclination to believe, is one of
those good Gifts which descend from the Father of Lights.

BY the secret Illuminations of His Spirit, He discovers to us the Excellency
and Beauty of a Savior, the Value and Importance of the Blessings He proposes
to our Choice; by a gentle but effectual Influence He disposes us to accept the
condescending Offer -- If this were not the Case, with what Propriety could the
Apostle propose that Question, who makes thee to differ from another? What
have thou that that thou did not receive? -- The Believer might answer, with
the strictest Propriety; -- I have made the Difference; the good Improvement I
have made of my Free Will, has distinguished me from the perverse and
incredulous Part of Mankind. -- "I adore the Most High God as the Father of my
Spirit; I render Him my devout Acknowledgments that He made me a free
Intelligence; I give Thanks to his Name* that He has favored me with the Light
of the Gospel, and the kind Assistances of his Spirit -- But these are common
Favors, equally enjoyed by all the Professors of the Gospel; they do not
distinguish me from the hardened Sinner -- That I believe -- while others reject
the Word of Life, is not the Gift of God, but must be ascribed to the Wisdom of
my Choice, the good Disposition of my Heart."

WHOSE Heart would not tremble! What Tongue would not faulter to utter this
presumptuous Language! I freely acknowledge those who remain in Unbelief, must
impute it entirely to their Pride and Perverseness; their Love of this World
and Attachment to their criminal Pleasures* But those who Believe must ascribe
their Faith, to the effectual Operations of divine Grace.

TO illustrate and confirm this Truth is what I proposed in the

SECOND Part of my Discourse. -- To this End, let us consider -- Our natural
Inability to that which is Good -- The Resistance Men generally make to the
Operations of the Spirit -- The Stratagems which Satan employs to keep them
from Believing to the saving of their Souls.

I. LET us consider our natural Inability, to that which is spiritually Good.
THIS is declared in Scripture in the most expressive Terms, in a Variety of
Forms. The God of Truth declares, that the Thoughts and Imaginations of the
Heart of Man, are Evil, only Evil, and that continually. An inspired Pen
informs us, that the carnal (i. e.) the unrenewed Mind, is not subject to the
Law of God, nor can be: That the natural Man receives not the Things of the
Spirit of God; for they are Foollishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.

THE same mortifying Truth is taught by Metaphors, that it may be the more
deeply engraven on our Minds: -- Not to discourage, but humble us, with a View
of our Wretchedness: -- Not to fill us with imaginary Terrors, but alarm us
sollicitously to seek a Cure. -- We are represented as blind to divine Truths,
till a celestial Ray shines upon our benighted Minds, and discovers to us their
Excellency and Importance. -- We are deaf to the Voice of incarnate Love, till
a mighty Power remove the Obstructions, and incline our Ears to attend to the
inviting Sound: -- Our Hearts are like obdurate Rocks, impenetrable to every
religious Impression, till victorious Grace softens them into Flesh, and makes
them receptive of salutary Impressions. -- We are dead in Trespasses and Sins,
till that irresistible Command, which must shortly awake the Inhabitants of the
Grave, causes us to arise and live.

THESE metaphorical Expressions are not the Flights of Fancy, but they convey a
solemn Truth. No Language can be contrived, better adapted to represent our
Inability, by any inherent Power of our own, to do any Thing which is
spiritually Good. -- I am sensible that Metaphors ought not to be pressed into
a Service, for which they were not originally designed; -- at the same Time, I
am sure they ought not to be explained away, till all their Sense, Propriety
and Beauty is lost. If this Variety of Metaphors, so often repeated, does not
teach us our spiritual Impotence to the Acts and Exercises of the divine Life,
they signify Nothing, -- They can be esteemed no better than extravagant
Hyperboles -- which I am persuaded no serious Mind will impute to an inspired
Author*

But I proceed to show,

II. THAT in our State of unregenerate Nature, we are not only destitute of all
Good, but resist the Influences of divine Grace.
WHEN our Lord performed His miraculous Works, it was with uncontrollable
Power; without the Aid of Means or Instruments. -- In the first Creation, He
issued out his authoritative Fiat, this harmonious System immediately existed;
nothing opposed the Execution of His Will. -- When the Dead are raised, though
they can contribute nothing to their own Resurrection, yet they form no
Resistance to the all-quickning Power of the Son of God. -- But when apostate
Man is created anew; when the spiritually Dead are animated with a divine Life,
they are not only destitute of all previous Disposition to Faith and Holiness,
but disaffected to the Sanctity of God, the Methods of His Grace, the Laws of
His Government: They perversely reject the generous Hand, which is stretched out
to recover them from their Guilt and Misery: They oppose the Operations of the
sacred Spirit, which are designed to restore them, to the Favor and Image of
God; to present Rectitude and future Happiness. -- Surely nothing short of a
divine Power, can subdue the native Enmity of our Hearts, change the Bias of
our depraved Inclinations, and reduce us to a Compliance with the appointed Way
of Salvation. A Heart to renounce our former Prejudices and Prepossessions; to
submit to the Grace and Government of the BLESSED JESUS, must be the Gift of
God. This will be further Evident --

III. WHEN we take a View, of the innumerable Stratagems which Satan employs,
to keep us from believing to the saving of our Souls.
THIS subtle Spirit is described in the Gospel under the Character of a strong
Man, who having entered into an House, guards it against every Assault, and
uses all Manner of Arts to maintain the Possession: Our victorious Redeemer
must therefore bind this strong Man, before He can establish his Empire in the
human Heart: It must be the Work of the omnipotent: God, and not of frail and
feeble Man, to triumph over this terrible Enemy, to expel him from the Dominion
he has impiously usurped, and as obstinately defends: He must be cast out with
Violence, before the sanctifying Spirit can regain the peaceable Possession of
His Temple.

THE Israelites, were delivered from the Tyranny of Pharaoh, with an high Hand
and outstretched Arm: But this Prince, in all the Pride and Plenitude of
Power, was an infirm Mortal. It is therefore, a more illustrious Conquest, to
rescue Mankind from the Captivity* in which they are detained by the infernal
Tyrant of Hell. He is great in Strength, and has Legions of mighty and
malicious Auxiliaries; who fight under his Standard, and assiduously promote
the Designs of his accursed Empire. It is the sole Prerogative of the most high
God, to dispossess the Prince of Darkness, and establish the Kingdom of Truth
and Righteousness, in a revolted World. From what we have heard we must
necessarily conclude,

IMPROVEMENT.
I. THE deepest Humility becomes the Character of fallen Creatures.
IN every View, we have the highest Reason to abhor ourselves, to deplore the
universal Depravity of our Natures, and to place our entire Dependence on
sovereign Mercy for every Blessing. -- Consider, -- attentively consider --
into what a fatal Abyss of Misery, the Apostasy has plunged the Race of Men!
What Miracles of Power and Goodness are employed for our Recovery! How
desirable was the Primitive State of Man! -- An enlightened understanding taught
him the Knowledge of God and his Duty; an uncorrupted Heart inclined him to pay
a perfect Obedience to the Mandates of his Heavenly Father; the Way to
unfailing Felicity was open to his View; every delightful Enjoyment was in his
Possession.

BUT alas! he rebelled against God; a melancholy Change immediately ensued: His
Glory departed from him; the Privileges of his innocent Nature were forfeited
forever: Darkness veiled his Mind; Pride and Perverseness took Possession of
his Heart; the Love of God was banished from his Breast, and Self-Love advanced
to the Throne. Man, the Lord of this visible Creation, became an infamous
Slave; the Favorite of his Maker a Captive of Hell: The Heavens were armed with
Thunder, the Earth exposed to a lasting Curse: Every Thing conspired to make
the ungrateful Rebel mortal and miserable.

WHAT Prodigies of Love prepared the Way for our Restitution to our former
Happiness! A God became incarnate -- the Lord of Nature took upon Him the Form
of a Servant -- the Prince of Life suffered and died: -- Salvation is purchased
at an infinite Price, and freely offered to a lapsed World.

BUT this is not sufficient -- Though the great Teacher of the Christian Church
has plainly directed us in the Way that leads to the Joys of Paradise -- yet
our Eyes are so dazzled with the Glories of this World, our Affections so
strongly attached to sensual Pleasures, our Minds so averse to every Thing
which is Spiritual and Divine; that the same Goodness which discovers to us a
Savior, must dispose us to accept of Him in His sacred Offices and Characters:
An Omnipotent Arm must be revealed to conquer our reluctant Nature, or we shall
voluntarily persist in the Paths of Perdition. -- If this is the Case -- as it
really is -- how vain are all our Boasts of the Dignity and Excellency of our
Nature, in its present depraved State! How ridiculous are all our Pretenses to
recommend ourselves to God, by our own Wisdom, Power or Goodness!

PROSTRATE thyself in the Dust, O fallen Creature! Know that thou art not only
despicably Mean but inconceivably Vile. -- To the all-penetrating Eye of God
thou appearest, not only destitute of all recommending Qualities -- but a Mass
of Deformity. Let us then approach the supreme Tribunal, not in the
presumptuous Language of the Pharisee -- Lord I thank Thee, that I am not as
other Men -- But with the self-condemning Disposition of the Publican -- God be
merciful to me a Sinner -- to Thee O Lord belongs Righteousness, but to me
Shame and Confusion of Face. I have no Plea, but the Merits of a crucified
Savior -- No Hope but in the boundless Resources of this Grace.

II. WHILE the Haughtiness of Man is obliged to stoop, the Excellency of Faith
is clearly discovered.
BY this we are recovered from Misery, restored to the Favor of Heaven,
conducted in the Way that leads to unfading Glory -- All the Graces which
reside in the Heart, all the Virtues which adorn the Life of a Christian, are
the Offspring of Faith: -- This secures us the final Victory over our spiritual
Enemies: -- By this we are supported in the most dangerous Trials, and enabled
to persevere, in our Attachment to the Great Redeemer; till we receive the End
of our Faith the Salvation of our Souls.

IT is a Maxim of eternal Truth, whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: We must
then, inevitably conclude, that without it, the most expensive Charity, the
most benevolent Disposition, the most assiduous Pravers, the severest
Mortifications, the most amiable Virtues, are essentially defective; destitute
of Life and Spirit: They may establish a Reputation among Men; but will be
pronounced Vain, at the enlightened Tribunal of God: They may gain the
Advantages of Time, but cannot secure the Blessings of Eternity. -- If we are
saved by Grace through Faith; it necessarily follows, that they who are
destitute of this Faith, are Strangers to that Grace, which forms the
distinguishing Character of the Heirs of Salvation, and consequently must be
forever deprived of those Privileges which constitute the true Felicity and
Glory of human Nature.

III. WITH what Ardor and Importunity should we seek to God for this important
Gift.
OUR Lord says to the Woman of Samaria, If thou know the Gift of God, thou
would have asked of Him, and He would have given thee living Water. Ask that
ye may receive, was the Direction given by the same divine Teacher to the
Multitude who attended on his Ministry. -- This is the Voice of Reason, as well
as the Command of God. -- When surrounded with distressing Dangers; when all
created Help fails; when human Policy and Power discovers no Way of Escape; is
it not natural? -- is it not rational? -- to prostrate ourselves in the Dust,
lift up our Eyes to Heaven, and implore those Almighty Aids which God takes
Pleasure to communicate to the humble Supplicant. If our Hearts are too haughty
-- if our Knees are too stubborn -- to bow at the Footstool of sovereign Grace,
and ask the Life of our immortal Souls, surely our Damnation is of ourselves.
It is Presumption to expect that God will vouchsafe to grant his choicest
Favors to those who proudly neglect to seek Him in the Ways of his own
Institution. Has He erected a Throne of Grace in our revolted World? Does He
command us by Prayer and Supplication to make known our Requests? and shall we
live in the Neglect of so plain, positive and reasonable a Duty? -- Should not
a People seek unto their God? -- a God who is the supreme Dispenser of
Happiness and Misery -- upon whose Goodwill depends our eternal Destiny. Does
not the Honor of the Deity require that we look up continually to Him from whom
alone our Help must come, and ardently implore that Mercy, without which we are
the eternal Victims of inexorable Justice?

ASK those, who live the Life of Faith -- By what Methods were you introduced
into this State? -- They will answer with one Voice -- "I was awakened to a
solemn Concern for my eternal Welfare: I daily waited at Wisdom's Gates, and
watched at the Posts of her Doors: I was convinced of the deep and universal
Corruption of my Nature; I found that I was dead in Trepasses and Sins, that
Nothing short of an Almighty Arm, could subdue my reluctant Heart, and induce
me to a cheerful Compliance with the Prescriptions of sovereign Mercy: I
prostrated myself at the Feet of the supreme Disposer of Life and Death; I
acknowledged, I had forfeited every Favor, and that if He frowned me from his
Presence forever, Justice must approve the Conduct; I had no Ground to complain
that He treated me with undeserved Severity: -- But I ardently implored that
Grace I had no Right to challenge, and earnestly deprecated the Execution of
that Sentence which was the just Punishment of my Crimes. -- He viewed me with
a compassionate Eye, He hearkened to the Cries of my Distress, and stretched
out his Arm to deliver me from the Depths of Misery. -- He revealed unto me his
gracious Nature, which revived my desponding Heart: -- He directed me by his
Word and Spirit, to an All sufficient Savior provided for the greatest of
Sinners: -- He captivated me by the Charms of his Love, to resign myself to be
his Servant forever."

IT is in this Way the Father of Mercies generally manifests Himself to the
Sinners of human Race. -- Thus he turns them from Darkness to Light, from the
Power of Sin and Satan unto God -- Their Success should encourage us to walk in
the same Way: Their Example should inspire us with unfainting Diligence to
pursue the same Methods: Never should we desist, till we experience that Power
from on High, which alone can form us into the Character, and entitle us to the
Privileges of the Sons of God.

IV. WHAT Gratitude should inspire the Breasts of those who are made Partakers
of the Gift of Faith.
IT was a pure Favor that brought us into Existence; but it is greater Kindness
that bestows upon us Faith. Redeeming Love demands an higher Song of Praise
than creating Goodness. -- How should we adore the Greatness of that Power,
which not only made us at first -- but designs to make us happy forever! --
When we look up to JESUS who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, our
Hearts should overflow with Love, and our Tongues be perpetually employed in
thankful Hallelujahs.

WHEN God delivered his People from Egypt, this Instance of the Divine Favor
was to be commemorated in every succeeding Age: A Festival was appointed to
perpetuate the Remembrance of it to the most distant Posterity.

BUT the Believer has a nobler Deliverance to commemorate. -- God has saved us
not from a temporal Bondage, but an eternal Prison: -- He gives us his Laws,
not inscribed on Tables of Stone, but on the living Tables of our Hearts. -- He
directed the Marches of his ancient People, through an unhospitable Desert by a
Pillar of Fire: He conducts his Saints in the present Day, by the Illuminations
of his Spirit, who brings them safely, not to in earthly, but the celestial
Canaan.

LET us follow our divine Leader, with undaunted Courage, with cheerful
Perseverance. It is God that works in us to will and to do* This, instead of
encouraging Indolence, should animate our Zeal and Diligence. -- The Teachings
of the divine Spirit show us the Path of Holiness and incline us to walk in it.
-- The Allurements of Grace captivate our Hearts, and give us Life and Spirit
to run the Way that leads to the Kingdom of God.

TO animate us in this blessed Course, we are assured, that He who has begun a
good Work in us, will carry it on to the Day of the Lord: He that has given us
Faith will increase and perpetuate it. -- He will revive our discouraged
Hearts, and support our tottering Steps: -- Though weak in ourselves, we shall
be strong in the Power of his Might: -- His Grace will be victorious in the
midst of the fiercest Opposition.

NEITHER present Enjoyments nor future Prospects -- Neither the Malice of Men,
nor Subtilty of the Principalities and Powers of Darkness: -- Neither the
Charms of Life, nor Fears of Death -- shall detach us from Him in whom we have
believed: We may triumph in the Assurance, that He will keep that which is
committed unto Him, till Faith shall be turned into Vision, and the Work of
Grace completed in the Regions of Glory. To Him be Glory forever and ever. AMEN.

SERMON VI. The Salvation we receive by Faith, UNSPEAKABLY GREAT.
HEBREWS II. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so GREAT Salvation?
IT is a just Reproach to Human Nature, that Men are so sollicitous to secure
the Interests of the present Life, and so unconcerned for their Happiness in a
future World. With what Art and Address do they pursue their temporal Affairs!
What Zeal and Diligence do they employ to accomplish their Designs! New Plans
are continually formed, to increase their Estates and aggrandize their
Families. If they fail of Success, it is not for Want of Inclination but Power.

WOULD to God, my Brethren, we were equally zealous in the Things which concern
our immortal Welfare. But alas! to the eternal Infamy of a great Part of
Mankind, the Body engrosses all their Thoughts, their nobler Spirits are
treated with astonishing Indifference; transitory Vanities confine their Views,
eternal Realities are comparatively despised. This unhappy Conduct degrades the
Dignity of a reasonable Creature, and makes us resemble the Inferior Animals,
who are under the entire Dominion of Sense. -- We wonder not, that those
Beings, who are only governed by Instinct; have no Views beyond the present
Moment: But that Men, to whom the Almighty has given Understanding, and
designed for a future Existence, should be wise only for this perishing World,
and disregard the supreme Happiness of their Nature -- this is truly
surprising, and could not be believed, did not constant Experience evidence it
to be a melancholy Truth.

THIS Conduct of Mankind is highly criminal, because it is voluntary and
chosen; and it is as foolish as criminal, because it is attended with the most
fatal Consequences: If not altered, it inevitably involves us in extreme and
eternal Misery. A Fool is generally esteemed one of the most contemptible
Characters; but when it is involuntary it does not merit any Punishment. -- But
foolishly to neglect the ultimate End of our Being, that we may gratify our
inferior Passions; of Choice to sacrifice our immortal Happiness to a few
transitory Advantages, involves us in aggravated Guilt, and exposes us to the
severest Punishment.

THIS is that awful Truth, which is taught by St. Paul, in the Words of my Text
-- How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

THE Words contain two Propositions, which demand our solemn Attention -- The
Salvation provided for Sinners in the Gospel is unspeakably Great -- They who
neglect this great Salvation must inevitably perish. -- I shall confine myself
to the first of these in my present Discourse.

THE Proposition at present to be confirmed is this --

THE Salvation provided for Sinners in the Gospel is unspeakably Great. -- To
evidence this let us consider -- THE Plan of this Salvation was formed in the
eternal Counsels of Heaven. IT was purchased with the Blood of the Son of God.
THE Mission of the Holy Ghost is peculiarly designed to make us Partakers of
this Salvation. WHEN this happy Event takes place with respect to any of the
Children of Men, it gives Joy to the Angels of Light. WHEN others are excluded
from it, the Spirits of Darkness triumph in their Ruin.


THUS God and his elect Angels -- the Devil and his malicious Associates --
conspire to evidence the Greatness of that Salvation which is revealed in the
Gospel.

FIRST, The Plan of this Salvation was formed in the eternal Counsels of Heaven.
MAN was originally the Favorite of his Almighty Creator: He gave him the first
Place of Dignity in this visible World: He united Heaven and Earth, Matter and
Spirit, in the Composition of human Nature: He introduced our first Parents
into Being, in the most agreeable Circumstances, and bountifully provided for
their Happiness in a State of Innocence. -- But the All-seeing Eye of God,
which penetrates into the most distant Futurities, beheld the ungrateful
Apostasy of Man, and formed the Design of his Recovery. -- He determined that
Satan should not triumph in his Success, nor the human Race be irrecoverably
ruined. -- Though perfectly happy in the Enjoyment of Himself, He did not
behold with Indifference the Misery of Man. Though Millions of Worlds must have
started into Being at his authoritative Command, yet He looked with Compassion
on this revolted Earth, and determined to disappoint the Devices of the Devil.

BUT the sublimest Spirits in Heaven would have been eternally at a Loss to
find a Way, in which this benevolent Design could be accomplished, and the
Honor of the Deity preserved. -- The Demands of Justice must be answered, that
Mercy may triumph in the Salvation of the Guilty -- The Threatening of the Law
must be fulfilled, that the Transgressor of it is righteous Precepts may be
pardoned. -- The Dignity of the divine Government must be maintained, that
condemned Rebels may be restored to Favor. -- The righteous Governor of the
Universe will evidence his Abhorrence of the Crime, while He receives the
Criminal to the Embraces of his Love.

INFINITE Wisdom has reconciled these Difficulties, and formed a Plan, which
gives the brightest Discovery of all the Perfections of the Deity, sacredly
maintains the Majesty of his Government, and displays the Riches of his Grace
to his apostate Creatures. -- In Conformity to this Plan, the Son of God
descends upon Earth in a human Form, fulfils the Law which we had violated,
submits to bear the Punishment of our Crimes; and thus prepares the Way for our
Approach unto God, as a compassionate and reconciled Father. -- Here we have
the most admirable Display of divine Love, and the clearest Evidence of his
Hatred to Sin: The Transgression of the Law is punished with awful Severity,
and the Transgressor graciously forgiven. This is that mighty Projection, which
is the Astonishment of Angels, and the Joy of the Redeemed. This gives us an
affecting View of the inestimable Value of Salvation -- Especially if we
consider,

SECONDLY, It was purchased by the Blood of the Son of God.
IN all Ages, God has done great Things in Favor of his chosen People: For
their Sakes, He exercises his Patience to a revolted World, and delays that
important Period, when this visible Creation shall be consumed by Fire: For
their Sakes, He has counteracted the established Laws of Nature, and performed
stupendous Miracles, in the Sight of Angels and Men: For their Sakes He will
shortly descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel and
the Trump of God: From his radiant Throne He will publicly pronounce them his
Friends and Favorites, and receive them to a Kingdom prepared for them from
before the Foundation of the World. But that which raises the Value of all
these signal Favors, is the inestimable Price, with which they are purchased. I
know Nothing so incomprehensible to human Reason, as the Sacrifice of the Son
of God for a guilty World. If this Mystery of divine Love had not been
predicted by a Succession of inspired Prophets, confirmed by numerous and
unquestionable Miracles, attested by Heaven and Earth, by Angels and Men -- it
could never be received as a Truth by any impartial Enquirer. It is difficult
to conceive, that God would do so much for miserable Man. But since He has
given us this surprising Discovery of his Love, we may justly infer the
Greatness of that Happiness which He designs for his redeemed People.

ELEVATE your Thoughts, my Brethren, above these Regions of Sense, ascend in
your devout Contemplations to the Throne of the Eternal Deity; behold THE SON
OF GOD shining in the Brightness of his Father's Glory, surrounded with Myriads
of adoring Angels. -- Then view Him, descending upon Earth, covered with
Wounds, bathed in Blood, nailed to the Cross, expiring in Death: -- From the
Dignity of his Person, learn the Value of his Sacrifice: -- From the Severity
of his Sufferings, learn the Greatness of his Purchase. -- For us Men, and our
Salvation, He appeared upon Earth in the Form of a Servant, passed through the
Miseries of Life, and submitted to the Pains of Death. That Salvation, then,
must be pronounced Great, which was procured at so great a Price. Our blessed
Lord would not have forsaken the Pleasures of his Father's Bosom, parted with
his heavenly Glory, and passed through this dark and distressing Scene of
Sufferings, were it not to answer the most important Designs. He knew the just
Value of Things, and esteemed the Happiness of his People an Equivalent for all
the Sorrows of his Life and the Agonies of his Death. -- Therefore we are
assured that He shall see the Travail of his Soul and be satisfied. But further
to confirm this Point, we may consider,

THIRDLY, The Mission of the Holy Ghost is designed to make us Partakers of
this Salvation.
WHEN our blessed Lord finished his Work upon Earth and ascended to the Court
of Heaven, according to his Promise, He sent down his Holy Spirit, to convince
the World of Sin, to deliver them from it is fatal Dominion, and form them to a
Meetness for the Kingdom of Glory. Every faithful Subject of our adorable
Redeemer is justified in the Name of Jesus and sanctified by the Spirit of our
God. This divine Agent not only favors the Church with an external Revelation,
but secretly influences the Minds of Men to attend to the Truths delivered in
the inspired Scriptures. He awakens them to a Sense of their Danger while they
continue in a State of Sin, animates them with a salutary Concern to fly from
the Wrath to come -- Though inconsiderate Sinners often resist his sacred
Operations, and though a fond Attachment to their Lusts, reject the indulgent
Methods of divine Grace, he does not immediately abandon his Work, but waits
upon them with admirable Patience, repeats his faithful Warnings, continues his
friendly Offices, and strives with them, from Day to Day, from Year to Year.

THIS is his general Conduct to Mankind, under the Dispensation of the Gospel.
Multitudes, for their ungrateful Opposition to the Agency of the divine Spirit,
are at last rejected of God, and left to consume away in their Iniquities. But
with respect to the Elect, He continues his Influences, ceases not to strive
with them, till their rebellious Hearts are conquered in the Day of his Power,
and they are made the Triumphs of divine Love, the Heirs of immortal Glory --
Having produced this happy Change, He watches over them with affectionate Care,
enlightens them in Darkness, supports them in Weakness, recovers them from
their Relapses, defends them in Dangers, and finally makes them victorious over
all their spiritual Enemies. The Work which He has begun He will never forsake:
-- The Seed of Grace which He has implanted in their Hearts, He will cherish
and increase, till it produces the Fruits of Immortality and Glory. -- Who can
imagine the Holy Spirit would be so sedulously employed to secure the Salvation
of Mankind, were it not an Affair of the greatest Importance. That must be of
inestimable Value, which is accomplished at such an infinite Expense. It is
dishonorable to suppose, that God should send his Son from the Regions of
Glory; that the Son should humble himself to the Dust of Death, that the Spirit
should employ his Almighty Energy, and not have in view the noblest Designs.

I add,

FOURTHLY, When any of the Children of Men are made Partakers of this
Salvation, it gives Joy to the Angels of Light.
THESE benevolent Spirits, with a disinterested Joy, congratulated the first
Appearance of a Savior in this lower World; they attended Him through all the
Sorrows of Life; they comforted Him at the Approaches of Death; they appeared
in Robes of celestial Glory to adorn the Triumphs of his Resurrection; they
accompanied Him with joyful Acclamations in his Ascent to the Kingdom of his
Father. -- Though they are illustrious Courtiers of Heaven, they do not think
the Inhabitants of this Earth beneath their Notice: Though they are the most
exalted Part of the Creation, they disdain not to maintain an Intercourse with
Worms of the Dust: -- When a Sinner is converted from the Error of his Ways,
the glad Tidings are propagated through the heavenly Mansions: There is Joy in
the Presence of the Angels of God, that an Addition is made to the happy
Society above: They cheerfully forsake their Thrones of Glory, to become
ministering Spirits to those who are appointed Heirs of Salvation: They encamp
about the Dwellings of the Saints, deliver them from numberless Dangers, and by
a Thousand Offices of Kindness, support and encourage them in their Passage
through the Wilderness of this World. When the People of God have finished
their Work upon Earth, they surround their dying Beds, receive their departing
Spirits, guard them from the malignant Powers of Darkness, conduct them through
the Regions of the Air, and safely introduce them into the Paradise of God. --
Thus the Soul of the despised Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's
Bosom. -- Thus the Soul of every faithful Servant of Christ, when delivered
from the Body, becomes the Charge of these heavenly Ministers. -- Nor do they
desist from their Care, till they have fixed it in these happy Abodes, where it
is secure from every Danger. -- Surely that Salvation must be great, which
these exalted Beings so affectionately desire to promote: They would not
willingly leave the rapturous Employments of Heaven, to secure a trifling
Advantage. Inconsiderate Mortals may despise this Salvation, but it is highly
esteemed by those wise and holy Beings, who live in the Light of the Divine
Countenance, and cannot be mistaken in the true Value of Things.

FIFTHLY. While the Angels rejoice, when any are made Partakers of this
Salvation, the Devils triumph, when any by their Fault and Folly are excluded
from it.
THE Devil is always represented as the Enemy of God and Goodness. Having
deserted his exalted Station, he envies the Happiness of Mankind. Condemned to
the Punishment of eternal Death, he seeks with incessant Malice to involve
others in the same irremediable Ruin. -- To accomplish this accursed Design, he
employs every Art, and exercises indefatigable Diligence. -- While Men go on
securely in the Ways of Sin, he flatters them with Hopes of Impunity, rocks
them asleep by a thousand deceitful Suggestions, that they may be insensible of
their Misery and Danger. -- If at any Time their guilty Fears are alarmed, he
hurries them into the Business and Amusements of Life; that they may divert
their uneasy Thoughts. He employs their gay Companions, by Banter and Ridicule,
to erase all serious Impressions from their Minds. -- If a Sense of Guilt abide
upon their Consciences, he terrifies them with unreasonable Fears, that the Day
of Grace is ended, or that if they give way to their present Impressions, they
must bid Adieu to every pleasant Enjoyment, and condemn themselves to perpetual
Melancholy. -- If all these Attempts are in vain, and we are effectually
persuaded to give up ourselves to our compassionate Savior, even then he does
not abandon his malicious Designs. When he cannot prevent our Happiness, he
endeavors to disturb our Peace: When he cannot regain the Empire of our
Hearts, he industriously strives to pollute our Persons and Performances: He
follows us to the Altar of God, and by a Variety of Temptations, interrupts our
Communion with Heaven: He pursues us to the Gates of Paradise, and never ceases
to distress us, till we enter that blessed World from which he is forever
excluded. -- Now, what is it that animates Satan and his confederate Hosts to
employ all their Power and Policy to destroy Mankind? -- They envy us the
Enjoyment of that Heaven from which they are righteously banished: Their Malice
is so great, that it increases their Torment to behold others rejoicing in the
Favor of God, when they are condemned to an eternal Departure from Him.

THUS I have endeavored to give you some View of the Greatness of that
Salvation which is revealed in the Gospel. -- It is great in the Judgment of
Heaven and Hell. -- The Goodness of God and the Malice of Satan -- the Angels
of Light and the Ministers of Darkness -- all conspire to proclaim it is
Excellency and Value.

IMPROVEMENT.
I. IS it not then astonishing Madness, to forfeit this Salvation for the
meanest Trifles? And yet, O my Brethren, to the Disgrace of the Christian Name,
this is a common Practice. We daily behold Souls capable of the extatic Joys of
Heaven, confining their Pursuits to the defiling Pleasures of this degenerate
Earth. We daily behold Souls formed for the Society of Angels deserting the
Throne of Reason, and transformed into the Likeness of savage Brutes. They
renounce the Happiness for which they were originally designed, and think and
act, as if they were made for no higher an End -- than to delight their Eyes
with splendid Prospects -- to gratify their Ears with the Harmony of Sounds --
To please their Taste with the Flavor of Meats and Drinks -- and after having
spent a few Years in these sensual Pleasures, to retire off the Stage and be
insensible forever.

IS this to act agreeable to the Character of Man, whom God appointed Lord of
this lower Creation; who was formed after the Image of the Deity; who was
placed upon Earth to glorify his Maker, and be eternally happy in the Enjoyment
of his Love? -- Are we capable of the Joys of Angels, and shall we associate
with the Beasts that perish? -- Were we designed to imitate the moral
Perfections God, the best of BEINGS, and shall we degrade ourselves to a
Resemblance of the Devil, the most hateful of Creatures? -- Awake, O Man I from
this State of Infatuation. Arise, consider the Greatness of your Folly. You are
indeed fallen from your primitive Excellency; your Nature is corrupted in all
it is Powers. But God has formed a Plan for the Recovery of the apostate Race of
Adam: Christ has died for their Salvation: The Spirit is sent down to operate
on the Minds of Men, and transform them into New-Creatures: Shall the Love of
God be despised -- the Merits of Christ undervalued -- the Influences of the
Holy Ghost be resisted -- and you perish at last, notwithstanding the Miracles
of divine Grace for your Recovery? -- Had you rather Devils should triumph in
your Ruin, than Saints and Angels rejoice in your Salvation?

YOU will doubtless say -- God forbid this should be my Case. -- But allow me
to assure you, this must be your inevitable Destiny -- if you neglect your
immortal Concerns -- spend your Time in the Vanities and Diversions of Life --
disregard the Service of your Maker and Sovereign -- live in those Sins against
which the Wrath of Heaven is denounced -- There is no Medium -- Every one of
you must be persuaded to give up yourselves to the compassionate Jesus;
experience his saving Power rescuing you from the Dominion of Sin; and be made
Partakers of the sanctifying Influences of the Holy Ghost; or remain under the
Wrath of God, and suffer the Damnation of Hell through immortal Ages.

FOR what do Mankind neglect their eternal Interest? A Stranger to human Nature
must suppose it must be for something of inestimable Value. -- No -- It is for
the Pleasures of an intemperate Hour, for the Joys of a lascivious Moment, for
the fordid Gains of Avarice, for the childish Amusements which take place on
this Theater of Vanity. -- For these Heaven is renounced, Hell is chosen.

SUFFER not, O my Brethren, the God of this World to blind your Eyes; attend to
the one Thing needful.

WERE we condemned to perish without Remedy, it would be cruel to attempt to
disturb your present Repose -- Were the great Salvation unattainable by the
Children of Men, all Exhortations to secure it would be impertinent and absurd.
But this World is the Region of Hope: While we reside upon Earth we are
Candidates for an heavenly Inheritance: Proposals of Grace are made to Sinners
of every Order and Character: They are both invited and commanded to accept the
Great Salvation. -- Those who are involved in the deepest Guilt, and pining
away in Indigence and Misery, are to be compelled, by all the persuasive Charms
of divine Grace, by every Argument that can gain the Attention and Influence
the Choice of a rational Creature, to accept of Life and Happiness. -- It was
our Wants, and not our Worthiness, that engaged our heavenly Father to form the
Plan of our Redemption -- It is to extricate us out of Misery, and not to
reward our Virtues, that a Savior is provided for us. The only Qualification a
Sinner can have antecedent to an Union to Christ, is a deep Sense of his
Misery, a Despair of all Relief in himself, a Willingness to receive a Supply
of all his Wants from the Fountain of all Good. -- Therefore, Whosoever will --
is the Language of eternal Love. It is an undoubted Truth, that none perish
under the Advantages of the Gospel, but in consequence of their own voluntary
Choice: By a positive Act of their Wills they reject Christ and the important
Blessings He offers to their Acceptance: He refuses None that rely on his Power
and Grace; but affectionately calls all weary and heavy laden Sinners to come
to Him, and kindly promises, I will give you Rest. -- The whole Number of
Believers on Earth, and the radiant Assembly of glorified Saints in Heaven,
bear their united Testimony to this consolatory Truth. -- In the Character of
guilty Creatures they cast themselves down at the Feet of an Almighty Savior:
encouraged by the unlimited Calls of his Word, they committed their future
Welfare to his Care: He extended the Scepter of his Mercy, and said unto them
LIVE. Their Example should revive the Spirit of every trembling Sinner, and
encourage them, from the Depths of Distress and Misery to confide in that
Savior who is the same Yesterday, Today, and forever.

II. WITH what Gratitude should we embrace this Great Salvation?
IF the King of Kings has published a royal Proclamation, inviting his
rebellious Subjects to return to their Allegiance and receive, not only a free
Pardon, but the Dignity and Privilege of Favorites -- We may be assured,
without Danger of Deception, that those who obey the Call, shall obtain the
promised Mercy. -- It is beneath the Character of the Deity, to amuse his
Creatures with imaginary Hopes, or disappoint the Expectations of those who
rely on his faithful Word. The Strength of Israel will not lie: The immutable
Jehovah will not repent of the Purposes of his Love.

To confirm our Faith, we may take a View of the Conduct of our divine Master,
when he condescended to be an Inhabitant of this inferior Earth: None were
rejected, that applied to Him in their Distress: -- All were relieved that came
to Him in the Language of humble Faith. The most despicable Objects were
received with condescending Goodness, and restored to Health and Vigor by the
Greatness of his Power. The vilest Sinners were delivered from the Dominion of
their infamous Lusts, and assured of the Forgiveness of their aggravated
Crimes. -- He is now the same mighty and compassionate Savior He ever was: The
Dignity to which He is advanced, has neither diminished his Power, or abated
his generous Concern for the Welfare of Mankind: -- He is equally willing to
hearken to the supplicating Voice of his distressed Creatures -- equally
willing to deliver them from their Guilt and Danger.

WHO can dispute his Power, when all Nature obeys his Laws, and the most
perfect Orders of Creatures are governed by the Direction of his Will! -- Who
can question his Readiness to apply his Power to relieve those who confide in
Him! -- Behold! the Sufferings He endured -- the Blood He shed -- the Death He
underwent for the Salvation of a guilty World: -- Every Wound discovers the
Compassions of his Heart; His expiring Agonies purchased eternal Redemption for
all who place their Trust in Him.

HE was once lifted up on an infamous Cross, and is now exalted to a Throne of
Glory, to evidence that He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to
God by Him. -- Those therefore who look unto Him, and receive Salvation as his
Gift, are sure of a welcome Reception. -- Their Safety is deposited in Almighty
Hands: -- Neither human Weakness or Folly, or the Opposition of the Powers of
Darkness, shall be able to effect their Ruin. -- Here is the great Security of
every true Believer: The Power and Fidelity of Christ is engaged for their
Protection: -- They may bid Adieu to all uneasy Fears, and banish all
disquieting Suspicions from their Minds: -- Their Hopes are built on the Rock
of Ages. -- The Sun shall grow dim with Age, the bright Luminaries of Heaven be
extinguished -- the Earth we inhabit evaporate in Smoke: -- But the Savior
lives, enthroned in Majesty and Might, to support the Hopes, and perpetuate the
Happiness of those who are committed to his Care. -- To Him be Glory forever
and ever.

AMEN.
SERMON VII. Those who neglect this Great Salvation must inevitably perish.
HEBREWS II. 3. HOW SHALL WE ESCAPE, if we neglect so great Salvation?
THE most generous Medicines, if they do not answer the End for which they were
administered, often exasperate the Disease, and render the Circumstances of the
Patient more dangerous: In like Manner, the Gospel, which is designed to
restore Mankind to spiritual Health, if it does not produce the desired Effect,
is attended with the most prejudicial Consequences. If the Methods of Divine
Grace are despised they involve us in aggravated Guilt, and end in
irrecoverable Misery. The Punishment of Infidels, who enjoy the Light of
Revelation, will be infinitely more terrible than that which shall be inflicted
on uninstructed Pagans. THE SON OF GOD, whom they despise, no longer resides
upon Earth in a State of Poverty and Meanness; but is ascended above the
visible Heavens, and sways the Scepter of the Universe. The once despised
GALILEAN is seated on a Throne of Light, Angels prostrate themselves at His
Feet, and Devils tremble at the Terrors of His Wrath. He has Crowns of Glory to
reward His faithful Subjects, and a glittering Sword to destroy His implacable
Enemies.

THEREFORE, we find the Misery of the wicked was never painted in more terrible
Colors, than by that divine Messenger, who came not to condemn the World, but
that the World through Him might be saved. The Apostles, who imitated their
blessed Master, persuaded Men, by the Terrors of the Lord not to receive the
Grace of God in Vain.

THE inspired Author in my Text, represents those who neglect the great
Salvation, as condemned to inevitable Destruction. -- How shall we Escape, etc.
These Words are an Inference from the Severity which attended the legal
Dispensation. If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
Transgression and Disobedience received a just Recompense of Reward, how shall
we escape, etc. -- The Reasoning is conclusive -- the Threatening it contains
should inspire us with awful Fear, lest it be executed upon us. The Law
pronounced Sentence of Death upon the presumptuous Transgressor: The Man who
violated the Sanctity of the Sabbath was immediately stoned: Many Thousand
Israelites were destroyed in one Day for their idolatrous Practices. The
Apostle assures us, that severer Punishments are appointed for the profane
Despisers of the Gospel -- How shall they escape -- This Method of Expression
declares, that to escape is a vain Expectation -- an impossible Attempt.

THOSE who neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel must inevitably perish. --
To evidence this, I shall show -- This is the Sentence pronounced upon them by
impartial Justice -- God has Power to execute this Sentence -- Mercy has
provided no Way of Relief.

FIRST, THE Sentence of inevitable Destruction is pronounced upon the Despisers
of the Gospel by the Justice of God.
IT is the positive Determination of the supreme and uncontrollable Sovereign
of the World -- He that believes not shall be damned. This Sentence is fixed
in the immutable Decree of God, and will be executed in the appointed Time. By
Sin Man is become an Enemy to God, and if he persists in his Rebellion, Justice
must triumph in his final Destruction. God beholds his unhappy Offspring with
Pity; He proposes Terms of Peace; He sends his Ambassadors to proclaim the glad
Tidings to a guilty World: Astonishing Love! -- Is it not daring Impiety to
refuse the great God an Hearing? -- Is it not inexcusable Insolence to reject
his Proposals? -- This is the Practice of Multitudes -- They presumptuously
despise his Grace: -- This is plainly to declare, that they value not his
Friendship, nor fear the Terrors of his Wrath. -- It is fit such obstinate
Rebels should abide by the Consequence of their own Choice. -- They judge
themselves unworthy of Life eternal, and are justly condemned to suffer the
Pains of eternal Death.

HAD divine Goodness signified his Intention to mitigate the Sentence of his
righteous Law, or grant a temporary Suspension of the deserved Punishment, it
must have been acknowledged a Favor, and ought to be received with Gratitude:
-- But He proclaims complete Deliverance to the Captives of Hell -- A
Deliverance not to be purchased by us, but thankfully received. -- This
contains a Freedom from all the Miseries we feel or fear -- A perfect and
perpetual Enjoyment of every desirable Good. -- Now, must not they perish, who
are unwilling to be saved? -- Should not they remain under Guilt, who refuse
the Offer of a Pardon?

MEN may please themselves with ungrounded Surmises; but God will not suffer
his Laws to be violated -- His Grace abused -- His Justice insulted -- His
Glory eclipsed, that obstinate Transgressors may escape with Impunity.

SECONDLY, IF impartial Justice pronounces the Sentence, the sovereign Ruler
has Power to put it in Execution.
THIS none can dispute who believe the Existence of a God. He who made the
World by a Command, can destroy it in a Moment with a Frown. His Power is
supreme and independent: Nothing can alter his Purposes, or resist the
Execution of his Will: His Smiles diffuse Life and Joy through all the
Inhabitants of Heaven: His wrathful Presence fills the Regions of Hell with
Darkness, Terror and Despair.

MEN often escape the Stroke of human Justice, by Art and Address: They may fly
from the Power of the mighty Monarchs of the Earth, and find a Retreat beyond
the Limits of their Jurisdiction: Death always removes us out of their Reach;
the Effects of their Anger cannot enter the Repository of the Grave: -- But
whither shall we flee from God! To what Part of the Universe can we escape and
be free from his Arrests! Death itself conveys us into his immediate Presence,
and delivers us up, the helpless Victims of his Vengeance.

IF indeed the Dissolution of the Body was the Destruction of the Soul, we
might neglect the Salvation of the Gospel, and escape all future Punishment:
But to suppose this, is to contradict the Voice of Reason, the Testimony of
Conscience, the unerring Orcles of Truth. That the Soul of Man is immortal, is
a Doctrine of natural and revealed Religion. -- The ancient Philosophers were
inspired with this Hope. -- Jesus Christ has confirmed it by express
Declarations and astonishing Miracles. The Soul is not formed of the Dust, but
immediately derived from the Great Father of Spirits. The Body is a beautiful
Fabric, finished with consummate Art; but animated, directed and moved by the
immortal Mind: The Body is composed of different Parts, and may be destroyed by
innumerable Accidents; but the Soul is a simple uncompounded Substance, not
liable to a Dissolution. These are strong Presumptions in Favor of this
important Truth. -- But that which Reason pronounces probable, revealed
Religion declares to be certain. The System of the Gospel is built on this
Foundation: They who deny it not only reject the Religion of Jesus, but are
Enemies to the Peace and good Order of civil Society. -- They oppose those
Sentiments which are common to all, except the most abandoned of the human
Race, and level themselves with the Beasts that perish. Not only the
Philosophers of Rome and Athens, but Barbarians and Scythians, will rise up
against them and condemn them.

IF the Soul exists in a future State, it perceives and acts, for these are
essential to its Nature; and therefore it is capable of Rewards and
Punishments. The God of Truth assures us, that when the Body descends into the
Dust, the Soul returns to God that gave it. -- To God -- to triumph in his
Love, or to experience the Effects of his severe Displeasure: -- While those
who embrace the great Salvation, enter into the Joy of their Lord, they who
despise and neglect it must suffer eternal Destruction from the Presence of the
Lord and the Glory of his Power. -- If the Justice of God has pronounced
Sentence against them -- if He has Power to execute this Sentence -- there can
be no Hope of Escape, except some Method is appointed for their Deliverance.
This brings me to say,

THIRDLY, MERCY has provided no Way of Relief for those who neglect this
Salvation.
DIVINE Compassion has instituted a Way of Recovery; -- this they reject; --
the Consequence is, they are deprived of all Hope, and must perish without
Remedy. -- After Man had violated the Law, the Grace of the Gospel was
revealed: -- Otherwise the Mercy of God must have been forever concealed; the
most illustrious Triumphs of unlimited Goodness could never have been
displayed. The Sufferings and Sacrifice of the Son of God in the Room of
condemned Man, was the highest Evidence of the Divine Benevolence, and will be
celebrated with Transports of Gratitude, through unceasing Ages. -- But if this
Love is undervalued, if Mercy is insolently despised, and the great Sacrifice
for Sin rejected; there remains no Resource; the Criminal is placed beyond all
possibility of Pardon. -- To what Sanctuary will he fly? The Law pronounces the
terrible Sentence, Justice demands immediate Execution, and insulted Mercy
increases the Severity of the Punishment.

SHALL Christ again descend from the Throne of Glory, and Tabernacle in Flesh?
Shall the Prince of Life again submit to the Stroke of Death; that the
Despisers of His Merits and Righteousness may be saved? No. -- The Scriptures
positively assure us, that henceforth He dies no more; He has finished his
Work, and they who believe not must perish forever.

NOW is the accepted Time; but Death finishes the Day of Grace. When this Event
takes Place, Repentance will be impossible -- God inexorable -- the Misery of
the Wicked extreme and eternal. I proceed to the

APPLICATION of this Subject.
I. WHAT Multitudes deceive themselves with ungrounded Hopes of Salvation! --
Ask them, do you expect to be saved? -- They answer without Hesitation -- Yes.
-- Upon what Foundation is your Expectation built? -- Is the Salvation revealed
in the Gospel the most desirable Blessing in their Esteem? -- No. -- They have
a greater Affection to the Pomps and Pleasures of this Life. -- Do they seek
after an Interest in this Salvation with unremitting Diligence? -- No. -- They
spend their Days i^ worldly Cares and Diversions. -- Have they received Power
from on High, to mortify their dearest Lusts? -- No. -- They go on securely in
the prohibited Paths of Vice. -- Do they aspire after that Holiness, without
which the Scripture declares no Man shall enter into the New Jerusalem? -- No.
-- This would lay too severe a Restraint on their Nature, and deprive them of
their chiefest Joys. -- What Reason have you then to hope for future Happiness?
-- You flatter yourselves that God is merciful, and will not be so strict as He
is represented in his Word.

AH fatal Delusion! -- prodigious Folly! -- Would you venture your Estate or
Reputation on chimerical Hopes, destitute of all Foundation either in Reason or
Scripture? -- If there was any other Dispensation of Grace, besides that which
is revealed in the Gospel -- If there was any other Sacrifice for Sin, than
that which the Son of God finished on the Cross -- If there was any other Way
to Heaven, than that which is traced out by the Precepts and and Example of our
blessed Savior -- there might be some Foundation for Hope: But if there is no
other Name given under Heaven by which Men can be saved but the Name of Jesus;
-- if none are accepted at the supreme Tribunal, but through his all sufficient
Righteousness; -- if the everlasting State of Mankind must be determined
according to the Gospel; -- then your Expectations of future Happiness are an
imaginary Dream: In the End you die a Fool, and must lie down in everlasting
Sorrow.

DO you dispute this? Then you raze the Foundations of Religion and treat the
Gospel as if it was a cunningly devised Fable -- Do you believe Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles? -- I trust, without paying a Compliment to
my Hearers, I may address them as St. Paul did King Agrippa -- I know that you
believe. -- What then remains, but that you bow to the Authority of divine
Revelation, and receive the most mysterious Doctrines with humble Submission.

IF our corrupt Reason is to be advanced to the infallible Chair, and the
Articles of Religion are to be explained according to it is Dictates, many of
it is sublimest Truths will be pronounced false, and it is self-denying Precepts
accommodated to the Genius of a degenerate Age.

MEN of Pleasure cannot conceive that God will be so severe, as to punish them
for the Gratification of their sensual Appetites and Inclinations: -- I, my
Brethren, if I only consult my Reason, cannot conceive that He should be so
indulgent to his guilty Creatures, as daily Experience evidences He is --
Nothing can be more incredible to our finite Reason, than that the Monarch of
the Universe should send his Son to give his Life a Ransom for his rebellious
Subjects -- That the immaculate Jesus should bear the Punishment of our Sins in
his own Body on the Tree: -- That He should be wounded for our Transgressions,
bruised for our Iniquities, and the Chastisement of our Peace be upon Him. --
But God speaks, let every mortal Ear attend; let human Reason be silent, and
devoutly acknowledge it is Incapacity to comprehend the Depths of the divine
Counsels. -- My Faith adores this mysterious Love -- my Heart acquiesces with
Joy in the salutary Truth -- I receive it as a faithful Saying and worthy of
all Acceptance.

BUT why should it be esteemed unreasonable, that Men who obstinately persist
in their Crimes, should reap the Fruit of their own Doings? What more
equitable, than that they who will not accept of Mercy, should fall by the
Sword of Justice?

EVERY enlightened Mind, instead of complaining of the Severity of God, will
adore his Patience to a revolted World. While Sinners continue in Arms of
Rebellion against Him, He visits them every Morning with his refreshing Light,
provides for them every Day with paternal Care, showers down Blessings upon
them with an unsparing Hand. -- Why do not the Thunders of Heaven destroy those
insolent Mortals, who defy their Omnipotent Maker! Why does not the Earth open
it is Mouth and transmit to unquenchable Flames those andacious Rebels, who will
not submit to the Government of of the King of Kings! It is because his Ways
are not as our Ways, neither his Thoughts as our Thoughts -- He is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should be brought to Repentance.

II. HOW greatly is it to be lamented, that the Bulk of Mankind pay so little
Attention to that which ought to engage their principal Concern!
LET us view the Conduct of Men: How carelessly do they spend their Time, in
the Fatigues of Business, or the Pursuit of Pleasure! They dissipate their
Thoughts upon a thousand Objects, and live without Retirement or Reflection. --
They contemplate these visible Heavens and measure the Magnitude, and calculate
the Distance of the Stars; but give themselves no Concern to secure an Entrance
into the Heaven of Heavens, the Habitation of God's favorite People. -- They
descend into the Depths of the Earth, to discover the Treasures which are
concealed in it is Bosom; but never seriously prepare for that decisive Hour,
when they shall have no more Connection with this material System, but become
Inhabitants of the invisible World of Spirits -- Borne on the Wings of Ambition
or Avarice, they fly from Pole to Pole, in Search of that Wealth and Honor
which vanishes in a Moment; but profanely despise that Honor which comes from
God -- those Treasures which would enrich them forever.

THIS careless and sensual Course of Life might perhaps admit of some Excuse,
if attended with no hurtful Consequences; but since it is inconsistent with all
regular Hopes of Salvation; since, if not awakned out of it, we remain the
Children of Wrath; every considerate Mind must condemn Sinners of this Order,
as the greatest of Madmen.

WHAT would you think of a Prisoner confined in Chains, who knew the Day of his
Trial was approaching, that Sentence of Death was ready to be pronounced upon
him; and when once pronounced could never be recalled, but would certainly be
executed: -- If in this melancholy Situation he was assured that a Way of
Escape was provided: -- But instead of improving the Opportunity afforded him,
he disregarded the Message, and spent his Time in Sports and Diversion, till
the fatal Hour arrive which excludes all Hopes forever! -- Would not every
impartial Observer pronounce his Conduct the Extremity of Madness?

THIS is but a faint Image of the Madness which possesses the Hearts of secure
Sinners. -- As much as the Punishment of Hell is to be dreaded above the
momentary Miseries of this Life, so much greater is the Folly of those who
neglect the Day of their Visitation.

THEIR Folly will be still more manifest if we consider -- what Motives induce
them to so fatal a Procedure. -- Motives so mean and contemptible, that it is
astonishing they have any Influence upon Men endowed with the Powers of Reason
and Reflection. The true Happiness of our Nature is sacrificed for a few sordid
Delights, which become insipid by Custom, are impaired by the Infirmities of
Age, and will certainly be lost in Death.

DOUBTLESS the Angels of Light are astonished at the Stupidity of Men, who for
a painted Toy -- a little Heap of glittering Dust -- or a sensual Pleasure,
which they enjoy in common with their kindred Brutes, part with Heaven and it is
unceasing Joys, expose themselves to Hell, and all it is dark and despairing
Horrors. In the mean time, in perfect Consistence with the Hopes of eternal
Happiness, we might enjoy every rational Pleasure. The Enjoyments of this
World, when regulated by the Precepts of Religion, are attended with peculiar
Sweetness -- We review them without Reproach -- and receive them as Earnests of
superior Joys.

III. LET us then be persuaded to renounce this inconsiderate Conduct, and with
unfainting Vigor and Resolution pursue those Blessings which constitute our
Happiness in Time and Eternity.
HAVE you hitherto neglected to walk in the Way that leads to Life? -- Have you
spent your Time in those Things which the wise Solomon pronouces Vanity of
Vanities? -- Have you to this Day been inattentive to the great Concern of a
rational and immortal Being? --

YET, O indulgent Goodness! -- Yet you live: -- You hear the Voice of a
compassionate God, inviting you to return unto Him. He addresses you as He did
his ungrateful People in the Days of old. How shall I give thee up Ephraim! How
shall I deliver thee Israel! My Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are
kindled together.

ATTEND, O my Brethren, to the heavenly Voice; it speaks particularly to you
who are in the Morning of Life, the flourishing Bloom of Youth: This is the
noblest Opportunity you will ever enjoy, to lay a sure Foundation for future
Safety. Your Hearts are not prepossessed with the distracting Cares of Life,
nor your Consciences rendered insensible by inveterate Habits of Vice. Nature
is now in her Prime, and Grace is more frequently bestowed upon young Persons,
then on those who are grown old in Sin.

BUT in what Language shall I address those who are bowed down under the Weight
of Years and Infirmities -- and are grown gray in the Service of Satan? -- Must
I say your Day is past -- your Doom irreversible? -- God forbid that I should
be sent on so terrible a Message. -- Your Case is dangerous, but not desperate:
Through the Patience of Heaven, you are yet commanded to seek the Lord while He
may be found: Let your vanishing Breath be employed in constant and ardent
Prayer to that Being who not only permits you to live in this World but invites
you to draw near to the Throne of His Grace. In a few Days more your Doom will
be fixed: Hope, the Relief of the Miserable, will forsake you forever.

MAY a gracious God convince you of your dangerous Situation, and excite you to
fly for Deliverance to Him, whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give Repentance and Remission of Sins! To Him be Glory forever and ever.
AMEN.

SERMON VIII. The JOY of FAITH.
1 PETER, I. 8. Whom having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see Him
not, YET BELIEVING YE REJOICE with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.
TO rejoice is agreeable to all Mankind; though there are but few, who have a
just Foundation for it. None have a Claim to this Privilege, but those who are
in Friendship with that adorable Being, who is the Fountain of Felicity to all
his Creatures. All the human Race are become Enemies to God, through the
Depravity of their Natures and the voluntary Transgressions of their Lives: A
Reconciliation must take place, otherwise the Enmity will be perpetual, and the
Misery of Man irrecoverable.

IN Christ God is reconciling the World unto Himself: None can rejoice in God,
but those who are interested in His Dear Son: He has made Satisfaction for the
Sins of a guilty World; but those who do not receive Him as their Savior are
deprived of the Advantages which flow from his Merits and Mediation: He has
purchased every Blessing for his People, but those who are not united to Him by
Faith, are Aliens and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel and the
Covenants of Promise.

ST. PETER, in the Words of my Text, describes the Character of true
Christians, and declares their Privilege. That Savior who was once an
Inhabitant of this inferior Earth, but now seated at the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High, is the Object of their undissembled Affection: They view Him
by Faith, in all the Glories of his Person and Character; and believing they
rejoice. -- The Words of my Text teach us this Truth, which shall be the
Subject of our present Meditation -- ALL true Believers have a just Foundation
for Rejoicing. --

TO illustrate this, let us take a View of some of their important Privileges.
-- Their Sins are forgiven -- Their Persons and Performances are accepted --
Their Natures are sanctified -- They are the Care of a distinguished Providence
-- Nothing can do them any essential Hurt -- All Things will conspire to
promote their real Good -- They have the assured Prospect of immortal Glory.

FIRST, THEY may rejoice that their Sins are forgiven.
THIS is the Covenant which God establishes with them through Christ their
exalted Head: I will be merciful to your Unrighteousness, your Iniquities will
I remember no more. To learn the Value of this Privilege, let us consider the
Number and Aggravation of our Sins. -- But who can understand his Errors! Who
can recount his continual Deviations from the Law of God, the unerring Standard
of our Duty! In many Things we all offend, in every Thing we fall short: The
Defects which attend our best Performances are highly criminal: The Defilements
which accompany our purest Services are justly offensive to the unspotted
Majesty of Heaven. -- What shall we say of our presumptuous Violations of the
Divine Commands! -- These are committed against Light and Love; not through
involuntary Surprise, but deliberate Rebellion: They are peculiarly displeasing
to God, and call aloud for Vengeance.

HOW astonishing is that Grace! which pardons all these Sins of every Order and
Degree, with all the heinous Circumstances which attend them. -- With what
admiring Gratitude must we rejoice in that God, who declares, He is merciful
and gracious, abundant in Goodness and Truth, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin!

TO increase our Gratitude we may consider, the pardoning Mercy of God is not
barely a present Benefit, but attended with the most lasting and salutary
Effects. It assures us of immediate Safety, and preserves us from future
Condemnation. The Sentence of Absolution is past in Favor of every true
Believer in the Court of Heaven, and will never be revoked, through the varying
Scenes of the present Life, or the unchanging Ages of Eternity. Well might the
Psalmist triumph in his Happiness, and pronounce a Blessedness on the Man whose
Iniquities are forgiven.

LET us suppose a Malefactor condemned to suffer an infamous Death; the Day is
come; the appointed Hour approaches, in which he must deliver himself into the
Hands of the Executioner; he beholds with weeping Eyes and a trembling Heart,
the solemn Preparation made for his Punishment. -- If in the critical Moment a
Pardon arrive, which delivers him from all his Distresses and Fears; will not
his Heart leap for Joy, and Nature sink under the excessive Transport? -- But
God bestows a more inestimable Favor on the true Believer. -- He delivers him
not from the Pains of a Moment, but from unceasing Torments. He restores him,
not to a temporal, but an eternal Life. -- To increase the Kindness,

SECONDLY, HE admits them to Friendship; their Persons and Performances are
accepted.
A PRINCE may pardon a Criminal and not enroll him among the Number of his
Acquaintance: He may open the Doors of his Prison, and not advance him to the
Dignity of a Favorite. But God manifests his Love to those, who receive
Forgiveness through the Blood of Jesus: He not only obliterates the Remembrance
of their Guilt, but embraces them in the Arms of Favor: He not only admits them
among the Train of his menial Servants, but exalts them to the Honors and
Privileges of his Children: His Anger is removed; He beholds them with
Complacency and Delight, and through his dear Son, graciously accepts their
poor imperfect Services.

WHO can comprehend their Dignity and Blessedness! They have free Access to the
Throne of Grace, and may approach his Presence with filial Confidence: They may
implore his Aid in every Exigence; and take Shelter under the Shadow of his
Wings in every Danger: He gives them a sacred Assurance, that He is their GOD,
and that all his awful and amiable Attributes shall be exerted for their
Advantage.

THIS is a perpetual Source of the most refined and transporting Joy. -- This
God is my God, may the Believer say; -- not barely by an external Title, but by
a firm and indissoluble Covenant: He not only honors me with the Name, but
affords me the Happiness of his Children: Surely this is an allsufficient
Portion; we may rejoice in it, though destitute of all other Comfort. Although
the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vines, the Labor
of the Olives shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat, the Flock shall
be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls: Yet will I
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation.

THIRDLY, THIS Restoration to the Divine Favor is always accompanied with the
Sanctification of our Nature.
NO Change in our Nature can make us happy, while we remain the Servants of
Sin: Our discordant Appetites and Passions must keep us in pepetual
Disquietude: The Breasts of the Wicked are like the tempestuous Ocean, in
constant Agitation. -- But the Divine Spirit, which resides in the Heart of the
true Believer, rectifies the Disorders of our corrupted Nature, and introduces
Peace and Harmony, instead of lawless Riot and Confusion. -- He implants an
heavenly Principle, which inclines us to revere the Authority of the Great God,
to obey the unerring Dictates of his Word, and regulate our various Appetites
and Passions by the Laws of Reason and Religion. -- By the benign Influences of
this blessed Agent -- I ight succeeds to Darkness -- Order to Confusion --
Beauty to Deformity. The Storms of Passion subside, the savage Disposition is
softened and subdued. -- The Proud become meek -- the Morose, benevolent -- and
Monsters of Vice, Examples of the most amiable Virtues. The tyrannical Empire
of Sin is conquered, and that Kingdom set up in the Souls of Men, which
consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

BELIEVERS being thus restored to the Favor of God and brought to submit to his
equitable Government,

FOURTHLY, THEY become the distinguishing Care of Divine Providence.
THAT all comprehending Eye, which with a single Glance, surveys the whole
Creation, is fixed upon them as the Objects of his complacential Regards: --
That unerring Wisdom, that directs the stupendous Revolutions of Nature, is
their unfailing Companion and Guide: -- That omnipotent Arm, whith Nothing can
resist, is their Guard and Defense: He who makes his Angels Spirits, and his
Ministers Flames of Fire, gives these benevolent Beings Charge concerning them,
to keep them in all their Ways.

WELL then, may they rejoice, though surrounded with Darkness, Difficulty and
Danger. God is their Sun, to direct their Way; their Shield to defend them from
their numberless Enemies. They are conducted through the Wilderness of this
World, by his Word and Spirit: They are preserved in Safety by his guardian
Care. The Faithful may therefore triumph in their Almighty Protector and
Friend, and say with the Psalmist, Because He is at my Right Hand I shall not
be moved. -- Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death I will
fear no Evil. -- In Consequence of this distinguished Care of Divine
Providence, I proceed to say,

FIFTHLY, NOTHING can do them any essential Hurt.
THEIR Security is founded on their Union to the Son of God, and confirmed by
an unalterable Promise, that Nothing shall separate them from his Love. In this
Situation they may possess their Souls in Peace, amidst the Tempests which
disturb the Repose of the Rest of Mankind. The Basis of their Happiness remains
unshaken, in all the Revolutions which take Place in this lower World. Attached
to their exalted Head, who holds the Reins of universal Empire, they shall
finally overcome the Power and Policy of their Enemies. They may be serene in
the greatest Dangers; secure in the severest Trials; happy in the most
afflicted Condition.

THE Edicts of Princes may banish them to uncultivated Deserts, and the Fires
of Persecution consume all their earthly Enjoyments: But if we belong to
Christ, our Happiness is out of the Reach of Accidents and Disappointments.
Secure of an invincible Friend, we need not fear -- the Lightnings of Heaven --
the Shakings of the Earth -- nor the Flames that shall consume this habitable
Globe. -- Let the Sun be covered with Darkness, the Moon withdraw her Light,
and this material Universe sink into Ruin: -- Let these Tabernacles of Clay be
destroyed by the Stroke of Death, and this beautiful Arrangement of Flesh and
Blood return to it is original Dust: -- Let the illustrious Day appear, when the
SON OF GOD shall descend from Heaven in radiant Majesty, and summon the
trembling Nations to stand at his impartial Bar: -- The true Believer will lift
up his Head with Joy amidst these astonishing Scenes, and with a Voice of
Triumph congratulate the Appearance of his GOD and SAVIOR: Clothed with his
Righteousness, he fears no Condemnation; animated by his Spirit, he is sure to
be found among the Number of his Friends. -- If the Judge is his Friend, what
can prejudice his Happiness? I may add,

SIXTHLY, ALL these great Revolutions shall conspire to promote his real Good.
THE Destruction of the Universe prepares the Way for the Descent of his
adorable Redeemer: The Dissolution of the Body introduces him into the Joys of
the divine Presence: Death is a Messenger sent from Heaven to convey him into a
State of immortal Existence. When the Heavens vanish away, the Vail is removed
that conceals the ineffable Glories of the Kingdom of God.

WHILE we reside upon Earth, we necessarily partake of those Miseries which are
inseparable from a State of Mortality; but when removed from this Valley of
Tears, we enter on the true Felicity and Glory of our Natures. As the Children
of the first Adam, we are subject to the Empire of Sin and Death; by our
Relation to the second Adam, we are Heirs of an heavenly Kingdom, where all His
People shall live and reign with Him forever. -- This leads me to say,

SEVENTHLY and finally, THEY rejoice in the Prospect of immortal Glory.
THEIR Joy is not confined to the narrow Boundaries of Time, but extends
through eternal Ages. -- This makes it full without any Defect, complete
without any Alloy.

THE happiest Condition on Earth is not equal to the magnificent Promises of
divine Grace, nor answerable to the sublime Hopes which God has implanted in
the Breasts of his People. Though their Joys are superior to those of the most
fortunate Worlding, yet they do not satisfy the Immensity of our Desires: We
only perceive the Dawn of an heavenly Day. The Fruits of Grace are but
Foretastes of the Harvest of Glory. We are refreshed with a few Drops which
flow from the unbounded Ocean of Blessedness. We have a transient Glimpse of
that amiable Countenance which diffuses Life and Joy through the Celestial
Regions. -- Even these imperfect Enjoyments, put Gladness into our Hearts, and
enable us to rejoice more than when Corn and Wine are increased. In the
Destitution of all Things, we may adopt the Language of the Psalmist, Thou O
Lord! art my Portion in the Land of the Living: Whom have I in Heaven but Thee?
and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee.

IN some favorite Moments, the faithful Servants of God experience those divine
Consolations, which change this Earth into a Paradise of Delights: Filled with
the transporting Views of a Savior's Excellency and Beauty, the World vanishes
from their Sight: Inspired with Love of the supreme Good, all Creatures appear
as comparative Nothings. To forsake the Pleasures of Sense for the Enjoyment of
God, gives them greater Satisfaction than to possess them in their highest
Perfection.

IF, O my God! to behold thy Face in this Land of Exile, through a Glass
darkly, be so inexpressibly delightful -- How extatic will be my Joy! when I
shall enter thy heavenly Habitation, and see Thee as Thou art in all thy
unveiled Glory. -- If the Refreshments I receive in the Place of my Pilgrimage,
be so agreeable -- How vast will be my Felicity, when I shall eat of the Tree
of Life, and drink of those Rivers of Pleasures that slow at thy Right Hand! --
If the Visits of thy Love make me happy in these Regions of Sorrow, what may I
not hope for in the Mansions of Bliss! WELL may the Voice of Rejoicing be heard
in the Tabernacles of the Righteous. -- Have I received Jesus as my Savior? --
Has a View of his Glory inspired me with unfeigned Love to his Person and
Character? -- Is his Salvation more precious in my Esteem than the dearest
earthly Enjoyments? -- Do I value his Favor as Life, and his Loving Kindness as
better than Life? -- Then let me rejoice that God has opened my Eyes, to
discern the true Value of Things, and directed me to choose that good Part that
can never be taken away. After a few Struggles more with a corrupted Heart, a
few more Selfdenials in an ensnaring World, I shall enter upon a State of
Existence, in which my Nature will be perfected, my Joys sincere, my Happiness
complete, without Interruption, and without End.

IMPROVEMENT.
I. THIS discovers the Excellency of true Religion, and evidences that it is
not an Enemy to human Happiness.
DELUDED Mortals are prejudiced against the Ways of Christ; they imagine they
are beset with Thorns, and that those who walk in them must bid Adieu to every
agreeable Enjoyment.

BUT, this is a fatal Mistake: Our amiable Master consults the present Comfort
as well as future Welfare of those who enroll themselves under his Banners. He
indeed prohibits those sensual Excesses, which pollute the Body, degrade the
Mind, and ever prove Bitterness in the End: All his Laws are admirably adapted
to make us happy in ourselves, and Blessings to all around us.

THE Pleasures of Sin are indeed inconsistent with the Character of a Disciple
of Christ. All who follow Him, are strictly enjoined to keep themselves
unspotted from the World, it is dangerous and polluting Manners: But they are
introduced into a new Scene of Delights, superior in their Kind and more
lasting in their Duration. We renounce that false and delusive Joy, which, like
a blazing Meteor makes a gaudy Appearance, but soon vanishes into empty Air: In
the room of these disguised Trifles we receive Joys spiritual and divine, which
are continually refining, and will increase more and more till they leave not
one unaccomplish'd Wish -- not one unsatisfied Desire. The Pleasures of
Religion, may be compared to the Path of the Just, which shines more and more
to the perfect Day.

THESE Joys, are discovered in the Gospel to those, who without its irradiating
Beams, must have remained in the Regions of the Shadow of Death: They are
offered to those, who without these glad Tidings, must live in perpetual Fear,
die in unutterable distress, and after Death be involved in Blackness of
Darkness forever.

HOW consolatory are the Discoveries of the Gospel! They present to our View a
God reconciled through the atoning Blood of Jesus: -- A Savior sufficient to to
supply all our Wants, and ready to relieve us in all our Necessities: -- To
those who thankfully receive these Revelations of divine Grace, it makes the
most precious Promises -- and assures them the Possession of every desirable
Blessing through every Period of their Existence.

WHEN we rejoice in any created Good, our Joy may be innocent, but it cannot be
enduring: Earthly Joys may delight for a Moment, but are like the Crackling of
Thorns under a Pot; they form a sudden Blaze which soon expires. -- But to
rejoice in the Lord Jesus Christ, is to build the Fabric of human Happiness on
an immovable Basis, which neither the Tempests of Life, nor the Depredations
of Death can diminish or destroy. This is to possess a Joy which will not decay
with Age, but survive the Funeral of universal Nature, and flourish through all
Eternity. Well may the Believer rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

II. THIS should be improved as a mighty Argument to persuade us to accept the
Great Salvation.
THIS is the Design I have been carrying on in several Discourses; and
certainly Nothing can be more worthy the Attention of a Being in a State of
Trial, and designed for an eternal Existence. If this is despised and
neglected, the Wrath of God attends you in all your Ways -- It lies down with
you at Night -- it rises with you in the Morning -- It accompanies you through
all the Business and Diversions of the Day: A secret Curse is mingled with all
your Enjoyments: You are every Moment exposed to the Arrests of Death: This
delivers you over to unceasing Torments.

TO rejoice in these Circumstances is the most thoughtless Stupidity. The Joys
of the Sinner may be compared to the Revels of a condemned Malefactor, who in
the height of his Folly goes dancing to an infamous Execution.

THINK, O my Brethren, how full -- how free -- how unlimitted are the Calls of
Sovereign Mercy? With what Authority does God Command! With what Compassion
does He invite! With what Earnestness does He beseech you, not to refuse the
Offers of his Love!

REVIEW the unspeakable Blessings which will be the immediate Portion of those,
who receive this great Salvation with Humility and Gratitude, and labor to
obtain it with indefatigable Zeal and Diligence. -- Being justified by Faith in
Jesus, they become Members of his sacred Family, they enjoy the Privileges of
the Children of God, and in the Relation of Children are Heirs of His heavenly
Kingdom. Compared to this, what are Crowns and Sceptres! What are all the
Glories of created Nature! -- glittering Phantoms -- disguised Nothings.

BUT if Men bar their Hearts against the Impressions of incarnate Love, and
give the Blessed Savior a final refusal; God -- His elect Angels -- and the
Assembly of perfected Spirits will rejoice in their Damnation -- May infinite
Mercy prevent this terrible Event! -- Perhaps you have lived long under a
Dispensation of Grace, but have entertained no Thoughts of preparing for
Eternity: -- Perhaps you are full of gay Expectations of Pleasure in the Ways
of Sin: -- In the Pride of Life, captivated with the Enjoyment of your Lusts,
immersed in Earthly Cares -- you pour Contempt on the Solemnities of Religion.

BUT make a Pause -- Bethink yourselves before it be too late: You have no Time
to trifle -- Your Life is as a Vapor, and may expire before the Dawn of another
Day: Or, if your Time upon Earth is lengthned out, a provoked God may swear in
his Wrath that you shall never enter into his Rest. -- Consider this, ye that
forget God -- Kiss ye the Son lest He be angry, when his Wrath is but kindled:
Blessed are they that trust in Him. --

TO whom be Glory forever and ever.

AMEN.

