Mr. NILES's TWO SERMONS ON LIBERTY.

TWO DISCOURSES ON LIBERTY; DELIVERED AT THE North Church, in NEWBURY-PORT, ON
Lord's Day, JUNE 5th, 1774, AND Published at the general Desire of the Hearers.

By Nathaniel Niles, M. A.

O Tempora! O Mores!

NEWBURY-PORT: Printed by I. THOMAS and H. W. TINGES.

MDCCLXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS what was said in public on the following subjects, was delivered. almost
entirely extempore, the author finds it impossible to give an exact copy. Those
things however, on account of which, he apprehends, a copy was desired, have
been carefully preserved. The particular expressions could not be recollected,
but the ideas are not lost. Several new thoughts on the subject are
interspersed.

THE author's general design is to awaken in his countrymen, proper sentiments
and emotions, respecting both civil and spiritual liberty. The former, without
the latter, is but a body without a soul. -- As the copy is so suddenly called
for, the first, rough draught, goes to the press; and the author doubts not,
but many imperfections will be observed in the style and manner; which however
he trusts are less evils, than a delay at a time when every means, however
imperfect, is needful, that may inspire a genuine spirit of true liberty. He
feels that he wants those advantages which many others enjoy, for becoming
entirely acquainted with the various branches of civil liberty. -- The main
ideas alone are attended to. The inquisitive mind will be able to draw a number
of important consequences.

SERMON I.
I. CORRINTH. Chap. VII. ver. 21. Art thou called being a servant? Care not for
it; but if thou may be made free, use it rather.


AT first glance, it is certain, this text refers to a state of personal
servitude, and extends to every instance of the same kind. It is also as clear
that the Apostle exhorts the servant to prefer liberty. This proves that the
inspired writer himself, prefered liberty to a state of servitude; for he would
not exhort another to prefer what was not preferable in his own esteem. Now, if
Paul esteemed personal liberty a valuable inheritance, he certainly esteemed
the liberty of a community a far richer inheritance; for if one man's enjoyment
of it was a good, the enjoyment of two must be a greater good, and so on
through the whole community. From the same manner of reasoning, the slavery of
a community appears to be a proportionably greater evil, than the slavery of an
individual. Hence, we may observe from the text, that CIVIL LIBERTY IS A GREAT
GOOD.

THIS is the proposition to which I ask your present hour's attention, and if
it should appear in the sequel to contain an important truth, you will not
esteem it below the gospel preacher's duty to explain and support it in public,
especially at such a time as this, a time, at the very prospect of which, our
generous forefathers would have wept in bitterness of soul. If civil liberty
is a great good, it ought to be deemed one of the blessings of Heaven; these it
is the preacher's duty to illustrate, that we may feel the obligations they
bring us under -- that we may enquire whether we have improved them for the
glory of the giver, and that we may know how to conduct toward them for the
future. Be pleased then to give your candid, close, and serious attention,
while I endeavor to explain the nature of civil liberty, and prove that it is
a great good.

AS it is much less difficult to point out the nature of true coin in general,
than to determine whether any particular piece is genuine, or how far it
differs from the perfect standard: So it is much easier to point out the
general nature of civil liberty, than to say what degree of it enters into any
particular civil constitution. It is therefore most natural to enquire, in the
first place, concerning the general nature of liberty; and indeed it is as
necessary as natural. For until we determine this question we have no rule by
which we may estimate the quantity o^ liberty in any particular constitution:
But when once we have found the standard, we shall be prepared to examine our
own constitution, or any other, at pleasure, and to determine what part of the
constitution should be supported, and what may be given up with safety. An
enquiry into the nature of liberty in general, is also needful on another
account. Without it we cannot see the force of any evidence that may be brought
to evince the value of liberty itself.

THAT the subject may be fairly elucidated, I will endeavor to remove some
mistakes by which it has been obscured. In doing this, I observe, that liberty
does not consist in persons thinking themselves free. The Jews could say we
were never in bondage to any man though they wore the Roman yoke at the very
same time. Again, though a certain constitution should be contended for and
supported by a majority of voices; yet this would be no sure evidence that it
is free: Because an hundred may as truly tyrannize over one, as one over an
hundred; or otherwise, the majority may be in favor of licentiousness. What
but a love of licentiousness or tyranny, or both, can induce the heathen
nations to approve of their several systems of government? What but these,
could induce Saul and the men of Israel to persecute David and his handful?
What but one or both of these drew down the fury of Sodom on Lot -- of the Jews
on the prophets -- on Jesus Christ -- on his Apostles and their followers. What
but these ever raised any one of the many terrible persecutions under which the
peaceable disciples of Jesus Christ have fallen from time to time? In all these
instances the majority have been unfriendly to liberty.

CIVIL Liberty consists, not in any inclinations of the members of a community;
but in the being and due administration of such a system of laws, as
effectually tends to the greatest felicity of a state. Herein consists civil
liberty, and to live under such a constitution, so administered, is to be the
member of a free state; and he who is free from the censure of those laws, may
fully enjoy all the pleasures of civil liberty, unless he is prevented by some
defect, not in the constitution, but in himself.

IF liberty consists in the being and administration of a civil constitution,
different from such an one as has been mentioned, I must confess, my inference
from the Apostle's exhortation is not just. For certain it is, that so far as a
constitution does not tend, in the highest degree, to the greatest felicity of
the state, collectively considered; it is a comparitive evil and not a good.

WHERE there is no system of laws, not liberty, but anarchy, takes place. Some
degree of liberty may, indeed, exist where neither the constitution nor the
administration of it is perfect. But in order to perfect freedom, the law must
extend to every member of the community alike, both in its requisitions and
prohibitions. Every one must be required to do all he can that tends to the
highest good of the state For the whole of this is due to the state, from the
individuals of which it is composed. Every thing, however trifling, that tends,
even in the lowest degree, to disserve the interest of the state must also be
forbidden.

ORIGINALLY, there were no private interests THE great God is the original
owner of all things. He has, originally, no partner in any thing; but has been
graciously pleased to invite his rational creatures, who are capable of
enjoyment, to a joint participation of his possessions, according to their
various capacities. Thus, ant^cedent to the creation of this world, whatever
existed was a kind of common stock enjoyed by God and those of his creatures
that could enjoy such a good. All were to exert themselves to turn every thing
to the best advantage, for the whole, and no one of all God's creatures, could
call any thing his own, in distinction from others, except the pleasure that
resulted to him from the common good. There were no private interests then.
Afterward, God made the world, and this became an addition to the common
stock. The world itself, and all the creatures in it were enjoyed by God and
his holy Angels. At length, Adam was formed out of the dust of the earth. He
was a new addition to the common stock of wealth, and being made capable of
enjoyment, was received as a member of the grand company, and became interested
in God, Angels, Heaven and Earth, and all things in them. This world, a
particular portion of the common stock, was committed, in certain respects, to
him and his posterity to be managed by them for the grand company. I say, in
certain respects, for there are certain other respects in which it was not
committed to them; in certain respects, God takes the care of it, in certain
other respects, the Angels have the management of the world and all things in
it. Each one has his particular department assigned to him, Adam and his
posterity are to be considered both as a part of the common interest, and as
overseers. They have nothing that they can call their own, to the exclusion of
the right, either of God or his Angels. Nor was there ever any thing in the
world that any one could call his own, to the exclusion of his fellow men, i.
e. in a state of nature. Antecedent to compact, any one of all the individuals,
had as good a right to lay claim to the same inheritance as another. Nay, any
one had as good a right to exclude the rest from the enjoyment of every part of
the whole, as from any, even the least part. Any one individual might
monopolize the whole earth by the same rule of justice, by which he could
monopolize a single acre, or inch. So that antecedent to compact, there could
not possibly be any private interest whatever, and every appearance of private
interest was the effect of violent seizure, and tenure, and not of just
distribution. No man has a right to enter on any common interest without the
order of the proprietors.

THERE are two modes in which earthly states were originally formed. The one
is, by the over grown influence of an individual, which put it into his power
to exercise an arbitrary government. The other is by a compact formed with a
particular design to secure and advance the private interests of those by whom
the compact was made. Both of these had their rise in usurpation. As to the
first there is no dispute. As to the second it may be said, that there were no
private interests antecedent to compact, but such as had been taken by
usurpation. It is true, that such usurpers may have appropriated such interests
as they called their own, without any resistance; but this no more frees them
from the charge of usurpation, than it would a tyrant, for him to say that he
had obtained a state of absolute monarchy gradually, and without resistance.
Stratagem, and the length of the sword are the only standards of right in
either of these cases. The absolute monarch justifies himself, by saying, that
he had a majority of strength in his favor, and the member of such an
association, as has been named, resolved to enter on a combination, for the
sake of using his sword in the best manner he could for the defense of what
little he had, and consented that his neighbors should hold what they had
appropriated, and determined not to attempt to divest them of the public
interest they have seized, least in the scuffle he should lose what he had as
unjustly monopolized. This is the maxim on which pirates and gangs of robbers
live in a kind of unity. If we go on this maxim, if we suppose that is a well
founded government which has its foundation in private interest, we can by no
means blame the tyrant for holding absolute dominion, without condemning
ourselves; nor can the tyrant blame his subjects for their rebellion, whenever
they apprehend rebellion will be their greatest emolument. For, if government
is first founded on private interest, it cannot be reasonab^^ expected, that
the superstructure will stand, when the foundation is removed. It matters not
whether men who build their notions of government on self-interest, call
themselves whigs or tories, friends to prerogative, or to the liberties of the
people. Their scheme of government is the same for substance. They cannot blame
their neighbor for commencing tory when it will be most conducive to his
private interest. Indeed, on this scheme it is unreasonable to withstand a mob
or a tyrant, or to make war on the pirates themselves, for, according to this
doctrine they are none of them doing any thing but what is right. Yes, say you,
they infringe on my rights. I ask, what rights? None but such as you have
pillaged from the community -- Rights in which these very persons are
interested as members of the community.

THE world and its inhabitants, are a common property that belongs to the whole
intellectual system. They are committed to mankind to be managed for the whole.
It is therefore the business of mankind collectively, to regulate and dispose
of the inheritance for the emolument of the whole company. In order to this,
government in its various parts is necessary; and the several offices in the
government become so many parts of the common good, or stock. These, as well as
the other parts of the common inheritance, are to be committed to individuals
by the body of stewards, to be improved for the company of proprietors. Every
individual is to have his part assigned him, and so long as he fills his place
well, he is to be rewarded for his services by the community, that is, he is to
have the enjoyment of such conveniences, in such a degree as shall be a
sufficient recompense for his labor and care; but he is not to have any
separate interest consigned to him, for this would tend to detach him from the
community. Just so far as his affection is turned on private interest, he will
become regardless of the common good, and when he is detached from the
community in heart, his services will be very precarious at best, and those
will not be expected at all which imply self denial. He is only to enjoy it at
the will of the commuity, which is to be regulated by the interest of the whole.

SOME are to be rewarded for their services to the community by an exchange of
commodities. Carriers, such as merchants are, are to have a certain proportion
of the commodities they carry. Others are to be rewarded by a general
collection from the whole. Thus each individual is to take care of the
community, and the community in its turn, is to make provision for the
individuals. -- These observations afford us a clue to the relation that
kingdoms and states, and the internal part of individual states, bear to each
other. The whole world is properly, no more than a small colony of the
universe. But small as it is it is too unweildy to be managed as one state, by
reason of the feebleness of human powers. There is therefore a propriety in its
being subdivided into still smaller portions called kingdoms. It is the
business of these still to regard the good of the world, in subserviency to the
good of the universe. Neighboring states have no more right to rise up against
each other, than neighboring individuals. Different states are interested in
the welfare of each other and ought to seek the good of each other. One has no
right to devise schemes to enrich itself by impoverishing another. The case is
the same with respect to different parts of the same kingdom.

THIS is a scheme of government perfectly consistent with the divine
government, and true reason. And on this scheme we may consistently exert
ourselves in favor of liberty, and punish tyrants according to their just
deserts.

THERE is much said about the prerogative of crowns. Crowned heads have indeed
a prerogative of doing good, but no prerogative for any private emolument. The
true honor of a King consists in his doing good; but if he becomes an obstacle
in the way of public good, he is to be removed like other common nuisances.

THIS scheme shows us, likewise, on what principles we are to stand ready to
lay down our lives in the cause of liberty, or, which is the same thing, in
vindication of good government. We, and all we have, belong to the communitity.
Whenever therefore the common cause requires it, we should, like Paul, be ready
to lay down our lives for the brethren. It is but what we owe to the community.

OUR worthy forefathers, however they might greatly err in some particular
instances, seem to have been inspired by this generous scheme of liberty. This
was what led them to this new world, and I would hope that we their posterity
have too much of that spirit which led them to risque their lives, to suffer
ourselves to be enslaved by an India herb, or English manufactures.


. The world and all things in it, were the common interests of all the
inhabitants, under God the great owner. Nothing is to be esteemed an interest
any farther than it tends to good, or is capable of being turned to the benefit
of the possessor. But whatever has this tendency, or may be thus used, is
properly termed an interest. According to this estimate, the term interest
includes all those various offices and employments that are capable of being
improved for the good of the community. These interests, being such as cannot
be managed by the whole body collectively, are distributed among the
individuals according as they appear in the eyes of the body politic, to be
qualified to use them for the good of the whole. In this way every member
becomes a servant to the state, and is a good or bad servant according to the
manner in which he discharges the trust reposed in him. This is equally true of
the King on the throne and the peasant in the field. The laws of a free state
require each individual to use the public interests deposited in his hands, in
every instance in that very manner that shall contribute most to the good of
the community, without any particular reference to Governor or subject, rich or
poor, high or low. While the laws require such a continual course of conduct in
every member of the community, they as critically forbid every one to take from
another that part of the public property which is committed to him; or to
impede him in making the best use of it for the public, unless when the
community see it best to deprive an individual of his place, and authorize
another to do it in their name. In this manner the laws of a free state provide
security for the particular properties of each individual member, or rather for
the public interest deposited in the hands of individuals, by denouncing such
penalties on every offender as are exactly adequate to his offense. There must
be an exact proportion between the offense and the penalty. Where there is no
such proportion, or equality, liberty is infringed, because the law is partial,
as it will injure, either the public, by not giving it its due, or the
offender, by inflicting a greater evil than he deserves. In this case there
must be no distinctions, made by the law, between persons of different
characters and stations, only as those different characters and stations may
give the same criminal action different degrees of aggravation. A criminal
action is more criminal in a person who fills an elevated place, than in one of
a more humble condition; because it has a more detrimental aspect on the state.
For this reason, the offenses of the great should be punished with greater
indignity and severity, than the crimes of persons in low life. In a perfectly
free state, friendship to the community will be as carefully noticed as an
offense. Punishment will not be more exactly alloted to the transgressor, than
adequate rewards to the faithful subject. The farmer, the seaman, the mechanic,
the merchant, and the practitioner of such of the learned professions as belong
to the state, are directed by the community, in effect, to reward each other by
an exchange of labor, or commodities. While those servants of the state, who
are employed in managing the reins of government, are rewarded by a collection
from the whole, an equality to which, is returned in the happy effects of
legislation and executive justice. At the same time that the laws make due
provs^ion for an equal distribution of rewards among the faithful servants of
the state, both of higher and lower rank, they make as full provision for the
infliction of penalties on every class alike. They render it as easy to bring a
royal offender to trial, -- to procure an impartial sentence against him, and
to inflict deserved punishment, as in the case of the meanest subject.

IN such a state, the laws extend to all the members of the society alike, by
making in impartial estimate of every offense, but as it is best in all
communities, that some offenders should be pardoned, for special reasons, and
that others should be punished; those same laws will lodge a power of
determining the alternative with some one, whose capacity and integrity are
equal to such a trust, that so the community may suffer no harm.

A GOOD foundation for liberty is laid in such a constitution, but its whole
worth lies in due administration. Perfect liberty takes place where such a
constitution is fully administered: But where the administration is imperfect,
liberty is likewise imperfect. In a perfectly free state, both the
constitution, and the administration of it, are full of propriety, equality,
and equilibrium.

THESE I take to be the out lines of genuine liberty, which, by a proper
application, may assist us in our enquiries after the degree of liberty enjoyed
by any particular state.

INDEED, the circumstances and occurrences, that attend human states are so
numerous, extensive, and uncertain, that no one man, or body of men, can
foresee and improve them all to the greatest advantage. Hence, it frequently
happens, that we cannot ascertain the degree of liberty enjoyed by a community,
by comparing the particular parts of a constitution, or the administration of
it, with the abstract notion of liberty; for we see but a small part of the
whole system. Our views are very partial. This is the case not only of
individual subjects, but the body of government, itself, cannot, completely,
comprehend the whole. Some degree of partial oppression is, therefore, to be
expected in every human state, even, under the wisest administration. We may,
however, determine, in some instances, whether liberty is unnecessarily
infringed or not. When we see the body of a community plundered for the sake of
indu^ging individuals in pride, luxury, idle^^ss and debauchery, -- when we see
thousands rewarded with pensions, for having either devised, or attempted to
execute some scheme for plundering a nation, and establishing despotis^^, we
cannot be in doubt whether some horrid attack is not made on liberty.

WE may reason thus in a few particular instances; but, in general, we must
form our judgments by considering the various dispositions of mankind, and by
noticing their various operations and effects, in various circumstances. We
must turn our attention to the facts that have already taken place; and may
reasonably conclude, that the same causes will always produce the same effects,
unless something special prevents. One general inference from the whole will
be, that liberty is much rather to be expected in a state where a majority,
first, institutes, and then varies the constitution according as they apprehend
circumstances require, than in any other.

OTHER things being equal, a majority has a more general and distinct knowledge
of the circumstances, and exigencies of a state than a minority; and, of
consequence, is more able to judge of what is best to be done. Add to this,
that private interest is the great idol of the human mind; and, therefore, when
a majority unite in any measures, it is to be supposed, they are such measures
as are best calculated to secure the particular interests of the members of
that majority; and, consequently, the general interests of the body are more
effectually provided for, in this way, than by the security of the private
interests of any minority whatever. And if the maxims adopted by the majority
are general, both in their nature and extent, it is to be supposed, they will
prove as salutary to the members of the minority as to those of the majority,
and, consequently, to the whole body Hence, though liberty is not necessarily,
nor invariably connected with the voice of a majority; yet, it is much more
likely to be found in connection with such a voice, than with that of a
minority. Indeed, there is in general, no reason to expect liberty where a
majority is counteracted, and, on the contrary, we may hope for some good
degree of it, where a majority governs.

IT is only on these maxims, that the present British monarch can be exculpated
from the several charges of rebellion, treachery, and usurpation, and on these,
the glorious revolution in favor of the house of Hanover is perfectly
justifiable.

LET us now attend a little, to a few particulars that may serve to excite in
us some more adequate ideas of the worth of civil liberty. Indeed, none but an
omniscient mind can fully comprehend, and exactly estimate the true worth of
this blessing, in its various consequences, effects, and inseparable
concomitants, as they take place on various occasions. Our views of this
subject may, however, be greatly enlarged and rendered much more distinct than
they generally are.

THAT civil liberty is of great worth, may be infered from the conduct of God
toward the Jewish nation. He promised them freedom from the oppression of
their enemies as a testimony of his favor in case of their obedience; and as a
chastisement for their disobedience, he threatened them with a state of
servitude. From this it is certain that the omniscient God himself, esteems
liberty a great blessing. The Israelites were taught by him to set their hearts
much on liberty, and to avoid slavery with great caution, constancy and vigor.

IT was observed that liberty has its rise in such a constitution as tends to
the highest good of a community, and that the due administration of such a
constitution affords a state of freedom. Hence, the bare idea of liberty
discovers it to be an inestimable good, for whatever tends to the highest good
of great numbers, must, undoubtedly, be an invaluable treasure. In this view
liberty is an inexhaustable fountain, which, under God, sends forth an endless
variety of such streams, as are both pleasant and salutary. I will instance in
a few particulars. When we enjoy liberty, and are sure of its continuance, we
feel that our persons and properties are safely guarded by her watchful eye,
her impartial disposition and her powerful arm. This excites to industry, which
tends to a competency of wealth. The vassal, on the other hand, having no
security of his present possessions, or for those he might obtain, concludes so
uncertain a prize is not worth the seeking, and therefore will do no more than
barely serves to silence the clamours of necessity from day to day.

IN such a situation, every bias of the human mind tends to idleness and
poverty. Even generosity itself will sinks into inactivity and indolence;
because it loathes a connection between tyranny and wealth, and therefore
refuses will do nothing that might establish such a connection, by
strengthening a tyrannical state. Liberty not only removes every obstruction
out of the way of industry, frugality and wealth, but rouses even indolence to
action, and gives honest, laborious industry a social, sprightly, cheerful air;
but in a state of slavery, sloth hangs heavily on the heels of dumb, sullen,
moross melancholy. Industry and frugality spring from the same source, and are
spontaneously productive of temperance. The former moderates the appetites,
while the latter forbids unnecessary expense. This triple alliance is the
natural parent of decent conversation and courteous behavior. They calm the
passions and urge even pride and avarice to mimic humanity, and every generous
sentiment. By these and such means, they, both enable and dispose us to fulfill
our contracts CONTRACTS are sacred things. The man that does not feel himself
bound by them, is totally incapacitated for political intercourse with mankind.
Notwithstanding the depravity of human nature, we all detest the man who breaks
his faith wi^h us. One great end of civil government, in this apostate world,
is to compel men to fulfill their contracts. Should the laws of a realm allow
the subjects to break over their contracts at pleasure, the very constitution
would contain the spirit of anarchy: And when those in the seat of government
become regardless of their contracts, and break through them, in so doing, they
throw the state, directly, into the depths of anarchy, and force becomes the
only law: For a default of one party in covenant sets the other at liberty.
When Kings, therefore, infringe on chartered rights they dissolve all manner of
union between themselves and their subjects. The obligation is mutual, and
neither party can fail to fulfill the conditions on his part, without seting
the other free. Both parts of a covenant are equally sacred, for a King,
therefore, to break that which subsists between him and his people, is as
criminal as for the people to renounce their allegiance to him. If this be so,
it ought to be made a capital offense, for any subject to endeavor to inspire
his sovreign with the notion that he is at liberty to break his faith with his
subjects. It ought to be deemed the most aggravated kind of high treason;
because he at once dethrones the King, and subverts the constitution of nature
itself. In the British nation, every right is held by charter. When, therefore
British legislators begin to talk seriously of the right of an English King to
disannul his royal charters, is it not high time for the whole nation to awake?
If a single charter is broken in upon, who can depend on the security of any
enjoyment? Awake, Britons awake! nor suffer your King to be dethroned. Let
truce breakers and traitors turn to the third chapter of the second epistle to
Timothy, if they know where to find it, and read the four first verses and
observe with whom they are ranked by their Maker.
with exactness, and so give us credit with our neighbors, and lay a
foundation for public confidence. In this manner liberty renders political
virtue fashionable, and tends to diffuse public spirit. It discountenances
disorder, and every narrow disposition. Thus the mind is fortified on all
sides, and rendered calm, resolute, and stable. Industry and temperance give
health to the body, and render it fit for the residence and operations of such
a soul. In a nation raised to such a pitch of vigor, firmness, health and
opulence, all the natural means of defense* are collected, and to such the arts
of war will be an easy acquisition. These united, will prove a bulwark against
every assault of lawless power, whether foreign or domestic. In such a state, a
free people will enjoy composure of soul and their taste will become refined.
The study of the fine arts will follow of consequence, and, after these, a long
train of science. Industry, frugality, and a curious turn naturally invent and
perfect the useful arts. What is more than all, liberty secures the rights of
conscience, by protecting every member of the state in the free exercise of his
religion, unless it be such a religion as is inconsistent with the good of the
state. The first effects of liberty, on the human mind, are calmness, serenity
and pleasing hope; and all the various fruits of liberty produce the same happy
effects. Thus liberty, first divides itself, as it were, into various streams;
which, at length, all meet together again in soothing sensations and sweet
emotion of soul. The pleasure that springs from liberty is the life of every
other enjoyment, and the importance of it in a single instance is vastly great,
too great to be conceived of, unless on a sudden transition from a state of
refined freedom, to that of the most abject slavery. How great then must be the
collective happiness that a community drives from a state of perfect freedom? I
confess liberty never has been enjoyed in perfection by any of the nations of
the earth; but this by no means affects the foregoing estimate. For, from the
small degree of liberty, with which we are acquainted, the consequences of
perfect liberty may be justly inferred. Nor is the imperfection of liberty, as
it has taken place in the world, any discouragment to the pursuit of it. The
more we can obtain, the greater will be our enjoyment. Each degree of liberty
is a precious pearl.

WHEN we would learn how much any thing tends to happiness, we must view it
with reference to the taste of the person in whom the happiness is supposed to
take place. So, the happy tendency of liberty cannot be seen, unless it be
viewed as terminating on some particular disposition in him by whom it is
enjoyed. Liberty is so illy calculated to give pleasure to either a tyrannical,
or, licentious spirit, that it proves a galling curb to both. A free spirit, --
a spirit that is consonant to a free constitution; -- a spirit that seeks the
highest good of a community, in its proper place, -- this, and this only, can
extract and taste all the sweets of liberty. If we would learn how great a
tendency liberty has to produce happiness, we must consider it in such
circumstances as give it an opportunity to do good.

LET us then, for once, imagine a state whose members are all of a free spirit;
and then attend to the glory and pleasures of liberty. The individuals are all
of one mind. They unite in the same grand pursuit, the highest good of the
whole. Only suppose all the members of such a state to be acquainted with the
best means of promoting their general end; and we shall see them all moving in
perfect concert. The good of the body will be their first aim. And in
subserviency to this, they will impartially regard the particular interests of
individuals. You and I shall perfectly unite in our regard for your interest
and for mine. Your interest will not be the more dear to you, nor the less so
to me, because it is yours. In these circumstances, there would be no room for
the emotions of any of the angry painful passions; but, on the contrary, every
soft and pleasing affection of every soul, would be called forth into vigorous
and harmonious exercise Every individual would choose to move in his proper
sphere, and that all others should move in theirs. This would at once
constitute pure felicity, and exalted beauty. How good and how pleasant it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity: Such a state of things, in the little
community of a single family, must be productive of great good. But should it
take place throughout a nation, each family would enjoy the same good from its
own domestic circumstances, beside the far greater pleasure which would accrue
to each individual from a consideration of the same happy condition of the
whole.

SHOULD it be said, that such a scheme as has been mentioned is merely
chimerical and roman^ic; because there never has been, nor ever will be such a
general state of mind on earth; I would say, the same objection is equally
strong against the worth of a state of perfect holiness. Such a state has never
taken place, in perfection, in this world, nor will it hereafter; but must we
therefore suppose that holiness is of no worth? The reason why we do not
experience all the pleasures of liberty, that have been mentioned, is, not any
defect in liberty, but the perverseness of our selfish hearts, which prevents
our pursuit and enjoyments of the delights of perfect liberty. Liberty still
remains a blessing too great to be compared with any other earthly good.

THE thoughts that have been suggested in this discourse, open to us the nature
of good government in its several branches. A legislature is denominated good,
from the goodness of its laws, or, from the tendency of the laws made by it to
produce the highest good of the community. In exact proportion to this tendency
of the laws, is the legislature to be esteemed good: -- The goodness of
executive government, consists in its due administration of the laws already
made. It is for the good of the community alone, that laws are either to be
made or executed. So that,

GOOD government is not inconsistent with liberty. Perfect liberty and perfect
government are perfectly harmonious, while tyranny and licentiousness are
inconsistent with both. Yea farther,

GOOD government is essential to the very being of liberty. Remove good
government, and you remove liberty. Abridge the former and you abridge the
latter. Let good government increase and you increase liberty. These can never
be separated in any degree. Their rise and fall is exactly uniform. Hence,

THE impropriety of saying of a person, that he is a friend to government, but
not to liberty, and of another, that he is a friend to liberty, but not to
government, appears to be very gross. Indeed one man may be a friend to tyranny
and not to liberty, but then he is as truly an enemy to government. Another may
be a friend to licentiousness and not to government; but then he is as truly an
enemy to liberty; and both, for this plain reason, that good government in a
state, and the liberty of that state, are one and the same thing. This suggests
another idea, which is, that

HE who infringes on liberty rebels against good government, and ought to be
treated as a rebel. It matters not what station he fills; he is a traitor; his
treachery is, however, more or less aggravated in proportion to his state and
condition. He that fills an elevated station is proportionably more criminal in
the same rebellion, than those in a lower state; and where a man proves false
to confidence reposed in him, his treachery is still more base and detestable.
Because his exaltat^on puts it into his power to do greater injury to the state
than could possibly be done by an inferior.

IT is equally true, that every kind and degree of opposition made against good
government is an ebullition of licentiousness. The true spirit of a mob
consists in unconstitutional violence, done with a design to bring about some
private end, and therefore the term is alike applicable to armies, or navies, or
a mixed multitude of madmen, minors and slaves when they are engaged in such
unconstitutional violence, and they are dangerous in proportion to their
elevation, influence, discernment and malice. All of them are evils and ought
to be avoided.
The man that rises up against good government is an enemy to liberty, a tyrant
in heart, and they who are discontented and fretful under it are of the same
cast.

IF liberty is such a thing, and so great a blessing as it has been
represented, it is, certainly, a rich tallent that Heaven has been pleased to
entrust with every man, and it undoubtedly becomes all to be constantly, and
thoroughly awake to a sense of their duty respecting it. We are too ready to
fancy, that when once we have appoined legislators, and given them charge of
this inestimable treasure, we need give ourselves no farther concern about it.
But this is not our whole duty. We are all stewards, to whom the God of nature
has committed this talent. The design of appointing a few individuals to
government, is not to free the rest from their obligations but to assist them
in the discharge of their duty, in the same manner that ministers of the gospel
are to assist their hearers in those duties that respect the care of their
souls. Communities ought therefore to keep an impartial and watchful eye on
government. They are urged to do so, by a consideration of the avaricious, and
aspiring dispositions of mankind in general, and the peculiar opportunities and
temptations that Governors have to indulge them. In these latter ages of the
world, after it has been found by several thousands years experience, that such
as have been made the guardians of liberty, have in almost every instance,
where it was thought practicable, endeavored to make themselves masters,
instead of continuing stewards of the community; in these days, I say, we are
more distinctly, sensible, and frequently called on to watch the conduct of
government. Liberty is not an absolute right of our own, if it were, we might
support, and guard, or neglect it at pleasure. It is a loan of heaven, for
which we must account with the great God. It is therefore, as unreasonable for
us to place an unlimited confidence in any earthly ruler, as to place such a
confidence in our spiritual ministers and depend wholly on them to settle our
final account with the holy judge of the universe.

I DO not mean that we should, as individuals, undertake to dictate to our
rulers, or oppose them by force whenever we judge they act a wrong part. This
would be utterly unreasonable, for surely we have at best, no better right to
usurpation than they. What I mean is, that we should all endeavor to turn the
attention of our fellow members of the community on the conduct of our rulers.
We should notice and compare it with the standard of right and wrong ourselves;
and excite others to do so like wise. We should endeavor on every alarming
occasion, to collect the sentiments of the body, and vigorously pursue those
measures that are thought the most salutary for the whole.

IT becomes us, with united hearts, to make a firm stand against every attempt
to wrest the jewel from us, either by force or fraud: -- The present state of
things is very alarming. In the view of the most simple common sense, we are
now called on -- men, women and children are called on to struggle for the
preservation of those rights of mankind which are inexpressibly ^ear. Let us
then rouse and ex^^t ourselves to the utmost, on the present occasion. But you
ask me. What shall we do? Shall we renounce the authority of our gracious
sovereign? Shall we take up arms against his troops? What shall we do?

I answer, By no means. Do not suffer the thought of renouncing our king's
authority, so much as to turn in your min^; rather, be ready to shed your blood
in defense of your rightful sovereign and his high office. Never let us think
of entering on a civil war, unless the Pretender, or some other usurper should
attempt to dethrone the British parent of his people. But should this be the
case, then let the world see that their king is dearer to the Americans than
their blood.

THOUGH the time has been, when our countrymen, but an handful, were obliged to
defend themselves against thousands of the native savages; by dint of arms;
yet, notwithstanding, a cloud, in some respects, much heavier than that, low^s
over us at present; such is the kindness of our God, that, humanly speaking, it
is in the power of America to save both herself and Great Britain from total
destruction, and that without a single hostile stroke. Nothing more than piety
and economy are necessary, and in these, every age and character may unite.
The pious supplications of the stammering child will as effectually reach the
ear of our God, and be as acceptable to him, as the most elegant address. A
thousand things may intercept our petitions in their way to an earthly monarch;
but a combination of all our enemies in earth and hell cannot prevent a pious
wi^h in its flight to Heaven; and let us remember, that the effectual fervent
prayers of the righteous avail much. We have sought in vain for relief from our
parent state -- from our King. And if salvation has not come from our gracious
sovereign King George, we cannot expect it from the hills. We must look still
higher. I^stead of railing against man let us notice and imitate the example of
Michael who railed no^ against the devil himself. David, said, of Shimei, let
him curse for the Lord has bidden him. He saw, he had deserved so illy at
God's hand, that it was no wonder, he had brought such a punishment on him. He,
therefore, accepted it willingly at the hand of God; while he was not
insensible to the wickedness of Shimei. It becomes us, likewise, to notice the
hand of God, and settle it in our minds, that evil springs not out of the
ground, -- that there is no evil in the city which the Lord has not done. Under
such views, let us all, like Daniel of old, piously pour out our hearts before
God, acknowledging our own sins, and those of our people. Meanwhile, let us
encourage no practice, in ourselves or others, that tends to enslave our
country. Let us learn to live in the plain manner of our forefathers. It is
high time for us to reform. We have had a rich inheritance and wasted it in
riotous living. Let us soon return to our father's house, least we be reduced
to the want, even of h^sks to eat. These are the only expedients that seem
needful at present, But if we will risque our country for the sake of a few
superstuities, posterity may curse our pride and luxury, and the present
generation may find that death and carnage will terminate their folly. And
should this be the case we must charge the horrid scene to our own misconduct.
-- If any should say, it is in vain for them as individuals to be vigilant,
zealous and firm in pursuing any measures for the security of our rights,
unless all would unite: I would reply,

A^ES are composed of seconds, the earth of sands, and the sea of drops, too
small to be seen by the naked eye. The smallest particles have their influence.
Such is our state, that each individual has a proportion of influence on some
neighbor at least; he, on another, and so on; as in a river, the following
drop urges that which is before, and every one through the whole length of the
stream has the like influence. We know not, what individuals may do. We are not
at liberty to lie dormant until we can, at once, influence the whole. We must
begin with the weight we have. Should the little springs neglect to flow till a
general agreement should take place, the torrent that now bears down all be^
it, would never be formed. These mighty floods have their rise in single drops
from the rocks, which, uniting, creep along till they meet with another
combination so small that it might be absorbed by the travelers foot. These
unite, proceed, enlarge, till mountains tremble at their sound. Let us receive
instruction from the streams, and, without discouragment, pursue a laudable
plan. But,

IS it not to be feared, that an appetite for the leeks and the onions, is the
source of our difficulty? The ungenerous language of the objector seems to be,
"I could wish to see my country happy, but if the fates have determined its
destruction I will not forego my share of the booty."

IT is great, it is gl^rious, to espouse a good cause, and ^it is still more
great and glorious in such a cause to stand alone. It is great and glorious
^o^u brave the reproach^^ the base. Should all our countrymen forsake us,
perseverance wo^ld be an honor, and the honor will rise as the number of our
adherents is diminished.

Let us therefore, vigorously pursue prudent measures in the present alarming
state of things. Then, should it please the righteous disposer of all, to
reduce us to the most abject slavery, we shall at least, have the consolation
to think, that we are in no part chargeable with having riveted chains on our
country, and the blessing of a clear conscience is incomparably better than the
greatest temporal interest and worldly applause.

THIS has been a land of liberty. We have enjoyed that bl^ssing in a great
degree for a long time. It becomes us now to reflect on our ingratitude to the
giver. When he has wrought salvation for us, on one occasion and another, how
have we expressed our thankfulness? By bonfires, illuminations, rev^llings,
gluttony and drunkenness. Would not a stranger have thought us worshipers of
the whole race of the heathen deities, rather tha^ of that God, who is a
spirit, and who seeks such to worship him, as do it in spirit and in truth?

WE have boasted of our liberty, and free spirit. A free spirit is no more
incl^^ed to enslave others than ourselves. If then it should be found upon
examina^ion that we have been of a tyrannical spirit in a free country, how
base must our character appear! And how many thousands of thousands have been
pl^nged into death and slavery by our means?

WHEN the servant had nothing to pay, and his master had frankly forgiven him
all, and he had gone and cast his fellow servant into prison, there to remain
till he should pay the last farthing; the master justly punished his
ingratitude and severity with the like imprisonment. Has not our conduct very
nearly resembled the conduct of that servant? God gave us liberty, and we have
enslaved our fellow-men. May we not fear that the law of retaliation is about
to be executed on us? What can we object against it? What excuse can we make
for our conduct? What reason can we urge why our oppression shall not be repaid
in kind? Should the Africans see God Almighty subjecting us to all the evils we
have brought on them, and should t^e^ cry to us, O daughter of America who art
to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us;
happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones;
how could we object? How could we resent it? Would we enjoy liberty? Then we
must grant it to others. For shame, let us either cease to enslave our
fellow-men, or else let us cease to complain of those that would enslave us.
Let us either wash our hands from blood, or never hope to escape the avenger.

TO conclude, unless we adopt some prudent decisive measures in humble
dependence on God; we have reason to sear some almost unparallelled calamity.
If we do not exert ourselves: It would not be strange, should a military
government be established, and popery triumph in our land. Then, perhaps those,
who now want fortitude to deny themselves some of the superfluities of life,
may see their husbands and sons slain in battle, their daughters ravished,
their wives r^pt up, their children dashed against the wall, and their pious
parents put to the ^ack for the religion of Jesus. Now is the dicisive moment.
God sets before us life and death, good and evil, blessing and cursing, and
bids us choose. Let us therefore choose the good and refuse the evil, that we
may live and not die.

SERMON II.
JOHN Chapter VIII. Verse 36. If therefore the son shall make you free ye shall
be free indeed.


THE general nature of liberty is the same in all societies, though different
circumstances give it different appearance The same general principles that are
the foundation of good government in a family are as truly so in the government
of a nation. These maxims are applicable not only to earthly societies, but are
equally so to the eternal kingdom of the great God. That government and that
liberty which takes place in earthly communities is called domestic or civil,
according to their extent. When these are spoken of as belonging to the kingdom
of God, they are termed divine or spiritual. The propriety of the manner of
expression made use of in our text, depends on the truth of these observations.
In the thirty first verse of the context, we are told, that our Lord Jesus
Christ said to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my words ye
are my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make
you free. It seems as though they did not apprehend he was speaking of
spiritual liberty but of civil, and therefore answer, We be Abraham's ^eed, and
were never in bondage to any man. How say thou, ye shall be made free? Jesus
th^n ea^s them to understand, that he spoke of spiritual liberty, by saying*
Whosoever commiteth sin is the servant of sin; and then he adds, The servant
abides not in the house forever; but the son abides ever, after which follows
the text. It is observable that our Lord in this conversation uses that
particular word to signify spiritual freedom, by which they un^e^stood civil
liberty, which would have been altogether improper, had not their general
nature been the same. We may observe, that it is Jesus Christ who makes th^^e
free that are so in a spiritual sense. It is ^e alone who introduces them as
freemen into this state, I^ the son shall make you free then shall ye be free
indeed. He does not say if ye be made free, or if ye make y^urselves free, but,
if the son shall make you free.

The freedom here spoken of, is no doubt, the same that in another place is
called the liberty of the sons of God. It is that liberty, which those enjoy
who are born of God, have his spirit, and a^e adopted into the number of his
children. Th^s liberty is ^^joyed in this world so far as persons are
sanctified; and shall hereafter be perfectly enjoyed in Heaven.

IT is observable that Christ calls this liberty, freedom indeed. Ye shall be
free indeed. This emphatical word was doubtle^s made use of to teach us, that
spiritual freedom, or liberty is preferable to any other, and that it is
perfect freedom, without any mixture o^ d^^ect.

THE principal thought in the text, and what I propose to dwell on at present
is, that,

THE state of liberty into which Jesus Christ introduces his disciples is far
preferable to any state of earthly liberty.

THE subject to which we attended in the forenoon, is vastly important; but
this is as much more important, as spiritual enjoyments are preferable to those
that are temporal; eternity to time; and as all the final host of Heaven, which
will be composed of God, Christ, Angels and Saints, are preferable to the
handful of dust and ashes that compose an earthly empire. It is a subject much
more interesting to us, as well as more important in itself. Let me then beg
your most diligent, conscientious and unbiased attention, while I endeavor to
illustrate and improve the observation just now deduced from the text.

IT was said in the former discourse that liberty consists in the being and due
administration of such a set of laws, as tend to the highest good of the
society. If this be so, it follows that liberty in a state is greater or less
in exact proportion to the greater or less tendency of the constitution and its
administration to the highest good of the community collectively considered. If
therefore it appears, on examination, that the constitution of Christ's kingdom
and the administration of that constitution have a stronger tendency to the
good of that kingdom, than the constitution of any earthly kingdom, and the
administration of that constitution, have to the highest good of that earthly
kingdom; the proposition is illustrated and proved.

IN a perfectly free state the laws forbid every crime against the community.
Every action that would be in the least degree injurious to the state is
forbidden. In order to this, the legislature must have a perfect view of all
the various circumstances and occurrences that may take place with respect to
each individual of which the state is composed, at all the various periods of
its existence. Actions that seem to us too minute to be regarded, have their
consequences, which are oftentimes vastly important and interesting to the
state. How often has a single word spoken in anger by some great p^^so^a^e,
^ain at the bottom of a nation's overthrow? The tongue is a little member, but
small as it is, it ^eth the course of nature on fire. Well might the Apostle
say, How great a matter a little sire kindles! But,

IT is impossible for any finite mind or number of minds, to ascertain every
particular word and gesture that may be detrimental in its tendency to the
state, and therefore, there cannot possibly be a system of human laws in which
every political evil shall be forbidden.

THE liberty of the most refined kingdoms of this world, is but like the lean,
scanty gleanings of the vintage, while the liberty of the kingdom of Christ is
like the full grown clusters of the first ripe fruits that load the generous
vine. Such is the weakness of the human mind, and the perple^ed state of
earthly things, that neither any community nor its wisest delegates, could make
sufficient provision against all political inconveniences, even though they
were quite free from every sinister design, unless they were under the
continual influence of miraculous inspiration from God. In order to such an
effectual precaution they must foresee all the various mental exercises of
every member of the community; and be able to judge, at the trial of every
supposed offender, what the real motives of his conduct have been; because men
are blame worthy or not, according to the meaning of their hearts. But we
cannot obtain any certain knowledge of any one motive that actuates the mind of
another. No man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man that is in
him. Besides this there is another diffi^ulty, for though we had the power of
looking into another heart, we should still find ourselves incapable of
tracing the heart through all its da^k and intricate labarinths. H^nce i^
appears that no political constitution on earth can extend its authority any
further than to a few of the many external expressions either of friendship, or
disaffection to the state. For this reason, the most complete system of earthly
government imaginable, falls immensly short of a finished scheme. This however
is nothing, in comparison with another inconvenience, that arises from the
depravity of human nature, which leads every man, in a greater or less degree,
to look on his own things and not on the things of another; to seek their own
private interest, without regarding the interests either of their fellow men,
the angels, or the deity, any farther than they may seem subservient to private
interest. We have, indeed, reason to hope, that a few are p^ssessed of some
small degree of a different spirit; -- a d^sinterested benevolent spirit: But
there is reason to believe, that by far the greater part of these are to be
found among the lower classes of mankind, and that a very small proportion of
them are among the great. From these considerations we may conclude, that,
though it is the duty of Kings and all other rulers to seek the best good of
the community, yet they too often act a part directly opp^site. Instead of
improving their power and interests for the good of the community, they make
use of the common interests as means of aggrandizing themselves and their
families. This sentiment is confirmed by the history of Kings, and other rulers
in every age of the world. We must therefore conclude that the highest degree
of liberty that can reasonably be expected in earthly states is very low. At
best, there are only some spices of liberty scattered in earthly states, and
yet these are more precious than we can conceive. But,

IN the kingdom of Jesus Christ, there is no reason to app^ehend any such
inconveniency or imperfection. For the constitution of his kingdom, and the
administration of it, are the effects of the pleasure of him who searches the
hearts, and t^yeth the reins of all his subjects, and is at all times perfectly
acquainted with every design of all his rational creatures. It was, therefore,
perfectly easy for him to form a constitution, which should never need the
least alteration in order to the best good of the universe. He is as powerful
as wise, and therefore, can administer this constitution with the utmost
precision in every instance. Both his wisdom and power are all-sufficient. This
being granted, nothing can be wanting in order to bring about the highest good
of the universe, except it be a disposition in Jesus Christ to employ his
knowledge and power for that ^urpose. If he has such knowledge and power and a
full, invariable, eternal inclination to employ his knowledge and power in the
production of the highest good of the universe, the design cannot possibly be
frustrated. The united exertion of sufficient skill, power and inclination will
forever obtain its end. Sufficient skill and power will in every instance,
without exception, carry all ones designs into execution. Now, that Jesus
Christ has such a disposition is evident from his being no respecter of persons.

FOR, we see, he has in fact done very many things, which, beyond all dispute,
are the effects of design, and not of inadvertency. Now, if those things are
done by design, and yet not from any partial respect to any person, what, but a
regard to the whole, could be the moving cause? And, if regard to the whole be
the moving cause of all that Christ has done, is doing, and will do, must we
not conclude, the highest good of the whole is his highest, and only ultimate
end? We cannot suppose otherwise, without believing, that Christ is a being of
mixed and jaring affections, which would imply great imperfection indeed. The
division of one's affections between two different objects, always creates a
painful discord, in such a case, the passions of the mind are in a confessed
state of opposition, which is ever productive of painful sensations of soul --
We must, therefore, believe that Jesus Christ aims, with the utmost strength
and uniformity of design, at the highest good of the whol^ or else, that he is
an inconsistant, and consequently a miserable being.

JESUS CHRIST has in his mediatorial work, given the highest possible evidence
of the most disinterested attention to the highest good -- Since he is an
omnipotent being, what reason can be given why he did not call down the
innumerable hosts of mighty angels from heaven to destroy his persecutors, or
why he did speak them unto hell; unless it be, that he is infinitely
benevolent. Such was his regard for the highest good, that he held not his own
life dear, and what is far more, he delivered himself into the hands of his
most unrighteous, invete^ate, malicious and detestable enemies, to be treated
according to the dictates of their accursed pride and malice. He clearly saw
how much their haughtiness, and revenge would be gratified in his meek
submission to the cross, and his bitter agonies on the tree. And yet, such was
his regard to the general good, that he cheerfully gave them an opportunity to
gratify their perverse inclination, and supported them in existence while they
did it.

THESE considerations are enough to convince us, that there is as much, and as
pure liberty in the kingdom of Christ, as unlimited wisdom, power and goodness
can possibly produce; and how inconceiveably greater, and more excellent must
this be, than any thing of the kind that can take place under the direction of
ignorant, impotent selfish men. The Lord of hosts has proposed his kingdom to
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of
the earth.

WHILE the members of Christ's kingdom are passing through this world; they
resemble the children of Israel, in their passage from their slavery in Egypt,
along the wilderness, and their various enterprises until they were peaceably
settled in the land of Promise. They resemble an enslaved people, who having
heard of a land of liberty, resolve to push their way through many barbarous
nations until they arrive at the happy region on which they have fixed their
eye. The prince has sent them a leader with such a guard as shall finally
introduce them safely to the land of rest; but not wholly prevent the
incursions of their enemies, on their passage. They must never lay down their
arms, nor quit a posture of defense. Christians are called to a steady warfare,
a constant skirmish all along through the wilderness of this world. Their
adversaries who oppose their passage through it, are artful, vigilant, active,
experienced, powerful and pe^severing. They are principalities and powers. This
renders the happiness of Christ's subjects in this world, very imperfect. They
do not fully enjoy the liberty of his kingdom until they come literally, unto
Mount Sion, the holy city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the
innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the first
born that are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant. But when once they have entered into heaven, they shall have the full
enjoyment of this liberty, in its full extent. Then their hearts will be wholly
conformed to the free constitution of Christ's kingdom, so that it will be a
delightful employment for them to study his glorious scheme of government; --
to range through its vast extent, and to collect the honey of paradise from the
lovely flowers with which it abounds It will give them such satisfaction to
attend to the almost innumerable instances of the divine administration, as
never entered into the thought of man They will see, with consummate pleasure,
how that administration has terminated in the highest good in every instance.
They will see, how every instance has afforded an additional illustration of
the divine glory, while they have all without exception, conspired to represent
all unfriendliness to the universe in its own detestable colors. In this
manner, they will enjoy all the liberty that has taken place in heaven before
their entrance into that world. While their hearts are panting after the
advancement of the highest good of the universe, which consists in the fullest,
and clearest display of the divine perfections, those glorious perfections will
be exhibited before their eyes, as fully as their minds are capable of
conceiving, and as their capacities expand, the displays will increase before
them. They will see God in every thing, and all things will sensibly be working
together for the good of all such as love God, whether saints or angels. This
will afford unmixed pleasure to the holy subjects of this heavenly kingdom,
whose hearts will be full of a free spirit, a spirit that will long for the
highest good, and greatest perfection of the universe, and earnestly desire
that all beings, and enjoyments, may be disposed of in that very manner that
shall most contribute to this end. In such a state the various springs of joy
will be numberless and inexhaustable. There will be nothing in God or any of
his loyal subjects, or in any thing done by them, that can give the least
uneasiness. But on the contrary the soul will enjoy a sweet acquiescence in all
the works, and ways of God, and be carried beyond all doubt respecting the
tender friendship of angels to the glorious God, to one another, and to itself.
The consequence of this will be a most unreserved familiarity: The whole heart
will be thrown open without the least restraint. O! how will the benevolent
soul be transported to see consummate happiness ^ead all around! While they
love others as themselves, their love will be gratified, by seeing others as
happy as themselves. While they insatiably desire the honor of their Lord,
their King and Redeemer, they will see him sitting on a thron^ high and lifted
up, and principalities and powers, even the most mighty of the mighty angels,
laying their crowns at his feet, not through servile fear, but through such a
principle as awakens all their powers of invention to find the most expressive
modes of discovering the lively sense they have of the excellency of Christ,
and the strength of their love to him; -- that love, which makes them delight
in conducting toward Christ, and in seeing him conduct toward them, in such a
manner as shall exhibit the most striking view of his infinite superiority. The
soul sees myriads of these exalted beings, as it were vieing with each other in
paying the most expressive kind of homage to the King of Kings, whose honor is
dearer to the saint than his own existence. While he walks through the temple
of God he hears all the saints, like so many heralds, proclaiming the glorious
grace of Jesus Christ; and sees them exhibiting themselves both as trophies of
their savior's triumph over Satan, and as monuments of his exceeding and
abundant grace discovered in the salvation of sinners, wherein he has displayed
his insuperable affection to the highest interests of the grand community of
the universe. An affection that shrunk ^ot at the greatest indignity or the
most cruel ^ath, but without reluctance plunged the L^ of life and glory into
both, for the sake o^ securing the darling object of his delight. Here t^ saint
at once beholds the highest and most pure affection mutually exercised by
Christ and all his loyal subjects. He has, in fact, laid down his life for
them, and they are freely willing to lay down their's for him, on the first
intimation of his pleasure that they should do so. Of this many have given an
example at their death, and the rest are of the same disposition. The saint in
Heaven sees the universal, pure and unlimited benevolence of Jesus Christ in
all his form r^conduct, and in his present administration he discovers the same
thing. All the saints and angels will most evidently, partake of the same
spirit according to the utmost stretch of their several capacities. From the
past and present the saint will infer the future. He sees how the wisdom of his
sovereign has reduced the utmost confusion to perfect order, and that it has
proved all sufficient without exception, and that in a multitude of instances
where the most labored, and promising efforts of the old serpent's ^unning
have been baffled with the utmost ease and by the most unlikely means: How he
has with infinite facility, overthrown the united force of earth and hell, and
confined all his enemies by the word of his power, in the bottomless pit. That
his friendship to liberty is such, as that, to establish and perfect it, he of
his own free will, laid down his life in opposition to the most alluring
prospects These things give the saint an unlimited confidence, that his Lord
will persevere in the same design, and forever rise superior to every
difficulty. From a consideration of the constant succession of strangly
glorious events that have been brought about by the Lord Jehovah, the saint
continually expects to meet with many things, that at present, he entirely out
of sight, which, when they appear will, if possible, be still more surprising
and glorious. And though he may not see how it is possible for the universe to
be rendered more perfect, yet he will expect to see it rising in perfection
forever and ever: Nor will these expectations be frustrated; for new worlds of
wonder and joy will be continually rising to view. His surprise and delight
will, in every new instance, exceed all he ever experienced before. In such a
state as this, the soul will eternally soar -- and soar, up the immense tracts
of knowledge, holiness, honor and joy, with the utmost rapidity and ease.
There will not be a single object, or thought, to excite terror or pain; but
all things will conspire to fill the soul with the most exquisite delight, and
to awaken sentiments full of generosity, tenderness and grandeur.

THE saint will never be required to do any thing irksome or disagreeable,
because his heart will spontaneously choose to do, whatever his sovereign will
choose to command. Thus while the laws of Christ will be the only standard of
the thoughts and exercises of all, every one will be a law to himself. They
will need to do nothing more than comply with their own inclination, in order
to a perfect compliance with the will of Christ; because the same mind will be
in them, that is also in Christ. Though there may be numberless different ranks
and stations in the heavenly world, yet no one will complain that he is not
exalted according to his worth; but on the contrary, all will wonder that their
king has raised them to their present pitch of dignity. Every one will esteem
the rest better than himself. While they all, cheerfully give themselves and
one another, to their Lord, to be disposed of at his pleasure, envy and the ten
thousand ills that follow it, will find no place in all the holy kingdom of
God. -- Here, therefore, liberty reigns in perfection, and is perfectly
enjoyed. But, alas! how vastly diverse is the happiest earthly state? It is at
most but a small degree of liberty that is enjoyed on earth, and that is seldom
arrived at, except through blood and carnage. And after it is bought at so dear
a rate, the sweets of it are constantly dashed with many a bitter. It is at
best, a very precarious enjoyment, and as short as precarious. There is an
infinite difference between those two.

HOW absurd then is it for us to neglect the former, while we are anxiously
concerned to secure the latter?

HOW strangly inconsistent are we in treating that liberty, which is of
infinite worth, with neglect and contempt, when it is most freely offered us,
while, at the same time we are ready to sacrifice, not only our fortunes, but
our very lives and friends to purchase and defend that which at best is but
imperfect, uncertain and temporal? To struggle for the latter is laudable, but
to neglect the former, is infinitely criminal. Surely none but a madman would
neglect millions which he might have at pleasure, and yet barter his life for
an uncertain penny. In the affair of civil liberty, the most spirited efforts
may prove ineffectual; but that which is spiritual will certainly be the
consequence of a single genuine desire to enjoy it. What makes the
inconsistency still the more glaring is, that while human nature shrinks at the
thought of the partial oppression of an earthly tyrant, we quietly remain in a
state of the most abject slavery to the worst of tyrants, the devil himself. To
shake off the former, has cost many their lives, and put them beyond the
capacity of enjoying the liberty, they have purchased at so dear a rate. When
we need but detest the chains of sin to rise up to Kings and ensure liberty in
its highest perfection. Our conduct proves that we prize time above eternity,
the liberties of an earthly state, above the glorious liberty of the sons of
God; the enjoyments of earth above those of heaven; sin above holiness, the
service of Satan more than that of God, -- yea, that we prefer the Devil
himself, the implacable enemy of our souls to the Lord Jehovah, our gracious
benefactor -- one who would drag us down to eternal torments, to him who offers
to save us from them, and fill our souls with everlasting, unmixed,
ever-encreasing joys, and calls for nothing in return but our hearty
acceptance, though it cost him the blood of his son. Should we accept the
liberty of heaven, it will prepare us to relish the sweets of civil liberty in
a manner wholly incompa^ible with a selfish spirit We should then delight in
the kindly aspect that civil liberty bears even on our enemies. But if we
refu^^ spiritual liberty, that of the civil kind, will be no otherwise
agreeable than as it tends to advance our own private interests, or to gratify
our revenge. In the one case we shall enjoy it in its operations on all the
members of the whole state; in the other we can enjoy no more of it, than
terminates in the private good of an individual. This thought gives our conduct
a still more inconsistent appearance, by showing us that while we contend for
civil liberty, we refuse the means of enjoying it to the best advantage, in its
highest resi^^ment and greatest extent. But our inconsistency will be seen in a
still stronger point of light, if we consider, that without spiritual liberty,
the other will finally prove worse than nothing It is in itself a great
blessing, but by abusing it, we may, and shall be rendered much more miserable
at last, than if we had never possessed it. So long as we refuse to accept of
the liberty of the gospel instead of using, we abuse every earthly good. Such
an abuse of civil liberty, renders us extremely criminal in the sight of our
judge, and will finally kindle his displeasure into an hotter flame that will
more dreadfully consume us. In this way it is, that the prosperity of the fool
shall destroy him according to the pro^hecy of Solomon. Thus, by neglecting to
embrace the gospel, we convert civil liberty, which is in itself, a delicious
kind of food, into a slow poison which will render our death vastly more
terrible than otherwise it would have been. It had been better for us not to
have been born, or, to have been born slaves, and doomed with Lazarus to beg
our bread at the doors of our rich oppressors, than to be found guilty at last
of having abused the blessed privilege of liberty. In what point of view soever
we look at our conduct in the light of this subject, we shall see new
inconsistencies opening upon us. We boast of liberty, and value ourselves much
on being free, when at the same time we are taken captive by satan at his
pleasure. This is a much more shocking absurdity, than it would be for a man
confined in a dungeon, to boast that he is at liberty, because he is not called
on, in providence, to go into the field and labor. Should we hear one in a
state of personal slavery vaunting, and boasting that he lives in a land of
liberty, who would not laugh at his folly, and pity his weakness; and yet, HE
might have good reason to rejoice in seeing others free though he himself were
in slavery. To dread and oppose a human tyrant, and yet bow voluntarily to
satan, sinks us beneath the brutes. Another of our inconsistencies is this;
notwithstanding all our pretenses to the contrary, our refusal of spiritual
liberty, proves us to be regardless of the liberty of the state. While we
refuse the one and yet profess to pursue the other we only play the hypocrite.
For who will believe a man loves money, merely because he exerts himself to
obtain a penny, when at the same time he will not accept millions that are
offered him gratis? In this case, it would be certain to a de^omstration, that
it was not affection to money, but something else, that put the person upon
action. So, with respect to lib^rty; he who will not accept the greater when
freely offered him; will not fight for the le^^ from a sense of its value, if
he exerts himself at all, it must be for some other end, and whenever he can
answer this end more readily, by a^y other means, he will appear as he really
is, quite cold to liberty: And when liberty shall be inconsistent with his
priva^^ e^ds, h^ will be as fierce an opposer of it, as he is now an apparent
advocate for it. No doubt many v^si^ly espouse the cause of liberty purely for
the sake of rising into popularity; and yet by this very means, sink themselves
in the view of common-sense. For who is so blind as not to see that the
li^e^tious cannot be friends to li^^rty? No man can be a friend to liberty who
is not likewise a friend to a free consitution, to the constitution of Christ's
kingdom which is the most free? A cursing, or swearing, or drinking, or any
other kind of vicious friend, either to liberty or government, is a monster of
absurdity; such a monster as cannot exist even in the most romantic ima^ination.

COME then, my friends, let us embrace the glorious liberty of the sons of God
Every possible motive, whether of terror or allurement, is set before us If we
embrace this, we shall of necessity be genuine sons of liberty. We shall
resolve that nothing but the wise superinten^ency of God shall ever make us
submit to public oppression; for no man can be a christ^an and not a friend to
civil liberty, in the strictest sense. To be freemen of Jesus Christ will
exceedingly ^^ee^en the enenjoyment of civil liberty i^ we can obtain it, or
sof^en the fetters of slavery if we shall be forced to wear them Spiritual
liberty opens up a pleasant prospect even in the midnight o^ p^tical slavery.
The most a^ject ^a^e may look forward and say, "a few m^ts more will u^her me
into a state of ev^rl^^t^ng Free^om." On the contrary, what w^l^ it profit us
to gain the whole world, crowns and ^p^e^s, ^f at last we lo^ our own souls,
and are dr^gged at the chariot wheels of Satan This is our time to secure
freedom and glory. Another hour may chain us down in eternal bondage.

GOD has given us rational minds. Let us then act a rational part. Let us act a
consistent part, and not dishonor our high birth. Consistency, reason,
interest and duty all call on us to yield an immediate and unlimited submission
to God. Heaven is set before to allure us. Hell flames behind. Satan is ready
to seize us, and the eternal Jehovah stretche^ forth his hand and offers to
save us Let us do whatever true wisdom may direct with respect to civil
liberty, but by all means let us do it so as that our slavery to satan shall
not increase with the increase of civil liberty. Let us act a part that shall
be approved of at the last day, by our own consciences, by saints and angels,
and by our holy judge. Then shall we rejoice at what we have done, but
otherwise we must be a shamed forever. May God give us grace so to do for the
sake of our Lord Jesus Christ.

THE END.

