FREEDOM From CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL SLAVERY, the purchase of CHRIST. A
DISCOURSE, Offered to a numerous Assembly, On MARCH the FIFTH, 1774, At the
PRESBYTERIAN MEETING HOUSE, in NEW-BURY-PORT. By Jonathan Parsons, A. M. and V.
D. M.

NEW BURY-PORT, New England: Printed by I. THOMAS and H. W. TINGES.

TO THE Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire OF BOSTON, The ensuing DISCOURSE is inscribed By
his humble servant, The AUTHOR.

FREEDOM From CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL SLAVERY, THE PURCHASE OF CHRIST.
My benevolent Townsmen and other hearers,
FROM a sense of my incapacity, and the shortness of the time allowed me to
prepare, I repeatedly declined speaking in public, on a day set apart to
Commemorate the bloody Massacre, the barbarous butchery at Boston four years
ago. And when I looked over the excellent pieces that have been printed on that
sorrowful occasion, I thought very little new could be offered, and therefore
felt the greater inclination to be excused. But the importunity of friends
which finally overcame me, I hope will be a sufficient apology, and engage your
candor in hearing, while I offer a few things inferred from

GALATIANS, Chap. 5. Ver. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith
CHRIST has made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

IGNORANCE, pride, covetiousness, or the lust of power, has, in all ages,
influenced many men to exert themselves many ways, to fix a yoke of bondage
upon the necks of some of their brethren. The Jewish Doctors being ignorant of
that freedom which Christ gave his true followers by his obedience and death,
used their utmost art to enslave their brethren by the rites and observances of
the ceremonial law, and when our Apostle opposed them, no doubt their pride and
covetuousness wrought fervently, as their gain and sovereignty were in danger
of being entirely muzzled. And had they obtained their end in bringing this
yoke upon the Gentile converts, yet even then, they would not have been easy,
for they were never able to bear it themselves.

BUT there are other ways of enslaving men, besides by burdensome rites:
Burdensome taxes laid upon them without their consent, whether in the State or
in the Church, are a sinful yoke of bondage.

AS to the STATE; Our patriotic brethren in BOSTON, have justly observed on one
of these anniversary occasions, that a noble attachment to a free CONSTITUTION
raised ancient ROME from the smallest beginings to that bright summit of
happiness and glory to which she arrived; and it was the loss of this which
plunged her from that summit into the black gulf of infamy and slavery.

AND we shall add, the same spirit of liberty prevailed in Christian Rome at
the first embracing Christian principles: But they were soon disposed to
enslave their brethren respecting matters of religion, as they had done in the
state before they embraced the Christian faith. Their merchandise and hire were
soon employed for sweet incense and costly perfumes, to serve the pride and
luxury of the great; until at last, haughty Popes and Prelates usurped a
tyrannical power over the consciences of men and drew money out of their
pockets, for pardons and indulgencies, and for praying them out of purgatory,
which was to their destruction and not to their salvation.

IT would not have been quite so dark, had the yoke never been put upon the
necks of protestants; but persecution for conscience sake -- imprisonment,
confiscation of goods, banishment and even death, have often been practiced
since the reformation, and in protestant nations too. Nor would it be necessary
to go out of England and Scotland for many instances of such flagrant
wickedness. -- But can we pretend that New England ever attempted to lay a yoke
of bondage upon any of its inhabitants, for conscience sake? Here we shall
spread a viel over our forefathers, and leave their extraordinary conduct with
that God who judges righteous judgment. We need not go back for proof to make
it appear, that men have endeavored to enslave their brethren in
ecclesiastical concerns: for all those that forcibly take away the money or
property from their honest neighbors to support a minister which they cannot
in conscience attend, are guilty of spiritual tyranny: They take away their
money or lay a tax upon them without their consent, and disenable them to
support the worship of God agreeable to the dictates of their own consciences.
And if this is not enslaving men in their most important interests, in the name
of wonder, what is? Our neighbors New Hampshire.
have been convenced of the injustice of such a practice, and have granted
liberty of conscience to all denominations of protestants. Nor do I know of any
province in New England, in this enlightened age of liberty, but what has done
the same, except THIS, which is foremost in espousing the cause of civil
liberty. -- But violence and spoil are still heard in our dear province. It has
relieved Episcopalians, Anabaptists and Quakers, but still keeps the yoke of
bondage upon the necks of Calvinists. BY Calvinists is meant the whole of those
doctrines which are usually called Calvinistic as they are contained in the
Westminster, New England and other protestant confessions of faith, that we are
generally acquainted with, or at least might to be, also the government of the
church agreeable to the Calvinistic or Presbyterian plan. -- Both the doctrines
and government referred to, we apprehend are founded on the scriptures; and,
viewing them in this light, we are careful to regard them -- not merely as
terms of peace, but as terms of stated communion.

For men to say that they cheerfully take the holy scriptures for their rule,
is, in our opinion, too uncertain to be received as a test of their orthodoxy
in the faith, or their agreement in worship and government; for as to the
faith, it is well known, that avowed Arians, Pelagians, Arminians, Socinians,
Antinomians, etc. etc. will as readily say that they take the holy scriptures
for their rule, as the strictest Calvinists: But reason itself teaches, that
words and syllables, in our English Bible, do not, but sense and meaning do
determine whither, and how far men agree with the word of God. We apprehend it
necessary to be known what sense men put upon the scriptures, in the
distinguishing doctrines of Christianity, in order to occasional communion with
them; and how, or in what sense they understand the scriptures relative to
church government, in order to stated communion. We are fully persuaded that it
is owing to the randum way of settling ministers and churches, together with a
vile contempt of creeds and confessions, that has been the guilty cause of the
many confusions and distresses in the land. No sort of church government fixed,
but all is managed to suit the taste of the party concerned; and all
confessions of faith, by which the sense and meaning of scripture may be known,
are set aside. -- Hence, all seem to jumble together, and make mere hodge
podge. Yet we hope better things of some, though we thus speak; and as to
ourselves, we openly declare we cannot receive doctrines in a sense counter to
the standards which we have solemnly subscribed. We apprehend that upon the
strictest examination they will stand the test, and as to church government, we
think it does not depend upon the capricious humors of men, but is of divine
original, both as to the thing itself, and the way of administration. Yet if
any are otherwise minded respecting government, we are far from striping them
of the Christian character, provided they firmly adhere to the great doctrines
of Christianity, which distinguish that from all other religions in the world.


These, though they are and through the shifting scenes of state affairs, have
been as dutiful subjects as ever the HOUSE of HANOVER had, must be kept in
slavery; while we as one united body are pleading for liberty.

BLESSED be God the several congregations in this town, have honored
themselves and done justice in this affair, by cordially agreeing in one united
application to our ASSEMBLY with success, that each religious society in the
town, should be obliged to pay ministerial charges "where they meet for public
worship" and they are exempted from "paying toward the support of the
ministry, and from other incidental charges at any other place than where they
attend." This is truly becoming the sons of liberty, and well worthy the
imitation of every town in the province. It is no more than our excellent
CHARTER allows us, though, it is pleaded, our laws made for ECCLESIASTICAL
affairs abridge us of this liberty.

WERE these equitable principles which have been the price of blood, propagated
in ecclesiastical as warmly as in civil concerns, there would be much more
peace and social happiness in our parishes than has generally prevailed among
us. But whether this privilege be granted to the church or not, yet I am sure
the law of reason and equity will stand up in favor of it.

THOUGH I have observed "with high satisfaction, the zeal and exertions of the
Americans in defense of their rights and liberties" of a civil kind, and
earnestly with that HE who holds the universe in his hands, may crown their
warmest efforts with everlasting success -- Yet I own it looks odd to me, that
a PROVINCE which holds on ecclesiastical tyranny beyond all her sister colonies
should be foremost in her attempts and pleas for civil liberty. -- Nor can I
groundedly hope for the smiles of Heaven upon us, in our utmost efforts, if we
endeavor to enslave our Christian brethren in their ecclesiastical concerns;
for while we plead for liberty on one hand, and promote slavery on the other,
our principles are too contracted and corrupt; and if we regard oppression in
our hearts the Lord will not hear us. Christian liberty, both civil and
ecclesiastical, is the greatest blessing of the kind, that we can enjoy; and
therefore to be deprived of either, is the greatest injury we can suffer; and
whoever they be that attempt to hold us in the claws of tyranny, must be
heineous offenders in the sight of God. All attempts to justify slavery, are
but the feeble endeavors of selfishness to oppose the law of nature and divine
revelation, and serve to show us the weakness of the judgment and the
wickedness of the human heart.

I WISH and earnestly pray that our patriotic House of Representatives may be
inspired to exert themselves, in the wisest and most effectual way, to put an
end to all civil and ecclesiastical oppression, and to make liberty equal to
all men inhabiting the province. -- This, this would immortalize their names,
and all the sons of liberty would rise up and call them blessed. When that time
commences it will be a token for good that justice will run down our streets as
waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

BUT whether success attends our endeavors or not, it becomes us, as men and
christians, to assert our natural and constitutional privileges -- never to
give them up, but if possible to recover and defend them against all malicious
claims of haughty and covetious tools of arbitrary power, they are a legacy
left us by Christ, the purchase of his blood. And will any tamely submit to be
entangled with the yoke of bondage, now Christ has made us free!

SURELY, My Friends and Townsmen, you will be very jealous for the defense for
our excellent constitution, and where a breach is made upon it you will
earnestly contend for its being healed. Neither the high notions of the British
Parliament, nor the groundless prejudices in this Province, should intimidate
your minds. Where is the brave spirits of our Forefathers that ventured life
and all that was dear to them, rather, than give up their privileges to the
pleasure of Sir Edmund Androse and his creatures! Sure, in this enlightened age
of liberty, you will not readily yield to slavery. Now natural and
constitutional rites are so well understood, and appear so reasonable you
cannot desert the cause, nor grow indifferent about it. I persuade myself, that
you, in combination with our brethren, will be more successful than our mother
country has some times been, in preserving that reverance and authority which
is due to christian liberty.

I PITY rather than hate the British parliament, in their tyrannic sentiments
respecting the Colonies. We choose to be as one body -- like Jerusalem, as a
City COMPACT together. We desire to live in connection with Great Britain, in a
sweet harmony, and are grieved to see the dispotism that is breaking us
asunder. I pity the place-men and pensioners in this Province, who are striving
by public measures among ourselves, and private letters to men abroad, to keep
up and increase the alienation between us and our mother country. I wish the
bleeding wounds may be thoroughly healed, and the true interests of Church and
State may govern all denominations in their future contests, and regulate all
their claims: They were designed to be mutual benefits; and if they were
cordially united in the truth, we might be led forth in the right way of peace,
by the hand of Moses and Aaron. May the virtuous on both sides endeavor, by
all probable means, to remove all grounds of complaint, and restore equal
liberties -- If every one uprightly considered his own happiness as a part of
the whole, and inseparable from it, he would feel no disposition to enslave
any. All would cheerfully submit to a righteous government in church and state;
for they would find all turn to general good, friendship and gratitude would be
restored between Great Britain and her Colonies, love and peace between the
various denominations of protestant christians. -- Church and state would be
mutual helps in this province; and as we are beautiful for situation* we should
soon be the joy of the whole land. None would be taxed without his consent, to
support a ministry he conscientiously dissented (...) The enemies would not
roar in parishes, nor break down the carved work with axes and hammers; the
same public spirit would reign in all orders and conditions of men, which
reigned in Christ Jesus. -- If a (...) of Christian benevolence was properly
cultivated in all the different classes, (...) lines would not bind any one to
pay their money to support a worship which they esteemed corrupt, but where
they could with peace and comfort set down with their brethren; and this would
not lessen the extent of good order and pleasure nor shorten their duration.

BUT when shall this happy era commence! Not in the STATE, as long as fleets
and armies are palmed upon us, to threaten destruction in a time of peace --
Not as long as the parliament of Great Britain strive to tax us without our
consent.

THE shocking effects of these violent measures we have already felt by the
ever memorable tragical scene at Boston four years ago! We mourn with our
brethren, that the sons of violence and blood were ever suffered to parade the
streets of our Metropolis! We feel for them, who saw their streets stained with
INNOCENT BLOOD, by worse than butchering Soldiers! Should the Lord arraign the
blood-thirsty crew as he did Cain, they might add rebellion to their other sin,
as he did: But if they should hear GOD say, "What have you done! The voice of
your brethren's blood cries unto me from the ground;" they would be ready to
cry, "Our punishment is greater than we can bear:" They would feel themselves
cut off from the church, and forbid to bring any more vain oblations,
unpardoned guilt would fill their souls with continual terror. May the awful
catastrophe of that evening be ever deeply engraven upon our hearts as it is
this day!

I READILY own that I feel upon my mind a great aversion to all enslaving
measures, and a strong desire for public liberty. I wish to see all those
fetters which parliaments have endeavored to fix upon us, done away. When will
the time come, that fleets and armies shall be (...), and better employed than
to threaten us with bondage and death! I could also wish for the peace and
happiness of the church; and therefore, that all denominations of protestants
might be at liberty to seek their edification in those worshipping assemblies
with which they agree in sentiment, and be discharged from ministerial taxes to
any but where they attend, as it is in this town, through the benevolent
application of its inhabitants. We see many sad consequences of violence in the
church; we have tried force long enough to convince us that we have no reason
to be proud of the experiment. Methinks a collector has as much reason to
tremble at the face of an honest man when he demands his money or property in
such a case, as a thief would have at the sight of a sheriff. What benefit has
ever accrued to people by the plunder of honest men, who soberly dissent from
their brethren -- the consequence of so much injustice has been to excite
people to devise several schemes to get rid of their fetters. Besides, it is
attended with a general loss of credit and confidence in one another. It
requires no great degree of virtue and wisdom in a court to put a stop to such
gains of ungodliness.

BUT a spirit of liberty is wanting, even among those that are pleading for
liberty* and dread slavery. The Church as well as the State must be founded on
principles of justice, benevolence and moderation, or there can be no peace The
wisdom that is from above is first PURE, then peaceable -- but envy and strife
arise from beneath.

I PRESUME not to dictate the legislators of the people: But it is our duty as
Ministers of Christ, to open the nature of justice and oppression We have a
right to say that what any man can call his, must remain his, (...) he agrees
to part with it; and if it is taken away by force, it is an act of injustice.
Justice will regulate the happiness of church and state; but oppression will
promote their misery. By what bond society and social happiness will be
promoted, I know not, as long as they bite and devour one another.

RIGHTEOUSNESS and mercy are due to all men, especially to those with whom we
are nearly connected. The law of nature and the written law of God, ought to be
the great maxims of all civil and ecclesiastical policy. It is truly
surprising to observe, how Slowly the principles of freedom prevail respecting
the Church in a land so warmly engaged for liberty in the State. It has been
the policy of some, who are zealous for liberty, to lay their brethren under
the severest restrictions on religious accounts, though doubtless if proper
freedom was granted, the whole body would feel the blessings of it; for the
most effectual method of receiving good from others is to do good to them.
Equal liberties granted to all denominations, would naturally tend to beget
affectionate union. The time I am persuaded will come, when the restraints laid
upon some christians, and the violence used toward them will cease, and there
will be as great freedom in the Church as we plead for in the state. It would
be a noble effect of laudable ambition in our whole legislative body, if they
should follow their neighbors in this matter, or fix upon some better plan for
relief. O that court and country may break through the prejudices and
selfishness of the age! O that all may be led into the right path to promote
truth and social happiness! The path that would make the province peaceful
among themselves, and respectable among others! But force and fraud will never
effect this blessing, thou^^ love and friendship might. And then we should,
with a be^^^^ grace, plead the merits of our cause, whenever called thereto
(...) it should be at the expense of life and treasure -- the evidence in our
favor would shine the brighter in the view of all wise and good men. It would
be a good means to convince them that we are contending for our rights and
liberties, with a benevolent and christian spirit -- by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left, through the manifestation of
the truth; and that we dread the defense of liberty by external force -- that
nothing but mere necessity shall draw us into it.

BUT if these and other equitable measures will not prevail over those that
would enslave us, Christian benevolence will inspire us to secure our rights,
and repair our injuries at the point of the sword; for if one man may defend
himself and his rights against an assailant, much more may a whole country
defend themselves when their rights are invaded, because the concern is
greater. In such case, the spirit of Christian benevolence would animate us to
fill our streets with blood, rather than suffer others to rob us of our rights.
I readily grant that arms are a sad remedy, and the more undesirable where
there has subsisted useful connections: But if old friends are disposed to be
terrible, if they endeavor to enslave, and bring mischief and misery upon
their brethren, this is a false notion of glory, and condemned by true
religion. Then it becomes us to take up arms and use them in the nature of a
remedy. Such corossives are painful, but the causes which make them necessary
are more dangerous. When nothing else will serve to preserve or restore our
liberties, it becomes a duty to make use of arms -- We desire liberty with
peace, and would gladly live as friends, but if the blessing of liberty cannot
be had with peace, it is lawful and right to enter into a contrary state. If
former friend^ (...) now resolved to entangle us with a yoke of bondage, God
forbid that we should suffer them to cut off our limbs and mangle our whole
body to gratify their injurious demands. Such terms of peace are no better than
what Nahajh the Ammonite proposed to the men of Jabeth Gilead, that they would
let him thrust out their right eyes, and bring reproach upon all Israel,
leaving them one eye to serve him in some mean and servile drugery. If it
should be so that our natural and constitutional liberties cannot be recovered
and maintained without repelling force by force, who could hesitate for a
moment, about the propriety of taking up arms! If our brethren will not be easy
unless we suffer them to thrust out our right eyes, and enslave our families,
it is a very loud call from God, to defend ourselves from their encroachments:
And if we go forth in the name and strength of Christ, he will be our sun to
guide and animate us, and our shield to defend and give us salvation.

IT is matter of deep lamentation that any of the ministry at home, or any
pensioners and their tools in the British colonies should distress a tree
people with any outward inconveniences from a sinful, imperious spirit directly
opposite to the genius of the gospel: It is a great pity that those who are so
nearly connected in interest, and a long combination productive of their common
good and happiness should be broken asunder by unprincipled tyrants and
traitors, -- traitors to their King and to his loyal subjects! They deeply
offend him who has purchased all our privileges, and who will severely judge
and condemn all tyrannizing over a free people. They cannot be justly offended
though in this open and undisguised way, I affirm they are acting over the old
trade of persecution, rather than we should be free, and the methods of
distress are calculated to prevent the nation and colonies from being a
flourishing people, so long as the old connection lasts. The same plan if it
should prevail, will issue in most fatal consequences. It has laid waste many
flourishing countries, and multitudes, for liberties sake, have been killed all
the day long; the blood of martyrs have run like rivers down the streets of
famous cities; it has put others to cruel mockings, bonds, imprisonments and
banishments. Yea it was the same principle that crucified the Lord of life and
glory, And as these have been the shocking consequences of such principles
prevailing in the church or state, the like may be acted over again, if the
principles are not seasonably suppressed.

BUT should we suffer ever so many temporal inconveniences for it, yet, as
Christians, we may not give up those rights and privileges that Christ has
purchased for and bestowed upon us; for giving them up, would not only reflect
great dishonor upon Christ, but would be inconsistent with the peace and
welfare of the people, and therefore be quite intolerable. We hope that HE by
whom Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, will inspire our DREAD SOVEREIGN
with those feelings of pity, humanity and goodness, which were very conspicuous
in his ROYAL GRANDFATHER; and dispose him to put a speedy and final end to all
those measures of despotism, invented and propagated by a corrupt ministry.

GOD grant, that we may so conduct in our ecclesiastical concerns, as that all
denominations of protestants may enjoy equal privileges. I am warranted to tell
you, that it has been the opinion of good judges of our charter, that no
denomination of protestants can be a legal establishment in the province, so as
to interfere with the freedom of another denomination: That if, by Parish
lines, any of our laws bind men to pay toward the support of a ministry from
which they soberly dissent, such laws will be judged a breach of charter, if
the matter be properly represented home. I humbly apprehend that, in such a day
of jealousy as this is, all of us are called to consider whether there has not
been a breach upon our Charter rights in this matter, for if the affair should
be complained of, our own arbitrariness may soon bring us into slavery.

MAY that God, who loves righteousness, and hates violence and oppression,
dispose all orders of men among us, both in church and state, to put away the
evil of our doings, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed! If mutual benevolence
and righteousness should reign among ourselves, we may hope to enjoy the
blessing of liberty: but if we refuse and rebel, we may justly fear being
devoured by the sword of those that are watching to enslave us.

FINIS.

