CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA EXAMINED.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXXIV.

"CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA" EXAMINED.
THAT the Author of this little Performance was born in Virginia, I shall not
question, since he has been pleased to tell us the Fact was really so. It seems
equally immaterial whether the Principles, in which he was nurtured, were of a
mixed or simple Nature, as it must be obvious that one Kind of those Principles
solely predominates at present and has given his Mind a strange and
unaccountable Bias. The perfect Enjoyment of his private Freedom in thinking
for himself, and offering his Sentiments to this Country upon every Occasion, I
wish not to interrupt; but he must excuse me, if I should differ with him in
Opinion, as to his being so devoted a Servant to the Welfare of this Community,
as he professes himself. Whether the Serenity of my Mind or the Soundness of my
Understanding will justify me in offering myself a Candidate for a Seat in his
exclusive Judicature, I will not determine; all I shall engage for is, that I
will not be clamorous. The present distressed Situation of Virginia is what all
good Men must heartily lament; but I hope he does not mean to insinuate that we
have wantonly drawn any of these Misfortunes on ourselves. He should recollect
his Latin Adage, " Jus suum cuique tribuere," that " Foundation of social
Duties," to which, without Doubt, he has religiously conformed in every
Instance. Popular Odium, the Weight of which he is so very sensible of, it is
far from my Intention to excite against him; but I am more strongly impelled to
dispute his great Indifference about an Office, "should he possess one," so
very precarious in its Tenure. My sole View is to put my Countrymen a little
more on their Guard, and to remove, if I can, those unfavourable Impressions,
he has labored to make on the Minds of others.

If some Men have unwarrantably and unjustly, in the Author's Opinion, assumed
to themselves that "most exalted and honorable Appellation" of a PATRIOT,
perhaps there may be found, in the World, other Characters equally
exceptionable. I do not wish to limit his Ardour and the Overflowings of his
Zeal for the Good of his Country; but would gladly be informed to what Purpose,
on the present Occasion, the Public is entertained with so many trite
Observations on the Nature of the British Constitution; I presume to give them
this Name, because they have been so repeatedly rung in our Ears, that the
merest Sciolist, the veriest Smatterer in Politics must long since have had
them all by Rote. It is devoutly to be wished that the Constitution of this
Country were assimilated in every essential Point to that of Great Britain; I
mean so long as this can be maintained upon its just, original Principles. Our
Constitution, however, such as it is, has suffered no internal Violation, that
I know of. Infringements of this Sort seem peculiar to another Meridian; had
they gained Ground amongst us, perhaps we might not have been left entirely
without an Apology, considering the Force of Example, and this held out by
those, who affect to be so much our Superiors. If the uncontrollable and
unlimited Power claimed by PARLIAMENT over the Colonies is disputed on legal
and constitutional Principles, this surely is exceedingly wide of what the
Author would insinuate. That the Prerogative of the King, "exists here in its
fullest Luster and Vigor," and that it ever ought to do so, is what we
cheerfully acknowledge and earnestly contend for; but the plain Inference which
the Author would have drawn from his Observations, if he intends any Thing
material, is that, by disputing the Power of Parliament, we draw into Question
the PREROGATIVE of our most gracious Sovereign; than which, nothing can be more
contrary to the Sentiments and Wishes of all America.

It seems that every One, who does not adopt the Author's Principles, is to be
considered as a designing Man and must no longer expect to be honored with any
Share of his Confidence. Hard and cruel Fate! but we must endeavor to bear up
under it, as well as we can.

That the unhappy Dispute, now subsisting between Great Britain and the
Colonies, is of a very interesting Nature must be acknowledged by every
Well-wisher to either Country. Viewing it in its extensive dangerous
Consequences, I believe few have been more affected by the gloomy Prospect than
myself; it has even harrowed up my very Soul. The Reflection, that we live in
a State of Discord with our Fellow Subjects, whom we formerly considered and
still wish to esteem as our dearest Friends; and, above all, the Horrors, which
every American must feel from an Apprehension that the Mind of his gracious
Sovereign may have been impressed with Ideas of a Disrepect and Want of Loyalty
in his Subjects, must be extremely afflicting. I will venture to express it as
my firm and steadfast Belief that there can be found in no Part of his Majesty's
Dominions a warmer and more cordial Attachment to his sacred Person and
Government, than prevails throughout the Continent of America; for myself I
will speak with still greater Confidence and say that, had I a Window in my
Breast, and his Majesty could deign to look into it, he would there see a Heart
glowing with the purest Sentiments of Duty and Affection. Oppressed, however,
as we are by so weighty a Burden, we nevertheless ought not, we cannot lose
Sight of what is due to our Country, ourselves, and our Posterity.

The Author tells us of his Persuasion that the Dispute may be adjusted without
Noise; and the public Tranquillity again restored, if Gentlemen would pursue
those Measures, which are likely to effect what is every Man's Wish to obtain.
Let him propose those Measures; so far from being noisy, I will become all
Attention, and catch, with Avidity, the delightful Accents, as they drop from
his mellifluous Tongue. If the Wisdom of his Counsels should be able to effect
this desirable End, his Memory shall be gratefully perpetuated in the Hearts of
all his Countrymen, and, to the whole Continent of America, he shall become the
Great Apollo. What he may have, in Reserve to be offered, when he inclines to
"descend to Particulars," I will not presume to anticipate. I must for the
present, take Leave to examine, a little, those obvious Means, he has been
pleased to recommend.

We ought, it is said, in the first Place, to declare, in the most public
Manner, that the Act of the Bostonians in destroying the Property of the East
India Company was illegal and ought not to be countenanced. This will evince
our Uprightness and serve as an Admonition to those headstrong People never to
go to the same Lengths again. Then let us petition his Majesty; assure him of
our inviolable Attachment to his Person and Government and implore his Royal
Interposition in procuring a Repeal of those Acts, which have excited such an
Alarm amongst us; and, when abrogated, will quiet the Minds of his most
faithful Subjects in America. I never have, nor will I ever attempt to justify
the Bostonians or any others in Acts of Violence or Intemperance; nor can I
presume to join, in a public Condemnation of them, without being convinced of
their Guilt. In short, I cannot form a proper Judgment without being fully
possessed of their Cause and a thorough Knowledge of the Motives of their
Conduct. Wantonly and unjustly to destroy the Property of another, I hold in
utter Abhorrence; but I can easily suppose an Act of Oppression, which will
justify a Sufferer in the Execution of every Means necessary for his Security.
Whether the Bostonians were reduced to such an Extremity I will not determine.
Justifying or condemning them are very distinct Considerations from the Opinion
we form of the Proceedings of Parliament. Each of these will be more distinctly
and properly remarked upon, when I come to take a View of other Parts of the
Work. I should be glad, however, in the mean Time, to know who are particularly
meant by the Bostonians. If, when we are invited to a general Proscription of
those unhappy People, it is intended that we should condemn them in a Lump, the
Innocent with the Guilty, the Author surely must give up every Pretense to
those Principles of Justice, he would fain have us believe him so much in Love
with. If, on the other Hand, he means that we should condemn the Guilty only,
why were they not discriminated? This perhaps would not have laid a proper
Groundwork for the Petition recommended, as it would necessarily imply a
Censure of Parliament, whose new Mode of Punishment extends, not only to all
the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston, but (...) involves, either mediately or
immediately, most of the Inhabitants of the whole Province; such a Petition,
therefore, could hardly be conceived in agreeable LANGUAGE. I wish, upon such
Occasions, as this especially, that Gentlemen would avoid connecting the Name
of his Majesty with that of any of his Subjects, however dignified or
distinguished. We have a Maxim in our Law, which has long since become
proverbial, that the KING can do no Wrong. It is not to be supposed that his
MAJESTY can HIMSELF attend to and direct all the arduous Affairs of his
extended Dominions. The Constitution has therefore assisted him with a
Ministry, who become the ostensible Men, and are accountable, for any Wrong or
Injury, that may fall on the Subject through their Counsel and Advice. As to
petitioning our most gracious Sovereign, I should prefer a Step of this Sort,
previous to all others. America, I am persuaded, would prostrate herself at the
Foot of his Throne and not think of any other Means, till this was tried; I
would join in the most respectful Applications to both Houses of Parliament for
the Redress of our Grievances; but, alas! of what Avail would these Things be?
Have they not been repeatedly attempted without the desired Effect, as well by
this, as the other Colonies? I would recommend to the Author's Perusal and most
serious Reflection the several disregarded Petitions preferred against the
Boston Port Bill, and should be glad to know how it could have happened, that
such dutiful and respectful Applications, and such Cogency of Reasoning were
withstood and surmounted, if Measures of the same Sort are now likely to
succeed.

In Exertion of what the Parliament claims as a Right of Taxation, we are
reminded of the Duty imposed upon Stamps and Tea; by which the Author would
have his Readers suppose that these two Duties were laid by the same Act of
Parliament. This may serve his Purpose, in the Contrast afterward drawn to
prove that the Duty on Tea ought to be considered merely as a Regulation of
Trade; but I beg Leave to inform him that this Tea Duty was the Offspring of
another Act, which imposed the Duties on Glass, Paper, etc. And that this Act
compared with another of the same Session clearly evinces that it was not
intended as a commercial Regulation, but originally designed as one Article of
the American Revenue, and afterward retained merely as a Precedent. The Stamp
Act he says was repealed; very true; and America expressed her Thanks for it,
hoping that Concord and Harmony would be restored and firmly established. We
are told, in the next Place, that, though the Duty on Tea remained, yet all
Uneasiness, on that Head, seemed to have subsided for a considerable Time past;
that the End of both Parties was answered; the Parliament's in asserting, and
America's in denying; and why, it is asked, should not the Dispute rest at this
Point? Fresh Clamours need not be made, until fresh Causes for such are given;
new Disturbances for an old Affront are neither consistent with the Dictates of
Policy or Prudence; all this is granted; but I find we shall differ, as to the
recent Causes of Complaint, which have been unjustly given to the Americans.
Had the Duty on Tea continued, where it was left a few Years since, we should
have troubled ourselves very little about it; but, if arbitrary Steps have been
taken to force this Tea on the Colonists and compel them to pay the odious
Duty, the Case becomes quite altered. Let us examine this Part of the Subject a
little more minutely.

That a regular System has been formed to subjugate America by establishing
that civil List in the Colonies, which was planned and so earnestly recommended
by a certain Governor, must be evident to every attentive Observer of the
Proceedings of Parliament for a Series of Years past. I will refer the Reader
no farther back than the 4th Year of his present Majesty's Reign, when the Act
passed imposing a Duty of L. 7 per Ton on Madeira Wine and other Duties on
different Articles. These were acquiesced in, as they carried with them a
specious Appearance of Advantage to the Colonies and bore the Semblance of
Regulations of Commerce. The Way being so far paved, the Minister then seized
what was judged a convenient Opportunity to impose his Stamp Duties; the
Americans were justly alarmed, plainly seeing through the whole Design. Upon a
seasonable and spirited Opposition, the Stamp Act was repealed, but not without
a Declaration of the Supremacy or rather Omnipotence of Parliament; this gave
the Colonists very little Concern; a Declaration nearly of the same Sort,
though not so extensive, has been made many Years before respecting Ireland;
this declaratory Act might have remained, with the other as a dead Letter,
unregarded, had there been no future Attempts to revive it. The favorite
Scheme of an American Civil List seems to have been kept in full View, and the
succeeding Minister, finding that the former Attacks on the Rights of the
Colonies had been made too openly, thought it most prudent to shift the Ground
and endeavor to effect the same Purpose by political Finesse His Maneuvers
were then displayed in another Act imposing Duties on Glass, Paper, Painter's
Colors and Tea. This, at first, had the Appearance of a commercial Regulation;
but the latent Design was soon detected and fully exposed. The Opposition made
to the Measure produced a very intimidating Address of both Houses of
Parliament to the King, by which his Majesty was desired to have Prosecutions
set on Foot against such, as were deemed principal Actors, upon a stale Statute
of King Henry the 8th; the necessary Consequence would have been, that those,
whom the Governor thought proper, were to have been seized and transported to
England, there to be tried for their supposed Offenses, contrary to every
Principle of Law and Justice. The Consistency of this Address with those
Arguments urged by the ablest Advocates for Parliamentary Power to prove that
the Colonies are so far a Part of the Empire of Great Britain, as to be subject
to every Law of Parliament, is left to them and our Author to be reconciled.
How could the Colonies avoid being alarmed at a Proceeding big with the most
dangerous Consequences and utterly subversive of every Thing dear and valuable
to them? These arbitrary Strides of Power were protested against by our House
of Burgesses in their Session of 1769, and the Resolutions, they were driven
into brought on the Dissolution of the Assembly. The Colony being reduced to so
disagreeable a Situation, the first Association, which the Author affects to
ridicule as a nugatory, insignificant Act, was entered into; and, though not so
universally adopted nor so scrupulously adhered to, as it ought to have been,
yet I am persuaded that it was the principal efficient Cause of a subsequent
Act of Parliament in the succeeding Year, by which the Duties on all those
Articles of British Manufacture, which included most that the Colonies had
Occasion for, were repealed; the Duty on Tea, however, was still continued; for
what Purpose will be presently inquired. This repealing Act being attended with
some particular Circumstances, not very friendly to America, the Association,
upon being revised, was continued with some Alterations allowing Importers a
greater Latitude. The Parliament not having revived their disagreeable
Measures, but shown some Disposition by this Act to relieve America, at least,
from a Part of her Grievances, many Persons became indifferent, as to the
Association, and, at a general Meeting of the Associates, the Whole was
dissolved except as to the Article of Tea, and others under the same
Circumstances, which they continued to protect against. That this was too
little regarded by many must be acknowledged: The Duty, merely as to the
Quantum of it, might have been thought too inconsiderable to deprive them of
what the Author supposes Custom had made almost a Necessary of Life; some Men
still saw its evil political Tendency and therefore abstained from importing or
buying it, though many others did not, and, I believe, they now sincerely
repent that all had not held it in equal Abhorrence. That this Duty on Tea was
originally imposed for the sole Purpose of raising a Revenue in America, and
not as a commercial Regulation; and that it was afterward retained, as a
Precedent, I think, must be evident to every One, who considers the several
Acts of Parliament relating to the Subject. The Act itself, which imposed this
Duty, declares it to be for the Purpose of a Revenue. We all know that Tea paid
a considerable Duty in England; the East India Company found great Difficulties
in disposing of their Tea loaded with that Duty. The Parliament, in the very
same Session, that the American Duty was imposed, passed another Act allowing a
Drawback of the whole Duties payable in England on all Tea, which should be
exported to America in the original Packages, upon the Company's agreeing to
make good any Loss the Revenue might sustain by these Debentures. This Act was
to continue to the 5th of July 1772. In the Session of the same Year, 1772,
another Act passed, to continue for five Years, allowing a Drawback of three
Fifths of the Duty on all Tea, which should be purchased of the Company and
exported to America. We know that, by former Statutes, the Company were obliged
to sell all their Commodities, Tea amongst the rest, at public Auction, by Inch
of Candle, to the highest Bidders; and were not allowed to export any Thing on
their own Account. In 1773, when it is probable the Plan was concerted for
shipping the enormous Quantities of Tea, which have occasioned our
Disturbances, to America, another Act passed authorizing the Company, under a
License from the Commissioners of the Treasury, to export any Quantity of Tea
to America, without being obliged to expose it at public Auction; and upon such
Exportation, the whole English Duty was to be drawn back, instead of the three
Fifths allowed by the Act of the former Session. The Question I would ask is
this; if either a commercial Regulation or the general Revenue, and not the
establishing a Precedent against America, had been the Object of Parliament,
why might not so much, at least, of the old Duty, as was thought sufficient to
answer their American Purpose of barely raising Money, have been continued?
This would have given no Uneasiness; the Expense and Trouble of collecting the
Duty in America and remitting the Surplus, if any should arise, to the Receipt
of his Majesty's Exchequer in England would have been saved. The proper Answer
to the Question will show the Design of Parliament, and, at, the same Time
prove what the Company had in View by sending the Tea to America. The large
Quantity, they had on Hand made it a Drug, and they had engaged to make good to
Government any Deficiency that might arise on the Duty. The allowing the
Company to export their Tea on their own Account, just at this Juncture,
contrary to standing Regulations, which had subsisted for so many Years,
affords an additional Proof of the Point in Question. Whatever Loss, therefore,
the Company may have sustained by the Destruction of the Tea, or having it
returned upon their Hands, should be placed to the Account of their own
Imprudence, or rather, to what seems to have been a Cooperation with the
Ministry to pour it down the Throats of the Americans. Suppose the Company had
a Right to monopolise this Branch of Trade, to the Exclusion and Prejudice of
all other Merchants; were they not sufficiently apprised how very disagreeable
and odious their sending the Tea to America would be to the Inhabitants of all
the Continent? Governor Johnston, we find, declared publicly in the House of
Commons that he had warned their Chairman against sending over the Tea and told
him the bad Consequences, that would probably attend such a Step; let the
Refusal of several Captains of Ships to take it on Freight be also recollected.
These Circumstances were surely enough to have convinced them that they could
not expect, in a regular, equal Course of Trade, to dispose of their Tea in
America. Was it not the greatest Insult upon this whole Continent to attempt to
force upon them a Commodity, which they had so much Reason to be convinced,
when introduced in this Manner, would be considered as bringing with it those
Shackles the Author speaks of? If the Company should pretend that they did not
see the Matter in this Light, I would gladly know how other Men, of different
Classes, happened to be so very sagacious as to foretell what followed? I cannot
but suppose that the Company had one of two Things in View. They either must
have hoped that the public Virtue of the Americans would not be able to
withstand the Temptation thrown in their Way; if they purchased the Tea, all
would be well; both the Company's Purpose and that of Administration would be
answered; the Drug would be got rid of and the Duty would be paid. If, in the
second Place, the Scheme should be obstructed and the Tea thereby miscarry,
their ultimate Expectation and Reliance seems to have been that the Ministry
would support and indemnify them.

In Hopes of aggravating the Offense of the Bostonians, the Author tells us
that, by our Magna Charta, even Aliens are protected in their Commerce with us;
and, had a Frenchman, the avowed Enemy of our Country, imported Tea into Boston
he would have met with no Molestation; if this be so, Thanks to the Rigor of
the Acts of Trade, Courts of Admiralty, etc. But, since he has drawn the
Comparison, I would gladly know what Sort of Trade, even a Frenchman can carry
on with America, that would prove so injurious and destructive, as that which
the Company endeavored to force with the Colonists. I agree it is unlawful to
trade with Foreigners, and that we ought, by no Means, to encourage such a
Practice; but I say the Trade attempted by the Company, all Circumstances
considered, was equally illegal and more unjust. I will suppose for a Moment,
though the Fact is supported by no Sort of Evidence, which I know of, that the
whole Town of Boston had been concerned in destroying the Tea, and submit to
every impartial Person how far they were blameable. I must here take Leave to
remind our Author of one of his Law Maxims; Sic utere tuo, ut alienum non
loedas. Make a free Use of your Property, but, so use it, as not to prejudice
what belongs to another. I take it that the Freedom and Liberties of America
are pretty essential Parts of their Property; I also consider a Community was
very materially interested in preserving the Virtue of its ^^^ferent Members;
so that every Infringement or Attempt to deprive the Owners of either Species
of this Property, I conclude comes within the prohibitory Part of this Maxim.
It is alleged that the Bostonians might have declined purchasing this Tea; but
why should we expect to find a larger Portion of public Virtue amongst these
People, than in other Countries? Many I make no Doubt would have refrained from
buying, but others, probably could not, or would not have withstood the
Temptation of purchasing at Half Price.

The Company having been disappointed in one of their Expectations, they are
now to be gratified in the other. The supreme, the omnipotent Power of
Parliament is to be exerted to procure for them what is called Justice,
Indemnification, etc. The Account given us, is said to be a true State of the
Case. As being in the Secrets of the Cabinet^, the Author may be supposed to
know more than common Men; but I incline to think him mistaken in many
essential Points; some Things, I am sure, are unfairly represented.

He introduces his State of Facts with the People of Rhode Island; the Case of
the Gaspee Schooner and the Court of Inquiry. Would not a Stranger suppose,
from his Relation of this Affair, that not only all the Inhabitants of Rhode
Island, but that this whole Continent was concerned either in perpetrating,
abetting, or countenancing that flagitious and wicked Act of burning his
Majesty's Schooner and maltreating the Commander? Nothing I believe was farther
from the Truth; I am sure every Man, in this Colony, whom I heard speak on the
Subject, loudly condemned the Deed, and, had it been in their Power, would I
believe, have consigned the Perpetrators of it to a legal, exemplary and
condign Punishment. Government it is said, opened a Court of Inquiry and that
this Mode of Proceeding was fixed on as a Test, from whence it might be known,
whether this Insult was a general Act of the Province; if not, it was concluded
that the better Class of People would exert themselves in Order to bring the
Offenders to Justice; that, no Discovery having been made, the Court could
proceed no farther; and, though insulted in all the public Newspapers on the
Continent, the Ministry were unwilling to proceed to Extremities, but sat down
silently under the Affront, laughed at by the Rhode Islanders and held in
Derision by Foreigners. Without detaining the Reader by a minute Scrutiny into
the Propriety of hastily setting up this Court of Inquiry in a Country
regularly established, and, where I should suppose, since we are not told the
contrary, proper Jurisdictions are fixed, competent to the Examination and
Punishment of all Offenses and Transgressions of the Law; without relying on
the just Alarms, which novel Jurisdictions are apt to give a free People, I
must remind the Reader of a few trifling Circumstances, which seem to have been
carefully kept behind the Scene. Will the Author allow us to recollect what was
to have been done with the Culprits, had they been discovered. If I do not
forget the Act of Parliament made on this Occasion, all Persons, supposed
guilty of any of the Offenses therein enumerated, were to be transported to
Great Britain and there tried for their Lives. It was this, which gave the
Alarm, and very justly to the whole Continent. I find a Disposition in some Men
to aggravate every Transaction of the Americans into the most enormous Crime,
whilst they are prepared to palliate and even justify every Act of the
Ministry, however arbitrary and oppressive. The dragging a Man from all his
Connexions into a distant Country to undergo the severest Trial; to strip him
of the glorious Privilege of being tried by his Peers of his Vicinage, the most
valuable Birthright of every Freeman; to deprive him of the Benefit of the
Testimony of his Witnesses, whom he has no Means of compelling to cross the
Atlantic; of the Assistance and Comfort of his Friends, when in a State of the
deepest Affliction, and to expose him to the bitterest Persecution of his
Enemies; these are trivial Circumstances, not worthy our Attention or Concern.
If the Ministry were insulted in the public Papers, I had no Hand in it, though
I frankly acknowledge my Concurrence in condemning so unconstitutional and
oppressive a Measure and hope that no American will ever submit to it. Odious
as so unjust and arbitrary an Act of Power must appear in the Eyes of every
Friend to Liberty, the fundamental Principles of our Laws and Constitution; yet
the Author is pleased to fix it as the Basis of his Justification of the
Ministry in their Attack upon Boston, still, if possible, more cruel and
unjust. As a Proof that the Ministry were not concerned in the Importation of
the Tea, we are told that the Admiral was desired to interfere, when the
Disturbance happened, but declined doing so, considering it as a "mere
mercantile Adventure." Viewing the Matter in this Light; did he not form the
better Judgment? But how contrary is the Author's Assertion to the Admiral's
own Letter to the Secretary of the Admiralty, in which he desires the Lords of
the Admiralty may be informed that, during the whole Transaction, neither the
Governor, Magistrates, Owners or Revenue Officers called for his Assistance; if
they had, that he could easily have prevented the Execution of the Plan, but
must have endangered the Lives of many innocent People by firing on the Town. I
cannot, considering what has since happened, suppose the Governor and the other
Persons alluded to, restrained from making such Application to the Admiral for
his Assistance, by any Motives of Regard for the Inhabitants. We know there are
sometimes Wheels within Wheels, to be put in Motion by secret Springs, which it
is not always convenient to have exposed to common Observation. It seems to me
that even the Preservation of their Tea, by all Accounts extremely mean in
Quality, would not have answered the Company's Purpose so well, in several
Respects, as the Retribution now demanded on their Behalf; and the immediate
Suppression of what is called a Riot might have defeated the earnest
Expectations of the Governor and the Revenue Officers. The Dutch we learn
destroy large Quantities ot their Spices, in Order to enhance the Value of what
remains upon Hand. How very convenient would it be to those People, could they
but find out a Method of being paid for what they thus destroy? I do not
presume to assert positively that the Ministry were concerned in planning and
promoting the Scheme of sending the Tea to America; but does it appear, in the
Course of all the Debates, we have seen, that they have once denied it? Does
not the Act of Parliament last referred to, when compared with the several
Measures lately adopted, furnish a strong presumptive Proof that it was
undertaken, at least, with their Approbation? How could this Act have been
procured without their Concurrence and Assistance? And why were not the Company
allowed to export, on their own Account, other Articles besides Tea? I suppose
there can be no Question made of the Advantages they would reap by monopolising
the Exports as well as Imporrs of all the Commodities they deal in. Let the
Boston Port Act and the other Bills brought into the House of Commons, by the
Minister, which have probably been passed into Laws before this Time, be
reviewed, and then, let those doubt, who can, whether every Step taken was not
with a Design to compel the People of Boston, in the first Instance, and after
this was done, the whole Continent to submit to the Payment of Duties imposed
for the sole Purpose of raising a Revenue in America, and, in so doing, to the
Power of Parliament in every other Instance, that they may be pleased to exert
it. As a farther corroborative Proof, I would gladly know whether it appears,
from any authentic Document, that the Company ever lodged a Complaint against
the Bostonians; they seem to have been either too conscious of their Fault to
do it; or the Readiness and Alacrity, with which the Ministry seem to have
engaged in the Business, might have superseded the Necessity of their
complaining.

The Ministry, it is said, took the Matter up on two Principles. They
considered, in the first Place, that the Idea entertained by the Bostonians of
this being an Act of Government, was affrontive to the Crown and therefore
deserved the Animadversion of Parliament. The second Reason was, that, without
the Intervention of the legislative Authority, there must be a Failure of
Justice. It ought rather to have been supposed, under the first Head, that the
Minister himself was affronted and vexed that the Scheme had been frustrated;
for I cannot help distinguishing between the Crown and the Ministry on these
Occasions.

In Proof of his second Reason, the Author is pleased to say, the East India
Company, it is true, might have brought their Actions against the Offenders;
but how were they to find them? The Affair of the Gaspee afforded Proof enough
that the Names of the Rioters would remain an impenetrable Secret; but, if
their Names had been known, what Reason was there to expect on the Trial, a
dispassionate Judge or a disinterested Jury, when the Minds of the People were
so generally impressed with the Notion, that, with the Tea, were imported
Shackles for themselves and their Posterity? As to the Difficulty in
discovering the Names of the Offenders, would this have been any Thing more
than the common Case; when either, from not being able to find out the Authors
of a Mischief, or, from a Defect of Proof, the Person injured is obliged to sit
down with the Loss? This may be a Misfortune, but, in the present State of
human Affairs, it seems unavoidable. With Respect to the Want of a proper Judge
or Jury, a dispassionate, impartial Judge might surely have been found, either
amongst the Commissioners of the Customs, or in one of the Courts of Admiralty
on the Continent; he might have been invested with the full Powers both of
Judge and Jury, and such a Jurisdiction would not have been a Whit more
exceptionable, than the Powers given to Courts of Admiralty by this and several
other Acts of Parliament. But the Ministry could have had no just Grounds to
suspect a Failure of Justice; several Instances had happened in that very
Province sufficient to convince them of the contrary.

This Matter was, therefore, laid before Parliament, as the only Resource; who,
in Consequence of it, thought proper to send an Armament to Boston in Order to
oblige the People of that Place to make Retribution for the Injuries they had
done, and to put a Check to that growing Disorder, which appeared to them to be
Licentiousness, instead of Freedom, and which must endanger the Peace of the
British Empire in America, unless it was smothered in its Infancy. We are told
farther that the Resentment of Parliament was levelled only against the Town of
Boston and that, if it had been intended against the whole Province, they would
have stopped all Communication with it; that this ought to convince every one
that they have no Intention to injure any other Colony, unless they commit the
same Outrage, and then, it is probable, "the same Cause will produce the same
Effect." Before the Author had supposed that only the Town of Boston and not
other Parts of the Province would be affected, I wish he had read the Address
of the Town of Salem to Governor Gage and learned their Sense of this Matter;
after representing the great Injury that particular Town will sustain, they
tell him that there is not a Town in the Province, but will feel the ill
Effects.

The Author is pleased to confess that the Part of the Act, which relates to
Wharfs is exceptionable, as it is taking private Property out of the Hands of
the Possesors, who may be innocent Men, and, perhaps, have done nothing to
forfeit their Rights. And is it, indeed, but barely exceptionable? Nothing more
verily; since, in the succeeding Paragraph, we find an Apology ready prepared
to justify even this Part of the Act. The Design of the Act, it seems, was only
"punitory;" when that End is answered and Satisfaction made to the East India
Company, he is persuaded that the Whole will be repealed. What are we to
understand by the Term " punitory?" It may imply confiscating, hanging,
burning; and, what not? But taking it in the most mollified Sense, the Author
surely has never read the Boston Port Act, or must suppose that others have not
done it, else he never would have given this as a true State of the Case.

What can he think of the Act's declaring void Charter Parties and Bills of
Loading? What of the Clause (which may indeed carry with it an Air of
Indulgence) effectually restraining his Majesty from opening the Port, till
Peace and Obedience to the Laws are so far restored in the Town of Boston, that
his Majesty's Customs may be duly collected? By Obedience to the Laws I
understand an implicit Submission to all Acts of Parliament whatever; by
Customs, is plainly meant all such Duties, as the Parliament may think fit to
impose. This obvious Comment may fairly be made from the Complexion of the Act
itself, and is clearly and fully justified by the other Bills before alluded to.

What shall we think of his Majesty's being also restrained from opening any
Part of the Port, till full Satisfaction is made to the East India Company for
the Damages they have sustained; and until it shall be certified to his Majesty
in Council by the Governor or Lieutenant Governor, that reasonable
Satisfaction has been made to the Officers of the Revenue and others who
suffered by the Riots, etc? Here it is plain that these devoted People, and
some of them supposed, even by the Author himself, to be innocent, are thrown
into the Hands of the Ministry (...) Privy Council, our gracious Sovereign
being restricted, without their Consent, from extending his Mercy to those
unhappy Objects; and, what is still worse, if possible, there being no Account
of Damages liquidated, the Deliverance of them from the Hardships and
Calamities, they are now groaning under, must, in a great Measure, depend on
their discharging such Claims, as the Company, the Officers of the Revenue and
others may exhibit against them; and, moreover, they are not to be relieved,
till the Governor or Lieutenant Governor may be pleased to grant a Certificate
The Proceedings, I own are uniform and of a Piece; but I defy their Authors to
maintain them on any Principles of Justice. Notwithstanding all these Things,
he endeavors to persuade us that we have no just, recent Ground of Complaint
and that the other Colonies need not be afraid. When my Neighbor's House is on
Fire, it highly behooves me to look to my own. When the rest of America sees a
Sister Colony grievously oppressed by the Hand of Power, and this, for making a
Stand against the Infringements and Violations ot American Rights; they are
surely called upon loudly by every Principle or Justice, of public Virtue, and
by every Motive to Self Preservation, to pursue such legal and proper Means, as
are most likely to save them from Ruin. Would not all the Colonies have the
greatest Reason to fear, it they continue supine and indifferent to the
Proceedings against Boston, that they might all, in Time, upon a Refusal to
submit to any Act of Parliament, however oppressive, be exposed to the same
rigorous Treatment? And have we not too many Proofs that a regular System has
been formed to bow down the Neck of America to the Feet of the Minister?
Humiliating, dreadful Thought!

That the Bostonians have acted unwarrantably, in the Opinion of our Author,
cannot be denied by the most zealous American. He should not be too precipitate
in pronouncing the Sentiments of others. Many judicious, upright Men, who, I
believe, are now fully convinced, had their Doubts, at first, upon this Point;
they suspended their Judgments, till they could be satisfied of the Motives,
which actuated the Bostonians, and of the Evidence, they might have to produce
of what Part the Ministry took in this Business at the Beginning of it.
Granting, however, for a Moment, that the People of Boston might have acted
unwarrantably; yet, what has the Parliament done? Or rather, what has it not
done? It is much to be suspected that the Author, as well as many others, in
considering this mixed Question, has attended only to one Side of it. Upon the
above Concession, then, some of the Men of Boston and in its Neighborhood have
acted unwarrantably in destroying the Property of the East India Company. In
this Town live a great many Thousand Inhabitants, amongst whom are, probably,
many Widows and Orphans deeply interested in the Trade of the Place, its
Wharfs, Storehouses and other Appendages. Several principal Proprietors might
have been absent, when the Fact was committed. Many of these must be presumed
entirely innocent; the Guilty however deserve Punishment. The Law is open to
the Injured; and, if the Aggressors can be found out, there is a proper
Jurisdiction to award such Punishment, as the Law has prescribed. From a
groundless Apprehension (I take the Liberty of calling it so, till the contrary
is proved) that Justice will not be impartially administered, the Ministry take
the Matter up and lay it before Parliament. A Bill is brought in; the Parties
accused, contrary to every Rule of Justice, are condemned, without being cited
to answer what is laid to their Charge; a few of their Friends, who happened to
be on the Spot, are refused to be heard, and an Act of Parliament, inflicting
the severest Penalties, is passed with unusual Precipitation; a Fleet and an
Armament are hurried across the Atlantic with the utmost Rapidity, as if it
was intended that they should be the first Bearers of the fatal Tidings, and
the dreadful Announcers of the Doom of these unhappy People. So much for the
Method of Proceeding. Let us attend a little more particularly to the Act
itself and its mischievous Consequences.

In the Author's pompous Display of the Beauties of the British Constitution
and the Laws of Parliament, he should have recollected one very essential Point
more, which seems to crown the Whole, and without which, the Power of
Parliament would become odious to every Man of free and liberal Sentiments.
What I allude to will be best explained by the following Observations.

To the Parliament it, of Right, belongs to make and enact Laws for the better
Government of all properly within its Jurisdiction; for the Encouragement of
those, who do well and the Punishment of all Transgressors. If Offenses should
arise, not guarded against by Law, this Defect of Provision is to be ascribed
either to the Neglect of the Legislature, or to the Imbecility and
short-sightedness of human Nature. Every Instance of this Sort should point out
to the Lawgiver a future Remedy, which ought to be provided with all Expedition
and without Respect of Persons. When general Regulations and Laws are
established, by which every Individual in Society is to be bound and governed,
such Laws are equal; the Legislature acts upon truly political and
constitutional Principles, uninfluenced by Partiality, Resentment or the Temper
of the Times. Of such Laws, as these, or rather, the Mode of enacting them,
none can with Reason complain. But we should be careful never to lose Sight of
the material Difference between the legislative, the judicial, and executive
Parts of our Constitution; since, upon a due Attention to and Observance of
these Distinctions, the Preservation of the Whole so very materially depends.
Occurrences prejudicial to Society may happen, which have not yet been provided
against by any Law; but these cannot be punished, without a gross Infringement
of the vital Principles of the British Constitution, and a direct Oppugnation
to a superior Authority; by which we are taught, that, where there is no Law,
there can be no Transgression. We know very well that, by the most just and
invariable Rules of judging, penal Laws are to be construed strictly; so that
no One accused can be subjected to a Penalty, unless he falls expressly within
it. Upon what is this Rule founded? but the Reason and Principles of eternal
Justice (which Legislatures as well as Judges should have imprinted on their
Hearts in indelible Characters) that penal Laws ought never to be calculated,
like Snares, to catch Men; on the contrary, that no One should be subjected to
the Pains of them, unless clearly and fully convicted. Again; we have another
Maxim in our Constitution, namely, that it is better many guilty Persons should
escape Punishment, than that one Innocent should suffer. We know ten righteous
Persons would once have saved a whole City; but this it seems is an antiquated
Doctrine, extracted from a strange old History; and the Reverse is now to take
Place in the System of modern Politics. Let these Observations be applied to
the Case in Hand. The Persons actually guilty of the supposed Offenses at
Boston were subject to the Penalties, and those only, of the Laws then in
Force; if there were no such Laws, I say they were not liable to any Penalty at
all. Show me the Law enacted by proper Authority, or submitted to by immemorial
Usage, declaring that the Port of Boston or any other Town should be blocked up
and the Trade, almost, of a whole Country destroyed, even supposing all the
Inabitants of the Town guilty, which is not pretended in the present Case, and
I will agree that the Penalty might be legally infflicted. There are many
Persons confessed to be grievously oppressed by this Act, who are perfectly
innocent. Let a Law enacted by proper Authority be produced, which declares
that all the Inhabitants ot Boston or any other Town, whether innocent or
guilty, shall be punished most severely for the Acts of Violence or
Intemperance of Individuals committed either in their own Town or its
Neighborhood, and I will kiss the legal Rod, and yield up the Argument; but,
if no such Law can be produced, I take the Liberty to pronounce that the Boston
Port Act, considering it in a judicial Point of View, is unconstitutional;
that, as an Act of legislative Power, it is entirely ex post facto, in the most
odious Sense of the Words; and that, with Respect to all those especially, who
were confessedly innocent, it constitutes a new Crime and inflicts a
Punishment, which cannot be justified. Here, I suppose, will be called into the
Author's Aid, the Precedents urged on the other Side of the Water. I shall not,
for Brevity's Sake, quote them all; but refer my Readers to the rest, with the
Answers given to them, contenting myself, with mentioning only two, the most
capital.

In the Reign of King Charles the second, when Dr. Lamb was killed by unknown
Persons, the City of London was fined; and, in Captain Portius's Affair, a Fine
was set upon the whole City of Edinburgh. I take the Liberty of referring for
an Answer to these Examples, in Part, to what was urged, with much Propriety,
by a few worthy, patriotic Americans in their Petition against the Boston Port
Bill. I give it in their own Words, as I would by no Means mutilate that Part
of a Petition, which must for ever endear them to all their Countrymen. The
Case of the King against the City of London, say they, was for a Murder
committed within its Walls by its Citizens in open Day. But, even then,
arbitrary as the Times were, the Trial was public in a Court of Common Law; the
Party heard and the Law, laid down by the Judges, was, that it was an Offense,
at Common Law, to suffer such a Crime to be committed in a walled Town, Tempore
diurno, and none of the Offenders to be known or indicted. The Case of
Edinburgh, in which the Parliament interfered, was the Commission of an
atrocious Murder within her Gates, and aggravated by an overt Act of High
Treason, in executing, against the express Will of the Crown, the King's Laws.
They observed that these Cities had, by Charter, the whole executive Power
within themselves, so that a Failure of Justice necessarily ensued from their
Connivance. In both Cases, however, full Time was allowed them to discharge
their Duty, and they were heard in their own Defense. But Time was not allowed
to the Bostonians, nor were they heard. Boston is not a walled Town, nor is the
executive Power in their Hands, but in the Governor's; nor was the Fact
committed within it. These Reasons I should have thought sufficient to
discriminate the different Cases; but my Objection is laid still deeper, as I
am for reducing Things to their proper Principles. Show me the Law, subsisting
at the Time these Offenses were said to have been committed, imposing the
Penalties inflicted, and I will agree that such Proceedings, before a proper
Judicature, might have been right; otherwise, from the established Principles
of the Constitution, I shall not scruple to declare them arbitrary Exertions of
despotick Power. Admit but an Authority in Parliament, not only to create new
Offenses, after they are supposed to have been committed, but to inflict what
Punishments they please for the same, and I would gladly know what will become
of that Security for their Properties, their Liberties and Lives, which
Englishmen boast of, as derived from the Independence of their Judges and the
Permanency of Tenure, by which they enjoy their Offices. Let the Author
disprove my Positions, and he will make Room for constructive Treasons and
Felonies; (a Doctrine long since exploded by all judicious, good Men, as
replete with Horror;) he will repeal the famous Statute of Edward the III. long
ago established by other Acts of Parliament, as a Criterion and Test not to be
departed from; and, above all, he will prove IRREFRAGABLY that a Man may
transgress a Law, which never had Existence. If he should tell me of the Power,
or rather Omnipotence of Parliament and the Necessities of State, I have to
remind him that such a Power is inadmissible, since it contradicts a more
transcendent Authority; and that no Exigency of Government can commute for so
flagrant a Violation of the first and fundamental Principles of the
Constitution and the sacred Laws of Justice. If, in attempting to reason on
these Principles, I am drawn back to the State of Nature, where, according to
the old Vulgarisms, Might was sure to overcome Right, and, where the weakest
always went to the Wall, I must drop my Pen, and go in Quest of a new Topic.

There is nothing, we are told, so likely to enforce the Act, as Violence.
Reparation will ever be demanded, when an Injury is received. In estimating the
Damages, there will always be an Article in the Account relative to that, which
is wished to be enforced; and, if we are obliged to pay the one, what will
prevent our being forced to discharge the other? Here the whole Secret
transpires. What is that Article, which is wished to be enforced, but the
detestable Duty on Tea? This we will agree was the primary, the principal
Object. The Author speaking here of Force, recalls my Attention to a former
Part of his Work, which I, by no Means, intended to neglect. There we are told
the "most stubborn (by which are plainly meant the unhappy Americans) must"
yield to superior "Force." This without Question is a most powerful and
irresistible Argument. A Man of superior Strength it would be imprudent in me
wantonly to provoke. But, if he treats me ill; if he irritates and oppresses
me; am I bound by any Laws, human or divine, to continue my good Offices
toward him, so as to increase his Power of doing me farther Mischief? Prudence
advises that I should lessen my Connexions with him; and, if he proceeds to
Acts of open Violence against me, Self Preservation, the very first Law of
Nature, demands that I should defend myself to the utmost of my Power.

The Author's Aphorism that Friendship sometimes gathers new Force and Vigor,
after an Interruption of its Intercourse, may be true enough; though I think he
had better have set it to the Tune of Amantium Irae Amoris, etc. than attempted
to prove it, by his subsequent Prophecy; which seems rather intended to keep up
the alarm in Great Britain, than to answer any other Purpose. Peeping into the
Womb of Time, he has discovered and foretold that America will, one Day, become
independent.

The principal, avowed Cause of the present rigorous Measures against America
seems to arise from a Jealousy excited by an Apprehension that we affect and
aim at Independency; and we cannot gain Credit, notwithstanding our explicit
and most solemn Assurances of the contrary. For myself, I do protest before God
and the World, that the utmost of my Wish is, that Things may return to their
old Channel, when we lived a free and happy People. This obtained, I would,
with Pleasure, say to each Country, ESTO PERPETUA. He had before given it as
his Opinion that the Americans might argue till Doomsday, but that he was
afraid they would find the Parliament deaf to their Reasoning and their
Eloquence unavailing; what can he now mean by Abatement of Rigor on their
Part, and Relaxation on ours; unless it is, that America should offer a Carte
blanch, in Hopes of prevailing with Parliament to desist from Punishment?

The great Pains he has taken to discourage Strangers from migrating to America
affords another strong Proof of his Regard for this Country. For my Part, I am
so thoroughly persuaded of the JUSTICE OF OUR CAUSE, that I have no Doubt of
establishing our Liberties upon so sure a Foundation, that Strangers will
applaud our generous Struggles to preserve those precious Enjoyments and become
the more anxious to settle in America, as in a Land of Freedom.

The Association entered into, upon the Dissolution of our Assembly, I find
has afforded the Author a Subject for Mirth and Pleasantry. Whether this is a
Season for such delicious Entertainments, others will judge. Upon me they are
entirely lost. I had before heard this Association found Fault with, as not
being extensive enough; so that I could little expect to see it ranked by any
one amongst violent Measures; much less, that so respectable a Number of
Gentlemen would be ridiculed for that Moderation, which, to all impartial
Persons, must afford the clearest Proof of their Inclination to live on the
most friendly Terms with their Fellow Subjects in Great Britain. However, when
these Resolutions were entered into, it was uncertain what Measures the other
Colonies would adopt; we did not know how far the Ministry had been
instrumental in bringing such extensive Mischiefs on our Sister Colony; nor
could we foresee what farther Steps the Parliament would take. The East India
Company was considered as extremely culpable, and therefore it was resolved
that they should reap as little Advantage from us, as possible. All their
Commodities were protested against, except Saltpetre and Spices. These
Exceptions were not made, from an Opinion that we could not possibly do without
those Articles. Saltpetre and Spices were considered not only as useful for
various Purposes of Life, but many of them, as necessary in Medicine, Cordials
and other Nourishments required by sick Persons. None of the Associates, I
believe, had Respect to their Palates; and, had these been their Object, I am
apt to think it would have been a Foible common to them with some others, and
should have supposed that the Author, at least, would have looked on it as a
venial Error and treated it with greater Indulgence. A Resolution to abolish
Tea, even that on Hand, totally, was prudent and necessary; as the Stocks of
some People, to whose Happiness it seems so very essential, would probably
never have been exhausted. Great as my Fondness for this delightful Herb once
was, I am now taught to consider it as the very accursed Thing, that ought to
be banished, with Disdain and Horror, from every American Society.

The future Associations, as proposed by many of the Colonies, as well as most,
I believe, of our Inhabitants, become the next Objects of the Author's
Animadversion. With Respect to stopping our Exports, there seems to be a
Variety of Opinions, as to the Propriety and Justice of this Measure; though
few, whom I have conversed with, doubt the Expedience and Necessity of the
other. These Matters, however, will soon be determined at a general Meeting of
Deputies from the different Counties; when I make no Question, every Subject
will be discussed with that Calmness and Deliberation, which its Importance may
demand. Those Gentlemen, who incline to adopt both Schemes, I dare say, are
actuated by the purest Motives to the public Good. The Parliament they consider
as having set the Example in stoping both Imports and Exports to and from the
Town of Boston. If the Parliament considers the Advantages of Trade to that
Town in so very interesting a Light, as to suppose that, rather than forego
such great Emoluments, the Inhabitants will submit to any Acts of Oppression;
the Advocates for promoting both these Measures, knowing the almost unspeakable
Benefits, which Great Britain derives from her Trade with the Colonies, give
it, as their Opinion, that she will be equally attentive to her own Interest
and the sooner prevailed with to shorten her outstretched Arm, and do the
Americans Justice. Stopping of Exports from one Country indebted to another,
where she has usually traded, may lay individual Creditors under temporary
Inconveniences and Hardships, and can be justified only in Cases of the
extremest Necessity. If, however, the Safety of a Community depends upon its
being done, the Salus Populi then becomes suprema Lex. Those, who think their
Liberties, their Properties, their every Thing, dear and valuable, at Stake,
and in the most imminent Danger of being wrested from them, can have but little
Spirit or Inclination to labor and toil for their Creditors, especially, if
they withold their Assistance in endeavoring to relieve them from
Oppression. They ought however, in Justice, to pay their Debts with Interest,
so soon as it may be in their Power; and they should be ready and willing to
give up so much of their Property, if required, as will discharge them
immediately. It is, after all that can be said, a very delicate Point. The
Honor of the Country, which ought ever to be held sacred, may possibly be
impeached and reflected upon by such, as are Strangers to the governing
Motives; but, as a Man is satisfied or not of the Purity and Uprightness of his
own Intentions, his Conscience will either acquit or condemn him. What I should
think might, in a great Measure, satisfy the most rigid Casuist, that nothing
base can lie at the Bottom of such a Scheme, if it is adopted, is, that the
engaging in and adhering to it must require the greatest Sacrifice of private
Interests and the most vigorous Exertions of public Virtue.

The Non-importation Plan, no One can with Reason object to; not even the
warmest and most virulent Advocate for ministerial Measures. As a free Man, I
surely have a Right to buy or import, and refrain from both, if I please; in
the Exercise of this Privilege I shall transgress, notwithstanding the
Declarations of a late unprecedented Proclamation, no Law divine or human. If
such a Proclamation, denouncing the heaviest Pains and Penalties, can be
justified; I should not be surprised to see a peremptory Mandate sent over to
America, commanding every Man to plant so many Thousand Tobacco Hills, etc.
etc. for the Enhancement of the Revenue, the Encouragement and Advancement of
the Shipping and Trade of Great Britain.

Stoping of Imports only I am hopeful might have all the good Effects, we wish
for; but, should I be disappointed in this, and our Exports be still continued,
as usual; I shall have to lament most severely that both Measures were not
adopted. The Schemes united most certainly would, and it is probable that
either of them will affect the Inhabitants of Great Britain of every Class, in
a most sensible Manner. Those, who think the Tradesmen and Mechanics only will
suffer, seem to have taken but a partial View of the Case. There is so intimate
and nice a Connection between the different Branches of Trade and Business of
every Kind in that Country, that few of them can be affected without the Whole
bearing some Proportion of whatever Loss may be sustained. The Landholder, and
the Merchant will feel the Inconvenience, as well as the Tradesman and
Mechanic. When the Interest of all these comes to be worked upon, they will be
convinced that the oppressive Schemes of the Ministry could not be enforced
without the Concurrence of their Representatives in Parliament; they will, it
is hoped, be excited, not to Acts of Violence, but to a proper and seasonable
Exertion of that constitutional Influence and Authority, which they have a
Right to exercise. Should their Endeavors to relieve America from her
Distresses be withheld, whatever Inconveniences they may be put to, the
Colonies must surely be acquitted by every impartial Judge. Much less Reason
can they have to complain, if stoping Exports to Great Britain is postponed to
a distant, future Day; this will give sufficient Notice of what they may
expect; a great Part of the American Debts will certainly be discharged, and
the Resources the Colonies will have left, if they are permitted to draw from
them, will, in all Probability, enable them to pay off the full Balance in a
reasonable Time. Let America but stop her importing Hand; apply a proper Share
of her Industry to Manufactures, and the rest of her Labor to cultivating and
raising such Articles, as she is allowed to export to other Markets, and I have
the most sanguine Expectations that she will, not only very speedily extricate
herself from Debt, but find the Balance considerably in her Favor. Should she,
by the Hand of Power, be laid under farther Restrictions in her Trade, and by
this Means any Part of her Debt remain unsatisfied, the Fault will not be
here is. So that every Suggestion of a Design in the Colonists to extinguish the
smallest Portion of their Debts must appear groundless and unjust. I know it
has been insinuated, with a View to fix an Odium on the Colonies, that they
have failed in former Engagements to satisfy their Creditors; but this,
considered as an Accusation on the whole Continent, as it must have been
intended, I am convinced is without Foundation. That some Individuals may have
remained in Debt for a Number of Years and that Insolvencies may have happened
in America, as well as Great Britain, I will not deny; but chief of the old
Balances, I make no Doubt, have been long since paid off, and that the Debts,
now due, have been mostly contracted since in a Course of Trade equally, if not
more, advantageous to the British Merchants and Traders, than to the Colonists.
For the Truth, at least Probability of this, I appeal to the various
Solicitations and Allurements held out, particularly to my Countrymen, to
engage and continue in this Trade. The Balance against America proves clearly
on which Side the Advantage has been.

Unless the Author is prepared for a Disappointment, I would not have him
depend too much on his present Opinion of the proposed Association compared
with that entered into some Years ago. I have already hinted some of the
Reasons why this was neglected; but I am convinced he will find a quite
different Spirit prevailing throughout America at this Time. Those Diversities
of Opinions and Differences of Interest, which formerly subsisted, will now, I
am persuaded, be sacrificed to the Good of the Whole. Whether the Duty on Tea
was, at first, considered as an internal Tax or not, is now quite immaterial.
The Designs of the Ministry were not then seen through by many; but I think I
have shown clearly that this Duty had originally every odious Feature of such a
Tax. Can a Doubt now remain, when we find an Armament sent either to enforce
the Payment of it or to punish most severely those, who refuse to do it? Such a
Refusal, as this, the Author would construe into a Resistance of the Authority
of Parliament to lay Duties on their own Commodities, which we do not wish to
question, when it is really done as a commercial Regulation. I grant, it makes
no Difference to me, as to the Quantum of the Tax, whether it is paid in Great
Britain or the Colonies; whether my Merchant pays it for me, or whether I do it
myself; but Circumstances will make that oppressive in one Case, which would be
almost indifferent in another. I have neither paid this Tax myself nor allowed
my Merchant to do it for me, since the Use of Tea was resolved against in
America; and, which is still more, I never will pay it.

The Mention of a Precedent, our Author, in the Abundance of his Politeness,
tells us is ridiculous; and we are referred to the List of his favorite Duties
to see whether there has been any Want of Examples. That America has
acquiesced in and paid former (...) and some of these merely internal, I do not
deny; but she did not discover their dangerous Tendency till, within these few
Years, her Eyes were clearly opened by farther Encroachments. Why must the
Mention of Precedents be ridiculous, when we find they were strenuously relied
on by the Minister, and all his Advocates, to justify the Stamp Act, and are
still quoted as Authorities to rivet Chains about our Necks? Is it not high
Time for America to look about her and not suffer ancient Precedents to acquire
additional Weight from others more recent? We are again reminded of the Power
of Parliament to enforce such Duties, as they may think expedient; and are told
that America will refuse the Payment of them, whenever she is able. Is it not
strange that a Gentleman, who professes himself so great a Friend to lenient
Measures, should, at every Turn, take so much Pains to remind Parliament of its
superior Power, and flatter America that she will, one Day, be able, and
certainly will resist it? Is not this the most direct and surest Method of
sowing the Seeds of perpetual Discord? We are advised truly for the present, to
affect a Submission; but still are to harbor in our Breasts the Poison of
Discontent and Animosity, which must fester and rankle to such a Degree, that
they will, at a future Day, most assuredly burst forth with redoubled Violence
and Fury. Whether such Sentiments, as these, are likely to prove inimical or
friendly to either Country, let them both judge. The Author widely mistakes
what the true and real Friends of America hope to have done. They do not desire
to leave every Thing to Posterity, but rather wish to have Matters now settled
upon such Principles, as will lay a strong and broad Foundation of Concord and
reciprocal Friendship, never more to be interrupted.

As to (...) up the Courts of Justice; it is a Measure, I own, that cannot be
justified, but in Cases of the last Necessity. If, however, the Magistrates,
who act on Oath, think they cannot proceed in Business without a Fee Bill, what
would the Author have them do more, than exercise that Part of their Office,
which is necessary to preserve the Peace and good Order of Society? This I
understand is universally resolved on throughout the Country. That the Fee Bill
has expired is a Circumstance we lament and ought not to be blamed for. Before
he censured the Magistates so very severely for declining to sit, he would have
done well to consider how far he himself coincided. If I am not mistaken, this
Gentleman holds a Seat in one or more Courts of Justice; he should let us know
what Part he took to prevent the Occlusion of those Courts, and then, perhaps,
his Arguments would have more Weight.

The Association he would recommend is that we should all unite in Virtue;
public Virtue, he is careful to tell us he means, lest, I suppose, we should
put too great a Value on the other. Public Virtue is what we earnestly wish to
rouse and excite in every American Breast; since, without it, we may probably
suffer in the very best of Causes. But why is private Virtue so low in his
Esteem? Without this, the other, in my Judgment, is like the baseless Fabric
of a Vision. If a Man is not just to himself, I can hardly suppose he will be
so to others, upon any trying Emergency. What is called public Virtue, unless
built on private Virtue, will become too precarious and unstable to be relied
on. A Man, with a small Stock of private Virtues, may, indeed, as his Interest
governs, do a Thing, from which the Public may reap Advantage; shift but the
Scene; let his Interest draw in a different Direction, and we shall find him,
Proteus like, put on a new Livery. It may be relied on as a certain Truth,
exemplified by the most extensive Experience, that no Man can be safely
trusted, who does not act upon solid, virtuous Principles. We are advised to
apply ourselves quietly to the Cultivation of our Soil; but how can this be
done without the Permission of a superior Power? How can it with Reason, be
expected that we should labor, unless we are kindly allowed to reap and enjoy
the Fruits of our Toil?

Our public Happiness, we are told, depends on the People; granted that it does
in a great Measure. Had the Author added to his List of Qualifications
necessary to make a proper Representative, that he ought to be a Man of private
as well as public Virtue; One who really loves his Country, and would support
her true Interest, even though he should be forced to sacrifice every sinister,
selfish Consideration, it would have made the Catalogue nearly complete; but I
should like it still better, if a proper Respect and Reverence for Religion
were required as an essential Part of the Character.

I am now led to take a View of the Author's very curious and decent Strictures
on the Fast, which was recommended by the late House of Burgesses to the
Members. Upon this Subject, he seems to have opened every Vein of paltry
Ridicule; but surely he has either strangely mistaken, or profanely applied
his Talent. He might have learned from one of those great Masters, under whose
Auspices he probably was nurtured, that Ridicule is the Test of Truth, and
thought this a fit Opportunity to display it with Advantage. A Stranger, from
his Representation, would suppose that we had acted a ridiculous Farce, instead
of what was so solemnly recommended. Though the Author had lost Sight of all
Decorum, he should, at least, have confined himself to the Rules of Justice. I
beg to know of him in whose Houses those sumptuous Suppers, he alludes to, were
served up at Night. I am sure I neither saw nor heard any Thing of the Sort.
Those, who had fasted through the Day, it was supposed would refresh themselves
in the Evening. Nature required and Decency did not forbid it. It could hardly
have been expected, even by the most indigent, (who it seems have suddenly
become Objects of his great Care) that the Calls and Cravings of Nature should
have remained unanswered. Savings, indeed, in Instances of Superfluity and
pompous Parade, may properly be expected, as well toward their Relief, as the
Satisfaction of all other just Demands. He has exceedingly mistaken the Matter,
in supposing that the Authors of the Measure either wished for his
Commendations or to be tickled by his Flatteries.

Fasting, we are told, when observed and repeated in a proper Manner, may be
salutary to the natural Body; (thus much no Doubt he collected from
Experience;) but how the political body can be benefited by changing the Hour
of dining and making the Repast in the Evening, instead of the Afternoon (which
was all that was required on the late Occasion, except the Circumstances of
attending the public Worship, in which, instead of a Form composed for the
Purpose, the ordinary Service of the Day was read) is what he cannot account
for. Not to be tedious in useless Quotations, I must refer the Reader to some
other of his very pretty Observations that follow. As he seems little
acquainted with the Reasons for setting apart particular Days for solemn
Fasting and Prayer on any Occasion, and the Motives, which governed on a late
one, I will take the Liberty to express my Sense of both.

There are many, it is to be hoped, ( would GOD there were more) who do not
consider this as a poor, Orphan World, discharged, so soon as it was called
into Being, from the Care, Superintendence, and Protection of its all-wise, and
bountiful CREATOR. Things, in general, they know are left to pursue their
ordinary Course, in Conformity to the Laws of their Nature; but still, they
consider the whole World as under the Direction of PROVIDENCE. They have been
taught that not even a Sparrow falls to the Ground, without the Permission of
their heavenly FATHER. They are enjoined not only to pray, but to be instant in
Prayer, for his Mercies and Protection. Upon these Principles is founded and
established, by Authority, the Service of our excellent Church, which I would
recommend to the Author's more serious Consideration. Not only Individuals,
but, in a more especial Manner, Nations and Countries, as having their
Existence solely in this Life, have been considered by all Ages, and
particularly by all good Christians, as under the Guidance of Heaven. In Cases
of general Calamity, either already felt or apprehended, what can be more
decent and proper than to look up to that Providence, who we are instructed to
believe rules the Hearts of Kings and Governors, according to his good
Pleasure, and to implore the Assistance and Blessings of his fatherly Goodness;
at the same Time making Use of all those just and proper Means, which he either
has been, or may be pleased to afford us for our Protection. Previous,
however, to this, we should be extremely careful to examine our Hearts; to
endeavor at a Reformation of whatever may be found amiss; to repent heartily
of all our Sins and to prepare our Minds for the Reception of the Influences of
his GOOD SPIRIT. Can any Means be better adapted to this End, than withdrawing
our Attention, for a Season, from the Business and Cares of the World, and
mortifying all our corrupt Affections by FASTING and PRAYER? To suppose that
any good Effect could have been expected from the mere postponing a Dinner, to
use the Author's polite Phrase, would have been ridiculous. I have too much
Reason to believe that the Design of this Fast was either misunderstood or
misrepresented from the first, having been informed that it was spoke of by
some as a Scheme calculated to inflame and excite an enthusiastic Zeal in the
Minds of the People, under a Cloak of Religion; than which nothing could be
more calumnious and unjust. The Author must know that the Resolution was not
smuggled, but proposed in a very full House, not above one Dissentient
appearing amongst near an Hundred Members. He, himself, I believe was present,
and should be glad to know whether he opened his Mouth against the Measure?
Surely he could not want that Resolution, he so earnestly recommends, to have
avowed his Disapprobation. The mixing of Religion with civil Matters, merely to
inflame People's Minds, I know has been practiced on some Occasions, but I have
ever considered it not only as culpable, but extremely wicked. It gave me Pain
to find that the Resolution of the House was considered as reflecting upon our
gracious Sovereign. Nothing, I hope and believe, was farther from the Intention
of those, who voted for the Fast, than this. I speak positively for myself.

The Minds of many People, especially of their Representatives, were a good
Deal agitated, at a former Session upon receiving an Account of the Act of
Parliament respecting Rhode Island, and for the Reasons before given. When the
Boston Port Act appeared at the last Session, the general Uneasiness, that
prevailed must be remembered. Many Expedients were thought of and the Measure
proposed was the Result of much Deliberation. Its primary Object I have
endeavored to explain; but there were others of a secondary Nature. So far
from designing to inflame, I believe it was expected that the Generality of
People would be brought to a serious and proper Sense of their Danger; the
Conduct they ought to hold; and, at the same Time, that it would be a Means of
restraining them from Acts of Violence and Intemperance. It was, with much
Pleasure, I observed that these Effects were produced. Another good Influence
it might have been expected to have, was, that certain GREAT MEN of this Earth
might be brought to a proper Sense of that Justice, which is due to all their
Fellow Subjects, by reminding them that there is a superior Power, even a GOD
IN HEAVEN, to whom they will be one Day accountable for all their Actions. As
to the ordinary Service of the Church being only performed on the Occasion; the
late House of Burgesses must think themselves peculiarly unfortunate in
fallling under the Author's Censure for this. They did not presume to desire
that any Additions should be made to that sacred Office, which they knew was
properly adapted to every Purpose. They did not wish that any Thing
particularly pointed or inflammatory should fall from the Pulpit. A general
Display of the Superintendence of Providence, and the Influence, which a
thorough Conviction and Remembrance of this, ought to have, together with an
implicit Reliance on his Goodness, were the Doctrines, which they desired to
have inculcated, leaving the Congregation to their own Reflections in making
proper Applications. The People of Boston will have no Reason to suppose that
it was our Design to fob them off, in their unhappy Situation, with Fasting and
Prayer. They will soon be informed, if they have not heard it already, how very
cordially we sympathise with them in their Distresses, and that we are exerting
every Means, in our Power, for their Relief. Should we, indeed, pursue his
Advice, it would be fobbing them off with a Witness. The Author, not having
professedly entered upon that long agitated Question, respecting the Authority
of Parliament to tax the Colonies, I am very willing to rest the Point upon
what has been already written by abler Pens, much to my Satisfaction, and to
my thorough Conviction that they have no such Authority.

At length he draws to a Conclusion and tells us that he has spoke pretty much
in Generals, but, if called upon, can descend to Particulars. It would have
been obliging to the Public, if he had favored them with any farther material
Observations; but what can he have left unsaid, that would answer his Purpose?
That he is determined to act with Caution, none, I believe, will doubt; but I
have lived to see some very cautious Persons fall through their deepest
Schemes. Could the Author suppose that those servile, dangerous Doctrines, he
has advanced, would remain unnoticed? With what Justice or Propriety could he
presume to censure what he is pleased to call the Severity of some Men's
Tempers, when he so roundly charges those, who differ from him in Sentiments,
with Want of "Integrity;" with the "Arts of Dissimulation" and almost every
Species of Baseness? Could he flatter himself that " Men of Sense" would not
easily see through his "Deception," and, as easily, distinguish it from "
Reality," notwithstanding the solemn Appeal he makes to that great Day, when
the Actions of all Men will be fully discovered, and their Integrity known?

It is more than probable that a Reply will be attempted to what I have
written. Should it contain any Species of Reasoning, worthy of Consideration,
perhaps it may engage my farther Attention; otherwise, I shall indulge a
silent, contemptuous Indifference; quite impregnable to every Assault of
affected Wit or Ridicule; those very despicable Things, for which I acknowledge
myself to have neither Taste nor Talents, especially in a Cause of so serious
and important a Nature.

I cheerfully accord with the Author's Wishes, that America may be restored to
the same Situation, in which it was, when our most gracious Sovereign ascended
the Imperial Throne of his Royal Ancestors. It is, farther, my most ardent
Prayer that all those unhapy Differences, which subsist between Great Britain
and America may speedily subside and be buried in eternal Oblivion; that a
perfect Reconciliation and inviolable Friendship may be established on the most
permanent Foundations, and, that both Countries may enjoy the inexhaustible
Sweets of constitutional Freedom and Liberty, till Time shall be no more.

FINIS.

