SOME FUGITIVE THOUGHTS ON A LETTER SIGNED FREEMAN, ADDRESSED TO THE DEPUTIES,
ASSEMBLED AT The High Court of CONGRESS in PHILADELPHIA.

By A BACK SETTLER.

SOUTH CAROLINA. Printed in the Year M DCC LXXIV.

TO THE IMPARTIAL PUBLIC.
FULLY convinced of the Necessity which exists, that a strict Union between the
Head and Members of the British Empire should take Place, no Person can harbor
a sincerer Veneration for every Branch of it, or would more cordially rejoice
in every Incident which had a Tendency to promote the Honor and Happiness of
the Whole. Problematical as this Language may appear, in such as are disposed
to offer modern public Opinions, I can with Truth aver, that it is in
Conformity to this Veneration, and that Conviction, I now attempt to expose the
Imbecility of a Pamphlet signed Freeman, which lately made its Appearance, and
point out a few of the many Absurdities with which it teems.

Men, who, to humor unprovoked Resentment on the one Hand, or to serve
unjustifiable Purposes on the other, would invert the Order of Things, as well
as the Grounds of established Policy, should be deemed Enemies to Society; but
when this Principle of Corruption is extended, and Persons of distinguished
Characters and upright Lives are singled out as Objects for Envy and
Disappointment to wreck their Effects on, we may, without hesitating, proceed a
Step further and venture to pronounce such, the Author of Calomnies, and
destitute of every Species of honorable Feeling.

I must freely confess my present Difficulty. In this little Pamphlet, I could
wish to give some exact Portrait of Freeman, but am at a Loss in the Choice of
Colors. Whether I should consider him as patriotick or ministerial, heterodox,
or orthodox, simplex vel unus, compositus vel idem, or both, or either, or
neither, I cannot with Candor determine? But as it is not in the least my
Intention to censure a Man who, in a personal Capacity, cannot much obstruct
the public Good, I will only confine myself to such Arguments as tend to
illustrate the relative Connection which subsists between Great Britain and her
Colonies.

I am well aware of the many Disadvantages which accompany an Attempt of this
Nature. The best of Men are at Times liable to receive wrong Impressions, under
the Influence of which many are apt to consider Objects only in that Point of
View which favors the natural Bias of the Mind. An Habit of thinking thus
acquired is not readily erased; indeed with Time it collects a Strength in the
Fancy frequently too solid for the forcible Appearance of Reason or Argument to
subdue. It is not to be then wondered that many Persons should be dazzled by
those false Lights which are often displayed for sinister Purposes, though in
other Respects possessed of a good Share of Understanding, as well as
Integrity, Qualities which, in general, characterize Americans.

As I solemnly declare that I do not wear the Features of any Party, the
impartial Public may safely rely on the Candor of such Reasons as will be
used in investigating the Nature of that Right of Dominion which Great Britain
claims over the Colonies of North America. It is the immediate Inheritance of
every Man born free, to give his Opinion on public Affairs with Truth; as an
Individual I claim that Right. My Opinion, however, shall be free, it must; for
certainly it will be the Language of my Heart, unstudied, uncorrected.

The Sovereignty of a British Parliament over all the Dominions belonging to
Great Britain is so essential a Part of the Constitution, that the Right cannot
be renounced without a Confusion of Ideas, or a treasonable Surrender.
Notwithstanding that internal Evidence which arises in the Mind of a thinking
Man to support the Truth of this Maxim, from a Survey of those Principles on
which parliamentary Power is grounded, a Pamphlet, signed Freeman, was
published a few Days since, replete with the most gross Strictures on the
Conduct of his Majesty, his Ministers, his Parliament, with many others of his
Majesty's Servants; -- a Pamphlet, which, if accompanied with
Grammar-Coherence, some Appearance of Decency, or show of Reasoning, would
evidently tend in its Consequences to subvert the Constitution, overturn a
settled System of sub-ordination, and blot out that Ear-mark by which legal
Dominion is distinguished.

The Arguments advanced by Freeman to sustain Positions in direct Contradiction
to the inherent Rights of a State, are as incongruous as the Positions
themselves are absurd. Since the first Establishment of Mankind into separate
Societies, there was a supreme Power centered in some Part of the State or
Society, for the Purpose of forming necessary Regulations for the Good of the
Whole. It was justly presumed, that such Regulations, though essential for the
Preservation of the Society, would not prove equally agreeable to each
Individual, who might be left at Liberty to judge them a heavy Restraint on the
Laws of Nature, there was a coercive Power, ex necessitate, established, which
enjoined an implicit Obedience to such Laws as the Wisdom of the legislative
Body judged proper to enact. The unequal Dictates of natural Law being thus
wisely restrained, for the general Benefit of the Community, and reduced to a
subordinate Limitation, no Arguments, on the supposed Impropriety of such
Measures as were adopted by the acknowledged legislative Power could be
admitted, being in their Nature opposed to those Principles on which the
constitutional Power of the State or Society was founded.

On this Ground I will meet Freeman's Opinion, and demonstrate its Incoherency:
That Gentleman may, if he pleases, use the Dialect of metaphysical Jargon, I
will confine myself to those plain Reasons which arise from a Contemplation of
that constitutional Authority which is established in Great Britain. His
Opinion might possibly carry some Weight in Foro Coeli, but I strenuously deny
that a Retrospect to the first Principles of our Constitution will render his
Plea in Behalf of American Independence admissible at the Bar of an earthly
Tribunal, guided by Wisdom or sound Policy. The Colonies were peopled and
planted by British Subjects; at their Departure for America, they brought with
them their Allegiance, an indelible Mark of their Subjection to a British
Parliament; a Token of Obedience derived from their Ancestors, who were coeval
with the Origin of the State, which no Change of Climate, no after-Act of
theirs, could erase from their Persons. Thus circumstanced, the first Emigrants
reached the western Continent, which had been previously declared to be
subjected to the English State by the Discoverers thereof, agreeable to their
Principles of Duty and Allegiance. The Proprietorship of those new Territories
was granted by the executive Magistrate to the Plymouth Company, with Intent of
promoting their Colonization; an Ability of forming such municipal Regulations
for their Government, as were consistent with the relative Tie of Subjection
they were under to the State, was also confirmed to the Company. They regularly
exercised their Right of Power until their Privilege ceased* Whatever local
Regulations were made, were instituted in England. In like Manner the other
Provinces of America were granted to different Persons, with Power of supreme
Jurisdiction, though subservient to the Control of Parliament: And no later
than 1732, half a Dozen English Gentlemen regularly assembled at a Tavern in
London, and there framed Laws for the Province of Georgia, for the Purpose of
collecting a Revenue, etc. without the smallest Altercation held by the
Inhabitants of that Province, concerning the Right of their Proprietors so to
do. It must have required a wonderful Accession of Knowledge since the above
Period, to discover; that a British Parliament, assembled in Westminster Hall,
cannot legally assume a Power which, when vested in Five or Six British
Gentlemen, enjoying themselves over a Bottle at the Crown-and-Anchor, they held
sacred, and with a placid Composure submitted to.

America is not a Part of the King's hereditary Estates; it constitutes a Share
of the British Empire. The Dominion of the King in America arises from
Parliament, which has appointed him supreme Governor over all the Dominions of
the State; and here I cannot sufficiently admire the Sophistry of Persons who
affect Obedience to a Magistrate, and renounce at the same Time Subjection to
that paramount Authority from which the Magistrate derives his Power. It is a
unlucky Circumstance, that Partisans for that Doctrine of Independence lately
broached by Freeman, under a new political Phiz, cannot avoid the sad
Alternative of either maintaining, that they are not Subjects to the King of
England, or, if that be granted, of confessing their Dependence on a British
Parliament, to the constituted chief Magistrate of which they humbly condescend
to submit.

Parliament, foreseeing that the Crown might claim an exclusive Dominion over
the Colonies, took an early Opportunity of asserting its Right. This Precaution
in Parliament was very necessary. We find, that on a Complaint exhibited by the
New England, Settlers to King James the First, against those who, under the
Countenance of Parliament, carried on a Fishery on the Coasts, that many
Outrages had been committed by Persons employed in that Business, on their
Persons and Property, by cutting down Wood in their Enclosures, etc. James was
glad of this Pretext, thinking it would furnish him with a proper Excuse for
usurping a sole and exclusive Right of Power. He therefore issued a
Proclamation, not only for the Purpose of redressing Grievances complained of
by the infant Settlers, but plainly importing the Idea of absolute Dominion,
which in his regal Capacity he claimed. The British Senate now judged it high
Time to interpose, and curb this gigantick Stride of Prerogative. The Affair
being introduced into Parliament, James sent his Secretary with a Message
desiring they may desist, as having no Authority over the Colonies Commons
Journal, 1622.
; but Parliament sensible of its Right, was not to be intimidated so far as to
neglect a Matter of such Importance to the State, it resumed the Debates on
that Subject, and expedited a Bill clearly thwarting the Assertions contained
in the Royal Proclamation. Though this Bill miscarried in the Upper House,
through the Machinations of the Duke of Buckingham, the Unanimity with which it
passed the House of Commons, (there being only two dissenting Voices The King's
Secretary, and Mr. G --.
) will remain a lasting Monument how conscious the Nation was of possessing a
paramount Right over all the new Settlements and Territories acquired conquered
or colonized, by its Subjects.

Parliament could not condescend to surrender into the Hands of the Crown a
Right of so weighty a Concern. We accordingly find this Business taken up the
Year following, in the House of Commons, and pursued with such Ardency Sir
Edward Sackville's Speech, Com. Jour. 18th Feb. 1623.
, that the King's Secretary gave up the Point. The supreme Jurisdiction of
Parliament over the Colonies being thus established and acknowledged, by a
Prince flushed with Ideas of divine Right, it cannot be doubted, that if its
Competency was disputed, of exercising plenary Dominion over other Colonies, as
well as New-Plymouth, it would have stepped forth with the same Zeal, and
incontrovertibly have determined its Right. Thus we see, that notwithstanding
the Opinions Individuals now adays adopt, the Language of Parliament continues
the same, with only this Difference, that the Struggle in the Reign of James
the First was with the Crown, which attempted to oust it of its supreme
Jurisdiction, and that in the Reign of George the Third was with the Colonies,
which contended for a Latitude of Independence inconsistent with every Idea of
Subordination.

There is not the least Similitude between the two Periods of Charles the First
and George the Third; nor would any Person draw the Portrait who had the
smallest Particle of Respect for his Sovereign. Unhappy Charles became Heir to
his Father's Follies as well as his Crown; taught from his Infancy to consider
Parliaments as formal Expletives in the State, he judged them unnecessary when
once they had ceased to echo the Will of the Sovereign, and determined to rule
without them. In consequence of this fatal Resolution, arbitrary Exertions of
the Prerogative grew into Use. Those were the Ills from which the Troubles of
that Reign sprung. The House of Commons could no longer endure the continual
Attacks which were made on its Privileges: It therefore, (not the People, as
Freeman observes) arose in its Might, and established its undoubted Right. This
was not a Contest between the Prince and a particular Body of his Subjects; it
was strictly a Case in which the Sovereign was Plaintiff and Parliament
Defendant: The Claim of the Crown was absolute and sole Dominion: Parliament
demurred; and since no other Court of Judicature could determine this important
Cause, the Appeal, from Necessity, lay to the God of Hosts. What a soul and
ungenerous Misrepresentation! to combine the Events of two Princes Reigns, and
assimilate them, where there is not the most distant Parity to justify the
Observation; the one having usurped the Authority of Parliament, and
substituted his will for Law; the other so tender of the Rights of this People,
as not to proceed in the smallest Affairs without collecting the Sense of his
Senate.

I will now consider the Weight of those Reasons which Freeman urges, to exempt
America from Taxation by a British Parliament.

1. That the Americans being descended from the same Ancestors with the People
of England, and owing Fealty to the same Crown, are therefore equally with them
entitled to the common Law of England, formed by their common Ancestors; and to
all and singular the Benefits, Rights, Liberties and Claims, specified in Magna
Charta, in the Petition of Rights, in the Bill of Rights, and in the Act of
Settlement. They being no more than principally declaratory of the Grounds of
the fundamental Laws of England.

Therefore, that the British Parliament ought not to have, and cannot of Right
possess any Power to tax, or in any Shape to bind American Freeholders of the
British Crown, seeing it is against the Franchises of the Land, because their
Consent is not signified in Parliament, by a Representation of their own
Election. The other principal Objection is, I think, the adjudged Case in Point
of Durham.

Having already admitted the Americans (though not descended from the same
Ancestors with the People of England, being a Compound of English, Scots,
Irish, French, Dutch, etc. New York in particular, was a Dutch Settlement until
the Reign of Charles the Second, and was subject to the States of Holland,
which gave Law and collected a Revenue therein) to be entitled to such Rights
as Englishmen legally should enjoy, I cannot see a single Inference that arises
from the Concession, to justify Americans in withdrawing an Obedience to such
Laws as the Wisdom of the English State judges convenient to enact. It is the
heavy Misfortune of Freeman, to quote Cases which, if properly considered,
overthrow the Principles he would wish to establish. I must confess his Case is
desperate; having impatiently solicited the Touch of Corruption for long Series
of Years, and meeting with only contemptuous Repulses, a lamentable
Circumstance, which, when coupled with a total and merited Disregard of his
Countrymen, and an entire Shipwreck of private Fortune, in the Reduction of
which, alas! the Nicks of Seven and Eleven bore no inconsiderable Share. I say,
to remedy those Calamities. Prudence must necessarily dictate some Measures
proper to be pursued; and in this Pursuit, what Choice could be so happily
adopted as that which bore the Aspect of Popularity, and offered an Occassion
of revenging himself on an unfeeling Ministry, unfeeling, alas! to the earnest
and repeated Solicitations of Freeman. I hope this will prove a sufficient
Answer to such as may be led to inquire with Hudibras, Why he chose that cursed
Sin,
Hypocrisy to set up in,
Because it is the general Calling,
The only Saint's Bell that rings all in.


The first Reason assigned by the Author of the Letter to the general Congress,
is so unguardedly couched that it may be retorted, I fear, with too much
Success. Exempli gratia; the Americans are formed of different People, Dutch,
French, Swedes, Germans, Scots, Irish and English.

Each Individual brought with him those unalienable Rights which were his
Inheritance in the Country from whence he emigrated.

Therefore each of those Persons is entitled to all and singular the Rights,
Privileges and Benefits, which they legally could enjoy in their several
Countries from which they extracted their Origin.

To prevent, however, the Absurdity and Confusion which take birth from the
Jumble of Matter contained in the first Position of Freeman's Letter, I have
taken Care to secure, by legal Demonstration, to the Americans the Rights of
Englishmen, in a former Part of this short Treatise.

Magna Charta comes next in Order, which is "such a Fellow that he will have no
Sovereign." If he is "such a Fellow," he must be formidable indeed; but that he
is "no such Fellow," will, I think, incontestibly appear.

The first and principal Care of the Barons who obtained that memorable
Charter, was to secure the Roman Catholic Religion: Their second Precaution
was to lop off the luxuriant Branches of Norman Hardships. That which was
granted to the Barons at Runnemede, and which Freeman has so highly extolled,
I account of little Weight, and this for two Reasons; the first, as not
sufficient for redressing the Oppressions which the People then groaned under;
the second, because the Acquisition of the Charter did not carry a legal
Complexion, being obtained from a Prince in Duress. But that Charter of
Immunities, which was confirmed by King Henry the Third to his Barons, with
Amendments in Favor of the Subject, which is properly styled Magna Charta, may
deserve the Eulogium of Freeman. I will now clearly demonstrate, that Magna
Charta has been, and still is, subject to the Control of Parliament; first,
in the Article of Religion, which is totally changed from that Form which the
Barons contended for in Blood, and indeed established. Here mark. This
Alteration in Religion was adopted by Parliament, which did not presume Magna
Charta to be a "Fellow superior" to its enacting Power.

The second Instance of doing away the Substance of the great Charter is
evident from every day's Practice. Whereas the twenty-ninth Chapter of Magna
Charta expresses, that no free Man shall be disseized of his Lands or
Tenements, or banished, or imprisoned, unless by the Judgment of his Peers; we
notwithstanding see a Writ issues in the first Instance from the Courts, which
requires special Bail, or in Default thereof an Imprisonment of the person
ensues before the Cause comes to a Trial, or a Judgment of his Peers can be
obtained. Least this Custom should be deemed an Abuse, and uncountenanced by
Parliament, we have only to refer to to those various Acts of Insolvency made
for the Relief of the Unhappy. Although those humane Laws free many Objects
from the Claws of merciless Creditors, is it not clearly apparent, that by a
(...) Wind they support, a Custom expressed in Cap. 29th of Magna Charta to be
oppressive and unwarrantable? Indeed the Wisdom of that Body which enacted a
Law in the Reign of Edward the Third, that Magna Charta should be deemed and
considered as the common Law of England was not very conspicuous; for if it was
the common Law of the Realm, or lex non scripta, and stood unrepealed by any
Statute, it imported such absolute Authority and Verity in itself, as not to
require the Aid of Parliament to sustain it. But when an Act had been passed
for that Purpose, so far from confirming the Substance of the Charter for
common Law, that every immemorial Custom or municipal Usage contained therein
must immediately lose its Habit of Action, and assume the Name of lex scripta,
through the legal Operation of that Statute. Even this Law, though not penned with
a superabundant Share of Wisdom, is an incontestible Proof that Parliament only
considered the great Charter as the best Confirmation of the Subjects Rights
that could then be obtained, and by no Means fastened on it an Idea of an
exclusive paramount Control over subsequent Parliaments, which in Truth have
repealed, explained or rescinded, almost every Article in this celebrated
Charter, notwithstanding the blind Assertion, "that he is such a Fellow, that
he will have no Sovereign." I will now proceed and speak on the Petition of
Rights, which is the next in Order of Succession.

The Nature of this Petition is so unconnected with the Purpose it was intended
to second, that the Author of the Letter to the Delegates must certainly have
imagined no Person properly informed of our History would have ever perused it.
Supplemental Acts of State to supply the Defect of Laws, Tonnage and Poundage,
and a Collection of other Duties upon Merchandises of all Kinds, all which had
been positively refused to be granted by Act of Parliament, with many other
Impositions on Trade, formed the Basis on which the Superstructure of this
Petition was raised. This also was a Contest between the King and his
Parliament, and not in any Degree analagous to the Case of the Americans. I
could say more on this Head: but behold the Bill of Rights, which claims some
little Attention.

What new and curious Alliances are hourly forming! Freeman is become a
Supporter of the Bill of Rights. How? From Habit of Body or Conviction of Mind?
From neither! Having exhausted his Stock of ministerial Expectation, and soured
by Disappointment, he has publicly avowed his Apostasy, and prophesied the
Approach of the final Ruin of American Freedom, with nearly as much Zeal as
George Fox did the Destruction of the English Monarchy in 1660. However, it is
Time to use a serious Dialect. The Bill of Rights has not the smallest
Tendency to support the Opinion of Freeman. This Bulwark of Freedom was erected
for another Purpose: It was a positive Declaration made by Parliament, of those
Conditions by which a Tenure of the British Crown could be held. The supreme
Authority of Parliament, not only over all the British Dominions, but also over
the Crown, was rendered manifest at this memorable Period; and the Subjection
of the Colonies to Parliament cannot be more strongly featured than in that
Resolve of the Assembly of Virginia, which unanimously agreed, That if the
Parliament had constituted the Prince of Orange King, we, who are subject to
Parliament, must acknowledge him likewise. The fifth Position now only remains
to be considered, which is the Act of Settlement; an Act equally fatal to the
Designs Freeman would wish to inculcate as any of the preceding.

Surely the Planet which presided over this Gentleman's Nativity must have been
of a very inauspicious Nature, and given early Omens of the left handed
Singularity of Fortune which was to accompany him in his political Walk of
Life. That a Man, procausis, may be an Enemy to others is not very uncommon;
but when a Person becomes the bitterest Enemy of the Cause he intended to
establish, it is a convincing Proof that he has attained the Summit of Folly.
The smallest Attention to those Principles on which the Act of Settlement was
founded, will render the Truth of this Assertion incontrovertibly clear.

The Heart of Man could not devise an Expedient, or produce a Case wherein the
unbounded Power of Parliament could appear in that Plenitude of legal Luster
with which it did in the Act of Settlement. The Ordinance formed for the Trial
of Charles the First, was neither constitutional or parliamentary: The Grant of
the Crown to King William, on the Abdication, wanted something of Form, and can
only be justified on Principles of Necessity; by such as would draw Conclusions
from abstracted Principles of Government; though, as Blackstone observes, the
safest Way for the Subject is to consider that Transaction on the Footing of
solid Authority: But in the Act of Settlement Parliament actually appeared in
the Zenith of its legal Omnipotence. By this Act we see Parliament modelling
the Crown, and limiting it to Persons not in a regular but a parliamentary
Order of Succession. And farther; the Issue of King William, by any other Queen
except Mary, excluded from the Inheritance of their Father's Crown, to make Way
for the Accession of the Princess Anne and her Issue to the Throne; on Failure
of which, the Crown was to revert to the Issue of King William, if in esse; or,
in Default thereof, the lineal Descendants of King James the First were to
inherit; under which last Clause King George First was called to the Empire,
Great Grandfather to our present most gracious Sovereign, whose Life may God
long Perpetuate.

The Case of Durham is by no Means applicable to the Colonies: It is a Country
situated in England, and paid Taxes equally with the represented Places of that
Kingdom before it obtained the Privilege of Representation. This Country was
ordered to send two Knights to represent it, at the first Parliament of Edward
the Third: Its Inhabitants presented Petition to Mortimer signifying their
Poverty, and could not well disburse Money for the Knights Attendance, but
that, as heretofore, they would contribute their Proportion of all general
Assessments. We accordingly find, specified in Doomesday-Book, the different
Levies collected in Durroman, or Durham, as it is now called, when general Aids
were required. The two cities in England most famed for Manufactures are now
unrepresented, viz. Bermingham and Manchester. A single Doubt is not to be
started, that had they desired a Representation it would have been allowed
them. Indeed the former had the Offer of Privilege made it in ^^66, by the
Marquis of Rockingham, but it was declined: The Inhabitants of those Towns are
a wise and loyal People, satisfied with the Blessings arising from the
auspicious Reign of the most humane Prince that ever graced a Throne. They look
nothing more on that Head, but bestow their whole Attention on the Acquisition
of Riches and Greatness.

When the Affair of Durham was agitated in the Reign of Charles the Second, the
Reasons quickly appeared for introducing the Motion in Behalf of its
Representation. This was a ministerial Maneuver, to give Sir John Willoughby,
a warm Espouser of the Doctrine of passive Obedience, a Seat in the House of
Commons. The popular Party, headed by Sir John Coventry, distinguished
themselves in Opposition, in the Lower House: As did the Earl of Shaftsbury in
the Upper. It was, however, agreed to, and a Right of Representation confirmed
to Durham. By what strange Fatality has the Author of the Letter to the
Delegates been induced to furnish his Adversaries with such a Number of
unsurmountable Arguments against himself? The most learned of Men may at Times
inattentively stumble into an Error; but such a Catalogue of Absurdities is
somewhat uncommon, and must oust of him of all Benefit of Clergy in the
argumentative World.

Indeed the first Position laid down by this Gentleman, "That the Americans
being descended from the same Ancestors with the People of England," would
imply a dangerous Tendency, to deprive one Moiety of Americans of those
specified Rights which, as English Subjects, they have a just Right to
exercise: For by this Method of Reasoning it would follow, that no Americans
but such as were descended from the same Ancestors with the People of England,
could with Propriety become Candidates for the chartered Rights of Englishmen.
The Americans, however, are entitled in general to every legal Right a Subject
can demand: Not on the Principle of "being descended from the same Ancestors
with the People of England;" but for this Reason, that on their Arrival in
America, they settled in a Colony, the Territory of which, with the whole
Country, adjoining, was declared by Cabot, who was authorized by Henry VII. to
make Discoveries, to be subject to the English State, and to constitute a Part
of its Dominions.

It is a Truth to which all Men have assented; that the Swedes were the first
People who colonized both Sides of the River Delaware. They called this
Settlement New-Sweden. They fortified it in several Places, and erected a Fort
in particular, which they named Elsenburgh, a Name it still preserves, The
Dutch laid a Claim to this Country, pretending that an Englishman, which they
had appointed for the Purpose, was the first Discoverer thereof in 1609. They
formed a Colony at the Mouth of Hudson's River, which they named New-Amsterdam
(now New York) and the Country adjoining was called New-Netherland. They
extended those Settlements as far as Fort Orange (now Forty Abany) which is a
Distance of forty Leagues up the River. They also established a Colony on the
Banks of Connecticut River. The prodigious Increase of the, Dutch in those
Parts rendered them formidable to the Swedes, who apprehending least their more
powerful Neighbors should wrest their Possessions from them, agreed to throw
themselves under the Protection of the States of Holland; and accordingly made
a formal Surrender of that Country to the Dutch Governor. Parliament considered
those Dutch Settlements as bold Usurpations on a British Territory; a
Conclusion which flowed from the Principle of Cabot's Discovery. Therefore, in
the Reign of Charles the Second, the House of Commons voted a large Sum for
sitting out a Fleet for the Reduction of New-Netherland; which was accordingly
effected, and the whole Country reduced to the Obedience of the English State.

As the Proprietory of Maryland had been granted by the Crown to Lord
Baltimore, a Roman Catholic, that Nobleman's Son brought over a great Number
of respectable Popish Families from Ireland: These were the actual and primary
Settlers of that Province. Therefore, agreeable to Freeman's Logic, we must
Reason thus:

The Inhabitants of Maryland being descended from the same Ancestors with the
Papists of Ireland, have a Right, and ought to enjoy all and singular the
Privileges and Immunities which Papists enjoy in Ireland.

But the Papists in Ireland being declared by Law incapable of exercising any
of those Rights or Immunities which Protestants in that Kingdom hold and enjoy.

Therefore the Inhabitabitants of Maryland, etc.

The manifest Absurdity of such Logic is evidently conspicuous. Were I not
well satisfied that Feeman's Appetite for ministerial Goods was truly sickened,
I would have concluded his Performance a high finished Stroke in Politics, to
subject threefourths of Americans to the State of Aliens or Papists, under the
outward Cloak of Patriotism. I have only continued that invidious Distinction
between English and Irish which characterizes the Writer of the Letter to the
Deputies, with a View of exposing the Fallacy of that Principle the Distinction
was created to sustain.

I believe now I may venture to affirm, that Magna Charta, the Petition of
Rights, the Bill of Rights, and the Act of Settlement, serve but to show the
unmeasurable Power of Parliament over the Crown and Dominions of the State. So
distant are they from generating an Incapacity in the British Senate, that they
confirm its imperial Authority, I cannot sufficiently wonder that Freeman
should overlook the two principal Laws now extant, which establish the
Subject's Right, viz, the 12th Charles the Second, and the Habeas Corpus Act.
The former removed every Oppression affecting Property, by reducing the Lands
of the Kingdom to free, or soccage Tenure: The latter effectually secured the
Person of the Subject from every Attack that Tyranny could devise. It is
therefore well observed by a learned Judge, that Magna Charta, and Charta de
Foresta, only pruned off some of the out-shooting Branches of Norman Tyranny:
But those two Acts of Charles the Second's Reign plucked up every Root from
which Oppression could by any Possibility take Birth. How those two only
Monuments of British Freedom should escape the Notice of the learned Author of
the Letter to the Delegates is inconceiveable to me: But, when we see a String
of Laws appealed to, Laws, which, on a proper Information of their Tendency,
incontrovertibly damn tha Assertions of the Appealer, can we possibly prevent
that risible Ton which every Muscle of the Face will naturally assume?

Seeing, therefore, that the various Arguments deduced to limit the taxing
Attribute of Parliament have not only failed, but fatally operated to
demonstrate its perfect Ability, I will now consider the Principles of feodal
Power, on which the Sovereignty of the British State is founded. Shall an
original Sovereignty, long annihilated in the English Crown by common Law, now
be permitted to revive by a Fiction, to destroy original Rights, expressly, and
often ascertained by the Forefathers of the Americans, and admitted as often by
the Kings of England? To expect this, is to think the Americans have no
reasoning Faculties. Thus far Freeman.

It is evident, that a very reasoning Faculty is here required, to form even a
distant Idea of what this loose and ungrammatical Jumble of Words would import;
yet, lest it should appear to be the Production of a Mind totally lost in the
wide Expanse of Space, I will beg leave to explain its Tendency: Which is, that
there does not exist a legislative Power on Earth warranted with sufficient
Authority to deprive a Man of any one original or natural Right which in a
State of Nature he is entitled to. Wonderful Reasoning! -- has this Phenomenon
been sent on Earth to recall the original Jurisdiction of Societies? By a
talismanick Wave to remit into the Hands of the People, those Powers delegated
by their Ancestors for the Purpose of correcting the savage Abuse of natural
Law! Has this speculum Justitiae perfectly forgot the first Principles of
common Law, which Lord Coke has laid down, that no absolute Property is vested
in a Subject; that every Idea of allodial Right ceased on the Introduction of
the feudal System -- a System on which the King's Right to collect Quit-rent
and Crown-rent is founded? and indeed, until the Appearance of this celebrated
Letter to the Delegates, was never contested. It may not be improper to
observe, that Ideas of feodal Sovereignty were actually supported by the common
Law, "not annihilated," as Freeman asserts; and in all Cases where the Terrors
of this lordly Dominion, are now suspended; with Thankfulness we must attribute
it to the Wisdom of that Parliament which passed the Soccage-Act, in the 12th
Year of Charles the Second's Reign. By this excellent Law the Lands of the
Kingdom were ascertained to their Proprietors; and Tenants were freed from the
vexatious and galling Oppressions which took Rise from the slavish Tenures
their feodal Tyrants subjected them to, and were only liable to those
Assessments which Parliament at different Times would judge proper to lay on.

Principles of feodal Sovereignty being incorporated with, and supported by
common Law; and the Hardships springing from such Principles being removed by
Statute Law, does it not follow, that Freeman, not content with subjecting one
Moiety of the Americans to the hard Condition of Aliens or Papists, would
further deprive the Whole, of those Exemptions from feodal Dominion, which
their English Brethren claim under Force of a Statute? Yet, lest I should be
accused of Misrepresentation in a Matter of this Importance, I think it
incumbent on me to quote the Gentleman's own Words. -- But supposing the
Position to be true, that the common Law not natually operating in America, the
Crown therefore possessed in Appeals, an original Jurisdiction, upon the
Principles of feodal Sovereignty; yet of what Importance can this be in Support
of the Jurisdiction, since it must cease when the common Law operates, which it
has long since in America. This surely is the most unluckly Argument Freeman
has hitherto used: In whatever extreme of Opposition it is placed in, it will
be still found to establish feodal Tyranny in America. If the common Law did
not naturally operate in this Country, in such a Case the Americans would be
subject to the Right of feodal Sovereignty claimed by a superior State. If the
common Law did naturally operate, we have also seen it would not have exempted
Americans from an Obedience with its harsh Dictates. Two Reasons which can be
urged will free this Assertion from every Color of Doubt. The first, because
the Idea of feodal Jurisdiction was founded on, and supported by common Law.
The second, that the Authenticity it had received, and still continues; to
receive, in our Courts, in all Cases wherein it is not abolished by Statute,
both was, and is, given upon the supposed Idea of being a municipal Usage of
the Land. In this Light it operated to an extreme in England until the Reign of
Charles the Second, when an Act passed which entirely discountenanced all its
oppressive Severities. It is therefore evident, that the Writer of the Letter
to the Delegates has mistaken the Nature of the feodal System, or be could not
have been guilty of such a criminal Want of both Accuracy and Attention to the
American Interest in a Point of this high Moment.

The Americans cannot be Candidates for more Immunities than their Brethren in
England claim by Law. Now, unless Freeman makes it appear that the Law made in
the Reign of Charles the Second extends to all the Colonies of North America,
it must give an incurable Wound to the flattering Hopes I entertained, that the
Americans were free Men, and entitled to every plenary Right of Exemption from
feodal Hardship, a Subject residing in England actually enjoys.

It is not to be here understood, that the 12th of Char. II. had any farther
Tendency than to remove the arbitrary Restraint under which the Subject's
Property was held, from illegal Stretches of feodal Principles. The Idea was
left untouched: It was only the frightful Edifice that was raised on this
visionary Foundation. which tumbled beneath that invaluable Law. The Basis
being of a magical Composition withstood the Shock, and indeed could not
disappear without a Repeal of the whole Body of both Statute and Common Law;
the great Outlines of which, in common with the Codes of every Nation in
Europe, are founded on this visionary Principle. The Happiness of the Subject
was not however completed by this Law; it is true his Property was thereby
secured; the Safety of his Person was not yet provided for: But the thirtieth
Year of this Kings Reign produced another Law called the Habeas Corpus Act,
which, in Conjunction with the former* effectuated the Redemption of the
Subject's Property and Person from every Device of Tyranny. These two Laws are
the Palladium of British Freedom.

Were Freeman's Principles adopted, and every genuine Right of Liberty which is
established in England made attainable in America, it would complete the Ruin
of many American Provinces, as well as the West India Islands. A general
Manumission of Negroes is a Doctrine badly calculated for the Meridian of
either America or the Islands; yet it is one of those original Rights, the
Exercise of which all human Forms immediately enjoy, by setting a Foot on that
happy Territory where Slavery is forbidden to perch.

As the Compliance of the Judges with the Motion for issuing Writs of
Assistance, has been construed and Effect of their Dependence on the Crown;
and as the Author of the Letter to the Delegates has been induced on this
Supposition to draw a Comparison between two Sets of Judges learned in the Law,
the one Men of Property -- the other, Men without the visible Shadow of
Independence, it may not be improper to consider at large those Reasons which
determined the Judges to comply with the Motion.

But, before I enter into these Considerations, it will be necessary to take a
Review of the superior Courts of Judicature, established for the Benefit of
the Community, and for the Support of our glorious and excellent Constitution,
together with the indispensible Duty of Justices appointed by the Royal Order
to preside in each.

These Courts are divided in two Parts, viz. Law and Equity: Judges in the
former are sworn, in their Dispensation of Justice, to be guided by the Common
and Statute Law of the Realm. Any wilful Appeal to private Opinion, in their
solemn Determinations, where there is a Record which attests, or an Act that
declares, how the Law in the particular Case stands, is a criminal Deviation
from their Duty, and a flagrant Breach of Oath, for which they are liable to be
prosecuted, and most severely punished.

However, least a rigorous Determination of a Court of Law should affect the
Subject in Cases wherein he lay exposed to the Letter of the Law; and, as it
was impossible for him to obtain Redress from Judges sworn to act according to
Law; a Court of Equity was established, and endued with Powers to mitigate the
Rigor of such Decisions as appeared not consistent with equitable Principles
of Justice.

This short Review of the Duty of Judges being ended, I am now left at Liberty
to consider the Propriety of the Conduct of that "Set" of Judges which
unanimously agreed that Writs of Assistance should issue.

The Attorney General moved the Court of Common Pleas in February Term 1773,
for a Writ of this Nature. A Gentleman who took Notes on that Day, has done me
to Favor of communicating to me the Substance of the Chief Justice's Argument;
I will beg leave to insert it here.

"Tolls or Duties upon Merchandises, now called Customs, have been long payable
to his Majesty's Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England; so long as to
induce many to believe that they were the Inheritance of the King by immemorial
Usage or common Law. But my Lord Coke, in his 2d Institute, Page 58, in his
Exposition of Magna Charta, clearly demonstrates, that these Customs derived
their Authority under the Sanction of an Act of Parliament, and were not
allowable by common Law; but were first granted to the Crown, by the Statute of
West. ^st, in the Reign of Edw. I. so that by this we see King's Rights to
Customs established by Authority of Parliament almost 500 Years since; and they
now constitute a Part of the King's extraordinary Revenue. At first they were
granted for only stated Terms of Years; and afterward to the different Kings
for Life, by different Acts of Parliament. I shall, however, go no farther back
than the Reign of Charles II. when the Act of Tonnage and Poundage passed,
among the first Laws made after the Restoration -- in the 12th of Char. II.
Cap. 4. By that Act a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage was given to his Majesty
for Life, and the Rates of Merchandise were settled, as they were then agreed
upon, by the Commons in Parliament, and signed by their Speaker.

"The same Duties were afterward granted for Life to Jac. II. and W. III. And
by three different Acts of Parliament made since, viz. 9th Anne, Cap. 6, the
1st Geo. I. Cap. 12, and the 3d Geo. I Cap. 7, they are made perpetual; so that
the King's Right thereto appears to be clear and indisputable, under the
several Acts of Parliament mentioned."

"Immediately after the Act of Tonnage and Poundage had passed, it became
necessary to secure to the King the Payment of the parliamentary Revenue
granted him by that Act, and to prevent him of being defrauded thereof.

"And accordingly, by the 12th of the same King, Cap. 19, it was enacted, That
where Goods liable to Customs, Subsidy, or other Duties, by the Act of Tonnage
and Poundage, shall be conveyed away without Entry or Agreement for the
Customs; that on Oath thereof before the Lord Treasurer, or any of the Barons
of the Exchequer, or the chief Magistrate of the Port or Place where the
Offense was committed, or of the Place next adjoining thereto, it shall be
lawful for the Lord Treasurer, etc. to issue Warrants to any Person, or
Persons, enabling him or them, with Assistance of a Sheriff, Justice of Peace,
or Constable, to enter any House by Day, where such Goods are suspected to be
concealed; and in case of Resistance, to break open such Houses and seize, etc.
and all Officers and Ministers of Justice are required to be aiding and
assisting thereto. -- No House to be entered except within a Month after the
Offense is committed; and Damages may be recovered against a false Informer.

"The Remedy provided by this last mentioned Act was what was first suggested
for securing the Payment of the King's Customs; but a very short Experience of
it showed that it was defective, and did not answer the intended Purpose; for
after an Information received by the Officers of the Customs, the Time spent in
taking the necessary Steps for obtaining the Warrant, generally gave the
Offenders an Opportunity of privately conveying away the Goods. A further Act
was therefore necessary; and we accordingly find, that in less than two Years
after, an Act was passed, entitled, An Act for preventing Frauds and regulating
Abuses in his Majesty's Customs. It is the 14th Char. II. Cap. II. the Preamble
of which sets forth, that, Forasmuch as it appears that several unlawful and
indirect Means and Devices are daily put in Practice, to export and import
Goods and Merchandises prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, as
also to defraud the King's most excellent Majesty of his Dues, Customs and
Subsidies, as well by secret and deceitful Designs, as by open Force and
Violence used against the King's Majesty's Officers employed in the Affairs of
the Customs; for the better preventing of which Frauds and Violences in Time to
come, by the said Act, it is among other Things enacted, That it shall be
lawful for any Person or Persons, authorized by Writ of Assistance under the
Seal of the Court of Exchequer, to take a Constable, Headborough, or other
public Officer, being near the Place, and in the Day time to go and enter into
any House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse, Room or other Place; and in case of
Resistance, to break open Doors, Chests, Trunks, or other Package, there to
seize, etc. any Kinds of Goods or Merchandise prohibited and uncustomed.

"By this Act the Remedy became as complete as possible; the Formality of
making Oath before the Lord Treasurer, a Baron of the Exchequer, or a chief
Magistrate, on every Information of uncustomed or prohibited Goods, is
dispensed with, and no Time lost, and as little Opportunity as possible given
to secret the Goods. Under this Act of Parliament, the Officers of the Customs
in England are constantly armed with a Writ of Assistance, which is issued by
the Clerk of the Exchequer as a Thing of Course, without any particular
Application to the Court. Thus the Power of the Custom-House Officer is given
him by Act of Parliament, and the Writ facilitates the Execution thereof: It is
a Notification to the Constable of the Character and Station of the Officer;
and is at the same Time a Security to the Subject, against others who might
pretend to that Character, without a Right to assume it. By the former Act, the
Officer acted under the Authority of any inferior Magistrate; his Power now
emanates from a higher and more solemn Authority; a Writ under the Seal of the
Court of Exchequer -- a Disobedience to which is a Contempt of the Court.

"It remains now to be considered, how these Powers came to be extended to the
Officers of his Majesty's Revenue in America.

"The first Act of Parliament I shall take Notice of for this Purpose is the 7
and 8 of Will. III. Cap. 22. entitled, An Act for the more effectual preventing
of Frauds, and regulating Abuses in the Plantation-Trade in America. By this
Act, it is among other Things provided, That the Officers for managing and
collecting his Majesty's Revenue, and inspecting the Plantation-Trade in any of
the Plantations in America, shall have the same Powers and Authority to visit
and search Ships, etc. and to enter Houses or Warehouses, to search for, and
seize, prohibited or uncustomed Goods; and, that the like Assistance shall be
given to the said Officers, in the Execution of their Office, as by the 14th
Char. II. is provided for the Officers in England.

"By this Act, it is evident the Intention of the Legislature was to cloth the
Custom-House Officers in America with the same Powers as those in England. But
as the 14 Char. II. directs the Writs of Assistance to issue from the Court of
Exchequer, and as such Courts are not generally established in America, for
that Reason it became a Doubt whether any other Court could legally issue such
Writs.

"This made a further Act of Parliament necessary. Accordingly, by the 7th Geo.
III. Cap. 46, after reciting the 14th Char. II. the 7 and 8 Will. III. and then
reciting, That no Authority being expressly given by the Act of King William,
to any particular Court to grant such Writs of Assistance for the Officers in
the Plantations, it is doubted, whether such Officers can legally enter Houses,
and other Places on Land, to search for the seize Goods in the Manner directed
by the said recited Acts. To obviate such Doubts for the future, and in order
to carry the Intention of the said recited Acts into efffectual Execution, it
is enacted by the 7th Geo. III. That from and after the 20th of November 1767,
such Writs of Assistance, to authorize and empower the Officers of his
Majesty's Customs, to enter, and go into any House, Warehouse, Shop, Cellar, or
other Place, in the British Colonies or Plantations in America, to search for,
and seize, prohibited and uncustomed Goods, in the Manner directed by the said
recited Acts, shall, and may be granted by the superior or supreme Court of
Justice, having Jurisdiction within such Colony or Plantation respectively.

This last Act, therefore, places the Matter beyond all Doubt. It is a polar
Star by which, agreeable to their Oath of Office, the Opinion of Law-Judges
must be guided, and their Determination concluded. It leaves not the smallest
Opening for a shuffling Disposition to run with the Hare, and hunt with the
Hound. A positive Refusal of a Judge to comply with an Act of Parliament, is a
violent Breach of the Trust reposed in him, and includes a Prosecution for high
and mighty Crimes and Misdemeanors.

These were the Reasons which influenced the Chief Justice to comply with the
Motion. An extensive Acquaintance with the various Laws relating to the
Customs, from the earliest Period to the present Time, informed this Ornament
of the Bench how the Law stood; and a Conscience not ungrateful to the
Remembrance of a solemn Oath, constrained him to determine according to Law.
The three Assistant-Judges, Messrs. Savage, Coslett, and Murray, concurred
unanimously in this Decision, and gave weighty and substantial Reasons for
coinciding with the Chief Justice's Opinion. Even Mr. Justice Fewtrell (whose
Conduct is misrepresented by Freeman on this Occasion) entertained no Doubt of
the Legality of issuing Writs of Assistance; and only hesitated in concurring
with the other Judges from an Uncertainty which was the superior Court of
Justice, the Court of Chancery or the Court of Common Pleas; a Doubt which
would have been entirely removed, by an Appeal to the Decision of all the
Judges in England, on a Question proposed by the Lord Chancellor Talbot, Anno
1735, which was the supreme Court of Justice in the Kingdom. The House of Lords
and the King's Bench were declared to be the two supreme Courts of Justice Vide
Observations on Lord Ferrers's Trial before the Lords.


Having taken a comprehensive View of the Arguments which constrained one "Set"
of Judges, "Men without the visible Shadow of Independence" to grant those
Writs, it will be only fair to consider what Motives could restrain another
"Set" of Judges, Men of Property, from issuing such Writs. But, before I
proceed further, it will not be amiss to observe, that Freeman might have been
contented with holding up his own Conduct to public Ridicule, without
introducing the Names of other Gentlemen to share a Part of his Calamity. It is
with Regret I answer this Passage in his Letter, as I am necessitated to
analyze somewhat unfavourably thereon; yet, perhaps, my Method of censuring may
do the Gentlemen at least as much Honor, as the ill-favored Eulogiums
bestowed on them by the Author of the Letter to the Delegates.

The first Motive, therefore, which naturally occurs, why Judges, Men of
Property, in a mercantile Colony like this, should determine contrary to
written Law, might arise from a partial Adherence to Self-Interest. The best of
Men, as Times now run, are induced to take every Step of aggrandizing their
Fortunes. The Spirit of accumulating Dollars, when added to that dissolving
Satisfaction of Mind which a free born Subject of America tastes in seeing a
stately Slave stand on every Perch of his extensive Plantation, is somewhat
allayed by the bitter Remembrance of paying Tribute to Caesar. I may with Truth
here add, that our Brethren in England would heartily concur with Americans, in
the Doctrine of paying neither Taxes or Customs (with which it must be allowed
they are heavily laden) were they not compelled by the positive Injunction of a
superior Power, and with which, as inferiors, they are bound to comply.

The second Reason, why they refused to grant those Writs, is humourously
related by Freeman; because the Opinion of the Bench was guided by Rawlins
Lowndes, Esquire who, Freeman asserts, was not bred regularly to the Profession of
the Law; and the other Judges went to School to Mr. Lowndes, who taught them to
quaff such large Draughts of Law, as quickly enabled them to administer Justice
with public Approbation. This is, I think, the richest and most expressive
Description of Quackery that ever caught my Attention. Indeed Empyrism is
displayed with such Pathos, that I would have considered it in no other Light
than of a Burlesque on the "Set" of learned Judges referred to, was I not
sensible that the ingenious Author of the Letter to the to the Delegates,
intended, sub ficto nomine, to be the Herald of his own Fame, and by the
Side-Wind of his Eulogium on the great Abilities of Mr. Lowndes, "who had never
eat Commons at the Temple," formed a Design to establish an Idea of his own
uncommon Powers, by the sole Strength of which he has been enabled to make
such a rapid Progress in Law-Story, without the vulgar Aid of a Temple-
Erudition.

I can now sincerely aver, that nothing but a warm Wish of promoting an Union
between the Mother Country and her Colonies, induced me to answer the mad
Arguments of a Man, who, soured by Disappointment, would widen the Breach of
Discontent: But, Americans! resume your Understanding, and discountenance every
Design of Faction. Famed as you are for Justice, Humanity and Honor; it would
ill become Men, justly celebrated for such godlike Virtues, to submit their
Judgment as a Prey for Artifice to sport with; or to suffer their Attention to
be diverted into any Channel but that which alone can render them a great and
flourishing People.

Imperial Rome, which once gave Law to the World, fell by public Discontents,
as much as by Debauchery. Whilst the Romans continued a firm united People,
they extended their Conquests over the Earth; but when Faction reared its Head,
and Persons thought it their Interest to embrace Extremes, ambitious Men were
not wanting to keep these Breaches open: It was then the ancient Roman Virtue
began to decline. Public Offices, which were in the Gift of the People, were
generally filled by their designing Leaders; indeed the most flagrant and
turbulent Characters were commonly preferred. The guilty Custom drawing into an
Establishment, soon rendered the Air of Italy too polluted for Freedom or Order
to dwell in; they therefore winged their Way: By which Flight the Romans lost
themselves and the Empire of the World together.

I will conclude this Pamphlet with an Advice to Freeman.

Frange, miser, calamos vigilataque praelia dele,
Qui facis in parva sublimia carmina cella,
Ut dignus venias hederis and imagine macra.
Let Flames on thy unlucky Papers prey,
And Moths through written Pages eat their Way;
Thy Loves, thy Wars, thy Praises be forgot,
And all become one universal Blot.
The Rest is empty Praise, an Ivy Crown,
Or the lean Image of a mean Renown.
A BACK SETTLER.
Keowee, Sept. 25 th, 1774.

