A DECLARATION OF THE PEOPLE'S NATURAL RIGHT TO A Share in the LEGISLATURE,
WHICH IS THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION of STATE.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

"QUI NON LIBERE VERITATEM PRONUNCIAT, PRODITOR EST VERITATIS." 4th Inst. Epil.
LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA, REPRINTED. And sold by JOHN DUNLAP, at the
Newest Printing-Office, in Market-Street. 1774.

A DECLARATION OF THE PEOPLE's NATURAL RIGHT TO A SHARE in the LEGISLATURE, etc.
AN accurate and critical knowledge of law (such as can only be acquired by
much reading and long experience in the profession) is indeed a necessary
qualification for those persons who undertake to deliver their opinions
concerning the nicer and more difficult questions of jurisprudence, but when
the Natural Rights of any of our fellow subjects are apparently at stake, every
man has a right to judge for himself, and to declare his sentiments, as far as
plain conclusions of reason and common sense will fairly warrant; and such only
are referred to in the following Declaration of the Natural Right of popular
Representation in the Legislature.

Amongst all the rights and privileges appertaining unto us, said that truly
noble lawyer Lord Summers Judgment of whole Kingdoms, etc. P. ^4.
, that of having a share in the legislation, and being to be governed by such
laws as we ourselves shall choose, is the most fundamental and essential, as
well as the most advantageous and beneficial, etc.

And as all British subjects, whether in Great Britain, Ireland, or the
Colonies, are equally free by the Law of Nature, they certainly are equally
entitled to the same Natural Rights that are essential for their own
preservation, because this privilege of "having a share in the legislation" is
not merely a British Right, peculiar to this island, but it is also a Natural
Right, which cannot, without the most flagrant and stimulating injustice, be
withdrawn from any part of the British empire by any worldly authority
whatsoever, because, by the Natural Law, whereunto he [Almighty God] has made
all subject, says the learned Hooker Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 1,
10, p. 87.
, the lawful power of making laws, to command whole politic societies of men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire societies, that for any Prince or
Potentate, of what kind soever upon earth, to exercise the same of himself, [or
themselves,] and not either by express commission immediately and personally
received from God, or else by authority derived at the first from their consent
upon whose persons they impose laws, it is no better than mere tyranny! Laws
they are not, therefore, which public approbation has not made so. Agreeable
to the same just principles of natural equity is that maxim of the English
constitution, that "LAW, TO BIND ALL, MUST BE ASSENTED TO BY ALL," (Principia
Leg. et Equit. p. 56.) and there can be no legal appearance of ASSENT without
some degree of REPRESENTATION.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that the Representation of the people of
England is not so perfect as equity may seem to require, since very many
individuals have no vote in elections and consequently cannot be said expressly
to give their assent to the laws by which they are governed. Nevertheless, the
whole country which they inhabit, and in which they earn their bread, and even
the very houses in which they live (whether they are housekeepers or lodgers)
are represented I must beg leave to refer the reader also to some excellent
observations on this head, in a pamphlet published since the above was written,
entitled An Argument in Defense of the Colonies, p. 76, 77, and 78.
by the votes of the respective proprietors, since every Freeholder has a right
to vote; so that, in this one respect, the representation is general; and,
though far from equal, would still be a sufficient check against arbitrary
power; and afford sufficient security for the lives and property of those
persons who have no vote, if the laws against parliamentary corruption (and
especially that act of 7 and 8 Will. III. c. 4.) were duly enforced; and also if
all persons, who are entrusted with the disposal of public money, were required
to render a strict account of it, and to be severely punished whenever
convicted of exerting the influence of the public treasury against public
liberty, which is the most baneful treachery and dishonesty that men in office
(who are the servants of the public as well as of the King) can possibly
commit. But, notwithstanding the inequality of the English representation, and
the various means practiced to corrupt it, yet it has been the principal
instrument of preserving amongst us those remains of natural Liberty which we
still enjoy in a greater proportion than most other kingdoms, and has
occasioned more examples of just retribution on Tyrants, Traitors, and Court
Favorites, in the English annals, than the history of any other nation
affords; so that Mr. Rapin is thereby led to conclude his account of K. Richard
II. (that notorious corrupter of parliaments, and enemy to the privileges of
London and other corporations) with the following reflection: That, in a
government such as that of England, all the efforts that the Sovereign makes to
usurp an absolute authority, are so many steps which lead him toward the
precipice. C'est que dans un Gouvernement tell que celui d' Angleterre, tous les
efforts que le Souverain fait pour usurper un pouvoir absolu sont autant de pas
qui le conduisent verse le precipice. Tom. iii. live. x. p. 329.
It is manifest, therefore, that the constitutional government of England, even
with all its defects, is infinitely better than any other form of government
whereby the people are deprived of their just share in the legislature; The
celebrated Chancellor Fortescue asserts, that a limited or politic government
(like that of England) is infinitely more eligible, for the interest and
satisfaction even of the Prince himself, than an absolute regal power: -- Non
jugum sed libertas est politice regere populum; securitas quoque maxima nedum
plebi, sed et ipsi regi; allevatio etiam non minima solicitudinis suae: -- Viz.
That to rule the people by government politic is no yoke, but liberty, and
great security, not only to the subjects, but also to the King himself; and
further, no small lightening or easement to his charge. (De Laud. Leg. Angl.
cap. 34, p. 78.) So that those politicians, who plead the necessity of
securing, at any rate, a majority in parliament, to vote implicitly for
whatever the minister proposes, do miserably betray the true interest and peace
of their Sovereign! for this fixes upon the King and his ministers (as in
arbitrary governments) the blame and ignominy of every determination that
happens to be wrong, which would otherwise either have been overruled by the
free council of the nation, or else must have been equally imputed to the
people themselves; and yet this wretched policy has alternately been adopted by
all parties, notwithstanding that it is founded (like many of Machiavel's
doctrines) on that abominable antichristian principle of mere worldly minded
men, -- "Let us do evil that good may come;" -- "whose damnation (says the
apostle to the Romans) is just." Romans iii. 8. The evil of an undue
parliamentary influence they endeavor to excuse by the plea of necessity for
the good of the state, though it is certainly the most flagrant violation of
the fundamental principles of the state, and is absolutely destructive of the
true interest both of the prince and people!
so that the inequality of Representation in this island, affords no just
argument for setting aside the Representation of the people in other parts of
the British empire, because experience teaches us, that even a defective
Representation is better than none at all; and therefore it is highly
unreasonable, and contrary to natural equity, to pretend that our brethren and
fellow subjects in the more distant parts of the British empire ought to be
deprived entirely of their natural Rights and Liberties, merely because our own
liberties are not entirely perfect! or because our own representation in the
legislature appears, in some few respects, to be defective! and it would be
quite as unreasonable to allege, that the principle or reason of the maxim
before quoted ( viz. that law, to bind all, must be assented to by all) is
unjust and inconclusive, merely because it would be very difficult to
accomplish it literally by the express assent of every individual! but it is
clearly sufficient that the maxim be construed to signify that delegated assent
of the people by a majority of their legal representatives, which is
constitutionally necessary to make all laws binding; Nedum principis voluntate,
sed et totius regni assensu, ipsa (i. e. Angliae statuta) conduntur, quo populi
laesuram illa efficere nequeunt, vel non eorum commodum procurare, etc. -- Et
si statuta haec, tanta solen^itate et prudentia edita, efficaciae tantae,
quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non esse contingant, concito reformari
ipsa possunt, et non fine communitatis et procerum regni illius assensu, quali
ipsa primitus (...), etc. Chancel. Fortesc. de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 18, p. 40. b.
and such a legal representation of the people is therefore absolutely
necessary to constitute an effectual Legislature for any part of the British
empire; for no tax can be levied without manifest robbery and injustice where
his legal and constitutional Representation is wanting; because the English law
abhors the idea of taking the least property from freemen without their free
consent -- It is iniquitous iniquum est, says the maxim (...) ingenuis
hominibus non esse liberam rerum suarum (...). Co. Lit. 223. And again: Quod
nostrum est, fine facto five defectu nostro, amitti (...) in alium transferri
non potest. 8 Co. 92. Rerum suarum quilibet est moderator et arbiter. Co. Lit.
223. Regulariter non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda. Co. Lit. 223. And
again: Non potest rex subditum renitentem onerare impositionibus. 2 Inst. 61.
from Fortescue, c. 9, and 18.
that freemen should not have the free disposal of their own effects; -- and
whatever is iniquitous can never be made lawful Quicquid est contra normam
recti est injuria. 3 Bulls. 313. And Lex nemini operatur iniquum -- nemini facit
injuriam. Jenk. Cent. 22. And therefore Quod contra legem fit pro infectu
habetur. 4 Co. 31.
by any authority on earth; not even by the united authority of King, Lords,
and Commons; for that would be contrary to the eternal "Lex est ab aeterno."
Jenk. Cent. 34.
Laws of God, which are supreme. -- "Etiam fi aliquid statutem esset editum
contra eas," (leges divinas,) "nullius vigoris in legibus Angliae censeri
debet," etc. Doct. et Stud. c. 6, p. 18.


In every point of view, the making laws for the subjects of any part of the
British Empire, without their participation and assent, in iniquitous, and
therefore unlawful; for though the purport of any law, so made, be in itself
perfectly just and equitable, yet it becomes otherwise Qui aliquid statuerit
part inaudita altera, aequum licet dixerit, haud aequum fecerit. Princip. Leg.
et AEquit. p. 90. or -- "haud aequus fuerit." 6 Co. 52.
(that is, unjust and iniquitous, and therefore unlawful) by the want of these
necessary legal formalities "Forma legalis forma essentialis." 10. Co. -- 100.
And "Forma non observata infertur adnullatio actus." 12 Co. 7.
of Representation and Assent; for if the inhabitants of one part of the empire
might determine a question, or enact a law, for the peculiar advantage only of
that one part, though to the manifest detriment and injury of another part,
without the Representation of the latter, the former part would be made judges
in their own cause, a circumstance that would be literally partial! the very
reverse of justice and and natural equity, and which must, therefore, be
esteemed iniquity, even to a fundamental maxim, "Iniquum est aliquem rei sui
esse judicem." -- In propria causa nemo judex. Principia Legis et AEquitatis,
p. 41.
viz. it is iniquitous for any one to be a judge in his own cause. Partiality
is, therefore, such an abomination in the eye of the law, that no power on
earth can make it lawful; for "even an Act of Parliament" (says the learned
Judge Hobart, Rep. 87.) made against natural equity, as to make a man judge in
his own case, (the example, observe, is the very point in question) is void in
itself; for jura naturae sunt immutabilia, and they are leges legum.

Every King of England (apparently for the same reason) is restrained by the
law from changing or making new laws without the assent or consent of his whole
Kingdom in Parliament expressed. Neque Rex ibidem, per se, aut ministros suos,
tallagia, subsidia, aut quaevis onera alia, imponit legiis suis, aut leges
eorum mutat, vel novas condit, fine concessione vel assensu totius regni sui in
parliamento suo expresso, etc. Chancell. Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae,
c. 36, p. 84. b.
And the whole Kingdom, even of Great Britain itself, is only a part of the
British empire; and therefore, by a parity of reasoning, cannot justly or
equitably be permitted to make laws for the whole, because where the same
reason is, the same law (or right) must prevail: "Ubi eadem ratio, ibi idem
lex," or "jus." Principia Leg. et Aequit. p. 116.
for "turpis est pars quae non convenit cum suo toto;" (Plowden, 161.) and
nihil in lege intolerabilius est, eandem rem diverso jure censeri. 4 Co. 83.
The free representation of the people in the legislature is, therefore, to be
esteemed, of all our rights, the most essential, (as Lord Summers has declared)
to maintain that excellent equilibrium of power, or mixed government, limited by
law, which our ancestors have always most zealously asserted, and transmitted
to us, as our best birthright and inheritance Major haereditas venit unicuique
nostrum a jure et legibus quam a parentibus. 2 Inst. 56.
; so that every attempt to set the same aside in any degree, or in any part of
the empire, or to corrupt it by undue influence of places and pensions, or
bribes with public money, is treason against the constitution; the highest of
treason The first and highest treason is that which is committed against the
constitution. Lord Sommer's judgment of whole kingdoms, p. 8. -- Est autem
injuria omne quod non jure fit. Fleta, l. 2, c. 1. And on the other hand, they
neither are, nor can be traitors, who endeavor to preserve and maintain the
constitution; but they are the traitors, who design and pursue the subversion
of it; they are the rebels, that go about to overthrow the government of their
country; whereas such as seek to support and defend it are the truly loyal
persons, and do act conformable to the ties and obligation of fealty. Lord
Summers, p. 9. -- Agreeable to this doctrine was the answer of Dr. Sharp,
Archbishop of York, when the question was put to him, How a person, who had
sworn allegiance to King James, could, with a good conscience, take the same
oath to King William? To which he replied, That the laws of the land are the
only rule of our conscience in this matter, and we are no further bound to pay
obedience to governors, nor to any other governors, than the Laws enjoin. If,
therefore, King William, in the eye of the Law, be our King, we must in
conscience pay obedience to to him as such. I take this (says he) for a certain
truth, that as the law makes the King, so the same law extends, or limits, or
transfers, our obedience and allegiance; and all oaths, imposed by law, oblige
the conscience no farther than the law meant they should oblige. Only this is
always to be remembered, that whatever obedience the laws of the land require
of us, it is to be understood with this proviso, that it be not contradictory
to the laws of God. But in that case we must obey passively, though we cannot
obey actively; and with this tacit condition, I do suppose, all oaths of
fidelity in the world are given and taken. Life of Abp. Sharp, part 3d, page
24, 25, and 26. MS. wrote by his Son, for the use of his Grandchildren.
: and therefore whatsoever is ordained, that can clearly be proved to be
contrary to the constitution, must be allowed to be fundamentally wrong, and
therefore null and void of itself; for, "sublato fundamento, cadit opus."
(Jenk. Cent. 106.)

But more particularly the Parliament has no power to give up the ancient and
established right of the people to be represented in the legislature, because
an act for so base a purpose would entirely subvert the principles and
constitution on which the very existence of the legislature itself, which
ordained it, is formed! so that such an unnatural act of the state would be
parallel to the crime of felo de se in a private person; and, being thus
contrary to the nature of things, can never be rendered valid by any authority
whatsoever Quae rerum natura prohibentur nulla lege confirmata sunt. Finch, 74.
And Nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum. Co. Lit. 97.
.

And indeed it is laid down as a maxim, by the great Lord Summers, that no man
or society of men have power to deliver up their preservation, or the means of
it, to the absolute will of any man (or men) and they will have always a right
to preserve what they have not power to part with. P. 26. And if a politic
society has no just power to deliver up even its own preservation, it certainly
has much less right to deliver up the necessary preservation of other societies
of their brethern and friends (not represented among them) without their
consent; and all such attempts must necessarily be deemed void and ineffectual,
because there is no necessity to obey, where there is no authority to ordain
Ubi non est condendi authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas. Dav. 69. And
Judicium a non suo judice datum nullius est momenti. 10 Co. 76.
. For as it so clearly appears, from what has been said, that natural equity
does not permit even the inferior property of lands, goods, chattels, or money,
to be alienated without the consent or fault of the proprietors, much less can
it permit the alienation, annulling, or changing, of our most valuable
inheritance, the law, without the due assent and consent of the heritors
themselves, the people at large, or their lawful Representatives in their
respective assemblies or parliaments Nam non potest rex Angliae, ad libitum
suum, leges mutare regni sui. Principatu namque nedum regali, sed et politico,
ipse suo populo dominatur. And again: Quia nec leges, ipse [rex] fine
subditorum assensu mutare poterit, nec subjectum populum renitentem onerare
inpositionibus peregrinis; quare populus ejus libere fruetur bonis suis,
legibus, quas cupit, regulatus, nec per regem suum, aut quemvis alium
depilatur, etc. Chancel. Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 9, p. 26.
! This is a necessary conclusion of reason and common sense, drawn from the
effect and force of natural equity, even in cases of much less consequence (
viz. respecting goods and common pecuniary property;) so that the distinction,
which some great and able politicians have lately made, between Taxation and
Legislation (in the late disputes about taxing the Colonies) was certainly
erroneous, though well intended; since it plainly appears, that the right of
legislation is not less inseparable, by natural equity, from the people of
every part of the British empire than the right of granting or withholding
taxes; for, otherwise, the free subjects of one part of the empire would be
liable to be most materially injured in their greatest and most valuable
inheritance, the law, by the hasty decisions of men on the other side of the
empire, with whom probably they would be totally unacquainted, and whose
interest might perhaps be as widely different from theirs (for any thing they
could know to the contrary) as their situation upon the face of the globe is
distant; that is, as widely different as the east is from the west! Would this
be equitable? Could such notorious injustice Si a jure discedas, vagus eris, et
erunt omnia omnibus incerta. Co. Lit. 227. And, Rerum ordo confunditur, si
unicuique jurisdictio non servetur. 4 Inst. proem. For if the fundamental rule
of the Constitution be set aside even in one instance, the baneful influence of
such an evil precedent will soon prepare the way for the destruction of the
whole law, because uno absurdo dato, infinita sequuntur. 1 Coke, 102.
be ever made lawful?

The true constitutional mode of connecting Brirish dominions, that are
otherwise separated by nature, is demonstrated by the established example of
the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, which, by long experience, has proved
to be sufficiently effectual. It must be acknowledged, indeed, that an act of
Parliament was made in the 6th of George 1. chap. 5. wherein it is laid down,
that the King and Parliament of Great Britain may make laws to bind Ireland. If
the preceding arguments are not sufficient to prove in what light the said Act
is to be considered, yet the present distinct and separate jurisdiction of the
Irish Parliament, the continuation of their ancient and constitutional
privileges, notwithstanding the doctrine asserted in the said Act, and their
annual transactions, both in taxation and legislation, are facts which prove
(better than arguments) that the people of Ireland have an inherent right to
enact laws independent of the British Parliament; otherwise the King's assent
would not be sufficient to render the said laws valid and binding without the
especial approbation and consent also of the British Parliament, which indeed
is never required; so far is it from being necessary! And, farther, the
inhabitants of Great Britain would think it extremely unreasonable and unjust,
if the Parliament of Ireland should claim a right of making laws, with the
King's assent, to bind any part of this island! The argument is reciprocal; so
that, if we should really detest such a measure against ourselves, the law of
laws forbids us to claim the like power over any of our fellow subjects,
without their free consent. "Non facias alteri quod tibi non vis fieri." This
is laid down as one of the most common precepts of the law of reason, (Doct.
and Stud. c. 2, p. 7.) and such is the immutability of the law of reason, that
against it there can be no prescription, statute, or custom; and if any are
made contrary thereto, they are not to be esteemed statutes or customs, but
corruptelae, i. e. corruptions or depravities. -- Non sunt statuta five
consuetudines, sed corruptelae. Doct. and Stud. c. 2, p. 5. To the same effect
is that command of Christ himself (recorded in Matt. vii. 12.) which our Lord
declared to be the Law and the Prophets; viz. Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets;
so that it may justly be entitled, the Law of Laws; and a statute, therefore,
which is contrary thereto, is doubly unlawful.

The separate interests of the two kingdoms are sufficiently restrained, with
respect to each other, by our excellent constitution of state, which requires
the assent of the people (that is of those which are concerned respectively) to
render any law valid and binding upon either nation; which the foregoing
arguments demonstrate; and I hope the ingenious and sensible author of the
Argument in Defense of the Colonies (lately published) will acknowledge, that
he has allowed too much, when he admits, in page 114, that the whole kingdom of
Ireland is bound by the acts of the supreme legislature, etc. which doctrine
leads him afterward to make a distinction between Taxation and Legislation.

And again, the two kingdoms are so firmly united by the bands of allegiance,
to one head (or monarchy) of limited power, that their interests in all
material external exigencies are thereby rendered mutual, as well as their
internal interest, in the maintenance of natural and constitutional liberty, in
each kingdom respectively, because one of them cannot be deprived of this (as
they are governed by the same head) without hastening the destruction of the
other. And this intimate connection of mutual interest in the constitution of
state, and in the reciprocal enjoyment of the same reasonable common law,
whereby each kingdom enjoys an equality of privilege and natural freedom,
renders the union of the two kingdoms more just and equitable, and,
consequently, more safe and durable than it could possibly have been made by
any other means; and the inhabitants of both islands (though sprung from a
variety of jarring, jealous, and fierce nations) have, by these means, acquired
a certain mutual consideration for each other, as fellow subjects, which could
never have been produced by mere alliances, guarantees, or defensive leagues;
nor, perhaps, by any other mode of government whatever, than that by which
divine providence has effected it, viz. the English constitution; this has
firmly united the strength of the two islands; whereby reciprocal succor, in
time of need, is insured to both.


But as it does not appear that the Parliament of Ireland ever acknowledged or
gave any formal assent to the said act, the same must necessarily be considered
as a mere assertion on one part, at the making of which, the persons most
materially concerned on the other part were neither heard nor represented! A
defect "Qui aliquid statuerit, part inaudita altera, licet aequum dixerit,
haud aequum secerit;" so that, if any act is ever so just in itself, yet it
becomes otherwise (that is, unjust and iniquitous, as is before remarked) by
the want of these legal formalities.
the most notorious that can possibly be attributed to any proceeding, either
in the enacting or execution of laws! and therefore it is to very little
purpose to cite the said act as a precedent for taxing the American subjects
without their consent; for the privileges which the Parliament of Ireland has
maintained and enjoyed, both before and since that time, (clearly distinct and
separate from the British Parliament) afford a better and more authentic
precedent on the other side of the question ( viz. in behalf of the people's
natural rights) than the act itself does against them; for, as the King and the
People (including the Lords and Commons) of Great Britain constitute the
sovereign power (under God) or Legislature of Great Britain, so the King and
the People of Ireland are the natural and constitutional Legislature or State
of that kingdom, and actually exercise (both in legislation and taxation) their
distinct jurisdiction, to this day, which is the best proof of their right;
and, in like manner, according to this ancient and established legal precedent,
the King, together with the People of every distinct province, subject to the
imperial Crown of Great Britain, and detached (as Ireland is) from this island,
ought to be and have been esteemed, from the first establishment of our
Colonies, the only proper and constitutional Legislature for each province
respectively Every establishment in the American Colonies has been settled by
our ancestors as nearly as possible to the constitutional form of government in
the Mother Country; and, as the advantages of this mode have been proved by the
experience of more than a century, (see an argument, just published, in defense
of the exclusive Right, claimed by the Colonies to tax themselves, p. 36, 39,
44) it is very dangerous (now that the Colonies begin to be filled with people)
to vary the ancient and approved form of the Constitution. Periculosum est res
novas et (...) inducere. Co. Lit. 379. And, Clausulae inconsuetae semper
inducunt suspicionem. 3 Co. 81. And again, Quae praeter consuetudinem et morem
majorum fiunt neque placent, neque recta videntur. 4 Co. 78. And lastly,
"Whatsoever is against the rule of law is inconvenient." Co. Lit. p. 379.
; because the Representation of the People, in every part of the British
empire, is absolutely necessary to constitute an effectual Legislature,
according to the fundamental principles of the English Constitution; for none
of them, separately, can be esteemed a competent Legislature to judge of the
other's rights, without the highest injustice and iniquity, which is before
demonstrated by some of the first maxims or principles of reason.

And yet, howsoever distinct these several parts or provinces may seem, in
point of situation, as well as in the exercise of a separate legislative power
for each, (which constitutional right they have enjoyed beyond the memory of
man) they are nevertheless firmly united by the circle of the British diadem,
so as to form one vast empire, which will never be divided, if the safe and
honest policy be adopted of maintaining the British constitution inviolate, in
all parts of the empire; for it is a system so natural, so beneficial, and so
engaging, to the generality of mankind, that by the same means we might hold
the empire of the world, were the laws of natural equity, justice, and liberty,
to be strictly observed, and the abomination of domestic The toleration of
domestic slavery in the Colonies greatly weakens the claim or natural right of
our American brethren to liberty. Let them put away the accursed thing, that
horrid oppression! from among them, before they presume to implore the
interposition of divine justice; for whilst they retain their brethren of the
world in the most shameful involuntary servitude, it is profane in them to look
up to the merciful Lord of all, and call him Father!
as well as political slavery abolished!

On the other hand, it is not only treason against the constitution to attempt
to deprive any free British subjects of their natural right to a share in the
legislature To extend the Governor's right to command, and subject's duty to
obey, beyond the laws of one's country, said that learned lawyer, Lord Summers,
is treason against the constitution, and treachery to the society whereof we
are members. Judgment of whole Kingdoms, etc. p. 6.
, but it is equally derogatory and injurious to the authority of the Crown Nor
is it merely the first and highest treason in itself, that a member of a
political society is capable of committing, to go about to subvert the
constitution; but it is also the greatest treason he can perpetrate against the
person, crown, and dignity of the King, for such an endeavor both annuls and
vacates all his title to superiority over those above whom he was exalted from
the common level by virtue of the constitution, and deprives him of all
rightful and legal claim of rectorial authority over the society by destroying
the alone foundation upon which it was erected, and by which he became vested
with it, etc. Ibid. p. 9 -- 10.
; because a King of England has no legal authority to govern by any other mode
than that limited government called the English Constitution, which he is sworn
to maintain; for such is the frailty of human nature, that no man, or body of
men whatever, is to be entrusted with the administration of government, unless
they are thus limited by law, and by a due Representation of the people at
large, subject to a frequent appeal, by election, to the whole body of
constituents, for it is a maxim, that he who is allowed more power, by law,
than is fit or equitable, the same will still desire more power than is already
lawful; Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quam licet. 2 Inst. 465.
so that no power on earth is tolerable without a just limitation, and law,
which ought to be supreme Firmior et potentior est operatio legis quam
dispositio hominis. Co. Lit. 102.
, cannot subsist where will and pleasure are absolute, whether it be the will
of one, of a few, or of many Whosoever, says Aristotle, is governed by a man
without law, is governed by a man and by a beast. Lords Summers, N. 11.

Ipse autem rex, non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, et sub lege, quia lex
facit regem. Attribuit igitur rex legi quod lex attribuit ei, videlicet
dominationem et potestatem: non est enim rex ubi dominatur voluntas, et non
lex. Bracton, lib. 1, c. 8. -- Rex autem habet superiorem, deum. S. -- Item
legem, per quam factus est rex. -- Item curiam suam, etc. -- Et ideo si rex
fuerit sine fraeno, i. e. sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, etc. Bract. lib.
2. c. 21, p. 34.


.

A King, therefore, who presumes to act without the constitutional limitation,
destroys the foundation of his own authority, for the most respectable and most
ancient writer on the English constitution assures us, that "there is no King
where Will rules," (or is absolute) "and not law." -- Non est enim rex ubi
dominatur voluntas, et non lex. Bract. lib. 1, c. 8, p. 5, b.
The same doctrine is expressed still more clearly in the old year books, -- La
ley est le plus haute inheritance que le roy ad: car par la ley it meme et
touts ses sujets sont rules, et si le ley ne fuit, null Roi, et null inheritance,
sera. 19 Hen. VI. 63.
that, if there was no law, there would be no King, and no inheritance.

For these plain reasons, whenever the English government ceases to be limited,
in any part of the British dominions, it ceases to be lawful!

And therefore the fatal consequences of proceeding to enforce the execution of
any acts, or resolutions, for the establishing such unlimited and unlawful Ubi
non est condendi authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas. Dav. 69. Prin.
Leg. et AEquit. p. 117.
government, is more easily conceived than expressed; because the condition of
all subjects would be alike, whether under absolute or limited government, if
it were not lawful Insuper lex rationis permittit plurima fieri, ut scilicet
quod licitum est vim vi repellere, et quod fas unicuique se tueri et rem suam
defendere contra vim injustam. Doct. et Stud. c. 2, p. 8 -- See also Bracton,
lib. 4, c. 4, p. 162. b.
to maintain and preserve those limitations, since will and pleasure, and not
law, would be, alike in both, the measure of obedience; for, to have liberties
and privileges, unless they may be defended, and to have none at all, is the
same thing as to be governed by mere will and pleasure, (Lord Summers, p. 24)
and misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum aut incertum.

Old-Jury, London, July 25, 1774. GRANVILLE SHARP.


