CONSIDERATIONS, etc.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MEASURES CARRYING ON WITH RESPECT TO THE BRITISH
COLONIES IN NORTH AMERICA.

There is neither King or Sovereign Lord on Earth, who has beyond his own
Domain power to lay one Farthing on his Subjects without the grant and consent
of those, who pay it; unless he does it by tyranny and violence. Phillippe de
Commines, Chapter 108. LONDON: PRINTED. BOSTON, REPRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES AND
GILL, IN QUEEN STREET. M,DCC,LXXIV.

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
NO one knows, how far every person in Britain may be interested in the event
of the measures now carrying on with respect to our colonies in NorthAmerica.
This seems to entitle any man on account of his own stake therein to speak his
sentiments on the subject. The concern of the community gives to them likewise
for their better security a claim, that every opinion may be offered for
consideration. These things result from the nature of a free society, and
particularly from the constitution of Great Britain, where the people choose one
part of the legislative and where every man is supposed to have ultimately a
share in the government of his country.

One point in dispute between us and the Americans is the right of taxing them
here at home. This may be said to concern the power of our parliament. But so
does every general proposition of right and wrong. When any thing is affirmed
to be unjust, does it not conclude and is it not almost synonimous to the
saying, that a law made to enforce it would be so too and beyond the proper
power of a legislature? Vengeance and punishment do in the course of things
assuredly pursue states and nations for their oppression and injustice; against
the commission of which it is beyond question the right of every member of the
community to warn the rest.

I say it with submission, but the power of the parliament is the right of the
public. The particular members of that most respectable body are in the
statutes enacted by them no more personally interested, than the rest of their
countrymen. These pass through their hands, but being so passed, they are
themselves bound to obey them in common with others. They are indeed our
trustees and guardians in that high office, but they will on that account be
the more inclined, that every step taken or to be taken by them should be fully
and carefully examined, like all other honest men earnest for the interest of
those, whose concerns are committed to their care.

A consideration of the measures now proposed may likewise possibly lead
toward some nice and delicate conjectures or circumstances, whether of the
present time or of that to come. But it need not be said, that the writer only
finds the one and guesses at the other; they depend on an author much higher
than Princes or their ministers, but who is pleased to suffer the actions of
these to have most essential effects in the producing them. What can then be a
more fit means to induce a due reflection on our proceedings and to insure from
them a desirable success, than to lay before the public or the governors of it
some possible consequences of their conduct?

We have not far to seek for the cause of the present situation of things
between the mother country and our colonies of North America; of the opposition
and disturbances on the one hand and of the violent laws, motions and
preparations on the other. These all undoubtedly proceed from our having taxed
those colonies without their consent. Affection and union obtained between us
before there succeeded instead animosity and opposition, as soon as that was
attempted; however peace and satisfaction were on our staying our hands again
restored. We are now once more come back to the charge and the spirit of
discord seems likewise returned seven times stronger than it was before. Other
broils and contests may and many no doubt will arise from this cause, should it
proceed; but this is the origin, the spring and the source. The right itself of
this measure is in question, as well as the expediency of it: I will therefore
prepare to say something to that proposition.

The inhabitants of our colonies in North America are supposed to consist of
about two millions of persons; they occupy and possess a very extensive
territory, much larger than Great Britain; they are not themselves the original
people of the country, but they now stand in their place; they have in general
been born and bred there, however they receive likewise yearly from other
places many, who mix themselves with them; they have divided themselves into
several different governments; they have according to certain rules or laws
agreed upon among them alloted every man his own; they have felled the forest;
they have cleared and tilled the land, they have planted it, they have sown it,
they have stocked it with cattle; they have built themselves houses; they have
entered into exchange and commerce; they have spared and saved for a future day
or for their families; they have by many and various means acquired many and
various sorts of property; they are by nature entitled to welfare and happiness
and to seek and pursue those blessings, by all the methods not attended with
fraud or violence toward others, which they shall conceive and believe the
most probable to procure or ensure them; they have for that end a right to
freedom in their governments and to security in their persons and properties;
none are warranted to deprive or dispossess them of these things; should on the
contrary one man or a body of men advance any claim, which tended to enslave
all the persons or to unsettle all the property of this great community, to
divest them of every thing, which they possess and to leave them nothing which
they could call their own of all, that they have thus inherited, earned or
acquired; the very enormity, the evil and unnatural consequences of such a
proposition would of themselves sufficiently show its absurdity, weakness and
unreasonableness.

These are all either primary, essential, inherent rights of human nature or
such as do with respect to persons in the situation before described
necessarily flow and follow from them. Those were conferred upon them by the
great Author of their being when he was pleased to endow them with the
faculties of men, with the perception of good and evil, with the means of self
preservation and self-defence, with the organs of reason and of speech and with
a capacity to associate themselves for their mutual protection and support.
They are common to all mankind; they subsist at all times, in all regions and
all climates; in Turkey, in Spain, in France, in Old England and in New, in
Europe and in America; whenever and wherever a number of men are found to be
the objects of them. I don't mean that they are in all these places always or
at this time possessed and enjoyed as they ought to be. But they are to answer
for that, who do so commonly employ to the enslaving and oppressing of mankind
the powers, which these entrust only for their protection and defense. However
this is only abuse, violence and injustice; the right nevertheless subsists and
remains.

It is not on this subject necessary to enter into a long and minute detail of
reasoning. These principles are with us common and public; they are founded on
the good, the welfare and the happiness of mankind. They were the principles of
our ancestors, of our grandfathers and of our fathers; they may perhaps not be
at present in their full vigor; however, I trust, that they are not yet so
worn out or lost from among us, but that they still remain the principles of
the nation. They are to describe them by a word well known in our language the
principles of Whigs; whereby I don't however mean of certain modern Whigs, who
seem more fond of the word, than of any thing belonging to the character; who
have perhaps at one time or other of their lives counteracted all the measures
and contradicted all the principles that ever did an honor to the name; but I
mean of Whigs before the Revolution and at the time of it; I mean the
principles which such men as Mr. Lock, Lord Molesworth and Mr. Trenchard
maintained with their pens, Mr. Hampden and Lord John Russel with their blood,
and Mr. Algernon Sydney with both; names, which must surely by all Englishmen
ever be revered, as those of some of the first among men. But let me add, that
they are not only the principles of speculative students in their closets or of
great but unfortunate men, whom their zeal and virtue have led to martyrdom for
the liberties of their country and the welfare of mankind; but that they are
likewise the real principles of our present actual Government, the principles
of the Revolution and those on which are established the throne of the King and
the settlement of the illustrious Family now reigning over us

On the same principles rest both in general many rights of the Americans and
in particular the right now before us. These are hereby involved and interwoven
with our highest and most sacred concerns; we cannot lift up our hands to take
them away without forfeiting our national character, without renouncing the
tenets and maxims whereon we have on our most important and critical occasions
ever acted as a People; and without declaring that we claim a right to resist
and oppose all those, who oppress us ourselves, and at the same time to trample
upon and tyrannize over all others, where we hope that we have the power to do
it with impunity.

But it may be said, that these are indeed in themselves very true and
commendable opinions; but that they are here introduced on subjects not worthy
of them; a duty of a few shillings upon some sorts of paper or parchment and a
few pence upon a pound of Tea. Let us therefore more particularly consider the
nature of the claim and pretension in question. Suppose then one person to have
in his pocket an hundred pounds, but another to have the right to take it from
him and to put it into his own pocket or to do with it what he pleases; to whom
does that money belong? This needs no answer. Suppose the sum to be a thousand
or ten thousand pounds? That makes no difference. Suppose one person to have a
right to demand of another not only one certain sum or what he has about him,
but as much as he pleases and as often? This goes to the all of that other. But
suppose not one single person only to be subject to such demands from one
other, but a number of men, a colony or any other community to be so subject to
the demands of some other society. What then? Why then that will go in like
manner to their all. This seems to be so evident, that whoever shall multiply
words on the subject, will hardly do it for the sake of being convinced.

But is this case, that of the Americans; for it is said that the money raised
on them is to be employed for their own benefit, in their civil service or
military defense? Let me ask then, Who are in their case to determine, whether
any money is at all wanted for such purposes; they who pay it or they who take
it? They who take it. Who are to determine the quantity wanted? They who take
it. Who are to determine, how often it is wanted? They who take it. Who are to
determine, whether it is really laid out in the purposes pretended? They who
take it. Suppose the Americans should be of opinion or declare, that the money
so raised is used not for their advantage but the contrary; is that a bar to
the raising? No. Suppose them to complain that the money pretended to be laid
out in their civil service is given to corrupt their Governors or Judges; is
that a bar to the raising? No. Suppose them to signify, that the money alleged
to be used in their military defense is employed in paying troops to enslave
them and which they had rather be without; is that a bar to the raising? No.
Wherein then does this differ from will and pleasure in the most absolute
sensse?

This claim affects therefore most clearly the all of the Americans. Two
millions of people, subject to no less than twelve different Governments and
inhabiting, possessing and being masters of a country exceedingly larger than
that of those, who make the claim or in whose name it is made, have on this
ground no property at all, nothing which they can truly call their own, nothing
but what may at any time be demanded of them, but what they may be deprived of
without and against their will and consent. It cannot therefore surely be a
question whether or no, this is a matter of such a magnitude as to deserve the
most serious discussion. But it might here be without further words left to
every man's determination, whether this is on the one hand a reasonable ground,
whereon to put into confusion all the parts of the British empire, to throw the
mother country and her North-American colonies into the most deadly feuds and
in all appearance a civil war with one another or whether it is not on the
other hand a proposition inconsistent with the essential laws of nature,
subversive of the first and inherent rights of humanity and contrary to the
principles whereon our forefathers defended, and under the sanction of which
they have through so many civil wars and with the disposition, banishment and
change of so many Princes, delivered down to us the rights and properties,
which Englishmen now enjoy.

But it is in this dispute very often represented; that a total and absolute
dependence on the British Parliament without any exception whatsoever either
with regard to taxes or any other is liberty itself; it is British liberty,
which is the best of liberty. I answer, who says otherwise in the case of us,
who choose that Parliament; but that in some other cases, this position may
perhaps be more liable to question. Our North-American colonies are as to their
internal constitution a very free people, as free as the Venetians the Dutch or
the Swiss, or perhaps more so than any of them. This proceeds from their
Assemblies being not only the nominal but the real Representatives; of those
whom they govern. These are elected fairly, fully and often. In these
Assemblies their liberty consists and it is certainly true and genuine. But
change the scene a little; let any one Colony be taxed and governed not by
their own but by the Assembly of another; what is then become of their genuine
liberty? It is gone and lost with their own Assembly. Let all the Colonies be
so subjected to the Assembly of some one among them. That will not mend the
matter. Let us take a larger scale. Suppose this power over them be lodged in
the Parliament of ireland. We are never the nearer. Let us come toward home.
Were the kingdom of Ireland under the taxation and direction of the British
Parliament would they then think themselves to be very free? For an answer to
this question enquire of one of that country. Place then the Irish under one of
the Assemblies before mentioned. They would be yet further from home and it
might not be better with them. Let us take our own turn. Suppose Great Britain
on the like conditions under the Parliament of Ireland. God forbid. I think
that I have but one more point, before that I am at an end of my combination.
Place over our heads with all these powers in their full sorce the Assembly of
Massachusetts Bay, what then? I fancy that we should soon change a certain tune
and sing another song, than what we do now. Let me then most seriously question
any man, from whose breast all candor and justice are not totally banished,
where is as to liberty or property the difference between any of the cases now
supposed, and that original one which has given occasion to them. I speak this
no otherwise than with the utmost reverence and respect toward our own
legislature; but are we to conceive or would it be a compliment to them, or
does any one mean to say, that they are not men, or that they are to be
excepted and exempted from the reasons and the rules, which obtain and take
place in the case of all the rest of mankind?

One of the long robe may perhaps demand the exact time when these rights begin
in rising and growing states to take place, and how many years, months and days
a colony must be first settled. I may venture to promise to resolve such an
one; when he shall tell me in how many years, months and days an oaken plant
grows to be an oaken tree, or a boy becomes a man; which seem to be two much
easier questions. The boundaries are seldom nicely distinguishable. where
nature proceeds with an even and constant hand. But it is not difficult to
answer that the event has already taken place, when near two millions of people
are in full and peaceable possession of such a country as is occupied by our
North-American colonies.

It may likewise be asked, whether these laws are applicable to all cases of
private property between man and man. But the full resolution of this question
might demand a Spanish casuist, or a book as big as a volume of our statutes at
large. Any man may for me amuse himself with trying the titles of nations to
the territories and possessions, which they fill, enjoy and inhabit, as he
would do those between man and man about a house and garden; and should the
process in the first case last as long in proportion, as one does in the latter
before some Courts of Justice in Europe the defendants need not perhaps desire
a longer or surer possession.

But may not these principles go far, if carried to the extent? That is indeed
a very serious question and perhaps well worthy of consideration. Our colonies
are content that we should at our pleasure regulate their trade provided that
what we do is bona fide, really, truly and sincerely for that purpose, and that
only; but they deny that we shall tax them. They assent and agree to the first;
but they absolutely refuse the last. These two different points do likewise not
stand on the same foundation; they have to the one submitted ever since their
origin; it has been corroborated by their perpetual and constant consent and
acquiescence; the other is a novelty, against which they have from its first
attempt most strongly protested and acted. Why cannot we therefore content us
with the line drawn by themselves and with the present establishment, from
which we receive such prodigious benefit and advantage, now arising and yearly
increasing? But may not they in time extend their objections to this also? The
course of things and the flux of years will certainly produce very many things
more extraordinary than that. All the whole of our colonies must no doubt one
day without force or violence fall off from from the parent state, like ripe
fruit in the maturity of time. The earth itself having had a beginning, cannot
but decay likewise, pass away and have an end. But why should we be over
curious about objects perhaps very far remote and disturb ourselves about a
futurity which does not affect us, and the distance of which, we don't know?
Why should we shake the fruit unripe from the tree, because it will of course
drop off, when it shall be ripe? Every time has its own circumstances,
according to which the events of it must be provided for, when they happen.
That cannot now be done. New and unreasonable demands, injustice, oppression,
violence on our parts, will forward and hasten these events even before their
time; let us withold our hands from these things; we have never yet had reason
to boast ourselves of such expedients, nor, let me add, ever to repent us of
the contrary conduct.

There are no doubt in all governments many most important points unsettled and
undetermined; such in particular as relate to the limits between the power of
the Sovereign and the obedience of the Subject. This must always be the case
between Kings and their People, principal States and their dependencies, Mother
Countries and their Colonies. It is very much the part of every prudent ruler
whether the First Minister of a Prince or any other to avoid with the utmost
care and solicitude all measures, which may possibly bring any such critical
circumstances into public debate and dispute. It is always a bad sign when such
contests arise; they cannot do so without the disorder of the whole, but they
are to the Sovereign in particular ever dangerous and often fatal. They may
perhaps be compared to gunpowder, than whose grain nothing is more harmless,
while it is at rest; but let it be put into action and it will make the wildest
ravages all around or overthrow the strongest bulwarks and fortifications.

To how many of these questions did our Charles the First give in his true rise
or occasion, and how dearly did he abide it! How many points of this sort are
undetermined between Great Britain and Ireland, which are now to our mutual
happiness entirely dormant, but which started and pursued with obstinacy and
eagerness might make one or both of the islands run with blood. They need
perhaps be no further looked for, than certain doctrines formerly advanced by
Mr. Molyneux on the one hand and the l^w of Poinings on the other. But it has
pleased Providence to shelter us hitherto from this mischief. It is not now
perhaps many months, since we did not want an opportunity to have engaged in
one such. The alterations of a late bill from that country were only
accidental. But does any one doubt, whether some forward man might not have
been found, who would on occasion have furnished reasons better or worse to
maintain the right of making them. But how much more prudent was our conduct?
If peace and harmony are then so beneficial and desirable between Great Britain
and Ireland and the measures producing or insuring them good, upright and wise;
why do these things so alter their nature, when they are applied to America?

The present accursed question between us and our colonies how long was it
unknown or unthought of! Who heard of it from the first rise of those
settlements, until a very few years ago; that a fatal attempt forced it into
notice and importance. But it is now already setting at work fleets and armies;
it threatens the confusion and perhaps the destruction of both countries and
but too probably of one of them; although God only knows whether the calamity
will fall on that of the two, which many men may now imagine and believe to be
the most in danger.

This point is not alone; there are other questions of the same sort,
concerning which no man now disturbs himself; but which stirred and started by
new demands or any other means might in like manner band against one another
Great Britain and its Colonies. Princes and States never do better, than when
their claims are not fathomed nor if I may use the expression, the bottom of
them over curiously founded and examined. The terms of municipal laws usually
favor the Sovereign, they are often framed or drawn by his creatures and
dependents; the law of nature is more commonly in support of the people and the
public; it is the production of him who sees with an equal eye, Prince and
Subject, High and Low, European and American. God forbid, that two such parts
of the British empire, as the mother country and her colonies should in our
times divide and contend against one another on the sanction of these two
different laws, which ought in every state to be constantly blended and united
and which can never without its utter disorder and confusion be made to strike
and to clash against each other. Whenever that shall happen, let us be assured,
that we are running upon a rock, whereon we cannot but make shipwreck.

I have hitherto, on the law of nature and the common rights of humanity
considered the claim of the Americans not to be here in England taxed by us
against their own will and consent. It rests firmly on that foundation; but I
don't mean to say that it rests on that only. Could this be removed, there
would yet remain another on which it would nevertheless stand sure and
unshaken; I mean that of the Special Constitution of Great Britain, which does
herein most justly and wisely coincide with the general constitution of
humanity and require that the property of no man living under its protection
should without his consent by himself or representative be taken from him or;
according to the language of the time, that representation should go along with
taxation.

But this argument has particularly been in the hands of the first men of our
times. They have set it in its full light and their authority has recommended
it to the attention of their country. It is well known and well understood and
I am persuaded that it is unanswerable. But I bear more respect both to those
persons and to the public, than to go over it again so much to its
disadvantage. I will therefore beg leave only to assume this reason and to join
it to my former; when the right of the Americans will stand on this double
foundation of the general law of nature and of the particular constitution of
Great Britain.

However it has been said, that the Americans are in our Parliament virtually
represented. How that should be when they are not really so, I shall leave to
be explained by those who advance it. But God forbid, that the condition of
British subjects should ever be such, as for a whole people of them to be in
danger of being stripped of all their properties only by the logic of such an
unmeaning word or distinction, as that is.

But what are the exact bounds and limits of real representation? I will excuse
myself from entering into that question. But will an American scruple to say;
that if in any future time things should here at home be from their present
state so far changed and the constitution of GreatBritain so lost, that a great
majority of its Representatives shall be named by a handful of needy men; that
they shall most evidently and most notoriously be both chosen by a corrupt and
undue influence and be afterward guided and governed by the same; will he not
say, that it may at that distant day better become such a mock Representative
to prove their own right of taxing Britain, than to pretend to tax America?

So much for consent and representation. But there is another ground, whereon
the Americans likewise rely, which is that of their own provincial charters. I
shall leave the particulars of this subject to themselves, who are best
acquainted with them. However I will in general say, that these charters are no
doubt in aid and assistance of the two sanctions before mentioned very properly
brought for the shortening and silenceing of disputes and debates, by the
producing the special authority of government. But they must be interpreted by
those before mentioned and consistently with them. They cannot be construed so
as to overturn the others. It would be the most downright absurdity and the
most direct contradiction in itself, to talk of a Grant or Patent or Charter of
rights given to any one to take away all the rights he had in the world, to
confer on him the privilege of having nothing of his own now, nor of being able
to acquire any such thing in time to come, neither he himself or his
descendants after him. Every thing of this kind must be understood so as to
coincide with the original, inherent rights of any single person or community,
whether as men or as Britons.

Charters would without doubt be for some purposes very effectual, if every
thing would take place as it is written on a paper or parchment. Suppose a
parcel of miserable people starved out of their native country or persecuted
and prosecuted there, because they don't believe just what some other men do or
pretend to do; that they cannot leave their homes without the consent of their
persecutors; that they must take with them a piece of parchment, did their
tyrants write thereon, that their descendants should go upon all fours, shall
be born with hoofs instead of hands and with instinct instead of reason and the
faculty of speech, and that these things would so happen; this might to be sure
give very notable powers over them: they might then be yoked as horned cattle,
saddled and bridled as horses, or fleeced and sheared as sheep; the difference
in the species would naturally and necessarily effect this; but nothing of all
this will come to pass. This future offspring will notwithstanding be born with
the nature, the qualities and the talents and consequently with the claims, the
rights and privileges of men. But suppose these strange terms to be on account
of the absurdity of them dropped, but that there are instead really entered on
the parchment or charter such an arbitrary superiority, such despotic and
uncontrollable powers and prerogatives over these poor people and their
posterity, as are only sitting, suitable and analogus to the former
circumstances, will this in right or in reason be a whit more valid than the
other, or where is the sense or justice in demanding such enormous consequences
when we are forbidden the unnatural premises, from which alone they can follow?
Suppose that it was on a paper or parchment written in fair characters; that
the horses and cattle of the New Forest in Hampshire should have to them and
their heirs forever the said Forest and it might be added to hold in free
soccage of the manor of East-Greenwich; suppose that dents were made in the
paper or parchment and a stamp put upon it, and that it was signed, sealed, and
delivered as an act and deed; what would be the effect? It would be answered
that it would be a thing to laugh at; for how should brute beasts take
property, who have neither understanding or capacity or any means for that
purpose; that it would be contrary to nature for them so to do. But let me
demand in my turn, where is the difference in the effect, whether it is written
that the beasts shall become men or that men shall become beasts; that a number
of beasts shall be able to take and hold property or that a community of men
shall not? The one is just as contrary to nature as the other. It might indeed
be a happy day for despotism, could such things be done; but they are beyond
its strength. The great Author of the world has for the transcendent purposes
of his unfathonable wisdom placed in the hearts of men, pride, ambition,
avarice and self-interest; but he has at the same time been pleased with his
most benevolent hand and by the laws of nature and the course of things to set
bounds to the power of these passions, which they can pass no more, than the
sea can exceed its shores.

So much for charters in general. However! will likewise say something
concerning one particular charter before I leave the subject. When the havoc
among charters happened in England a short time before the revolution and which
contributed not a little to produce that event, America was not spared. About
the year sixteen hundred eighty-four a quo warranto was on that head issued
against Massachuset's-Bay. Some of the colonies did on the like occasion give
way and throw themselves on the pleasure of the King. Massachuset's-Bay refused
to do this. They were exparte and for nonappearance condemned and their
charter shared the same fate as that of the city of London and so many others.
Four years afterward the Revolution happened. As soon as ever the news of it
arrived at Boston the colony declared in favor of it. They took possession of
King James's Governor and of the rest of his creatures and sent them all home
to England. But then it will perhaps be said, they recovered in return their
charter. Is there almost faith in man to believe otherwise? Other cololonies
fared well enough, who had not withstood the will of the King, and whose
charters had not been vacated in the court of justice. They did themselves put
them again in execution and no words were made. Our own charters here at home
were likewise returned. The colony of Massachuset's-Bay went on that account
first into the Convention Parliament; but there they could not get through. It
is well known that our Parliaments are not usually dissolved or prorogued,
while any business is depending, which there is an inclination to pass. They
had then nothing left but to beg and pray of the King's Ministers. But is it
credible that they could not procure the restoration of their charter of these
Revolution Ministers, of these Makers and Unmakers of Kings, who had so lately
been on the same bottom with them and in whose cause the colony had so readily
declared itself, but who had now obtained their own ends? Tired out therefore
with delays and not being sure of the worst that might happen, they were
obliged in the end to accept of a new charter mutilated and castrated of many
of the most important and essential privileges of the old. I shall take notice
of no other particulars, than that before they chose annually their own
Governor, DeputyGovernor and Secretary. These were from this time to be
appointed during pleasure by the King. Of what extreme consequence the change
in the nomination of these their three Chief Officers has proved to them, no
man at all acquainted with the name of Massachuset's-Bay can be so ignorant of
their history, as not to be informed and sensible. Hence their differences with
their own Governors there and with our own Ministers at home. Hence their
present Military Governor and the armies and fleets now gone or going against
them. Hence the strange provision said to be in agitation, that their blood may
not be liable to be answered for there. They would otherwise in all appearance
be at this moment on these subjects in the same situation, as their neighbors
of Connecticut and Rhode Island, with whose charters their own agreed, until
they lost it by their resistance and opposition to the will of the two last
Stuarts; when the others saved theirs by giving way. I shall leave my readers
to judge, whether it was the good or the evil contained in this poor piece of
parchment which thus united against it Stuart-Kings and Revolution Ministers.
But this charter must certainly have been granted under an evil planet, if what
some people say be true; that it is now again under displeasure at home and on
the brink of being once more reversed and altered. But that event has not on
the writing of this happened. I am therefore perfectly persuaded, that should
any thing of that kind take place, it will on the contrary be the restoration
of those its former privileges and powers, which was so unreasonably and so
unjustly denied at the Revolution. But let any one consider this history of a
charter and then reflect, whether mankind have not reason to bless themselves,
that they have some rights of a higher nature than charters, superior to them
and independent of them.

But are not we the parent country? That is a very respectable word, but so
likewise is the relation of it mutual. It has always hitherto had its full
weight with our colonies of North America and will probably continue to have,
if we can content ourselves with any tolerably reasonable sense and use of it.
But was every master and mistress of a family resident there the immediate son
and daughter of a father and mother living now at this time in England; yet
they being gone from us and having established themselves and got families of
their own, and having acquired a large territory, we could by no means even as
true and real parents make out any claim having such consequences, as that
which we advance. However the fact is very different; they left us in former
times a part of the public, as well as others; they are since become hardly
our cousin's cousins, and no man knows how far we might mount toward Adam or
Noah to settle the real relation between us. But was their history told, as it
deserves: How they have made these their great establishments at their own
charge and with almost no expense of ours: How we have ever had the total
command of the produce of that immense country, so as to regulate the commerce
and exportation of it merely according to our own advantage and convenience;
that this is grown to be an object of perhaps no less than four millions
sterling a year, all turned toward our profit; could the extreme benefit be
all set forth, which we have by this means received from the first foundation
of these colonies to this time and the cheerfulness, fidelity and loyalty
wherewith they have submitted to this; the sincere and warm friendship and
affection, which they have ever born us, while we kept ourselves within these
bounds; the assistance which we have received from them in war, as well as the
profits in peace; could all these circumstances be with very many others
favorable to them told and represented together and in their full light, the
story itself would bid fair to make these harsh and unmerited Acts of
Parliament drop out of our hands, if we held them at the time. However at least
don't let us extend a figurative and metaphorical saying to the divesting of
all their properties near upon two millions of people and make it at the same
time a warrant for ourselves to hold toward them an unjust, rapacious and
unnatural conduct, directly contrary to that of real parents toward their
children, and totally inconsistent with the expression, whereon we would ground
our pretensions.

But how do these projectors and promoters of taxes and taxing hold concerning
Ireland? Do they reckon that to be likewise within the jurisdictioa of their
ways and means and in the same predicament with America? Adventurers went
formerly from hence, others succeeded, more followed, until they were masters
of the island. It might be added, that this was done with a much greater
expense of the blood and treasure of this country than our settlements in
America ever cost us. The Representative body of Ireland is called a
Parliament; that of America an Assembly. The term of kingdom obtains in one
country and that of colony in the other. Is there any charm in the sound of
these words which makes a difference or would the author of the Stamp Act have
gone thither also; had the people of America shown a facility to his first
attempts with them and if the Parliament of Ireland had ever made difficulties
to his future demands there? Does any one imagine that learned or other
arguments would have been wanting to maintain the rectitude of the one measure,
any more than of the other?

But is there any medium? Must not we either rigorously enforce obedience from
our colonies or at once generously declare them free and independent of all
allegiance to the crown of Great Britain? To which I answer if there is a
medium between Great Britain and Ireland, why may there not be also between
Great Britain and North America? The claims of the colonies are not higher than
those of Ireland. Certain rules of mutual respect preserved between us and that
neighboring part of the King's dominions keep us on the best and happiest
terms together, terms of perpetual and almost unspeakable profit and advantage
to England. Does this overturn the constitution of Great Britain or weaken the
dependency on its crown, as some language has been? Why should not then
forberance, moderation and regard toward that a little more distant portion of
our country produce in the one case, effects consonant and answerable to what
the like causes do in the other? It is most evident and may in general be
depended on, that no evil consequences can happen from any condition or
situation between Great Britain and her colonies, which does actually and
advantageously obtain between Great Britain and Ireland. How was it there
twenty years ago, before the first or the last of these taxes were either of
them thought of? All was then peace calm and content. The repealing the first
of them, the Stamp Act, did that do any mischief? Not unless the reconciling,
uniting and connecting again all the parts of our government be such. There was
hardly any where to be found a man, but who was pleased and happy in the
measure; except a minister or two at home, who lost their power and their
places on the occasion and except a few sycophants abroad, who hoped to
recommend themselves by traducing and disturbing those, to whom they owed
assistance and protection, and who desired to fish in troubles, which they
themselves contribution greatly to create. What evil star reigns then at this
period, that these blessings cannot now take place as they formerly did?

I have on this subject no mind to play with the name of Ireland. I presume to
introduce on the scene and to couple, as it were, with America that country
only in order to expose the more plainly by the instance of the one some
notions advanced concerning the other and at the same time to the utmost of my
small power to recommend, inculcate and enforce that cautious, considerate,
brotherly and affectionate conduct toward each, which I am sure that they both
of them most exceedingly well deserve, whether of the government or of the
people of England.

It is sometimes made a claim on the Americans, that we incurred on their
account a great expense in the late war.

On whose account have we not since the Revolution incurred a great expense?
Our whole history from that time to this is little else, but a sconce of
prodigality in the service of different People or Princes, for which no man can
give any good reason. However I answer on this occasion with the fact. We did
not engage in the late war at the request of the Americans nor upon any desire
or inclination of theirs. The language at the time was on the contrary, that
the less concerned the inhabitants of our colonies appeared to be about the
encroachments of the French, the more reason we had to be jealous on the
subject. I believe that I may in support of what I am saying venture to appeal
to those, who are the best acquainted with that period. Had it been otherwise,
we should no doubt have heard enough of it. Substantial reasons might be given,
that the Americans judged better in the case, than we. There may be ground for
us to condemn ourselves for not having consulted them more on the subject, than
we did, before that we were so hasty to take up the hatchet. However there is
not the least pretense for charging to their account the consequences of a war,
which we undertook without any instance and application from them and entirely
of our own motion.

But the honor of Government is concerned. That is certainly an unaccountable
reasoning, though not perhaps very uncommon; that if Government or in plain
English, the Minister and those about him do a thing which shall be wished to
be undone, they are therefore to proceed in the same road and do many more
such, until at length the case may perhaps be beyond redress. Surely the more
credit is lost the deeper that people are plunged into mischief. The welfare
and happiness of five or six millions of mankind or more is a prodigious
object. Whoever puts himself at the helm of our State undertakes in a manner
for that. We are all mortal and fallible. One in such a situation had need to
march with the utmost caution, circumspection and foresight; should he make an
unlucky step, it is his highest duty to endeavor instantly to retreat and
retrieve it. A late Minister repealed an Act similar to the one in question and
that Statesman well knew what to do and what to avoid. In the present case a
gulf is before us, which will not admit many steps forwards, but that the
Government and the Public will both go headlong.

But their outrages. I presume these to be an object of discourse, as well as
any other subject; how can they otherwise be discussed and considered? However
I shall without declaring any opinion of my own take them up only in the light,
as they may appear to an American. He will certainly say, that these receive
their complexion from the claim of the colonies not to be taxed by us and
accordingly as that shall be grounded or not. If that is not well founded, that
then their whole opposition is unlawful, whether only concert and combination
or force or violence. That the latter indeed may be productive of more mischief
than the former, but that they are on such a supposition both of them entirely
unwarrantable. I would in this case willingly speak freely but without offense;
he would therefore certainly add, that should the Americans on the other hand
have a real right not to be so taxed, they are undoubtedly entitled likewise to
the necessary means of using and enjoying that right. That this is a rule of
the law of nature as well as of the law of the land or rather that the latter
has only borrowed it from the former. I speak with great submission; but he
would without doubt proceed, that the means used on this occasion were
absolutely those necessary ones and no other; that an object was artfully or
judiciously chosen for this tax, which is so constant a part of diet or luxury,
that it was totally impossible to prevent the tax from taking place without
hindering the commodity itself from being introduced; that therefore the
Americans must absolutely do that or lose their right; that the endeavoring to
do it by a general concert and agreement would have been no better than
building a city out of the sands of the sea; that thereupon the town of Boston
did at a sort of public meeting use every instance and application possible
both with the Captains of the tea ships and with the Governor, that the tea
might be returned, untouched and undamaged as it came; that this would have
secured their right and they desired no more; that this was absolutely refused;
that there was thereupon no expedient left for the preserving their right but
destroying the tea; that this was without any express authority of the town
done by private people, but in all appearance with the general inclination and
with the least mischief and damage possible; that there was some tea spilt, but
no blood; that this refers the whole to the first and original question of the
right; that the Americans make thereon the same claim, as the people of
Scotland would have in an essential circumstance of the Union or those of
Ireland, should the line observed between them and Great Britain be passed in
any point, which would affect their whole interest and welfare, as a nation;
that in the other colonies the Governors and Captains consented to the sending
back the tea or shutting it up in such a manner as never to be sold or
dispersed; that these did not therefore in their cases make immediate force
necessary, but that their act was in effect the same and stands on the same
ground. That there is nothing malignant in the whole matter, nothing but a
determined desire to support this their great and necessary right. This is no
doubt the American idea, as appears by many proofs and papers from that side
the water. I shall myself presume to speak no opinion in the case, much less
will I call again on the manes of our ancestors in support of this pretension.
But should it be observed, that it ends in a question, which concerns the
bounds and limits of government; I cannot on the occasion but repeat and
enforce by this example the remark before made, of how dangerous and deadly a
nature the disputes and contests are, which lead thither.

So much for the rectitude of taxing the Americans! But I may be told that I
have not yet touched the true point, that I have been doing little more, than a
man, who rides post out of his road. That Statesmen and Politicians do indeed
sometimes talk of the right and wrong, of the justice and justice of measures;
but that this is all only ostensible reasoning, while there may be at the
bottom nothing, which they really care less about. That the Great do every
where bear hard on the Little, the strong on the weak. That the hawk hunts the
partridge, the lion the wolf, and the wolf the lamb; that powerful Princes and
States oppress the Helpless, and the High and the Rich those beneath them; that
this is the course of the world and the chapter of the law of nature, which we
intend to consult and to follow; that we want money at home; that our debts are
very heavy and our resources but too nearly at an end; that we have yet fleets
and armies and are determined to bend to our will our colonies of America, and
to make them subservient to our wants and occasions; that this is at the bottom
and that all my casuistry may in the mean time serve the purposes of grocers
and pastry cooks; that if people must write about matters of state they ought
to do it like men. Very well; I join issue hereon, only don't let us go too
fast; one thing at a time.

I answer that you cannot force them nor is there any appearance that you can.
The number of free people in those colonies is reckoned at toward two
millions. The common calculation is of one sencible or fighting man in five
persons and this is supposed to be rather under than over the truth. This will
give us at least between three and four hundred thousand fighting men on the
number before mentioned. Mr. Rome tells us indeed in some letters etc. lately
published in opposition to the colonies; that there is hardly any thing more
common, than to hear them boast of particular colonies that can raise on a
short notice a hundred thousand fighting men. However to have nothing to do
with these exaggerations and to take only the number before mentioned; what
expectation can there be of sending from hence an army fit to subdue that
continent, a country not defended indeed on the side of the sea with forts and
castles built by men, but extremely strong within by the natural fortifications
of forests and rivers.

But can they arm so many? In any country very greatly taxed and much more so
than its inhabitants would willingly bear with, it is impossible consistently
with such a state of things to arm the whole body of the people. These might be
apt to count noses and to consider who were the stronger, they themselves or
the tax gatherers and the Redcoats or White coats or Black coats or any other,
who support them. The difficulty would be yet greater, were there any further
dissatisfaction. But these are all democratical governments, where the power is
in the hands of the people and where there is not the least difficulty or
jealousy about putting arms into the hands of every man in the country.

But are they united among themselves? In the cause of not being taxed by us it
is well understood, how much they are so. All accounts and reports from thence
of all men and of all parties run in that style and concur in that circumstance
It was so experienced to a very great degree concerning the stamps and has now
been found the same on the occasion of the Tea. Their conduct has in this case
been every where alike and correspondent. The Tea is either returned without
being landed or received without being suffered to be sold, at New York, at
Pennsylvania, at Carolina, at all the places to which it was sent. We reckon
entirely without our host, if we don't expect to have to do with a union of
that continent or depend on any measures insufficient to subdue the whole.

But let me ask; how can we expect otherwise? They are not unacquainted with
the history of the mother country They know the weight of the taxing hand here.
They have heard of our debt of one hundred and forty millions of pounds
sterling incurrred since the Revolution besides other hundreds of millions
spent currently within the same period The time to come is to be judged of by
the time past. Will our brethren of America expect, that this hand should be
lighter on them at a distance or that our breasts will feel more for them than
for ourselves? Let an Englishman make the case his own and question himself;
what he should think were he of that country and his whole fortune and concerns
there. Would not he believe his all to be at stake upon the cast? Does any one
in America or in England imagine, that all these disputes and feuds are only at
the bottom about a duty of three pence upon a pound of tea? How can then any
candid man doubt, whether there will be a general union and concurrence on the
subject or wonder if there is so?

They are said to have already Committees of Correspondence and no doubt
necessity will teach them other means of moving and acting together. Every
thing is there by choice and election; they will probably have at their head as
capable and as wise men, as are to be found among them. The power and influence
of Governors and other civil officers appointed from hence, must on an open
rupture have an end. Our authority would perhaps then extend little further,
than where it was enforced by our own troops.

But what are an untrained and undisciplined multitude? Could not an
experienced officer with a few regular regiments do what he would in America? I
answer, that a different story may be told. In the war before last our measures
directed at home were every where unsuccessful. The plains of Flanders were
fatten'd with some of the best blood of Britain and of Ireland. Our government
was shaken almost to the foundation by a rebellion contemptible in its
beginning. Were we more fortunate in our attempt by sea against Pondicherry or
that afterward against Port I 'Orient? But the people of New England
maintained at that time the honor of our arms. It is well known, that they
carried on with their own counsels and with their own soldiery and under the
command of one of their own planters against Cape Breton and Louisbourg an
expedition, the event of which need not now be told. We did not begin in a much
better manner the last war. I am unwilling to call to mind our first campaigns
in Germany, our situation and treaty of Closter-Severn, the fate of Minorca or
the histories of Bradock and Abercrombie. But who were at that time the first
to stem the tide of our ill fortune! Was not it an American militia who
commanded by Sir William Johnson, a gentleman at that time of the country met,
fought and beat the French and Indians under Monsieur Dieskau, and made
prisoner their commander? But what wonders were afterward done by our people
properly conducted and directed? It is very true, and I am sure, that I have no
inclination to depreciate them. But neither did those of America want their
share therein. However the courage of our countrymen was never yet questioned;
but may they always unite and employ it against our common enemies and never be
encamped or embattled against one another either in America or any where else.

But we are masters at sea and wherever our ships can come. We may do, whatever
a fleet can. Very true; but it cannot sail all over North America. It is said,
that Marshal Saxe had before the declaration of the last war but one, and at
the time of our army being in Germany, conceived a design to have landed on our
coast with ten thousand men, and to have tried the fortune of a brisk march to
London He did not find this so easy to execute as he thought for. He was most
happily disappointed. But there was an object. No one can tell the consequence,
had he succeeded. The present is a very different matter No immediate
impression upon the town of Boston nor possession taken of it by means of a
fleet nor the same circumstance with regard to any other towns of America
liable thereto by their situation will carry the command of that whole
continent or force it to submit to measures so universally against their bent
and inclination.

It may however be said that this is not the plan. The charter of the town of
Boston is to be changed and their trade suspended and other measure of the very
strongest sort to be enforced against them. The moving mountain is according to
the imagination of Dr. Swift to hang over them and the sun not shine or the
rain or the dew to fall on them until they are brought to submission and made
to the rest of America an example of the danger of refractoriness and
disobedience to the mother country; all which we think may and will with time
be compassed and accomplished.

This is indeed as to the question of force the true point of the matter; I
mean, which will at last and at the end of a long trial get the better; but I
add, that this will probably not be Great Britain. Here I must again crave
leave to write with freedom. If it is the first wisdom of a private man to know
himself; so must it likewise be that of a State to consider in all its measures
its own condition and situation. The searching into our circumstances neither
makes or mars them. But what must be our case, should we have any wound or
mischief and that it might not be probed or examined? We must ever suppose our
adversaries to be informed and not by shutting our own eyes pretend to blind
other people. I shall therefore without scruple enquire into the state of the
public, as far as it concerns my subject.

The condition of the great staple manufactures of our country is well known.
Those of the linen and the silk are in the greatest distress and the woolen and
the linen are now publicly banded and contending against one another. One part
of our people is starving at home on the alms of their parishes and another
running abroad to this very country, that we are contending with. The produce
of North America used to be sent yearly to Britain is reckoned at about four
millions sterling; the manufactures of Britain and other commodities returned
from hence at nearly the same sum; the debts due from people in America to the
British merchants here at about six millions or a year and a half of that
commerce. I say, the time past must be our guide with respect to that to come.
Supposing therefore the Americans to act in this case, as they did in that of
the Stamp Act; we shall then have yearly until the final settlement of this
affair manufactures to the value of four millions sterling left and heaped on
the hands of our merchants and master manufacturers or we shall have workmen
and poor people put out of employ and turned adrift in that proportion. There
will likewise be withdrawn from our home consumption and out of our general
trade and traffic North American commodities to the same value, and debts will
to the immense sum above mentioned be with held from private people here. This
was the train of things begun before and we must look for the like again. What
effects these things will produce considering the present state of our trade,
manufactures and manufacturers, the condition of our poor at home and the
numbers of our people running abroad, it don't want many words to explain and
set forth. They were before very severely felt for the time, that they lasted
and it is apprehended, that the present situation of the Public is yet more
liable to the impression. These are some of the difficulties and distresses
which we are for the sake of a trail of skill with our colonies going to bring
on ourselves and which must be perpetually magnifying and increasing, as long
as the unnatural contest shall continue.

To these a former administration gave way; but it is to be supposed, that the
present has by returning to he shock resolved to be more callous on the
occasion and to leave the Americans, the merchants and the manufacturers to
settle among themselves their matters as they may. Our people will indeed be
less clamorous about the ears of their betters if they shall all run and
emigrate out of the kingdom. But there is a circumstance not yet mentioned,
which will bid fair to go further and which may but too probably involve in one
common confusion the nation, the government and the administration itself. I
mean the danger of a disorder or failure of the public revenue, the difficulty
or impossibility to pay the interest of the debt, the navy, the army the civil
list and our other expenses; if the present contention shall proceed and
continue.

I desire in explanation of this to consider our present income, our out goings
and our resources. I will not enter into any detail thereon; the particulars in
gross will be sufficient for the purpose before us. I will however in order to
be the better understood premise something about the revenue in general. It may
be divided into two parts, the one of taxes laid in perpetuity, the other of
such as are granted by the year and for the year. The first part consists of
all our taxes in general whatsoever, except the Land tax. and the annual
Malt-tax; the latter consists of these two only. Perpetual taxes are now in the
language of Europe often expressed by the name of funds, as affording a fixed
and settled foundation for any special use and particularly for that of
borrowing money. It was to answer the interest of our debts, that our own funds
were established and they are now pledged for that purpose. These of ours have
been chiefly thrown into three great common ones called the General, the
Aggregate and the South Sea Funds. These are sometimes with all other funds or
perpetual taxes whatsoever destined and settled for the discharge of the
interest of our debt comprehended and united together in discourse and called
the Sinking Fund; although there is in reality no one particular Fund of that
name, any more than there is such a piece of money as a pound sterling or a
French livre. The civil list is placed on the same Funds, as the interest of
the Public Debt. What remains annually of the whole collection of those Funds
after the satisfying these two encumbrances is, what is meant by the surplus of
the Sinking Fund. I have thought proper to preface these few things, that my
own language may at least be understood, in what little I shall say on the
subject.

The interest of our debt amounts to near upon five millions a year; all
annuities for lives or years, every thing redeemable or irredeemable included.
The Civil List is eight hundred thousand pounds a year. The surplus of the
Sinking Fund is changing and uncertain, that being composed of very many
variable parts. It is impossible to fix it, but I will at an average for the
sake of round numbers suppose it to be two millions and more, about as much
more as will answer to what the interest of the debt may want of five millions.
We shall then have about seven millions three quarters for the produce of our
perpetual Taxes and Funds. Our annual taxes remain then only to be considered
which are easily reckoned; the Land Tax granted for a million and an half at
three shillings in the pound, as it now is; the Malt-tax always granted at
three quarters of a million. These sums put together give us about ten millions
of pounds sterling, being our present annual national income and likewise our
present annual national expense; including what may at times be paid toward
the discharge of the Public Debt and besides the collection, which is not to my
present purpose. Should any one be of opinion, that the surplus of the Sinking
Fund is either over charged or undercharged, he has my consent to make such
addition to it or subtraction from it, as he shall please. Neither the one or
the other will affect the argument which I am upon. Our receipts and
disbursments will in either case go hand in hand. I shall therefore without any
more nice disquisition take these at the medium of about ten millions sterling
each.

So much for our income and our expenses. Let us next consider our resources; I
mean what resources we may be supposed to have in our power without creating
any new debt. The first to occur will be the surplus of the Sinking Fund. We
apply to course to this on almost all occasions. We are by law obliged to
discharge regularly the interest of our debt; but whatever we may be in
prudence and a proper care of ourselves and of those after us, we are by no
contract or engagement bound to do more or to pay off any part of the principal
of it. This surplus is therefore one resource; but it is such no otherwise or
further, than it can be spared from our current expenoes, toward which it is
commonly in whole or in part taken. We can for our present purpose reckon only
on so much of it, as might otherwise be employed toward lessening the capital
of our debt. We have now had twelve years of peace, in which time I reckon,
that we have discharged about eight millions of that capital. This will
therefore at an average give us by the year too thirds of a million or
something more than six hundred thousand pounds. This is what we may look to
for one of our resources. But we have likewise another, which is the Land tax.
That is now at three shillings in the pound, but it is sometimes at four. We
may therefore count in case of exigency on one shilling more, that is on half a
million. These two sums amount together to about one million one hundred
thousand pounds. These are our resources and without borrowing these are all.

Let us next turn in our thoughts, whether these eleven hundred thousand pounds
a year, being a little more than a tenth part of our present income, are likely
to be sufficient for this American occasion. Fleets and armies, ships of war
and regiments are the means, the Tip-staves and the Constables, which are to
execute the measures in question. A million goes but a very little way with us
in such articles. This business must in it conclude a supposition, that all our
colonies, all our ancient colonies on that continent may in the progress of it
be combined and united in one common association, interest and defense. There
can be no reasonable hopes of success, nothing but mortification and
disappointment directly in view by proceeding on any plan, which does not
comprehend the probability of that circumstance. What a field is then here
opened? Is our million or eleven hundred thousand pounds to furnish us there
likewise? However these things concern only our expenses. Let us consider the
other side of our situation; how much our income is at the same time likely to
be lessened. Four millions sterling yearly of the produce of America; as many
of the merchandise of Great Britain; more of debts here at home withheld and
kept back from our duties, our customs and our excise. What an operation on the
revenue! Is our million one hundred thousand pounds to supply all this besides?
How is it possible either on the one hand. that a person having these
circumstances before his eyes should set on foot the present measures against
our colonies or on the other, that any one having capacity and understanding to
be at the head of the government and administration of a great kingdom should
overlook them? This seems to be like not discerning the sun at noonday or the
moon and the stars by night.

There is from the general condition of our country, but too much reason to
apprehend, that the public revenue is without these additional causes finking
and decreasing. This could not but add greatly to our difficulties in the
situation before described. However it is to be hoped, that this is only
surmise and opinion. I shall not take it into the present account; but most
assuredly any one at the head of our affairs ought not to forget it in his, if
it is true.

But it may be said, that we will in the supposed exigency borrow as our
predecessors have done before us. I answer that this may very probably be then
out of our power. I will not go upon a general discussion, whether we should
enter into another war, with the same credit we have hitherto had; although we
may have but too much reason to reflect on that subject. But the consideration
properly before us is, what would be the state of our credit under a revolt and
separation of settlements in America, that great and essential source of our
riches and revenue? Loans and money advanced to us have as yet been reckoned
equally secure, there has been no doubt made of the regular payment of the
interest nor in consequence of a public market for the principal, whether we
should ourselves happen to be more or less successful on any occasion, wherein
we were at the time concerned and for which they were borrowed. They were as
safe under the defeats and disappointments of the war before, as upon the
victories and conquests of the last. But things could not in this case but be
much changed. The security of millions lent must depend upon the future chance
and fortune of war. It might be made a doubt, what fruits would for some years
to come be received from provinces mangled and mutilated in a severe contest
decided to their disadvantage, should these at last return to us again; but on
one could overlook, what must be the case should the event terminate against us
and end after an expense of much treasure and blood in so fatal and inestimable
a loss on our side, as that of these colonies would be. However no man knows,
whether this affair might run into a very long tail. A general breach and
defection of these colonies would cut the sinews of our power. We could not
most probably in such a situation long continue to provide and pay the interest
of our most enormous debt already incurred and subsisting. It need not be
repeated, that it is the assistance received from their commerce and produce,
which enables us now to do it. Deprived of that it will be but to little
purpose for us to be inventing new Funds at home. We have enough of them
already. More would only run foul of one another. We may in that day without
the operations of a war in America, without the sending or supplying fleets or
armies at a distance, without creating new debts, new Funds and new taxes have
at our own homes, from our actual situation, business on our hands, but too
sufficient to engage and employ us.

But it may be asked, what will be the consequence should we from these causes
become unable to pay the interest of our present debt. I will be bold to say,
that there is no man living wise enough to answer that question in its extent.
Experience teaches men; but there is no proceeding history or tradition of any
state or nation whatsoever, which can throw sufficient light on that
proposition. There never was before in the world such a debt contracted or
subsisting, as the British. Letters and books are older than money, I mean than
gold and silver commonly current and having their weight known by a stamp. But
there is no occasion to ransack ancient times on this subject. The discovery of
Mexico and Peru, and the possession of them by the Spaniards is the era from
whence we are to date the beginning of the present plenty in Europe of these
two precious metals, which command often individuals and sometimes
commonwealths and kingdoms. The art of Funding was formerly very confined It is
a succession of English administrations, which has carried it to an extent
never before known among men. It is a new experiment in a state. There is no
example of it in the annals of mankind. We are at a loss where to look for the
consequences of such an unprecedented and unheard of deficiency or bankruptcy,
as this would prove. However we cannot but have before our eyes disorder,
anarchy and confusion; the monied interest of the nation banded against the
landed and the landed against the monied; rich monied men brought to beggary
and the land drained of the utmost farthing which can be forced from it; every
one catching rending and providing for the present moment; our manufactures and
commerce at a stand; the middling people emigrating out of our country and the
poor in famine or in sedition; foreigners pressing for their demands and the
Dutch particularly in rage and almost in madness for their countless millions
trusted and hazarded in our country; perhaps at the same time our navy unmanned
and our army in mutiny for want of pay. Who can withal tell the end; for the
debt, the burden and the demand will ever remain? There was a time, when the
Romans had formerly withdrawn themselves from this island, that the possessions
became here through the weakness and helplessness of those remaining the prize
and the prey of all plunderers pirates, robbers and conquerors who came and
seized upon them; until that these people themselves, the Danes, the Saxons and
the Normans replenished and strengthened again the country. Whether the like
scenes will on the same spot be once more acted or what issue awaits us, he
only knows in whose hands these events are. But we must necessarily expect that
the distant or detached parts of our empire, will fall from us; the stronger
and the bigger will probably provide for and govern themselves, the weaker and
the lesser sick away or seek another master. I don't at all mean that they have
any inclination so to do, where we give no cause of provocation; but the reins
of government will in such a conjuncture of course and of themselves drop out
of our hands; we shall no longer be able to hold them No man can tell whether
Great Britain itself might at that time continue in one or whether it may again
be split and divided into two. There have not been wanting endeavors toward
that end. I don't now pretend to decide at whose door this principally lies. It
is not perhaps one man or one party only, that is in fault. There have been on
one hand most unjust and cruel persecutions. High and strong resentments of
these are no otherwise than natural and warrantable. But they have in one
respect been carried to an unreasonable extent. Reflections have been made and
continued, where they are totally ungrounded and unmerited. They have hitherto
been born with a national good sense, that brings more honor to the parties,
than all the ribaldry in the world can ever do them discredit. But who knows,
how their effects may be felt in such a time, as is before described? What a
situation! Britain or England left alone with a debt of hundred and forty
millions sterling on its head! How can any one have before his eyes such an
event yet run on in he road, which leads directly toward it? We need not
perhaps be nice in measuring our force with that of the Americans; the evil of
such a day will but too sufficiently decide the contest.

But all is not yet said which this subject demands. I have hitherto only
considered us and our colonies as engaged between ourselves, not a word has
been said of any foreign state meddling in the matter That is yet behind. We
must look upon our colonies in the light of the provinces of Holland when they
contended with Spain. The wish the hand of every man will be against us. I will
not enter into a general discourse of politics how far it may be for the common
good of mankind to split great states into small ones, to divide them into a
size fit to profit and benefit others, but not to overbear or distress them.
Let us consider the subject by examples familiar to us. Mexico and Peru are
more distant from Great Britain, than our colonies of North America, from Spain
or France; but were those in a state of defection and separation from the
Spaniards, I wonder, whether we should find a way to approach them or to avail
ourselves in any manner of that circumstance. France was pretty well plumed in
the last war; but nevertheless were the reviving or beginning settlements of
Pondicherry, of Mauritius and Madagascar disjoined from it or its own continent
broken once more into several different parts and separate governments, would
our endeavors contribute to unite them? Should Batavia; the Spice Islands and
the Cape of Good Hope revolt from the United Provinces, would not Englishmen
try to profit by the conjuncture? I will not touch on the Brazils, that may be
a tender point. But would none of all mankind, neither French or Spaniards or
Dutch or Portuguese or Danes or Swedes, to say nothing of the Russians or of
the new maritime State of Prussia; would none of them all give directly or
indirectly aid, assistance, encouragement, countenance or protection to our
colonies? Would they not trade or traffic with them, would they supply them
with nothing wherewith to defend themselves or offend us? Is it very
practicable to watch and guard such immense coasts, or do we with all the navy
of England in our ports find this so easy, with respect to those only of Kent
and Suffex at home? Did neither England or France support formerly the seven
united Provinces in their breach with Spain? Have the French at this time
afforded no essential assistance to the Turks nor another nation to the
Russians, while each continues at peace with the enemies of their respective
friends? Are the independence of the British colonies in North America and
their disjunction from GreatBritain no object to other nations; are not they in
particular as much so to France as this Turkish and Russian squabble? Was that
nation formerly ever wanting to Scotland or insensible of its interest in
assisting that division? I don't at all mean hereby to signify any attempts or
endeavors of other Governments to take possession of these colonies or any
inability in them to defend themselves from that circumstance; but I mean the
general desire and inclination, which there would assuredly be in all Europe to
see them disjoined from our nation and to become absolute distinct,
unconnected, independent states and governments in larger or in smaller
proportions and more or less like the present states of Holland, as it should
happen. Were there in sight such a condition with respect of Mexico and Peru or
the Dutch settlements in the East Indies would not the English without
insisting on becoming themselves masters thereof be most abundantly contented
with their general advantage resulting there from? It cannot be doubted* but
that there will be found a conduct and actions consequent and correspondent to
such universal and almost unanimous views and wishes of mankind.

This is all said on a supposition of peace. But what if one or more of the
greatest powers in Europe should in a most critical and difficult moment
declare war against us? Have France and Spain forgot the loss of Canada and
Georgia and the many defeats and disgraces received in the last contest with
us? Have they for their honor or interest no desire of revenge nor that those
provinces should again return to their own crowns? On whom does it depend
whether it shall in the case supposed be war or peace? Is this to be determined
at London, or at Madrid or Versailles? Is it in the power and in the breast of
ourselves or of those, who are most our rivals and whose enmity may be said to
be hardly yet cooled? Are four years past since we had two alarms? Is one year
gone since we had one? Should there now be happily at the head of one or other
government a Personage inclined to peace; yet how uncertain are the days of
every mortal and how are Princes, Ministers or States tempted into action by
circumstances, opportunities and advantages? Let us well weigh what it is for a
private man, but much more for a great nation to part with the means of their
prosperity out of their own hands and to place it in the power and
determination of those, of whom they have on account of a long and ancient
rivalship and the continuance of many bloody wars the utmost reason to be
suspicious and jealous.

We cannot too much consider or reflect upon what happened between Spain and
the Dutch Provinces at their breach and separation. The Spanish Government
consisted at that time, of Spain, of Portugal, of Mexico and Peru and other
provinces of America, of the Spanish and Portuguese being all the European
settlements at that time in the East Indies and of Flanders making seventeen
provinces whereof those now united and then revolted were only seven. How
unequal a match! But yet the battle was not to the strong. The story and event
of their war are well known. I am not about to repeat them. How little did in
the beginning the Spaniards or Portuguese or even the Dutch themselves dream
that the latter would before long strip and divest the former of the chief of
these their settlements in the East Indies and make them their own. They were
nevertheless different nations, spoke different languages, had different
customs and religions inconsistent together and were themselves before the end
extremely odious to one another. The Dutch obtained nothing except by sorce,
victory and conquest. But surely we are well aware, how different things may in
these respects be between us and the Americans and how much to the advantage of
the latter. We are one nation, with the same language the same manners and the
same religion. Their Seamen, their Soldiers, their People are ours and ours
theirs. How easy will be the transition or the change of dependence, protection
or government between one and the other. Our people do already and at this
moment seek with them shelter and refuge from their domestic poverty and
misery. Should ever these our provinces in the events of chance and time come
to look us in the face with any near equality, would it then be a very strange
thing, if they should cause a general revolt of all or of almost all the seamen
of the British Empire? These might not look upon themselves as engaging or
acting against their country but as choosing between two parts of it. They will
at their pleasure distribute the titles of unreasonable and unjust, of injured
and oppressed. The best terms and the best treatment will not fail to carry the
greater numbers. There is perhaps on the one side toward this brave and
deserving body of men a most cruel, unjust and impolitic practice which has
long cried for vengeance and which cannot fail to be one day heard and at that
moment perhaps as likely as at any other. It is in every one's discourse, that
something of the same kind may happen with respect to our common soldiery; I
will not therefore dwell on the point. But what part might our Islands in the
West Indies take at such a conjuncture? To whom are they the nearest or on whom
do they most depend for their lumber and other necessary circumstances of their
trade? Would there be in the East Indies the same necessity of conquest as the
Dutch found? Might more equal conditions or independence itself be no
temptation to one or the other or might it in that day be thought a great sin
to change the words Old England for New? There is one point so important, so
critical, that I hardly know either how to mention or how be silent in it.
Suppose that Ireland itself, I mean the protestant. opulent and ruling part of
Ireland should grow jealous; should begin to make comparisons between the
state, situation and relation of the Americans toward us and their own; -- but
I will pass by this subject. However I know so well the openness, the frankness
and generosity of that nation, as to be fully assured, that there are at least
none of that country who advise or urge at this time the present measures with
any distant or double view to forward and hasten the independence of Ireland
and that not at its own, but at the cost and hazard of America. The human heart
can hardly be conceived to conceal such mysteries. But were it otherwise, our
administration would no doubt be sensible of it and instead of being imposed
upon be the more upon their guard.

Unhappy are the people, which pursue those steps that their friends most fear
and their enemies most wish. Were the cabinets of Versailles and Madrid or any
other the most jealous of the power and prosperity of Great Britain united in
Council and that they had it in their option to drive and push us for their own
advantage upon some ruinous and destructive measure, what would they choose
before this very one which we are now of ourselves so fatally and so madly
running upon?

It is sometimes said, that Providence blinds the understanding of those, whom
it destines to destruction. When things are ripe for that end, men often
provoke and hasten their own fate. But God forbid, that any one being at the
helm of this State should ever not fully and repeatedly consider or that he
should from any unhappy impulse scruple or hesitate to stay and to stop such
measures, as may in their consequences make his master to sit uneasy on his
throne nor suffer him himself to lay down his head upon his pillow without
bearing on it the curses of his country, but which may throw all the parts of
the British empire into such disorder and confusion, that neither he nor any
man shall be able to guide or hold the reins of its government.

I cannot guess into whose hands these sheets may fall or how they may be
received. It is not a Prince alone who may in these abject times be surrounded
with flattery; a Minister may not want his share of it. It is withal but a poor
satisfaction for a private person to wish in the waste and havoc of his
country, that it may be remembered; that there was not wanting One who laid
freely and plainly before the Public and those governing it the risque and
likelihood of these fatal events and circumstances. But it is to be hoped, that
better and more substantial effects will follow, should these things be truth
and reason, which are here advanced. It is at the same time the furthest from
my meaning, that futurity can be foreseen or that it is permitted to look into
the book of the time to come. There is nothing certain in human affairs. But in
incidents of this prodigious importance, in the fate of states and of kingdoms,
in dangers of this transcendent magnitude, probability takes the place of
certainty and every prudent ruler ought to shun and avoid the one with almost
as much caution as he would the other, nor can I finish this subject without
once more repeating that our present debt puts us its into a situation, in
which no nation ever was before.

I know that some people affect to magnify the debts of France, but they are
hardly worthy speaking of in comparison of ours. I don't believe, that they
exceeded at the utmost fifteen millions sterling when the Regent Duke of
Orleans took the method of the Missisippi to cancel and annihilate them. The
wants of Lewis the Fourteenth had been great, but his credit was as small. What
can the present King have contracted since to be compared to the debt of
GreatBritain? Where is the credit? Does any one believe the Dutch concerns of
that kind to be equal in France to what they are in England or has France
itself supplied the rest? However I will only observe more that the French debt
consists in great measure of arrears of pensions, places, posts and other
grants which the same hand withholds, as conferred; but that our debt was all
received in millions sterling.

As to what has been said that great men moving in a public sphere are above
the rules of right and wrong. He must be unworthy to hold the helm of any
government, who is so ignorant of the facts and incidents before his time or so
blind to those about him as not to observe and perceive that good and virtuous
action, I mean, such as are really so without the false colors of flattery and
obsequiousness, produce in general and national matters their proper and
correspondent effects. We have not indeed before our eyes in that case the
formalities of a trial and a sentence, the Judge in his robes or the apparatus
of an execution; but due consequences do from the general and original law
given to the world follow a good or evil conduct in public concerns with much
more certainty, justice and impartiality, than they do by the means of
municipal laws in private. But I desire to explain, that it is not the piety of
a bigot on his knees or the prayers even of a devout Prince which will stay or
turn the general course and order of the world. Had that been the case our
Henry the Sixty would not have fallen in a prison by the hand of an assassin
nor Charles the First suffered on a scaffold by the axe of the executioner nor
James the Second have led the latter part of his life in banishment. These were
all remarkably both devout and unfortunate Princes. I don't at present enter
into the consideration of what reward personal piety will meet with in another
place; but it is the public good, a love and regard for that and attention to
it, a constant resolution never to take directly or indirectly by the means
either of force or of corruption the property of the subject at will and at
pleasure, but to employ the prerogatives and the powers entrusted by the people
only for their welfare and happiness; which are the true trial and touchstone
of the conduct of Princes and Ministers, as such. These naturally produce
affection, loyalty, fidelity, attachment and support. But should any man or
number of men be regardless of the good or condition of others, trample on
their rights, lay unjust hands on their properties, treat them rather like the
beasts of the fields than as their fellows and equals, should they support
themselves herein with the sword and a superiority of power; the great Author
of mankind and of their welfare and happiness has so linked and chained
together causes and effects, that these things will certainly turn to the
detriment and disadvantage of them and theirs who do them; sometimes by a
silent and hardly observable course of things and sometimes with long
forbearance and at a great distance; but sometimes likewise at the moment and
upon the occasion, with direct and immediate resistance and a common confusion,
wherein the authors of the mischief are themselves involved and wherein they
often fall a prey and a sacrifice. The ways of Providence and the course of
futurity are unsearchable; but were any man to presume to divine, how justice
and injustice and the general morality of the universe may possibly in the
present case operate, it would perhaps be; that Right will strongly unite,
cement and combine by a mutual association and assistance those, who shall act
under its banners, while Wrong shall naturally and on the contrary confound and
weaken with disunion, dissension and disturbances among themselves those, by
whom it shall have been unhappily adopted. These are on each side the suitable
and, as it were, the necessary consequences of their own choice; but there
appear some untoward and threatening signs, that the Hand of Heaven will on the
occasion be heavy and severe, when woe to the party, which shall abide it.

If any thing can in this case enhance the importance of the great stake, which
we are about to venture, it must be a comparison of the very little profit,
that we are going to contend for. The Americans are willing and consenting to
give us all they have, provided that we will accept it with our right hand, but
we are obstinate to risk every thing both of theirs and of our own rather than
not to take it with our left. Our whole object is on this occasion no more,
than the difference between those two proposition. Our Americans have now no
gold or silver. It comes all to the mother country. It would equally do so, did
they receive as much again. They keep none for their own currency; they use
themselves paper for that and send us all the other. One would be amazed to
think, what men or administrations can desire. Cannot we be contented with all
and do we insist on having more than all?

But it will be said we want to tax them. I ask why? It must be answered,
because we are bent upon getting their money. I repeat again, we have it
already. But says a ways and means man; we must have it in the shape of taxes.
No other will serve our purpose. I reply once more, that we have it really in
that shape; for cannot we and don't we tax it when it comes hither and is not
that the same thing? Are there not taxes enough to take it, as soon as it gets
to Britain or why don't you ask for more if there are not? Who say you nay
here? I will be bold to say, that there is at this time raised on Great Britain
nothing less than ten millions sterling a year, besides the collection; which
it need not be said is a very considerable sum more. Our specie has never been
used to be reckoned at above twenty millions. It is said, that about three
millions and a quarter of guineas have on occasion of the light gold been
brought into the Bank. Let our currency be calculated on that ground and we
shall according to any just reasoning thereon appear to raise within the year
by taxes, including the collection, a sum at least equal to half of the whole
specie and current coin of the kingdom; a prodigious proportion and perhaps
incredible, were we not to examine into particulars.

Should it be said, that a circulating guinea cannot but pay twenty different
taxes in a year, some might possibly be at first sight surprised at it. But how
far short will that on a more minute examination be found of the truth? Let us
consider only the course of a shilling for a very short time. A chairman pays
out of it for his pot of porter. How many taxes does that include; the new and
old taxes on beer and malt and the tax on hops? They are more than I have time
to reckon. His wife sends next morning to the shop for her tea and sugar. How
many more are there? I will leave them to be counted by those better acquainted
with the book of rates, than I am. But here are a considerable number gone
through out of one single shilling by the time, that a porter has got his beer
over night and his wife her breakfast the next morning. There remains then a
third part of the money to run the gauntlet again in the service of the man at
dinner time. However they do not perhaps amount quite to twenty; but so is
likewise the time a good deal short of a year and the money much less than a
guinea. But this is not taking the matter in the strongest light. There is a
chain and union of taxes, which operate insensibly and almost beyond
imagination. Go into a Shoemaker's shop. Buy a pair of shoes there. How many
taxes does any one in effect pay then? The Journeyman Shoemaker must put into
his day's labor and consequently there must be laid upon the shoes made by him
all the taxes, which he and his family pay in the mean time for his salt, for
his soap, for his coals, for his candles, for the linen and for the very shoes
worn by him, his wife and his children and for very many other things. These
are all just so much money out of his pocket and he must be repaid them-by his
daily labor, which is his only means. He cannot otherwise live; there would be
no shoes and men must go without them. But it is not the immediate taxes of the
Shoemaker only which go upon his manufacture, but those likewise of his
tradesmen. The price of his clothes is enhanced by the taxes, which the Tailor
and the Weaver paid while they were making and weaving them; however not by
theirs only, but by those likewise of the persons working for them in their
turn and so on. These must all be put on the shoes. Insomuch that the whole
fully pursued and observed makes a series and combination fit to put Newton or
Demoivre at a stand. A poor guinea or shilling cannot in England put its head,
if I may so express myself, out of any man's pocket, but that an army of these
catchpoles are ready to seize upon it, wherever it stirs. The matter being then
viewed in these lights, it seems no longer strange, if we raise a revenue equal
to the half of our currency or more. This is a prodigious operation and surely
sufficient to satisfy any administration whatsoever. Let us therefore content
ourselves with getting hither the American money. That is our business. We know
what to do with it here. This is the very land of taxes. It is now coming on as
fast, as it can. Don't let us move Heaven and Earth only to disturb it in its
passage. Let us have the least patience and fall to work upon it at home. We
are certain, that it will be here and that it will then be taxed, and as it
were, taxed upon taxed. The rest is with all submission to my superiors no
better at the bottom, than a childish fancy and impatience and owing only to
the want of a full reflection and consideration on the subject.

I have yet something to add on this head; which is, that were the Irish and
the Americans both of them unanimously to cry out to us to spare their lives
and to take all they have; to beg of us to send them such another army of
taxgatherers, as our own, and with them a copy of our code of revenue laws; I
will be bold to say, that it would nevertheless be in us the worst policy in
the world and totally contrary to our own interest to take them at their words
and to do in the least degree any such thing. We see the Thames flowing
constantly into the ocean and yet always full. It need not be said, that the
rain and the dew are the causes of this, which first fall and fertilize the
earth and then replenish that noble river. Were those two stopped or dried up,
it would not be long, before we should pass over dry shod at London Bridge.
Were they so only in part, the stream would then likewise lower in proportion.
What our whole debt to foreigners amounts to, no one may probably know with
exactness; but the more it has been enquired into the higher it has alwyas
appeared. However the interest of it is a current, which runs perpetually into
the Continent. We do not indeed see it with our eyes, as we do the Thames;
otherwise we love money so much better than we do water, that we might perhaps
be less indifferent about it than we are. It passes imperceptibly, but
nevertheless surely and without ceasing. What are then the causes which supply
it? I answer those two great sources of Ireland and America. These first water
and fructify with their most benignant current the whole island of
Great Britain and then finish their course in the discharge of our debt abroad.
Their way is no more visible than that of the interest itself of our debt, but
it is alike certain and constant. Stop or dry up these and you will as surely
stop or dry up the funds of our debts, as withholding the rain or the dew of
Heaven would lessen and lower the stream of the river Thames. Taxes will do
this. They are the bane of commerce and of agriculture. They affect the
Merchant, the Manufacturer, the Planter, the Farmer and the Labourer. Our
America is not of an age to support their operation. The things from above keep
their course in spite of man for his benefit and advantage. It is God's very
great mercy that the dew and the rain do not depend on Administrations, they
would otherwise have undoubtedly been taxed and dried long ago. But it is not
so, with what is of our own fabric or production. We have a great power over
riches and treasure. Governments can effectually cut off the wells and the
springs of these. We have only to look a broad in the world to be abundantly
convinced of that truth. The example of Great Britain will not prove the
contrary. It was when and while we were not taxed, as we now are, that we
prospered, grew great and rich. Those times gave us strength to bear for a
while the burden since imposed upon us. It is from the Revolution, that our
prodigious taxes have begun. They were laid by degrees and so must their
effects be perceived. They don't operate like a storm or a whirlwind. Let us
give them a fair and full trial before we declare, that we are not undone by
them. It will then be time enough to make ourselves a model for others. I ask,
whether it is not our own actual difficulties brought on by these very taxes,
which do now at this instant urge us upon our colonies and which are the cause
of all the present contest and disorder. It is one of the first principles in
commerce not to burden the means and materials of manufactures. It would be
nipping the fruit in the bud. The same reasoning holds here. Let us keep our
hands from these two great causes and sources of our treasure and wealth. They
have hitherto wonderfully supplied and supported us. They may continue so to
do, if we will suffer them.

But it may be said, that we have at home great and profitable manufactures and
our woolen one in particular; whereby we stand less in need of distant
assistance. That is very true; but so is it likewise, that we have on the
continent very many expenses and demands for money besides the interest of our
debt. We shall be very fortunate, if we can with the means of all our richest
resources make at the year's end an even account.

But it may be asked, what are we then to do? We are pressed with our domestic
burdens and encumbrances. These put us first on the measure of Stamps in
America, wherein we did not succeed. These induced us afterward to make
demands on the India Company, wherein we had rather better fortune. It is
these, which have again bro't us back to our attack on America. How are we
either to stand under them or to march forwards? Is it safe to rest as we are?
What course are we to take if it is not? This is perhaps as serious a
proposition, as one Englishman can put to another. No man laments more than the
writer of these sheets, that twelve years of peace are now elapsed without any
thing being done, without any establishment being made, which may enable us to
maintain another war or perhaps even in peace support long the present very
heavy pressure under which we labor. We are in the mean time daily liable to
be engaged in war. We have now had an uncommon interval of peace. It was but a
very few years ago, that we were on the brink of a rupture with Spain, which
would undoubtedly have been attended by one with France. How can any minister
sleep in peace, who has on his hands the care of a great government and the
welfare of many millions of people, while public affairs are in a condition so
very unprepared for an events, which may at any moment happen and which may in
our present situation bring with it consequences of an importance hardly to be
conceived? Surely they think on these things whose duty most demands it of
them. It is impossible, that such concerns of ours can be left only to chance
and hazard or as it were, to the fortuitous concourse of atoms. One would think
there could hardly be a man in Britain, Minister or any other not perpetually
employed at the plough, but who must daily revolve in his mind the present
circumstances of his country, our burdens, our debts and our expenses and at
the same time cast in his own breast, what must be the best means of our
supporting ourselves under them, whether in war or in peace. There is an issue,
which some men have in view and which I will not express, we may be assured
however that they do but very superficially consider the matter, who imagine
that this will in our case take place without the utter ruin and confusion of
every thing. All is notwithstanding as yet tranquillity and sunshine with us. We
possess a great and fine country; we have most noble and beneficial
dependencies; we have a fleet; we have an army; we have several hundred
thousands and perhaps near a million of men capable of bearing arms in their
own defense; we have a revenue with a surplus above the interest of our debts
and expenses. Surely there is yet an opportunity to find some plan; to settle
some establishment, whereon things may rest safely and securely and the Public
and all reasonable persons be satisfied, that they do so. There is however to
time to be lost. It may be too late to prepare, as it were, in the day of
battle and at the moment when our difficulties press strongly upon us. But this
is of itself a very wide field and one of the greatest of considerations nor is
it my immediate subject. But the measures now carrying on will not effect it or
any thing toward it. No surrounding dangers or difficulties are a good reason
for running down a precipice; our fate can but leads us thither at last.
However no other end can happen to us from the way, which we are now in, if we
persevere and proceed in it.

This seems to be a sufficient answer to the point before us. However I will
not so turn my back on this question, as not freely and frankly to propose,
what, I trust, will at least be more effectual for our purpose, as well as more
easily carried into execution, than what we are now driving at. I mean to do
almost directly the contrary of what we are about, that is to give a greater
liberty and latitude of trade both to Ireland and to America, to America
including our West India Islands. That is my proposition. We are the seat and
center of Government. This is our strength. This is our advantage. This is what
we are to preserve. While we retain this all the money riches and treasure of
the more distant and dependent parts of our Empire cannot fail to flow in upon
us. We have nothing to do with little jealousies about this trade or that
manufacture; it is the proper business of the rich to spend their money and of
the poor to earn it; the State may well, without meddling in it, leave them to
settle the means of that matter with one another. The end of all trades and of
all manufactures must rest with us, while we continue the seat of dominion. It
is the necessary consequence of giving the tone and the law. Ambition,
pleasure, fashion, business, curiosity, education, trade and commerce posts and
places possessed abroad by Englishmen and numberless other causes will
contribute to and effect it. The island of Jamaica and our other islands in the
West Indies what money and commodities equivalent to money have they sent to
England, could the whole be added together? Had they in the time acquired ten
times as much, it would all have run the same road. The climate would have
driven the possessors from thence, while the seat of empire would have invited
them hither. Do not we see the very Proprietaries of our northern colonies
living in England as private gentlemen and have not we sometimes known them
voting in Minorities of our Lower House of Legislature, while they might have
been almost as Princes and Kings in their own governments? Were it in the next
month to rain over the different parts of Ireland a million of money, how long
does any one imagine it would be, before at least nine hundred thousand pounds
of it would find its way into England? Have we lately wanted very sufficient
proofs, that there remains no abundance of cash in that kingdom? I will not
repeat, what has been said of North America; but they have by their paper money
invented the very contrivance of the world for sending to us every ounce of
their gold and silver, did we but know when to be content. Look at the city of
London; they neither plant nor do they saw nor do they reap yet Solomon or his
Jerusalem were not in all their glory rich and great like that capital of our
dominions. The money of our whole empire is remitted thither, as the blood runs
to the heart. Our great body politic is preserved and nourished by the
dispersion and circulation of it again from thence. This is the constant and
never-failing course of things. But the case is much more strong, if we take
Great Britain itself, whereof London is only a part. That would retain a
considerable share of what it receives, did not the interest of our debt carry
it out, as fast as it comes in. This is the issue and the drain, which prevents
us from perceiving ourselves more enriched and replenished from the vast
quantity of treasure perpetually arriving to us from many parts. This may
perhaps be the reason, why we are less sensible, less attentive and perhaps
sometimes less grateful on the occasion. But that is all our own fault, our own
doing. We have none to thank for it but ourselves. We ought not on that account
to esteem these supplies the less, for had we not them, it would be much worse
with us. Nothing could follow but our last decease and dissolution, as a State.
These must and will take place, whenever the others shall stop. However these
things don't require much reasoning. We have the world before us for an
example. Such are every where the effects between the center and other parts of
a Government, although perhaps in no case more so than in that of Great Britain
on account of certain circumstances and causes attending that empire, which are
particularly suited to produce them. This is our point, if we are but sensible
of our true interest; let us but preserve this our great and sacred
prerogative, the other benefits and advantages will of course follow, even
while we are asleep.

I shall use no words to prove that this arangement will bring a greater influx
of treasure to those, to whose liberty of trade it shall extend. The person the
most prejudiced or the most short-sighted in the case will not dispute that
with me. I will venture to presume on that point. This will therefore attach to
us our dependencies at the same time, that it enriches us ourselves. It will
strengthen and fasten the bond and union between us. It will confirm our
superiority while it increases the fruits of it. It will bring us more spoils
and profits than conquest, although it will operate by love and affection. It
will require neither fleets or armies to enforce it; we need fear no revolts,
no defections or confederacies on the account of it. How happy would it be, if
all the circumstances of the other plan would in the same manner answer and
play into the hands of each other! When will men be contented to do to others
no more mischief, than what will turn to their own benefit? States and
ministers will have advanced no mean way in policy as well as in morality, when
they shall once have learned to confine all their evil toward others within
that circle. It is the very perverseness of folly to suppose, that men can
serve themselves only by oppressing others. But here on the contrary the hand
of nature itself works with us. Freedom of trade is our foundation; no wonder
then that so many blessings coincide together. There is open before us a rich
and wide field; we have only to enter and to reap the harvest, which is ripe
and plentiful. This proposal rests therefore on three points; to wit, that it
will bring a greater influx to treasure into our outward dominions; that this
must enrich the center of empire; which cannot therefore likewise but increase
its revenue. These are short propositions and no way perplexed. Let them be
well examined. All falls to the ground, which has been said on the subject, if
any one of them be false or mistaken; but should they on the contrary be all of
them most evident, most certain and indisputable, let any man and the greatest
in trust the most consider; how he can answer to Ireland, to the Colonies, to
his Country at home, to his King himself in the concern of his Revenue and his
Exchequer, the refusing his attention and assistance to a measure, so very
practicable and at the same time so universally beneficial and salutary.

This is the more and much more necessary on account of the present condition
of Ireland. The late enquiry concerning their linen manufacture, the public
history of their emigrations and the state of their credit at the beginning of
the present Session of Parliament have made that sufficiently known. I shall
not pretend to describe it. England has perhaps from the Island reaped more
real benefit, than Spain ever did from Mexico or Peru Spain gains indeed from
those possessions great riches of silver and gold; but she has dearly purchased
them at the price of her inhabitants and people at home. Whereas Ireland
affords us in many ways a very advantageous assistance and support of men,
while we receive from her at the same time a constant most rich influx and
supply of money. We now so depend on these things and can so ill do without
them and are by these means so united with our Sister Island, that should she
on any account unhappily sink, she cannot but like a mill stone fastened about
our necks carry us down along with her. Should her condition grow worse, who
knows but it may turn to rage and despair and either have an effect on her
Legislature or that the majority thereof may be hardly able to manage and
govern their own State. I am unwilling to point out such possibilities; but it
will not be long health and wealth in England, should any irretrievable
mischief happen in Ireland. A moderate remedy might however now be timely for
what may in futurity be beyond redress. A greater liberty and latitude of trade
is the proper assistance in the case. It is what Ireland itself wishes and
desires. It will at the same time be of more benefit to us than to them. France
is beating us out of the trades of Turkey, of Spain and even of Portugal. Let
but loose the Irish and they will do as much for them and likewise for some
others. It is Great Britain which witholds the hand of Ireland and not the
nature of things, that confines it. Let us but consent and they will soon
stretch out their right hand into many a market in the world, where it now
never appears and having done so they will immediately pay to us with their
left the money gained there, as surely, at that we are born Englishmen. I don't
point out particulars; lights will not be wanting in that respect, whenever
there shall be an inclination to demand them. I don't moreover mean to signify,
that any opening of the commerce of Ireland and America recommended within the
compass of these sheets will of itself be adequate to all the demands of our
present situation. That will in all appearance require a new and universal
arangement of our taxes and commerce, wherein Great Britain herself must bear a
most material part. No man can say, that all the money in Europe is equal to
our National Debt nor can therefore any provision be sufficient, but what may
produce effects answerable to such a very great necessity. Some plan seems to
be demanded which may bring into GreatBritain a good part of all the gold and
silver now current in the world. Nothing less will perhaps do our business. The
practicability of this cannot but appear a doubtful problem. Were all states
whatsoever formed on a constitution the most advantageous for commerce, whereof
each is capable, it is evident, that they would then share among them those two
precious metals in so near a proportion, that no one could therein have over
the rest any very great superiority. But this is exceedingly wide of the case.
No one state is so constituted; but on the contrary almost all governments
whatever are framed and act on principles directly opposite thereto. This gives
a very great opportunity for an extreme difference and disproportion in that
respect. It is perhaps on the availing ourselves thereof, that depends the
future welfare of our country and the safety, the stability and the very
subsistence of our state. The Dutch are a small people or at least have but a
very confined territory and that defended with difficulty from the sea. They
have nevertheless done a great deal in the way, which we are speaking of. They
are certainly therein at the head of all mankind. However it is evident and
might be easily pointed out, that they are yet far short of perfection. There
is good room for others to go beyond and especially for a state which has such
advantages as Great Britain. However what degree of advantage the nature of
things will admit of on this head or how to attain thereto are not questions of
this present instant. I have said thus much led to it by my subject together
with the interest of the Public therein and the necessity, which I am persuaded
that my country is at this time under of finding and carrying into execution
some great, general and salutary measure. Happy will be the hand that shall in
the first place prevent the ruin, whereon we are now running. We must begin
there. That is the object directly before us. Let us next enlarge the trade of
Ireland and America. This will do a great deal. It may lead us toward a more
universal plan, with which it cannot at the same time but coincide. It will
withal be well, that this double benefit of these two parts of our country went
hand in hand together. The present state of Ireland makes it absolutely and
immediately necessary for the one and the interest of Great Britain requires it
for both.

I don't enter into particulars concerning the stopping up the Port of Boston
or the new laws given to Massachusett's-Bay. However I must observe, that the
alteration of their Charter and of their Civil Government is not temporary like
the other provisions, but perpetnal. The breaking of Charters is making the
worst war upon mankind. It involves the innocent and those yet unborn. Every
thing depends with men on their constitution of government. Such a measure is
therefore wantonly laying waste the territories of the earth and I speak it
with reverence, but it is even forbidding Providence itself to make mankind
happy thereon, unless he shall for the undoing the works of unreasonable and
ill judging men perform immediate miracles and suspend or counteract his own
laws of nature, which is surely not to be supposed or expected. As for those,
who refuse or impede law and justice for blood, let them be well aware, that
they don't thereby bring it on their own heads or warrant private men to be
themselves their own avengers. However the whole will no doubt be received in
America as a declaration of war and depend upon the same issue. It must be by
force and conquest if they submit. It is probably not a month or a year, that
will finally determine this affair. The flame may break out immediately or the
fire may smother until some fatal opportunity of our being engaged in a foreign
war or some other such occasion. The authors of these measures no doubt expect
that the removal of the Customhouse and the suspension of the trade of Boston
will bring these people on their knees and force them to submit to the rest of
our measures. It is evident, that this is their idea. They might have been well
informed and instructed and ought to have been so before they proceeded so far.
They may nevertheless find themselves much mistaken in the event, however
forward they are to hazard on their opinion the welfare and prosperity of their
country. It is no wonder, that some men cannot even at the distance of America
bear a Democratical Constitution. But they ought to know the History of the
World better than to be ignorant of the strength and the force of such a form
of government and how strenuously and almost wonderfully people living under
one have sometimes exerted themselves in defense of their rights and liberties
and how fatally it has ended with many a man and many a state who have entered
into quarrels, wars and contests with them.

Some say, that all the contradiction and opposition of America originates from
home and that it is only the faction of England, which catches there. Nothing
perhaps testifies a greater ignorance of the true state of that country, than
such a notion. What is all the spirit of Patriotism or of Liberty now left in
England, more than the last snuff of an expiring lamp? It is not longer than
three and thirty years ago, that it was otherwise with us. But who can say
whether the same flame, the same sacred flame may not at this time burn
brightly and strongly in America, which once showed forth such wonders in
Greece and in Rome and from whose ashes it still enlightens a great part of
mankind, I mean, all who are not sunk in ignorance or barbarity. They have
certainly there excellent and free forms of government and which partake
perhaps in some degree of the principles, whereon were framed the ancient ones
of those eminent cities. They are themselves as yet a new and uncorrupted
people. They carried with them formerly the spirit of Liberty from England, at
the time that it was in its greatest purity and perfection there, nor has it
since degenerated by the climate. Whoever shall judge of their temper by that
at home and proceed accordingly, will perhaps in the end be scorched by that
flame, which he may find to burn too powerfully for him and of the nature and
of the means to extinguish which, he was totally ignorant.

I have now considered the rectitude, the practicability and the profit to be
expected from our present measures and have gone so far as to offer another
measure instead. I hope, that I have proved my propositions to a great degree
of clearness and certainty. I don't know what to do more on this subject unless
I should propose something, which might convince and satisfy without the
trouble of reason and argument. This seems difficult. However I will not
despair. Let me be permitted to try my hand in the case. I will recommend and,
so far as becomes me, desire and request, that every one when he considers of
this subject and especially before he uses any hard words or passes any harsh
laws, will place himself in America; will imagine himself born, bred, resident
and having all his concerns and fortune there. I don't mean in the light of a
Governor or of one, who seeks to recommend and to advance himself here at the
expense of his countrymen in that part of the world; but as one, who has no
other views or interest except in the common good of his colony or continent.
Let then any such man heartily and fairly ask himself in his own breast, what
he should in that situation think of being taxed at Westminster; and let no man
on this occasion throw a stone, whose heart does not plainly and roundly answer
him with its assent. I may make too free with Ministers of State; but I would
particularly press this on those, whose desires, passions and inclinations are
followed by effects and who hold perhaps at this moment in their hands the fate
of Great Britain and of North America. This I say, is a proposition without a
syllogism; but which if properly brought home and enforced by every man upon
himself, may perhaps penetrate move and soften more than all the arguments and
earnestness, which I have hitherto used.

I would willingly try this experiment of transposition upon a late
transaction, wherein some peoples opinion seem to be affected by locality.
Certain letters (see letters of Governor Hutchinson, etc.) have been published
of an American Governor and Lieutenant Governor and a third person together
with remarks and the speech of a learned and ingenious Gentleman. They are
offered as an appeal to the public against the colony of Massachusett's Bay.
These cannot therefore, but be themselves likewise the objects of a public
consideration. I have by the touchstone of locality a mind to examine and
question some of this learned gentleman's reasoning. It is now but between
eighty and ninety years, since we of this country banished our King. On what
ground did we do it? -- It will be answered; that we did not like his actions;
for that they tended to deprive us of our best rights and properties. That we
did it as Englishmen on the Constitution of England -- Who was the common Judge
between us and him? -- There was no such common Judge. We judged for ourselves.
He was our King, our Magistrate, our Trustee. When we found him to fail in the
essential points of these offices, we took another. This was our right as
Englishmen -- But we set aside one of his daughters from her turn in the
succession and appointed instead a person, who had no title by birth. The Kings
horse threw him and the Lady succeeded. But that was chance. It might in a
course of nature very well have happened, that she had never been Queen. What
had she done? -- She had taken a remarkable part in the Revolution and was
totally unexceptionable. But there were in one scale the welfare and happiness
of many millions of people and in the other the advancement of only one Lady,
although a deserving one. There was therefore no equality, the latter could not
but kick the beam -- I answer, that I subscribe to this with my hand and my
heart. But this is one fide of the medal. Let us turn the reverse. An American
Governor is not so big as a King; he don't wear a Crown nor bear a Scepter nor
fit on a Throne nor is worshipped on the knee nor has a Navy nor an Army nor
makes Bishops nor Judges nor is his Civil List perhaps above a thousand pounds
a year. He seems to be much more responsible and more removable, than a King.
Suppose then that one of our Colonies should take the strongest exceptions to
their Governor and desire to change him; would they in that case be permitted
to judge for themselves? -- No, Why not? -- Because they are Americans. Who are
to judge for them? -- We. Why so? -- Because we are Engligmen. -- But would
their application be to us a sufficient cause for a removal? -- Perhaps not;
but on the contrary a reason to continue him at present and to promote and
advance him afterward. That has been the case before and may probably be so
again -- But why is the measure which we mete to them so different from that,
which we measure to ourselves? -- Because we are Englishmen and they are
Americans. -- This must be owned to be perfectly just and satisfactory and the
Americans are the most unreasonable men in the world, if they don't see it
exactly in the same light.

But suppose that the Representative Body of the Province should make the
complaint? -- The answer would then be, that there was no accuser or if any one
chose to speak Latin no delator. -- Suppose that they complain of falsehood and
treachery toward the Province? -- That would be no charge, no crimen. --
Suppose that they gave in evidence the party's own letters? -- That would
complete the thing; for there would then be no evidence, no t^stis -- But will
this hold water? -- Admirably; with respect to America and in Latin.

It is strongly disputed, whether these American letters are of a public or
private nature. This may not in itself be a very important point. However let
us endeavor to settle it since it lies in our way. Whatever concerns and
affects the interests, the welfare and happiness of a whole people is and must
be of a public nature, whether papers, letters or any other thing whatsoever.
Good and evil are not matters of Law or of Logic. They are the most, if not the
only essential circumstances of the world. They are what every thing else
refers to. They stamp an eternal mark and difference on all things which even
imagination cannot cancel or erase. The enjoyment of the one and the avoiding
of the other is the very end of our being and likewise of all the beings which
do or which even can be supposed to exist and which have a sense and perception
of them. Whatever therefore relates to the general good and evil of a People is
of a public nature. It is that circumstance which makes it so. The terms are as
good as synonimous. Whatever concerns on the contrary only this or that
individual is of a private nature. It is confined to his or their happiness or
welfare; to his or their good and evil. There is again the true and unerring
distinction. These things seem clear to the greatest degree of intuitive
certainty. It is strange to be forced to reason about them. However we are told
otherwise. If some compliments happen in a letter to be made to an old Lady, it
changes the essence of every thing; she contracts and confines the whole matter
and all becomes of a private nature; although the chief subject of that very
letter should be to advise and point out the means of altering the Charter and
of new modelling the Constitution of a Colony and that there should be
recommended therein the finding some way according to its own language "to TAKE
OFF the original incendiaries," lest they should continue to instill their
poison into the minds of the people; but the mention of the old Lady makes it
all private (see Mr. Wedderburn's speech page 94 and letter of Mr. A Oliver
Feb. 13, 1769) But suppose that these letters were really meant and intended to
produce public effects; what will that do? -- Nothing at all. If the person had
not at that moment a place, to whom they were written, it signifies nothing;
although he might have had a post before and might look for one again and
although he might have communicated these letters to others for the very
purpose of affecting the Public. All this will be of no importance, if the
person did not happen to have a place at the time. -- Would not one be tempted
to (...) that as some endeavor to leave no property in America, others have a
mind to banish all human reason out of American affairs?

But let us take this matter, in another light -- Suppose a Prince to have been
the subject of these letters instead of a People and his conduct and character
to have therein been so freely treated and censured instead of theirs and the
divesting him of his power and dignity so plainly mentioned and recommended,
instead of the depriving them of their rights and privileges and the taking him
off proposed instead of the taking off some of them, what would have been the
consequence? -- High Treason -- But might not these have been private letters
of friendship and the receiver have secreted and concealed them? -- There is no
such thing as private letters in the case. No civilities sent to the fairest
Lady in the land can make them so. The person receiving must at his over peril
carry them to a Secretary of State or to a Justice of the Peace or to some
other Magistrate; we don't otherwise want a word for him, which is misprision
of treason. -- But who would take notice of such a thing? -- Let Mr. Attorney
or Mr. Solicitor answer that -- But on what ground is all this? -- Because the
Prince is supposed to be the public person and to represent the whole people
and that what relates to him may affect them -- But there are bad Princes and
writing against them is sometimes writing in support and in the interests of
the Public and of the People -- No such plea or proposition is ever suffered.
It would on the contrary be an additional crime even to make or to offer it. --
But does any one by representing a body acquire more prerogatives than belong
to that body itself or are the Public more affected through a third person
than immediately in themselves? -- Yes, just so. Say a word against a Prince
and beware of informations, indictments, fines, prisons, scaffolds and gibbets.
These are the strongest arguments in the world and I never knew any man get the
better in disputing with them. But abuse a people from morning till night and
every one knows, that the rule and the law is; let them mend their manners, if
it is true; let them despise it and leave it to fall on the author, if it is
not -- I am at the feet of Gamaliel, I desire only to learn. I shall not
contradict the doctrine concerning a Prince and I subscribe heartily to that
about a People. Should these commonwealths of America ever become as strong and
independent, as they are now weak and depend^^^ and should they in their
greatness and glory remember word of the humblest and the meanest, but not the
lea^^ sincere or the least disinterested of their friends and advocates, it
will be, never to employ force and power against reason and argument; to leave
those instruments to such as choose to make use of them, but to believe truth to
be ever the real interest of the People and the Public and that no other
incense or sacrifice should ever be offered at the altars of that Goddess, but
the pure oblation of a freedom of thinking speaking and writing. But here it
cannot will fail to be observed; that should these people, whose distresses are
now pleaded, ever come to be masters both of themselves and of others to be
glutted with power and riches, that they will certainly run the race of the
rest of mankind and learn in their turn tyranny and injustice, as their betters
and their predecessors have done before them -- I answer, no man perhaps
believes this, more than myself; however that is not now the case. But it is
hoped, that neither will there in that day be wanting some honest man who will
endeavor to make them blush at such a conduct, if he shall not be able to
dissuade and divert them from it. However I would willingly in my turn now ask,
whether this last observation is also local and confined to America or whether
it extends itself likewise to GreatBritain?

It is not reason and argument; it is this locality which operates on the
present occasion. It is this only that makes many men easy and indifferent in
the case about right and wrong justice and injustice. Were my countrymen now in
England dipped once in the River Delaware. I dare say, that it would make an
almost miraculous change in their opinions. If some, who might be named were
transposed into Assembly Men, they would perhaps be as ready to repeal certain
late laws as ever they were to pass them. However I will not go back again to
topics, which seem sufficient to awake the most lethargic Englishman out of
his soundest sleep; but I desire to put a case relating to this locality itself
and its power and effects.

At the beginning of the last century, there lived a gentleman of the name of
Fawkes; He h^red a house and some cellars and other apartments in Westminster.
We will suppose that he had a lease of them; a lease is for the time as good as
a purchase; it might not indeed be stamped, but stamps were not then in
fashion, it was good without. He bought some gunpowder. It is to be believed,
that he paid honestly for it. He could perhaps have produced a receipt for it.
He placed it in the cellars or other apartments hired by him He had indeed a
mind to amuse himself with blowing up the Legislature of Great Britain. He met
with his reward. But suppose that he and Garnet and the rest of their
associates, instead of falling into the hands of an English Jury, had been
tried at Rome before the Consistory Court or any other Court there, they would
no doubt have found an advocate. That is no other than the duty of the
profession. I will not take upon me to say, whether he would in this case have
flourished about private property, trespass or forcible entry; but whatever
turn the Italian council had thought proper to give the cause of his clients,
has any one seriously the least doubt, but that they would have been cleared
and acquitted and probably by the Court of Rome itself in good time preferred
and promoted. As it happened, nothing remained for them but the honor of
Martyrdom, which however some of them are said to have attained. So much can a
difference of climate do and such force have prejudice, prepossession and
locality. But Garnet and Fawkes and their friends were fools, Jesuits as some
of them were. They did not understand their trade. A certain northern Prince of
our time and perhaps some others, have found better ways of blowing up
Legislatures than with gunpowder; which don't make a quarter of the crack and
combustion, but which are ten times more effectual.

But our colonies might be well enough, were it not for Dr. Franklin, who has
with a brand lighted from the clouds set fire to all America -- No Governments
care ever to acknowledge the people to be fairly against them. For whatever may
be the case with the opinions of the multitude in abstruse and refined matters,
which but little concern them nor do they much trouble themselves about; yet
the end and therefore the touchstone and trial of all Government being their
welfare and happiness, there is hardly common modesty in affecting to despise
and refuse their sense concerning their own good and evil, their own feelings,
benefits or sufferings. It is in these things that the voice of the People is
said to approach that of their Maker. The sycophants of Ministers endeavor
therefore to throw on the artifice and influence of individuals all discontent
or dissatisfaction of the Public. Mr. Wilkes moves England and Dr. Franklin
America; as if we had here no feeling, but through the first and they had there
neither eyes or ears, but by the latter. It were happy for mankind, if
Administrations procured their own votes and majorities with as much fairness,
as the voice of the People is commonly obtained. I wonder, whether we should
then have ever heard of any government in Europe indebted in the sum of a
hundred and forty millions sterling or be at this moment under the alarm of a
parent state attacking its own colonies or of a great empire setting at work
its fleets and armies only to throw the parts of itself into mischief and
confusion. It is idle and childish to be crying out against this or that
private person. The truth is that whenever governments heap up combustibles,
there will always be found a hand to put the match to them or these would heat
and fire of themselves, if there were not.

But is not Mr. W.'s Philipick against the Doctor a capital performance? -- I
am sure that I have not the least inclination to depreciate the ingenuity of
that learned Gentleman, whose argument I have been making so free with. But the
being charmed with spruce expressions or a smartness of invective, where the
subject makes against the privileges or the liberties of a People, what is it
better, than if a parcel of prisoners or of galley-slaves were so abject as to
take a pleasure in the rattling, or as it were, in the music of their own
chains?

I am drawing toward an end of my career. However I will first say something
to the Americans themselves. I observe them to charge sometimes on the British
subjects in general the measures, with which they are aggrieved. Herein they do
us wrong. I may venture to affirm, that there would not be hurt the hair of the
head of an American, where it to be voted by all our country. Every one must
remember, the universal satisfaction produced by the repeal of the Stamp Act
and it would no doubt be the same again were the present measures discharged
and remitted. But it often happens, that Representatives and their Constituents
are in the most essential and the most important points directly and
diametrically opposite to one another. I don't pretend to account for this. It
is a fatality. But the Americans should consider, that two different parts of a
country may be oppressed by one and the same hand. Administrations have been
squandering and running us in debt at home, until our whole substance is wasted
and consumed. It may now be coming to their turn. But procul a Jove, procul a
fulmine. Great Britain is first brought to its extremity. Let any of our
dependencies compare their burdens with ours and then complain of the nation,
if they shall find that ours are the lighter. I don't mean to make a merit of
this; but let them suppose the same strong hand to be upon us both, when they
shall have been convinced, how little we are in this respect to be envied.

I am unwilling to take my leave without saying likewise one word to my
Countrymen of England. It is not only riches and power, men and money, which
the center of government receives from the detached parts of its dominions, but
likewise credit and honor in the world. The Scotch and the Irish are as good
men, as any in Europe. This is well known, wherever they seek service and
establishments; and the which they are left to do in more parts, than is for
the benefit of Great Britain. Our Countrymen of America have not yet so figured
in our Quarter of the globe; but it is hardly a compliment to place them
clearly at the head of their own, the offspring of all other people there
included. If there are any spoiled children of our national family, it must be
the English themselves; unless that riches and luxury mend the manners of men.
But nevertheless being so the seat of Empire and all commands issuing from our
capital and our name being forward, the actions, the merits, the figure, the
reputation and the glory of all our Countrymen whatsoever and wheresoever do
exceedingly redound to us and to he credit of England and of Englishmen. In
return for these things they desire no more than a just sense and
acknowledgment of them. Whether we do make this return, whether these
circumstances have always the weight with us, which they merit, Englishmen will
best determine by examining into their own breasts. But this we may be assured
of; (...) good will, affection and attachment of our Countrymen spread
throughout our common Empire will be our firmest strength and security, if it
shall be our lot to continue in our present splendour and prosperity; as
likewise that the same cannot but be our best support and assistance, wherewith
to weather the storms of fate and fortune, if Heaven shall on the contrary have
any reverse or times of difficulty and distress in store for us.

I have now finished, unless it may be a few words with respect to the Author
himself. He hopes, that should in the warmth of writing any inadvertencies or
inaccuracies have fallen from him, that they will be readily overlooked; he is
persuaded that there are none such, as affect his argument. He has wrote with
freedom, but he trusts without offense; he has no personal views whatsoever in
any thing, that he has advanced or offered; he has no interest in any distant
part of the British Dominions, neither in Scotland, Ireland or America; he has
neither trade or traffic with them nor a foot of land in any of them. His
concerns, his property, his family, his friendships his affections, every thing
most dear to him center in South-Britain. He has no intercourse or connection
with any man, that either is that ever was, or who to the best of his knowledge
desires to be a Minister. He is totally indifferent, who shall be at the head
of our affairs, any otherwise than as the Public may be concerned in it. He
would not perhaps in his humble situation accept of any place or post, high or
low, which the King has to confer great and powerful as he is He wishes only
that these sheets may be read, as they are written, with the purest and the
most disinterested intentions for the good the greatness and the prosperity of
our whole empire, for the union, harmony and preservation of all its parts and
for the particular interest, safety, peace, welfare and happiness of England.

FINIS.

