ESSAY ON THE CHARACTER, MANNERS, AND GENIUS OF WOMEN IN DIFFERENT AGES.

Enlarged from the French of M. THOMAS, By Mr. RUSSELL.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. AITKEN, BOOKSELLER, OPPOSITE THE
LONDON-COFFEE-HOUSE, FRONT-STREET. M,DCC,LXXIV.

PREFACE.
FENELON has left us a treatise on the education of women. Since his time,
other authors, more or less celebrated, have written on the same subject; and
there is still room for a treatise on female education. But to supply that want
is not the immediate design of this piece: the Author here only presents an
historical picture, an assemblage of facts and observations, which may serve as
the elements of a didactic work. It will perhaps show, that women are
susceptible of all the qualities which religion, society, or government, would
choose to assign them.

After the foregoing preamble, M. Thomas proceeds to tell us, that this Essay
must be considered as part of a History of the Manners. Viewed in that light,
it is perhaps the most complete performance hitherto published; and it is
indisputably the most elegant, and most philosophical treatise, on the female
mind and female character. But, notwithstanding these excellencies, it appeared
to the Editor to want a good deal more than translation to make it satisfactory
to the English reader. The sentences were often complicated, and the paragraphs
tedious. It had none of those larger divisions, which are so necessary to
relieve the mind, nor any of those inferior ones, which are not less essential
to the perspicuity of reasoning. He therefore in some measure decompounded it;
he split the sentences, broke the paragraphs, and divided the work into parts
and sections: he omitted some things His omissions consist only of such things
as seemed foreign to the subject, and which can only interest a Frenchman, and
a lover of eloge.
, and added others. What relates to the progress of society in Britain is
entirely new. In short, he is answerable for the defects of the Essay, as it
now appears; though he has not the vanity to claim its beauties. Those who are
acquainted with the original, however, he doubts not will give him credit for
his labors.

CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Women of Antiquity. Introduction. Page 1 SECT. I. Of the great
and virtuous Actions of Women in general. Page 14 SECT. II. Of the Grecian
Women. Page 19 SECT. III. Of the Roman Women. Page 32 SECT. IV. Of the Effects
of Christianity on the Manners of Women. Page 53 PART II. Of the Women of
modern Nations. SECT I. Of the Inundation of the Barbarians, and the Effects of
Chivalry on the Character and Manners of Women. Page 64 SECT. II. Of the
Revival of Letters, and the Learning of Women. Page 91 SECT. III. Of the Books
written in Honor of Women, and on the Superiority of the Sexes. Page 106 SECT.
IV. The Subject continued. Page 115
ON THE CHARACTER, MANNERS, and GENIUS OF WOMEN. PART I. Of the WOMEN of
Antiquity.
INTRODUCTION.
IF we take a survey of ages and of countries, we will find the women -- almost
without exception -- at all times, and in all places, adored and oppressed.
Man, who has never neglected an opportunity of exerting his power, in paying
homage to their beauty, has always availed himself of their weakness. He has
been at once their tyrant and their slave.

Nature herself, in forming beings so susceptible and tender, appears to have
been more attentive to their charms than their happiness. Continually
surrounded with griefs and fears, the women more than share all our miseries,
and are besides subjected to ills which are peculiarly their own. They cannot
be the means of life without exposing themselves to the loss of it. Every
revolution which they undergo alters their health, and threatens their
existence. Cruel distempers attack their beauty -- and the hour which confirms
their release from those, is perhaps the most melancholy of their lives. It
robs them of the most essential, and, in some respects, the most endearing
characteristic of their sex. They can then only hope for protection from the
humiliating claims of pity, or the feeble voice of gratitude.

Society, instead of alleviating their condition, is to them the source of new
miseries. More than one half of the globe is covered with savages; and, among
all those people, women are completely wretched. Man, in a state of barbarity,
equally cruel and indolent, active by necessity, but naturally inclined to
repose, is acquainted with little more than the physical effects of love; and
having none of those moral ideas, which only can soften the empire of force, he
is led to consider it as his supreme law, subjecting to his despotism those
whom reason had made his equals, but whose imbecility betrayed them to his
strength.

'Nothing' (says professor Millar, speaking of the women of barbarous nations,)
can exceed the dependence and subjection in which they are kept, or the toil
and drudgery which they are obliged to undergo. -- The husband, when he is not
engaged in some warlike exercise, indulges himself in idleness, and devolves
upon his wife the whole burden of his domestic affairs. He disdains to assist
her in any of those servile employments; she sleeps in a different bed, and is
seldom permitted to have any conversation, or correspondence with him.
Observations concerning the Distinction of Ranks in society. See also Colhen's
Voyage to the Cape of Good. Pope. Histoire Generale de Voyages, live. 14 chap.
3. sect. 4. Sale's Voyage to North America.


The women among the Indians of America are what the helots were among the
Spartans, a vanquished people obliged to toil for their conquerors. Hence, on
the banks of the Oroonoko, we have seen mothers slaying their daughters out of
compassion, and smothering them in the hour of their birth. They consider this
barbarous pity as a virtue.

'The men' (says Commodore Byron, in his account of the inhabitants of South
America,) exercise a most despotic authority over their wives, whom they
consider in the same view they do any other part of their property, and dispose
of them accordingly: even their common treatment of them is cruel; for though
the toil and hazard of procuring food lies entirely on the women, yet they are
not suffered to touch any part of it, till the husband is satisfied; and then
he assigns them their portion, which is generally very scanty, and such as he
has not a stomach for himself. Byron's Narrative.


Among the nations of the East, we find another kind of despotism and dominion
prevail -- the seraglio, and the domestic servitude of women, authorized by the
manners, and established by the laws. In Turkey, in Persia, in India, in Japan,
and over the vast empire of China, one half of the human species is oppressed
by the other.

The excess of oppression in those countries springs from the excess of love.

All Asia is covered with prisons, where beauty in bondage waits the caprices
of a master. The multitudes of women there assembled have no will, no
inclinations, but his. Their triumphs are only for a moment; and their rivalry,
their hate, and their animosities continue till death. There the lovely sex are
obliged to repay even their servitude with the most tender affection; or, what
is still more mortifying, with the counterfeit of an affection which they do
not feel: There the most gloomy tyranny has subjected them to creatures, who,
being of neither sex, are a dishonor to both: There, in short, their education
tends only to debafe them; their virtues are forced; their very pleasures are
involuntary and joyless; and, after an existence of a few years -- till the
bloom of youth is over -- their period of neglect commences, which is long and
dreadful.

In the temperate latitudes, where the climate giving less ardour to passion
leaves more confidence in virtue, the women have not been deprived of their
liberty; but a severe legislation has at all times kept them in a state of
dependence. One while they were confined to their own apartments, and debarred
at once from business and amusement; at another time, a tedious guardianship
defrauded their hearts and insulted their understandings. Affronted in one
country by poligamy, which gives them their rivals for their inseparable
companions; enslaved in another by indissoluble ties, which often join the
gentle to the rude, and sensibility to brutality; even in countries where they
may be esteemed most happy, constrained in their desires, in the disposal of
their goods, robbed of freedom of will by the laws, the slaves of opinion,
which rules them with absolute sway, and construes the slightest appearances
into guilt; surrounded on all sides by judges who are at once their tyrants and
their seducers, and who, after having prepared their faults, punish every lapse
with dishonor -- nay usurp the right of degrading them on suspicion; who does
not feel for the tender sex? Yet such, I am sorry to say, is the lot of women
over the whole earth. Man, with regard to them, in all climates and in all
ages, has been either an insensible or an oppressor; but they have sometimes
experienced the cold and deliberate oppression of pride, and sometimes the
violent and terrible tyranny of jealousy. When they are not beloved, they are
nothing; and when they are, they are tormented. They have almost equal cause to
be afraid of indifference and of love. Over three quarters of the globe, nature
has placed them between contempt and misery.

The melting desires, or the fiery passions,' says professor Fergufon, 'which
in one climate take place between the sexes, are in another changed into a
sober consideration, or a patience of mutual disgust. This change is remarked
in crossing the Mediterranean, in following the course of the Missisippi, in
ascending the mountains of Caucasus, and in passing from the Alps and the
Pyrenees to the shores of the Baltic.

The burning ardours and the torturing jealousies of the seraglio and the
haram, which have reigned so long in Asia and Africa, and which in the southern
parts of Europe have scarcely given way to the difference of religion and civil
establishments, are found, however, with an abatement of heat in the climate,
to be more easily changed, in one latitude, into a temporary passion which
ingrosses the mind, without enfeebling it, and which excites to romantic
achievements: by a farther progress to the north, it is changed into a spirit
of gallantry, which employs the wit and fancy more than the heart; which
prefers intrigue to enjoyment; and substitutes affectation and vanity, where
sentiment and desire have failed. As it departs from the sun, the same passion
is farther composed into a habit of domestic connection, or frozen into a state
of insensibility, under which the sexes at freedom scarcely choose to unite
their society. Essay on the History of Civil Society, part iii. sect. 1.


Even among a people where beauty received the highest homage, we find men who
would deprive the sex of every kind of reputation. The most VIRTUOUS woman,
says a celebrated Greek Thucydides.
, is she who is least talked of.

That morose man, while he imposes duties upon women, would deprive them of the
sweets of public esteem; and, in exacting virtues from them, would make it a
crime to aspire at honor.

If a woman were to defend the cause of her sex, she might address him in the
following manner.

How great is your injustice! If we have an equal right with you to virtue, why
should we not have an equal right to praise? The public esteem ought to wait
upon merit. Our duties are different from yours; but they are not therefore
less difficult to fulfill, or of less consequence to society: they are the
fountains of your felicity, and the sweetners of life. We are wives and
mothers. It Is we who form the union and the cordiality of families; it is we who
soften that savage rudeness which considers every thing as due to force, and
which would involve man with man in eternal war. We cultivate in you that
humanity, which makes you feel for the misfortunes of others; and our tears
forewarn you of your own danger. Nay, you cannot be ignorant, that we have need
of courage not less than you. More feeble in ourselves, we have perhaps more
trials to encounter. Nature assails us with sorrow, law and custom press us
with constraint, and sensibility and virtue alarm us by their continual
conflicts. Sometimes also the name of citizen demands from us the tribute of
fortitude. When you offer your blood to the state, think that it is ours. In
giving it our sons and our husbands, we give more than ourselves. You can only
die on the field of battle, but we have the misfortune to survive those whom we
love most.

Alas! while your ambitious vanity is unceasingly laboring to cover the earth
with statues, with monuments, and with inscriptions, to eternize if possible
your names, and give yourselves an existence when this body is no more, why
must we be condemned to live and to die unknown? Would you, that the grave and
eternal forgetfulness should be our lot? Be not our tyrants in all. Permit our
names to be some time pronounced beyond the narrow circle in which we live;
permit friendship, or at least love, to inscribe its emblems on the tomb where
our ashes repose; and deny us not that public esteem, which, after the esteem
of one's self, is the sweetest reward of well-doing.

All men however, it must be owned, have not been equally unjust to their fair
companions. In some countries public honors have been paid to women. Art has
erected them monuments, eloquence has celebrated their virtues, and history has
collected whatever could adorn their characters.

Without entering into circumstantial details, which might perhaps disgust by
their uniformity, I shall inquire, in general, what are the qualities and the
kinds of merit of which women are capable; how far government, laws, and
circumstances can raise them; and shall attempt to discover the secret
connections of policy with their manners. I shall then quickly examine what the
women have been in different ages, and how the spirit of their times, or of
their nation has influenced their character.

This Essay, if I may so speak, will be a history of that part of the human
species, which the other flatters and calumniates by turns -- and frequently
without knowing them. For it is with women as with sovereigns, they seldom hear
the truth; and we estimate them more by interest and by humor, than by justice.

I neither mean to write a panegyric nor a satire, but to make a collection of
observations and of facts; in which may be seen, what the women have been, what
they are, and what they ought to be.

SECTION I. Of the great and virtuous Actions of WOMEN in general.
WE find in the writings of Plutarch, the panegyrist and the judge of so many
great men, a piece entitled, THE VIRTUOUS ACTIONS OF WOMEN. It is addressed to
one of the sex, named CLEA, of whom we know little. But her connection with the
philosopher of Chaeronea alone, has been deemed sufficient, by some writers, to
class her among the number of learned women.

Plutarch begins his performance with blaming those, who would deprive women of
that praise which is their due. 'One might,' says he, make a comparison between
Anacreon and Sappho, between Semiramis and Sesostris, between Tanaquil and
Servius, and between Brutus and Portia. The talents and the virtues are
modified by the circumstances and the persons, but the foundation is the same;
the color and the surface, so to speak, are only different.

The philosophical historian next proceeds to mention a great number of women
of all nations, who have given examples of their courage, and who have shown a
generous contempt of death.

He instances the Phoenician women; who, before an engagement which threatened
the destruction of their city, agreed to bury themselves in the flames, if the
battle should be lost, and crowned with flowers the woman who first made that
motion in the council.

He tells us of other women, who, in a city besieged, made the men blush for a
shameful capitulation; -- of women, who, seeing their sons and their husbands
flee in battle, ran before them, and obstructed their passage, forcing them to
return, to death or to victory; -- of women, who, during the time of a siege,
mounted the walls, defended their city, and bravely repulsed the enemy: -- of
women who resisted despotism and oppression, and who, as soon as the tyrant was
slain, ran dancing before the conspirators, and crowned them with their own
hands; -- of some, who themselves gave liberty to their country; -- of several,
who exposed themselves to death, and loaded themselves with chains to save
their captive husbands: -- and he takes particular notice of Camma, who
poisoned herself at the altar, that she might poison the murderer of her
husband; and who, turning toward the assassin, said,

I have only lived to revenge the death of my spouse -- It is done. Thee, this
moment, I order, in place of a nuptial bed, to prepare thyself a tomb.

He likewise instances the women of Gaul, who, in the time of a civil war,
threw themselves between two armies rushing to battle, and separated, and
reconciled the combatants. As a reward for which act of valor, they had the
honor of being admitted into the public councils, and sometimes of being
chosen the arbiters of nations.

To these great and generous qualities, by which women seem to rise above
themselves, Plutarch has joined the softer, and to men more attractive virtues,
as being more natural to the sex. He praises the women of an island of the
Archipelago, where, during the course of seven years, he says, there was
neither an instance of weakness in a young person, nor of infidelity in a
married woman: -- And he relates an anecdote of the Milesian virgins, which
merits the attention of a philosopher. Multitudes fell by their own hands --
doubtless in that trying age, when nature giving birth to restless and
turbulent desires, inflames the imagination; and when the heart, astonished at
new wants, which virtue forbids it to gratify, feels pining melancholy succeed
to the sportful tranquillity of childhood. Nothing could stop the contagion. A
law was made condemning the first who should be guilty of self-murder, to be
brought naked, and exposed in the marketplace. Those young women were not
afraid of death; but they were afraid of shame, even after death. Not one of
them henceforth made an attempt upon her life.

Plutarch in the same piece relates another anecdote, which, even at this day,
might afford an excellent lesson of political economy. A king, who believed
that riches consisted in gold, obliged the greater part of his subjects to
labor in the mines. They all perished. The remaining inhabitants of the
country had recourse to the quen. She ordered an artificer to make privately
the resemblance of bread, of meat, and of different kinds of fruits, of gold;
and, when the king returned from a journey, she had them served up to him. The
view pleased him very much; but, at length, he grew hungry, and desired to have
something to eat. The queen replied.

We have nothing but gold. Your lands are uncultivated: they produce nothing. I
have set before you what you love, and all that now remains to us of a once
plentiful and populous kingdom.

The king saw, and corrected his mistake.

SECTION II. Of the Grecian WOMEN.
BESIDES his general treatise on the actions of women, Plutarch has left us a
piece in honor of the Spartan dames. There he cites a variety of expressions,
which demonstrate their courage and vigor of mind; there we find beings and
virtues very different from those of the same sex with which we have occasion
to be acquainted: -- Nature sacrificed to patriotism; honor ranked before
affection; the name of citizen preferred to the name of mother; tears of joy
shed over the body of a son pierced with wounds; the maternal hands armed
against a son guilty of cowardice; the mandate of death conveyed to a son
suspected of a crime; and sorrow, and even compassion, regarded as a weakness,
or as an insult! --

He gives us a singular instance, in a Spartan woman, of intrepidity and
fortitude in a state of servitude. A prisoner, and sold as a slave, the
question was put to her, 'What know thou?' -- 'To be free!' she replied;
and, when her master commanded what she deemed ignominious, she cooly said, You
are unworthy of me: and resigned herself to death.

Those who have not been accustomed to look beyond their own times, and who
conclude what women have been, from what they are; and those, more
particularly, who are ignorant what essects a legislation conceived in one
head, and combined in all its branches, can produce on the mind, will be at a
loss to comprehend, how a sex that seems rather formed for sensibility than
fortitude, should possess so much courage. It sprung from the vigor of ancient
laws.

Among the Greeks, who were almost all republicans, the manners of the women
became necessarily bold and austere. The retreats where they spent their lives
subdued their desires; the poverty of the public denied the means of
corruption; and the apprehension of national honor exalted their sentiments.
They had an ambition of not being behind their sons, their brothers, and their
husbands; and, not being able to attract them by feminine arts, they boldly
trod in their footsteps.

Other causes co-operated to place the women of those early ages on a level
with the men. In the era of the formation of states, when society is only
emerging from barbarism, the toils and the dangers of the two fexes are nearly
the same.

The republics, or the kingdoms of Greece, consisting often only of one city,
were continually either threatened with war, or were the scene of blood.
National animosities, inflamed by the clashing of interests, were more ardent,
and less easily extinguished than in our times. The wars of Europe are now only
the means, and the manner of deciding the quarrels of princes: they were then
the awakened passions of the people. The inhabitants of one state fought for
the lives of the inhabitants of another. Victory condemned the women to
slavery. Such a condition was an asylum against death, and might sometimes be
alleviated by the favor of a master, but could never protect them from
dishonor.

The uncertainty of the laws, in the particular states of Greece, and the
shocks of liberty, opened a door to tyrants. The right to command, was then a
right to abuse it. To ascend the throne, was to be a robber and an assassin.
The citizen knew not thenceforth what he had to fear, to hope, or to suffer.

The inhabitants of one place were involved in opposition and bloodshed, and
chose of another were engaged in dark conspiracies, where women were admitted
to the mysteries, and sometimes employed as the ministers of vengeance; for the
ills complained of extended to them, and they had often more to lose than their
lives. The two sexes then kept pace with each other: their courage was great,
because the occasions of exerting it were many and trying.

In the same periods, and from the same impulse, both Europe and Asia were
overrun by invasions and emigrations of armed multitudes; and, among all those
wandering people, the two sexes encountered the same hardships and the same
perils. The women would therefore imperceptibly acquire a habit of fortitude;
-- and, as the virtue of the softer sex has its existence in pride -- as
indolence is almost always the companion of seduction -- as the practice of
surmounting dangers teaches us to subdue ourselves -- as the life of those
women was either altogether active, or altogether retired; -- and, as they
could know nothing of that anxious leisure of society, where imagination
eternally out-runs desire, and the soul is at once corrupted by all its senses,
they would join to their courage a high and delicate apprehension of honor: --
and these are, indeed, the two qualities assigned by Plutarch to the women of
those early times, both Greeks and Barbarians.

But, in the different eras of Grecian history, we must not suppose that the
women were always the same. It appears that the manners in the isles of Greece,
in general, were much purer than on the continent. Those islanders, by being
less exposed to foreign intercourse, could more easily preserve their laws and
their virtues. The warlike convents of Lacedemon, the nurseries only of
soldiers, would be much more rigid than the smiling retreats of Athens, whence
politeness was propagated, and fashion announced; and the city of Thebes, where
a rustic grossness supplied the place of an elegant luxury, must have been very
different from Corinth, which on account of its situation and commerce,
obtained the name of THE TWO SEAS OF WEALTH AND PLEASURE.

In proportion as their Institutions were corrupted, the virtues of the women,
we may conclude, were lost. But the rank which the courtezans enjoyed, even in
the brightest ages of Greece, and particularly at Athens, is one of the
greatest singularities in the manners of any people. By what circumstance could
that order of women, who debase at once their own sex and ours -- in a country
where the women were possessed of modesty, and the men of sentiment -- arrive
at distinction, and sometimes even at the highest degree of reputation and
consequence? -- Several reasons may be assigned for that phenomenon in society.

In Greece, the courtezans were in some measure connected with the religion of
the country. The goddess of Beauty had her altars: and she was supposed to
protect prostitution, which was to her a species of worship. The people invoked
Venus in times of danger; and, after a battle, they thought they had done
honor to Miltiades and Themistocles, because the Laises and the Glyceras of
the age had chanted hymns to their goddess.

The courtezans were likewise connected with religion by means of the arts.
Their persons afforded models for statues, which were afterward adored in the
temples. Phrine served as a model to Praxiteles for his Venus of Cnidus: and,
during the feasts of Neptune near Elusis, Appelles having seen the same
courtezan on the seashore, without any other veil than her loose and flowing
hair, was so much struck with her appearance, that he borrowed from it the idea
of his Venus rising from the waves.

They were therefore connected with statuary and painting; as they furnished
the practisers of those arts with the means of embellishing their works.

The greater part of them were skilled in music; and, as that art was attended
with higher effects in Greece than it has ever been in any other country, it
must have possessed, in their hands, an irresistible charm.

Every one knows, how enthusiastic the Greeks were of beauty. They adored it in
the temples; they admired it in the principal works of art; they studied it in
the exercises and the games; they sought to perfect it by their marriages, and
they offered rewards to it at the public festivals. But virtuous beauty was
seldom to be seen. The modest women were confined to their own apartments, and
were visited only by their husbands and nearest relations. The courtezans
offered themselves every where to view; and their beauty, as might be expected,
obtained universal homage.

Society only can unfold the beauties of the mind: modest women were excluded
from it. The courtezans of Athens by living in public, and conversing freely
with all ranks of people, upon all manner of subjects, acquired by degrees a
knowledge of history, of philosophy, of pelicy, and a taste in the whole circle
of the arts. Their ideas were more extensive and various, and their
conversation was more sprightly and entertaining, than any thing that was to be
found among the virtuous part of the sex. Hence their houses became the schools
of elegance. The poets and the painters went there to catch the fleeting forms
of grace, and the changeable features of ridicule; the musicians to perfect the
delicacy of harmony; and the philosophers, to collect those particulars of
human life which had hitherto escaped their observation. The house of Aspasia
was the resort of Socrates and Pericles, as that of Ninon was of St. Evremont
and Conde. They acquired from those fair libertines taste and politeness, and
they gave them in exchange knowledge and reputation.

Greece was governed by eloquent men; and the celebrated courtezans having an
influence over those orators, must have had an influence on public affairs.
There was not one, not even the thundering, the inflexible Demosthenes, so
terrible to tyrants, but was subjected to their sway. Of that great master of
eloquence it has been said: What he had been a whole year in erecting, a woman
overturned in a day? That influence augmented their consequence; and their
talent of pleasing increased with the occasions of exerting it.

The laws and the public institutions, indeed, by authorizing the privacy of
women, set a high value on the sanctity of the marriage vow. But in Athens,
imagination, sentiment, luxury, the taste in arts and pleasures, was opposite
to the laws. The courtezans therefore may be said to have come in support of
the manners.

There was no check upon public licentiousness; but private infidelity, which
concerned the peace of families, was punished as a crime. By a strange, and
perhaps unequalled singularity, the men were corrupted, -- yet the domestic
manners were pure. It seems as if the courtezans had not been considered to
belong to their sex; and, by a convention to which the laws and the manners
bended, while other women were estimated merely by their virtues, they were
estimated only by their accomplishments.

These reasons will, in some measure, account for the honors which the
votaries of Venus so often received in Greece. Otherwise we should have been at
a loss to conceive, why six or seven writers had exerted their talents to
celebrate the courtezans of Athens See Athenaeus.
; why three great painters had uniformly devoted their pencils to represent
them on canvass; and why so many poets had strove to immortalize them in their
verses. We should hardly have believed, that so many illustrious men had
courted their society; that Aspasia had been consulted in deliberations of
peace and war; that Phrine had a statue of gold placed between the statues of
two kings, at Delphos; that, after death, magnificent tombs had been erected to
their memory.

The traveller, says a Greek writer Dica^rchus.
, who, approaching to Athens, sees on the side of the way a monument which
attracts his notice at a distance, will imagine that it is the tomb of
Miltiades or Pericles, or of some other great man, who has done honor to his
country by his services: he advances, he reads, and he learns, that it is a
courtezan of Athens who is interred with so much pomp.

Theopompus, in a letter to Alexander the Great, speaks also of the same
mounument in words to the following effect.

Thus, after her death, is a prostitute honored; while not one of those brave
warriors who fell in Asia, fighting for you and for the safety of Greece, has
so much as a stone erected to his memory, or an inscription to preserve his
ashes from insult.

Such was the homage which that enthusiastic people, voluptuous and passionate,
paid to beauty. More guided by sentiment than by reason, and having law rather
than principles, they banished their great men, honored their courtezans,
murdered Socrates, permitted themselves to be governed by Aspasia, preserved
inviolate the marriage bed, and placed Phrine in the temple of Apollo!

SECTION III. Of the Roman WOMEN.
AMONG the Romans, a grave and austere people, who during five hundred years
were unacquainted with the elegancies and the pleasures of life, and who, in
the middle of furrows and of fields of battle, were employed in tillage or in
war, the manners of the women were a long time as solemn and severe as those of
the men, and without the smallest mixture of corruption or of weakness.

The time when the Roman women began to appear in public marks a particular era
in history. In the infancy of the city, and even till the conquest of Carthage,
shut up in their houses, where a simple and rustic virtue paid every thing to
instinct, and nothing to elegance; so nearly allied to barbarism, as only to
know what it was to be wives and mothers; chaste, without apprehending they
could be otherwise; tender and affectionate, before they had learned the
meaning of the words; occupied in duties, and ignorant that there were other
pleasures, they spent their life in retirement, in nursing their children, and
in rearing to the republic a race of laborers or of soldiers. Nor were they
inattentive to the other parts of domestic economy: virtuously happy during
the night, in the recess of more important cares, they were employed through
the day in working alternately at the loom and at the spindle.

The habits of the most illustrious Romans, for many ages, were spun by their
wives, or by their sisters. Even Augustus, when lord of the world, remained an
example of that ancient simplicity.

The Roman women, during that period were respected over the whole earth. Their
victorious husbands revisited them with transport, at their return from battle;
they laid at their feet the spoils of the enemy, and exalted, and endeared
themselves in their eyes, by the wounds which they had received for them and
for the state. Those warriors often came from imposing commands upon kings,
and, in their own houses, accounted it an honor to obey. In vain the too rigid
laws had made them the arbiters of life and death: more powerful than the laws,
the women ruled their judges. In vain the legislature, foreseeing the wants
which exist only among a corrupt people, permitted divorce; the indulgence of
the polity was proscribed by the manners.

Such was the influence of beauty at Rome, before the licentious intercourse of
the sexes had corrupted both, debasing the one by the other: and every mean it
appears was used to prolong the happy period, and preserve the purity of female
manners.

A severe guardianship, from which no age relieved the unmarried women; the
censure of the magistrates; the domestic tribunals; the laws for preventing
their luxury, by fixing their dowries; the sumptuary laws, for regulating their
ornaments; the temples erected to chastity, and to a goddess who presided over
the peace of marriages and the reconciliation of spouses; decrees of the senate
in favor of women who had been serviceable to the state; all demonstrate the
attention which that warlike people paid to the softer sex, and to their
virtues, as long as they had any themselves.

The Roman matrons do not seem to have possessed that military courage, which
Plutarch has praised in certain Greek and Barbarian women. They partook more of
the nature of their sex; or, at least, they departed less from its character.
Their first quality was decency. Every one knows the story of Cato the censor,
who stabbed a Roman senator for kissing his own wife, in presence of his
daughter.

To these austere manners the Roman women joined an enthusiastic love of their
country, which discovered itself upon many great occasions. On the death of
Brutus, they all clothed themselves in mourning. In the time of Coriolanus,
they saved the city. That incensed warrior, who had insulted the senate and the
priests, and who was superior even to the pride of pardoning, could not resist
the tears and the entreaties of the women: They melted his obdurate heart. The
senate decreed them public thanks; ordered the men to give place to them upon
all occasions; made an altar be erected on the spot where the mother had
softened her son, and the wife her husband; -- and the sex were permitted to
add another ornament to their head-dress.

It is to be wished, that our modern ladies could assign as good a reason for
the size of their caps.

The Roman women saved the city a second time, when besieged by Brennus. They
gave up all their gold as its ransom. For that instance of their generosity,
the senate granted them the honor of having funeral orations pronounced from
the rostrum, in common with patriots and heroes. -- After the battle of Cannae,
when Rome had no other treasures but the virtues of her citizens, the women
sacrisiced both their gold and their jewels. A new decree rewarded their zeal.

Valerius Maximus, who lived in the reign of Tiberius, and who has left us a
book which is a more singular monument of great virtues than of good taste, has
several essays in praise of the Roman women. But these are less panegyrics than
detached histories, to which he has sometimes given the style and the manner of
the oration. We have good reason to think so, since the celebrated Portia, the
daughter of Cato, and the wife of Brutus, is not there forgot; nor that Julia,
the wife of Pompey, who died of terror, at seeing the robe of her husband
tinged with his blood; nor that young Roman, who, in prison, supported her
father by her milk; nor several other illustrious women, who, during the time
of the proscriptions, exposed their lives to save their husbands.

The same writer, in extolling the virtues, touches also on the talents of the
Roman women. He informs us that, in the second triumvirate, the three assassins
who governed Rome, thirsting after gold not less than blood, and having already
practiced every species of robbery, and worn out every method of plunder,
resolved to tax the women. They imposed a heavy contribution upon each of them.
The women sought an orator to defend their cause, but found none: nobody would
reason against those who had the power of life and death. The daughter of the
celebrated Hortensius alone appeared: she revived the memory of her father's
abilities; and supported with intrepidity her own cause, and that of her sex.
The ruffians blushed, and revoked their orders. Hortensia was conducted home in
triumph; and had the honor of having given in one day, an example of courage
to men, a pattern of eloquence to women, and a lesson of humanity to tyrants.

But the era of the talents of women at Rome, is to be found under the
emperors; when society was more perfected by opulence, by luxury, by the use
and abuse of the arts, and by commerce. Their retirement was then less strict;
their genius, more active, was more exerted; their heart had new wants; the
idea of reputation sprung up in their minds; their lesure increased with the
division of employments. They had servile offices, which the women of rank left
-- if I may so express myself -- to the people: they had those of a higher
class, which were soon silled. During upwards of six hundred years, the virtues
had been found sufficient to please; they now found it necessary to call in the
accomplishments. They were desirous to join admiration to esteem, till they
learned to exceed esteem itself: for, in all countries, in proportion as the
love of virtue diminishes, we find the value of talents to increase.

A thousand causes concurred to produce this revolution of manners among the
Romans. The vast inequality of ranks; the enormous fortunes of individuals; the
ridicule affixed by the imperial court to moral ideas; all contributed to
hasten the period of corruption. Then vice had no curb. The excessive desire of
shows brought a low and shameless freedom into fashion. Women contended with
each other, who should bribe highest for the embraces of a player. They sixed
their hearts and their eyes upon the stage, to devour the movements of a
pantomime. A dancer, or a juggler, swallowed up the patrimonies, and gave heirs
to the descendants of the Scipios and the Emiliuses. Debauchery reduced
fertility. They learned to cheat nature. The art of producing abortions
completed the detestable practice. The passions, always craving, always
gratified; and the women tired of all, cloyed of all, multiplied in Rome the
monsters of Asia: they mutilated their slaves, to satisfy the new caprices of
an imagination jaded even with pleasure itself. The vices became more powerful
than the laws. It was no longer the study of the magistrate to preserve the
manners, but to punish crimes; and sometimes their number, and their nature,
was so alarming, that it became necessary for public justice to cover herself
with a veil: because there would have been no less danger than shame in taking
notice of all the guilty.

When Septimus Severus mounted the throne, he found three thousand accusations
of adultery on the roll. He was obliged to lay aside his plan of reformation.

In that age, the rank of the women appears to have been more frequently
praised than the virtue, and the talents, or accomplishments, than the manners.

About the beginning of the empire, several funeral orations were pronounced at
Rome in honor of women: the oration of Junia, the sister of Brutus, and the
wife of Cassius; the oration of the Empress Livia, the mother of Tiberius; that
of Octavia, spoken by Augustus; and that of Poppaea, by Nero. The first may be
said to be the eulogy of virtue, still severe and republican. The second ought
to mark the gradation of the manners of the women of a commonwealth to their
manners in a court, and under monarchical government.

The manners of Livia partook of both periods, and of both governments. She was
connected with the republic by a remnant of simplicity; and, to use the words
of Tacitus, by the sanctity of her house: She was connected with the monarchy
by a boundless ambition, by a desire of reputation, by a studied deceit, by the
art of happily employing the allurements of her sex -- in short, by intrigue
and address applied by turns to great or to trifling purposes.

The third oration, or that of Octavia, the sister of Augustus, the wife of
Anthony, and the virtuous and tender rival of Cleopatra, was the eulogy of
beauty rendered interesting by misfortunes, and mingled with great events, of
which she was rather the victim than the cause.

These panegyrics might pass without reprehension; but the eulogy of Poppaea
pronounced by an Emperor and applauded by the Romans, was a proof of the last
stage of corruption Tacit. Ann. XVI. 6.
It seemed to insinuate, that all the women connected with the imperial house,
or who entered there, had a right to be praised in the same manner after their
death. Several of them, while on the throne, were publicly abandoned in their
pleasures; but the apotheosis repaired all. Religion was even less strict than
the manners: it was easier to obtain the rank of a goddess, than the character
of a virtuous woman.

There were still however some virtues among the Roman women; but these were
remarkable. The greater part of them owed their birth to Stoicism, which, under
the first emperors, spread itself to Rome. Stoicism is to the manners, what
republican severity is to government. It revived in some houses the ancient
virtues; but with this difference, that formerly the Romans may be said to have
sucked in virtue with their milk; it was a kind of habitual instinct, and the
happy effect of example and of laws: now, to resist the torrent of corruption,
it was necessary to possess cultivated manners, firm opinions, and
philosophical resources. It was likewise necessary to have principles; for cold
reason could not long have held our: it was necessary to possess a certain
enthusiasm, which at once animated and supported the soul; which proposed to
itself a dignity superior to man, that it might elevate him to the height of
his powers; which despised pleasure, that it might hate vice; which withstood
sorrow and compassion, that it might fortify itself against weakness; which, in
short, in places where guilt was all powerful by authority and by example,
where men were enslaved by all things, rendered man independent of all things
-- but of moral obligation; and which, raising him above this sublunary scene
and all its delusive joys, made him his own censor, his preceptor, his
contemplator, and his judge.

Such was the doctrine of the Stoics. It was therefore highly necessary at Rome
in this period, as a powerful counterpoise to an enormous weight; and it
produced, indeed, in that city the most amazing contrasts: -- the most exalted
courage was often found by the side of the most debasing cowardice, and the
most rigid austerity in the neighborhood of the most shameless licentiousness.

It is worthy of remark, that Stoicism never produced such great effects in
Greece as in Rome. As there is something extravagant in its nature, it perhaps
requires extraordinary circumstances to give it energy. Great wants and great
evils are necessary to create great virtues. Stoicism resembles those
mechanical powers, which increase in proportion to their resistances.

Several illustrious Romans, nursed in this sect, displayed the virtues which
it inspired: and the women, more susceptible of habits than of principles, and
almost always governed by the manners, which strike them more forcibly,
imitated the conduct of their husbands or of their fathers. Portia had given
the example. The daughter of Cato, and the wife of Brutus, she was raised to
the very summit of their ideas. In the conspiracy against Caesar, she showed
herself worthy to be associated with the first of humankind, and trusted with
the fate of empires. After the battle of Philippi, she would neither survive
liberty nor Brutus, but died with the bold intrepidity of Cato.

The example of Portia was followed by that Arria, who seeing her husband
hesitating, and afraid to die, to encourage him, pierced her own breast, and
delivered to him the dagger with a smile The name of Arria's husband was Petus.
The manner of their death has afforded Martial the subject of an elegant
Epigram; which may be thus paraphrased. When to her husband Arria gave the
sword,
Which from her chaste, her bleeding breast she drew,
She said, "My Petus, this I do not feel;
"But -- oh! the wound, that must be made by you!"
She could no more -- but on her Perus still,
She fixed her feeble, her expiring eyes;
And, when she saw him raise the pointed steel,
She sunk -- and seemed to say, "Now Arria dies!"

; by Arria's daughter, the wife of Thrasea, and by the daughter of Thrasea, the
wife of Helvidius Priscus, both worthy of having had for their husbands men of
the greatest virtue and fortitude; by Paulinia, the wife of Seneca, who made
her veins be opened at the same time with her husband's; and who, forced to
live, during the few years which she survived him, bore in her countenance,'
says Tacitus, 'the honorable testimony of her love, a PALENESS which proved
that part of her blood had sympathetically issued with the blood of her spouse.

The same exalted virtues were displayed, though in a different manner, by
Agrippina, the wife of Germanicus; who, naturally haughty and sensible, after
the death of that great man, buried herself in retirement in all the bloom of
youth; and who, neither bending her stateliness under Tiberius, nor allowing
herself to be corrupted by the manners of her age, as implacable in her hatred
to the tyrant as she had been faithful to her husband, spent her life in
lamenting the one and in detesting the other. Nor should the celebrated Epinina
be forgot, whom Vespasion ought to have admired -- but whom he so basely put to
death.

It is remarkable, that not one of those extraordinary women had the honor of
a funeral oration. But that avails little: their virtues were preserved by
Tacitus. Two lines of that author are of more weight with posterity than all
the panegyrics that ever were pronounced.

I do not mean to speak of all the celebrated women of the empire; but Oppian,
Herodian, Philostratus, and Dion, take notice of a woman possessed of a
character, and a species of merit so very different from any of those that I
have had occasion to mention, as to claim my particular attention. It is the
empress Julia, the wife of Septimus Severus: born in Syria, and the daughter of
a priest of the Sun, it was predicted, that she should rise to sovereign
dignity. Her character justified the prophecy.

Julia, while on the throne, loved, or pretended passionately to love letters.
Be it taste, be it a desire of knowledge, be it a desire of reputation -- be it
all these, or be it what it may that induced her, she spent her life with
philosophers. Her rank of empress would not perhaps have been sufficient to
subdue those bold spirits; but she joined to that the more powerful influences
of wit and beauty. These three kinds of empire rendered less necessary to her
that which consists only in art; and which, attentive to their tastes and their
weaknesses, governs great minds by little means. It is said that she was a
philosopher. Her philosophy however did not extend so far as to give chastity
to her manners. Her husband, who did not love her, valued her understanding so
much that he consulted her upon all occasions. She governed in the same manner
under his son. To conclude her character, empress and minister of state,
occupied at the same time about literature and politics, and mingling her
pleasures freely with both, having courtiers for her loyers, scholars for her
friends, and philosophers for her counselors, in the middle of a society where
she reigned and was instructed, Julia arrived at the highest celebrity; but, as
among all her excellencies we find not those of her sex, the virtues of a
woman, our admiration is lost in blame. In her lifetime she obtained more
praise than respect; and posterity, while is has done justice to her talents
and her accomplishments, has agreed to deny her esteem.

After this extraordinary woman, we find Julia Mammaea, of the same family, and
who was likewise an empress, or at least mother to an emperor. Her merit was to
have united genius and valor; but, above all, to have educated for the throne,
her son, the young Alexander Severus, nearly in the same manner as Fenelon
afterward educated the duke of Burgundy. She made him at once virtuous and
intelligent.

In following the course of history, the illustrious Zenobia, though not of
Roman extraction, presents herself to view -- A princess no less worthy, than
happy, to have had Longinus for her preceptor; who knew as well to write as to
conquer; who was afterward unfortunate with dignity; and who consoled herself
for the loss of a throne, and the pleasures of grandeur, with the sweets of
solitude, and the joys of reason.

All these women received high encomiums from the writers of their age; --
which have since served to swell the size of all the panegyrics of celebrated
women.

We have still remaining two panegyrics on empresses: one is the panegyric of
Eusebia, the wife of Constance. She was the protectress of Julian. It was she
likewise who raised him to the imperial throne; and, by that secret charm which
wit and beauty have over even tyrants themselves, she often prevented the
political cruelties of a prince, who was always ready to assassinate those whom
he feared. Julian, who owed to her, life and empire, composed her panegyric,
His gratitude has not made him eloquent.

The other panegyric is written by Lucian: it is in dialogue, and in the form
of a portrait. We do not know precisely whom it is designed for; but the
commentators, who are always in confidence of such secrets, have not failed to
tell us that it is the panegyric of an empress. Be that as it may, we may
venture to a affirm, that it is the original of forty or fifty thousand
portraits of heroines or of princesses, which, four hundred years after, had
been made in France, in Italy, or in Spain, by the orators, historians, poets,
and romancewriters of those times, who frequently bestow on one woman all the
perfections of the sex.

It is the first trace which we find among the ancients of that light spirit of
gallantry, which is so fashionable among the moderns; and which consists in
saying to women, with a warm tongue and a cold heart, all that we do not
believe, and all that we would have them to believe. This rant, which is the
offspring of insensibility and affectation, and which joins bombast to
falsehood, owes its birth to Lucian; and must have proceeded from the
corruption of the manners of the empire, from the levity natural to the Greeks
of his time, and from some peculiarity in his own character. The head may
declaim, but the heart only knows how to praise.

SECTION IV. Of the Effects of Christianity on the Manners of WOMEN.
WE have already seen, that the revolution in the government of Rome, was
followed by a change in the manners; but, toward the third century, they
underwent a new and more remarkable change.

Hitherto the manners of the women had been only founded on morality, and had
no connection with religious ideas. The manners had been united to the policy
of some countries; but the laws had traced different lines, according to the
different plans of legislation, for the commencement and termination of the
virtues of women.

The dances, and the dress of the Spartan virgins, are well known. According to
Montesquieu, Lycurgus had murdered modesty, and chastity itself.

At Rome, women had been seen to dance publicly on the stage, without the
slightest veil between their nakedness and the eyes of the people: and, if Cato
retired from such a spectacle, the magistrates and the priests there attended.

The arts of painting and sculpture, which chiefly delighted in imitating
nature simple and unattired, contributed farther to seduce the imagination by
means of the senses.

Philosophy had no fixed principles for women. Sometimes it combated, and would
have extinguished in them, that sweet sentiment which is at once the safeguard
and the charm of their sex The school of the Cynies, which regarded modesty as
a dangerous allurement, and made it a duty to banish it from society.
; sometimes it taught that the tender union, which supposes a perpetual
contract of hearts, was only the tie of a moment, destroyed by the moment that
followed Systeme de la Communaute des Femmes dans un Etat.
.

Religion itself was only a kind of sacred policy, which had rather ceremonies
than precepts. The ancients honored their gods, as we honor our great men:
they offered them incense, and expected their protection in exchange. The gods
were their guardians, not their legislators.

Christianity, which now began to spread itself over the earth, was a
legislation. It imposed the most severe laws upon women, and upon manners. It
strengthened the marriage knot. To the political, it added a sacred tie; and,
ratified between the bench and the altar, placed the matrimonial engagements
under the jurisdiction of Heaven.

Not satisfied with regulating the actions, Christianity extended its empire
even to the thoughts. Above all it combated the senses. It waged war even with
such inanimate objects as might be the accomplices of seduction, or were the
means of delight. In a word, rousing vice in her secret cell, it made her
become her own tormentor, and condemned all the guilty to blush, by a forced
confession of their weaknesses.

The legislation of the Greeks and Romans referred the motive of every action
to the political interest of society; but the new and sacred legislation,
inspiring only contempt for this world, referred all things to a future and
very different state of existence. Hence sprung the idea of an unknown
perfection.

The detachment of the senses, the reign of the soul, and an inexpressibly
sublime and supernatural something, which blended itself with both, became the
doctrine of a body of people. Hence the vow of continence, and the consecration
of celibacy.

Life was a combat. The sanctity of the manners threw a veil over nature and
over society. Beauty was afraid to please; valor dropped his spear; the passions
were taught to submit; and the severity of the soul increased every day by the
sacrifices of the senses.

The women, who generally possess a lively imagination and a warm heart,
devoted themselves to virtues which were as flattering as they were difficult,
which were no less elevated than austere. It is almost a matter of indifference
to happiness, whether high passions are to be gratified or subdued. The soul is
pleased with its efforts; and, provided it is exerted, it signifies little
though its activity should be turned against itself.

The disciples of Christianity were farther taught to love and comfort one
another, like children of the same family. In consequence of this doctrine, the
more virtuous as much as the more tender sex, converting to pity the
sensibility of nature, -- the use and abuse of which religion taught them
equally to fear, -- devoted their lives to the service of indigence and
distress. Delicacy learned to overcome disgust; and the tears of beauty were
seen to flow in the huts of misery, and in the cells of disease, with the
friendly sympathy of a sister.

The persecutions which arose in the empire soon after the introduction of
Christianity, afforded that religion a new opportunity of discovering its
efficacy. To preserve the faith, it was often necessary to suffer imprisonment,
banishment, and death. Courage then became necessary.

There is a deliberate courage, which is the result of reason, and which is
equally bold and calm: It is the courage of philosophers and of heroes. There
is a courage which springs from the imagination, which is ardent and
precipitant; and such is most commonly the courage of martyrs, or the religious
courage.

The courage of the Christian women was founded upon the noblest motives.
Animated by the glorious hope of immortality, they embraced flames and gibbets,
and offered their delicate and feeble bodies to the most excruciating tortures.

This revolution in the ideas and in the manners, was followed by another in
the writings. Such as made women their subject, became as austere and seraphic
as they.

Almost all the doctors of those times, to whom the church has assigned the
compound title of saints and of orators, commend to admiration the Christian
women. But he who speaks of them with most eloquence, and with most zeal, is
Saint Jerome; who, born with a soul of fire, spent twenty-four years in writing,
in combating, and in conquering himself.

The manners of this saint were probably more severe than his thoughts. He had
a number of illustrious women at Rome among his disciples. But, though
surrounded with beauty, he escaped weakness, without escaping slander; and,
flying the world, the women and himself, he retired to Palestine; where all
which he had quitted pursued him still, tormented him under the penitential
sackcloth, and, in the middle of solitary deserts, reechoed in his ears the
tumult of Rome.

Such was Saint Jerome, the most eloquent panegyrist of the Christian women of
the fourth century. That warm and pious writer, though generally harsh and
obscure, softens his style in a thousand places to praise the Marcellas, the
Paulas, the Eustochiums, and many other Roman women, who at the Capitol had
embraced Christianity, and studied in Rome the language of the Hebrews, to read
and understand the books of Moses.

When the Roman empire, like some venerable column, was pushed from its base,
and broke in pieces by the myriads of the North, Christianity passed from the
conquered to the conquerors, and almost entirely by the zeal of the women; who,
at the same time, diffused the Gospel, and softened the manners of savages.

It is observed, that the Christian women have, in all ages, been more anxious
of making proselites than the men. Whether it be that their weakness takes
advantage of the sacred opinions, which are the greatest support to the soul;
that their imagination, more lively, is more strongly inflamed by objects which
are above nature, and sometimes even above reason; that the religious
principles of men are more connected with reflection, and those of women with
sentiment; -- for the one, we know, has much more activity than the other; --
that they look upon Christianity, which reduces all conditions to a level, as a
necessary defense for them, and a counterpoise to weakness against force; that,
in short, their natural desire of sway, which is supposed to have no bounds,
would perhaps exercise its dominion over that which is most free, over the mind
itself -- or whatever be their motive, the world has been obliged to their
ardour.

It was women who, making the charms of their sex subservient to religion --
who, raised to thrones by their beauty, drew over their husbands to their
opinions, and spread Christianity over the greater part of Europe. It was by
their means that France, England, a part of Germany, Bavaria, Hungary, Bohemia,
Lithuania, Poland, Russia, and, for some time, that Persia received the gospel.
By the same influence, Lombardy and Spain renounced the opinions of Arius.

I shall not here repeat the names of those princesses. They are inscribed in
the barbarous annals of the times, and have since been repeated by a number of
panegyrists. It is sufficient for me to have pointed out the species of merit
for which they were distinguished, and on what the eulogies dwell, which they
received in their lifetime, or which have been paid them by posterity.

ESSAY ON THE CHARACTER, MANNERS, and GENIUS OF WOMEN. PART II. Of the WOMEN OF
MODERN NATIONS.
SECTION I. Of the Inundation of the Barbarians, and the Effects of Chivalry on
the Character and the Manners of WOMEN.
HISTORY does not afford so singular a revolution in policy and manners, as
that which followed the subversion of the Roman empire.

It is to the Barbarians who spread conflagration and ruin, who trampled on the
monuments of art, and spurned the appendages of elegance and pleasure, that we
owe the bewitching spirit of gallantry, which, in these ages of refinement,
reigns in the courts of Europe: and that system, which has made it a principle
of honor among us to consider the women as sovereigns, which has partly formed
our customs, our manners, our policy, and which has so remarkably influenced
our writings and our languages -- that system, which has exalted the human
character by softening the empire of force, which mingles politeness with the
use of the sword, which delights in protecting the weak, and in conferring that
importance which nature or fortune have denied, was brought hither from the
frozen shores of the Baltic, and from the savage forests of the North.

The northern nations in general paid great respect to women. Continually
employed in hunting or in war, they condescended only to soften their ferocity
in the presence of the fair. Their forests were the nurseries of chivalry.
Beauty was there the reward of valor. A warrior, to render himself worthy of
his mistress, went in search of glory and of danger. Jealousy produced
challenges. Single combats, instituted by love, often stained with blood the
woods and the borders of the lakes; and the sword ascertained the rights of
Venus as well as of Mars.

Let us not be surprised at these manners. Among men who have made few advances
in civilization, but who are already united in large bodies, women have
naturally, and must have, the greatest sway. Society is then sufficiently
cultivated to have introduced the ideas of preference and of choice in the
connection between the sexes, -- which seem to be little regarded, if at all
known, among savages: it is too rude to partake of that state of effeminacy, in
which the senses are enfeebled, and the affections worn out by habit. People
but little removed from barbarism, in the perfection of their animal powers,
and ignorant of all those artificial pleasures created by the wants of polished
life, feel more exquisitely the pleasures of nature, and the genuine emotions
of man. They mingle even with their love a kind of adoration to the female sex.

Several of the northern nations imagined, that women could look into futurity,
and that they had about them an inconceivable something approaching to
divinity. Perhaps that idea was only the effect of the sagacity common to the
sex: and the advantage which their natural address gave them over rough and
simple warriors; perhaps also those barbarians, surprised at the influence
which beauty has over force, were lead to ascribe to supernatural attraction, a
charm which they could not comprehend.

A belief, however, that the Deity communicates himself more readily to women,
has at one time or other prevailed in every quarter of the earth. Not only the
Germans, the Britons, and all the people of Scandinavia were possessed of it:
it was women among the Greeks who delivered the oracles. The respect which the
Romans paid to the Sibyls is well known. The Jews had their prophetesses. The
predictions of the Egyptian women obtained much credit at Rome, even under the
emperors. And in most barbarous nations, all things that have the appearance of
being supernatural, the mysteries of religion, the secrets of physic, and the
rites of magic, are in the possession of the women.

The barbarians, who overran Europe, carried their opinions along with their
arms. A revolution, in the manner of living, must therefore soon have taken
place. The climates of the North required little reserve between the sexes; and
during the invasions from that quarter, which continued for three or four
hundred years, it was common to see women mixed with warriors. Hence that sweet
and timid modesty, which has generally been considered as essential to beauty,
by being unveiled to every eye, ceased to be regarded as a virtue.

Among the ancients, the retirement of women was a long time a part of the
constitution of the state; because the government and the laws rested upon the
manners. In modern Europe, the barbarians having every where concerted military
establishments, paid little attention to the manners: they rested all things
upon force.

By mingling with a corrupted people, who had all the vices of former
prosperity along with those of present adversity, the conquerors were not
likely to imbibe more severe ideas. Hence we see those sons of the North, in
softer climates, uniting the vices of resinement to the stateliness of the
warrior, and the pride of the barbarian.

They embraced Christianity: but it rather modified than changed their
character. It mingled itself with their customs, without altering the genius of
the people.

Thus, by degrees, were laid the foundations of new manners, which in modern
Europe have brought the two sexes more on a level, by assigning to the women a
kind of sovereignty, and associating love with valor.

Nearly about the time that this revolution took place in the West, a
circumstance pretty remarkable, a religion, Mahometism.
and a people, arose, that established and consecrated in the East, the
domestic servitude of women: so that the same era which gave birth to the
empire of beauty in Europe, doomed the lovely sex to be eternal slaves in Asia.
Their slavery extended with the arms of the conquering Arabs, and their
dominion and the gallantry of the North accompanied the victories of the
savage, but generous inhabitants of the pole.

The reign of chivalry already commenced, began to advance over Europe. That
civil and military institution took its rise from a train of circumstances, and
the native bent of the new inhabitants. Its true era was the fourteenth century.

Shattered by the fall of the empire, Europe had not yet arrived at any degree
of consistency. After five hundred years, nothing was fixed; nothing, if I may
use the phrase, was molded together. From the mixture of Christianity with the
ancient customs of the barbarians, sprung a continual discord in the manners;
from the mixture of the rights of the priesthood with those of the empire,
sprung a discord in laws and politics; from the mixture of the rights of
sovereigns with those of the nobility, sprung a discord in government; and,
from the mixture of Arabians and Christians, sprung a discord in religions.
Anarchy and confusion were the result of so many contrasts.

Christianity, which had now lost much of its original influence, like a feeble
curb, was still sufficient to restrain the weak passions, but was no longer
able to bridle the strong. It produced remorse, but could not prevent guilt.

The people of those times made pilgrimages, and they pillaged: they massacred,
and they afterward did penance. Robbery and debauchery were blended with
superstition.

It was in this era that the nobility, idle and warlike, from a sentiment of
natural equity, and that uneasiness which follows the perpetration of violence
-- from the double motive of religion and of heroism, associated themselves to
effect in a body what government had neglected, or but poorly executed. Their
object was to combat the Moors in Spain, the Saracens in Asia, the tyrants of
the castles and strong holds in Germany, and in France; to assure the safety of
travelers, as Hercules and Theseus did of old; and, above all things, to
defend the honor and protect the rights of the feeble sex, against the too
frequent villainy and oppression of the strong.

A noble spirit of gallantry soon mingled itself with that institution. Every
knight, in devoting himself to danger, listed himself under some lady as his
sovereign. It was for her that he attacked, for her that he defended, for her
that he mounted the walls of cities and of castles -- and for her honor that
he shed his blood.

Europe was only one large field of battle, where warriors clad in armor, and
adorned with ribbands and with the ciphers of their mistresses, engaged in
close fight to merit the favor of beauty.

Fidelity was then associated with courage, and love was inseparably connected
with honor.

The women, proud of their sway, and of receiving it from the hands of virtue,
became worthy of the great actions of their lovers, and reciprocated passions
as noble as those they inspired. An ungenerous choice debased them. The tender
sentiment was never felt but when united with glory; and the manners breathed
an inexpressible something of pride, heroism, and tenderness, which was
altogether astonishing.

Beauty perhaps never exercised so sweet, or so powerful an empire over the
heart. Hence those constant passions which our levity cannot comprehend, and
which our manners, our little weaknesses, our perpetual thirst of hopes and
desires, our listless anxiety that torments us, and which tires itself in the
pursuit of emotion without pleasure, and of impulse without aim, lead us to
reject, are turned every day into ridicule on our theaters, in our
conversations, and in our lives.

But it is nevertheless true, that those passions, fostered by years and roused
by obstacles, where respect kept hope at a distance, where love, fed only by
sacrifices, sacrificed itself unceasingly to honor, reinvigorated the
characters and the souls of the two sexes; gave more energy to the one, and
more elevation to the other; changed men into heroes, and inspired the women
with a pride -- which was by no means hurtful to virtue.

The foregoing account of the origin and progress of chivalry, seems naturally
to arise out of the history of the times, and is founded upon the authority of
the best early writers. But there are two late writers, of so high, and such
justly merited reputation, that it would be an injury to the public to omit
their opinion, and a crime against genius, to alter their expression: they
shall therefore speak for themselves, for the women, and for us; -- for their
sentiments seem only to corroborate ours.

The system of chivalry, when completely formed, says professor Ferguson,
'proceeded on a mavelous respect and veneration to the fair sex, on forms of
combat established, and on a supposed junction of the heroic and sanctified
character. The formalities of the duel, and a kind of judicial challenge, were
known among the ancient Celtic nations of Europe. The Germans, even in their
native forests, paid a kind of devotion to the female sex. The Christian
religion enjoined meekness and compassion to barbarous ages. These different
principles combined together, may have served as the foundation of a system, in
which courage was directed by religion and love, and the warlike and gentle
were united together. When the characters of the hero and the saint were mixed,
the mild spirit of Christianity, though often turned into venom by the bigotry
of opposite parties, though it could not always subdue the ferocity of the
warrior, nor suppress the admiration of courage and force, may have confirmed
the apprehensions of men in what was to be held meritorious and splendid in the
conduct of their quarrels.

The feudal establishments, by the high rank to which they elevated certain
families, no doubt greatly favored this romantic system. Not only the luster
of a noble descent, but the stately castle beset with battlements and towers,
served to inflame the imagination, and to create a veneration for the daughter
and the sister of gallant chiefs, whose point of honor it was to be
inaccessible and chaste, and who could perceive no merit but that of the
high-minded and the brave, nor be approached in any other accents than those of
gentleness and respect. Essay on the history of Civil Society, Part iv. Sect. 4.
.

From the prevailing spirit of the times, says professor Millar, the art of war
became the study of every one who was desirous of maintaining the character of
a gentleman. The youth were early initiated in the profession of arms, and
served a sort of apprenticeship under persons of rank and experience. The young
squire became in reality the servant of that leader to whom he had attached
himself, and whose virtues were set before him as a model which he proposed to
imitate. He was taught to perform with ease and dexterity those exercises which
were either ornamental or useful, and at the same time he endeavored to
acquire those talents and accomplishments which were thought suitable to his
profession. He was taught to look upon it as his duty to check the insolent, to
restrain the oppressor, to protect the weak and defenseless; to behave with
frankness and humanity even to an enemy, with modesty and politeness to all.
According to the prosiciency which he had made, he was proportionably advanced
in rank and character, and was honored with now titles and marks of
distinction, till at length he arrived at the dignity of knighthood; a dignity
which even the greatest potentates were ambitious of acquiring, as it was
supposed to distinguish a person who had obtained the most complete military
education, and who had attained to a high degree of eminence in those
particular qualities which were then universally admired and respected.

The situation of mankind in those periods had also a manifest tendency to
heighten and improve the passion between the sexes. It was not to be expected
that those opulent chiefs, who were so often at variance, and who maintained a
constant opposition to each other, would allow any sort of familiarity to take
place between the members of their respective families. Retired in their own
castles, and surrounded by their numerous vassals, they looked upon their
neighbors either as inferior to them in rank, or as enemies, against whom they
were obliged to be constantly upon their guard. They behaved to each other with
that ceremonious civility which the laws of chivalry required; but at the same
time with that reserve and caution which a regard to their own safety made it
necessary for them to observe. The young knight as he marched to the tournament
saw at a distance the daughter of the chieftan by whom the show was exhibited;
and it was even with difficulty that he could obtain access to her, in order to
declare the sentiments with which she had inspired him. He was entertained by
her relations with that cold respect which demonstrated their unwillingness to
contract an alliance with him. The lady herself was taught to assume the pride
of her family, and to think that no person was worthy of her affection who did
not possess the most exalted rank and character. To have given way to a sudden
inclination would have disgraced her for ever in the opinion of all her
kindred; and it was only by a long course of attention, and of the most
respectful service, that the lover could hope for any favor from his mistress.

The barbarous state of the country at that time, and the injuries to which the
inhabitants, especially those of the weaker sex, were frequently exposed, gave
ample scope for the display of military talents; and the knight who had nothing
to do at home was encouraged to wander from place to place, and from one court
to another, in quest of adventures; in which he endeavored to advance his
reputation in arms, and to recommend himself to the fair, of whom he was
enamoured, by fighting with every person who was so inconsiderate as to dispute
her unrivalled beauty, virtue, or personal accomplishments. Thus, while his
thoughts were constantly fixed upon the same object, and while his imagination,
inflamed by absence and repeated disappointments, was employed in heightening
all those charms by which his desires were continually excited, his passion was
at length wrought up to the highest pitch; and uniting with the love of fame,
became the ruling and governing principle of his conduct, and gave a particular
turn and direction to all his sentiments and opinions.

As there were many persons in the same situation, so they were naturally
inspired with similar sentiments. Rivals to one another in military glory, they
were often competitors, as Milton expresses it, 'to win her grace whom all
commend;' and the same emulation which disposed them to aim at preeminence in
the one respect, excited them with no less eagerness to dispute the preference
in the other. Their dispositions and manner of thinking became fashionable, and
were gradually diffused by the force of education and example. To be in love
was looked upon as one of the necessary qualifications of a knight; and he was
no less ambitious of showing his constancy and fidelity to his mistress, than
of displaying his military virtues. He assumed the title of her slave or
servant. By this he distinguished himself in every combat in which he was
engaged; and his success was supposed to redound to her honor, not less than
to his own. If she had bestowed upon him a present to be worn in the field of
battle in token of her regard, it was considered as a sure pledge of victory,
and as laying upon him the strongest obligation to act in such a manner as
would render him worthy of the favor which he had received Memoires sur
l'ancienne chevalrie, par M. de la Curne de Ste. Palaye.
.

The sincere and faithful passion, the distant sentimental attachment, which
commonly occupied the heart of every warrior, and which he professed upon all
occasions, was naturally productive of the utmost purity of manners, and of
great respect and veneration for the female sex. Persons who made a point of
defending the reputation and dignity of that particular lady to whom they were
devoted, became thereby extremely cautious and delicate; lest, by any
insinuation whatever, they should hurt the character of another, and be exposed
to the just censure and resentment of those by whom she was protected. A woman
who deviated so far from the established maxims of the age as to violate the
laws of chastity, was indeed deserted by every body, and was therefore
universally contemned and insulted. But those who adhered to the strict rules
of virtue, and maintained an unblemished reputation, were treated like beings
of a superior order Observations concerning the Distinction of Ranks in
Society, Chap. I.
.

Such was the spirit of chivalry. It gave birth to an incredible number of
performances in honor and in praise of women. The verses of the bards, the
Italian sonnet, the plaintive romance, the poems of chivalry, the Spanish and
French romances These compositions, all once so much celebrated, are only
calculated to gratify a vain curiosity. They may be compared to the ruins of a
Gothic palace: almost all of them have the same foundation; and the praises in
the one are as uniform as the apartments in the other. All the women are
prodigies of beauty, and miracles of virtue. The diversity of nations, however,
has shown itself in the manner of painting the same objects. Hence the French
compositions have most simplicity, the Italian most depth, the Spanish most
imagination -- and the reason is obvious. The simplicity of the French writers
proceeded from the uncompounded manners of a people still in a state of
military subordination, and more accustomed to fight than to think: the depth
of the Italian writers was the effect of more cultivated minds, more
intercourse with strangers, more diversified manners, and of a crowd of little
political interests: the pomp and imagination of the Spanish writers took its
rise from an ancient pride, from the activity of souls more sublimed by the
sun, and from the mixture of the Moors and Arabs with the native inhabitants of
the country; which last circumstance must have had a prodigious influence upon
the manners, upon the Language, and, by the manner of painting objects, upon
the manner of seeing them. For, if the genius of a people forms their language,
the characteristic of language must stamp itself upon genius.


, were so many monuments of that kind, composed in the time of a noble
barbarism, and of a heroism in which the great and the ridiculous were often
blended.

In the courts, in the fields of battle or of tournament, every thing breathed
of women: -- and the same taste prevailed in letters. One did not write, one
did not think, but for them. The same man was often both poet and warrior; he
sung to his lyre, and encountered with his lance, by turns, for the beauty that
he adored.

The times, and the manners of chivalry, by bringing great enterprises, bold
adventures, and I know not what of extravagant heroism into fashion, inspired
the women with the same taste. The two sexes always imitate each other; their
manners and their minds are refined or corrupted, invigorated or dissolved
together.

The women, in consequence of the prevailing passion, were now seen in the
middle of camps and of armies: they quitted the soft and tender inclinations,
and the delicate offices of their own sex, for the courage and the toilsome
occupations of ours. During the crusades, animated by the double enthusiasm of
religion and of valor, they often performed the most romantic exploits;
obtained indulgencies on the field of battle, and died with arms in their
hands, by the side of their lovers or of their husbands.

In Europe, the women attacked and defended fortifications; princesses
commanded their armies, and obtained victories. Such was the celebrated Joan de
Mountfort, disputing for her duchy of Bretagne, and fighting herself. Such was
that still more celebrated Margaret of Anjou Queen of England, and wife of
Henry VI.
, active and intrepid, general and soldier, whose genius supported a long time
a feeble husband; which taught him to conquer; which replaced him upon the
throne; which twice relieved him from prison; and, oppressed by fortune and by
rebels, which did not bend, till after she had decided in person twelve battles.

The warlike spirit among the women, consistent with ages of barbarism, when
every thing is impetuous, because nothing is fixed, and when all excess is the
excess of force, continued in Europe upwards of four hundred years, showing
itself from time to time, and always in the middle of convulsions, or on the
eve of great revolutions.

But there were eras and countries in which that spirit appeared with
particular luster. Such were the displays it made in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries in Hungary, and in the islands of the Archipelago and the
Mediterranean, when they were invaded by the Turks.

Every thing conspired to animate the women of those countries with an exalted
courage: -- the prevailing spirit of the foregoing ages; the terror which the
name of the Turks inspired; the still more dreadful apprehensions of an unknown
enemy; the difference of dress, which has a stronger effect than is commonly
supposed on the imagination of a people; the difference of religion, which
produced a kind of sacred horror; the striking difference of manners; and,
above all, the confinement of the female sex; which, though in the East
considered only as a civil and political institution, presented to the women of
Europe nothing but the frightful ideas of servitude and of a master -- the
groans of honor, the tears of beauty in the embrace of barbarism, and the
double tyranny of love and pride!

The contemplation of these objects accordingly roused in the hearts of the
women a resolute courage to defend themselves, nay sometimes even a courage of
enthusiasm, which hurled itself against the enemy; and that courage was
augmented, by the promises of a religion, which offered eternal happiness in
exchange for the sufferings of a moment.

It is not therefore surprising, that when three beautiful women of the Isle of
Cyprus were led prisoners to Selim, to be secluded in the seraglio, one of them
preferring death to such a condition, conceived the project of setting fire to
the magazine; and, after having communicated her design to the rest, put it in
execution; -- that the year following, a city of Cyprus being besieged by the
Turks, the women ran in crowds, mingled themselves with the soldiers, and,
fighting gallantly in the breach, were the means of saving their country; --
that, under Mahomet II. a girl of the isle of Lemnos, armed with the sword and
shield of her father, who had fallen in battle, opposed the Turks, when they
had forced a gate, and chased them to the shore; -- that, in Hungary, the women
distinguished themselves miraculously in a number of sieges and battles against
the Turks A woman of Transylvania, in different engagements, is said to have
killed six janis^ries with her own hand.
; -- that, in the two celebrated sieges of Rhodes and Malta, the women
seconding the zeal of the knights, discovered upon all occasions the greatest
intrepidity: not only that impetuous and temporary impulse which despises
death, but that cool and deliberate fortitude which can support the continued
hardships, the toils, and the miseries of war.

That era, and these multiplied examples of courage among the women merit our
most serious attention: but only to consider the revolutions of history, to
observe, in the islands of the Archipelago, the descendants of the illustrious
Greeks, after a revolution of fifteen hundred years, became Christians, and
subjects of the republic of Venice, defending their cities and their coasts
against the ravages of the conquering Tartars, who carried to the countries of
Homer and Plato the religion of an Arabian prophet, is an interesting
spectacle, and teems with reflections of every kind.

The Hungarian women, in their encounters with the same Tartars, do not present
us with a spectacle less singular. We cannot doubt that it was the double
motive of religion and honor, which exalted their courage to such a height:
for these are the two principles which in all ages have given birth to the
great actions of women.

SECTION II. Of the Revival of Letters, and the Learning of WOMEN.
WHILE war reigned in Greece, in Hungary, and in the islands of the
Mediterranean, which seemed only so many theaters for the illustrious actions
of women, another revolution took place in Italy: -- the revival of arts and of
letters. That era gave a new direction to the ideas and occupations of the
female sex. A general thirst after knowledge turned all the world to the study
of languages.

There is a time when the symbols of ideas are taken for ideas themselves. We
hope to instruct ourselves by learning words, as some projectors have hoped to
enrich themselves by exploring mines. Languages are otherwise so many chains of
enigmas, where ideas are hid, and never could provoke our assiduity. Before the
exercise of thought, we would know the history of the thoughts of others. This
process is perhaps even necessary. In the infancy of life, the senses collect
the materials of thinking; in the infancy of letters, the mind treasures up
words, to combine them afterward. In both cases, it is the memory that gives
activity to the rest of the intellectual powers.

As words lead to ideas, the ancient philosophy revived with the languages.
Persons of austere minds and obtuse feelings, those who looked upon cold reason
to be right reason, who set most value upon a certain logic that restrains, a
subtilty that divides, and a vague obscurity which exercises the understanding,
and leaves it the merit of determining for itself, and of fixing its ideas,
made choice of the philosophy of Aristotle: But people of sensibility and
fancy, those who could pardon errors for eloquence, who preferred a sublime and
seraphic system of metaphysics to a dry logic, and elegant allusions to
sylogistic quibbles; those, in short, who had souls upon which ideas, even
chimerically refined, of perfection, of order, and of beauty, made a deep and
lively impression, devoted themselves to the philosophy of Plato.

The philosophy of Aristotle occupied the universities and the cloisters; the
poets, the lovers, the sentimental philosophers, and the ladies, were the
disciples of Plato.

Theology, or the art of applying human reasonings to celestial matters, was
another kind of knowledge which then employed and engaged the mind: it was
fashionable, and it was necessary that it should be so. It was a magazine for
the wars of religion, a support for the court of Rome, and a sure road to
honor and preferment. A high value was therefore put on that science; and the
descendants of the ancient Romans became celebrated by their religious studies,
in the country where their ancestors had been so much renowned by their
victories.

After the times of conspiracy, of tyranny, and of domestic broils, law and
order must have been highly prized. Jurisprudence was therefore cultivated.
They had not sufficient knowledge to become legislators; but they studied, they
explained, they altered, and they disfigured the Roman laws.

Chivalry now began to decline in Europe: but it left behind it a tincture of
romantic gallantry in the manners, which communicated itself to the works of
imagination.

Many verses were then written, expressive of passions either real or feigned,
but always respectful and tender: and as in France, where the dissipated
nobility spent their life in war, love was generally painted under the idea of
a conquest; in Italy, where another set of ideas prevailed, it was always
represented as an adoration or worship.

This confusion of religion and gallantry, of Platonism and poetry, of the
study of the languages and of the laws, of the ancient philosophy and the
modern theology, formed the general character of the most illustrious men of
those times. The same observation may be extended to the most celebrated women.

Never were the women so universally distinguished for profound learning, as in
this period. Perhaps as it followed the ages of chivalry, when several women
had disputed with men the prize of valor, willing to establish the equality of
their sex in all things, they were ambitious to prove that they had as much
genius as courage; and to subject, even by their talents, those over whom they
reigned by their beauty.

What strikes us most remarkably in that era is, the general spirit. We see
women preach, and unwind controversy; women publicly support theses; women fill
the chairs of philosophy and of law; women harrangue in Latin before the popes;
women write in Greek, and read Hebrew; nuns, poetesses; women of quality,
divines; and (which happened more than once) young girls perfected in
eloquence, with the sweetest features and the softest voice, pathetically
exhorting the Holy Father and the Christian princes to declare war against the
Turks.

The religious spirit which has animated women in all ages showed itself at
this time, but it changed its form. It had made them, by turns, martyrs,
apostles, warriors, and concluded with making them divines and scholars.

An incredible value was still set on the study of languages. In private
families, in the cloisters, in the courts, and even on the thrones the same
taste reigned. It was but a poor qualification for a woman to read Virgil and
Cicero. The mouth of a young Italian, Spanish, or British lady, seemed adorned
with a particular grace, when she repeated some Hebrew phrase, or thundered out
some verses of Homer.

Poetry, so dear to the imagination, and to susceptible hearts, was embraced
with ardour by the women. It was a new and pleasing exertion of talents, which
slattered self-love, and amused the mind. Perhaps too that want which they must
have experienced, spite of themselves, and even without knowing it, in a
subtle philosophy, an abstract theology, and an empty study of dialects and of
sounds, would make them more sensible to the charms of an art, which
continually feeds the imagination with its images, and the heart with its
sentiments.

I shall particularize a few of the women, who were most celebrated for their
learning and talents in that period. It would be easy to double the list.

In the thirteenth century, a young lady of Bologna, devoted herself to the
study of the Latin language, and of the laws. At the age of twenty-three, she
pronounced a funeral oration in Latin in the great church of Bologna; and, to
be admired as an orator, she had neither need of indulgence on account of her
youth nor of her sex. At the age of twenty-six she took the degree of a doctor
of laws, and began publicly to expound the Institutions of Justinian. At the
age of thirty, her great reputation raised her to a chair, where she taught the
law to a prodigious concourse of scholars from all nations. She joined the
charms and accomplishments of a woman to all the knowledge of a man. But such
was the power of her eloquence, that her beauty was only admired when her
tongue was silent.

In the fourteenth century, a like example was exhibited in that city. In the
fifteenth century, the same prodigy renewed itself there a third time: -- and I
cannot help here remarking, that even at this day, in the city of Bologna,
there is still a learned chair silled with honor by a woman.

At Venice, in the course of the fourteenth century, two celebrated women
attract our notice, the one (Modesta di Pozzo di Zorzi) composed successfully a
great number of pieces in verse, serious, comic, heroic, and tender; and some
pastorals, which were much admired: The other, (Cassandra Fidele) who was one
of the most learned women of Italy, wrote equally well the three languages of
Homer, Virgil, and Dante, and in verse as well as in prose. She possessed all
the philosophy of her own, and of the preceding ages; she embellished with
graces theology itself; she supported theses with the greatest luster; she gave
public lectures at Padua; she joined to her serious studies the elegant arts,
particularly music, and softened her learning still farther by her manners. She
received homage from sovereign pontiffs and sovereign princes; and, that she
might be singular in all things, she lived upwards of a century.

At Milan a lady of the illustrious house of Trivulzio, early in life,
delivered a great number of elegant discourses before popes and potentates, in
the ancient language of the Romans.

At Verona, in the fifteenth century, Issotta Nogarolla, acquired so great a
reputation by her eloquence that kings were curious to listen, and scholars to
attend, to hear, and to see.

At Florence, a nun of the house of Strozzi dispelled the languor and indolence
of the cloister by her taste for letters; and, in her solitude, was known over
Italy, Germany, and France.

At Naples, Sarrochia composed a celebrated poem upon Scanderbeg; and, in her
lifetime, was compared to Boyardo and to Tasso.

At Rome, we find Victoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescaira, who passionately
loved and successfully cultivated letters; and who, left in youth to mourn a
great and gallant husband, spent the rest of her life in study, and in sorrow,
celebrating in her tender verses her long lost hero.

In Spain we see Isabella of Rosera, preach in the great church of Barcelona,
come to Rome under Paul III. there convert the Jews by her eloquence, and
comment upon the learned Scotus, with applause, before the cardinals and
archbishops; -- Isabella of Cardoua, who understood the Latin, the Greek, and
the Hebrew, and who, though possessed of beauty, reputation, and riches, had
still the whim of becoming a doctor, and took degrees in divinity; -- Catharine
Ribera, who composed a great many Spanish verses, partly devotional and partly
amorous; -- Aloysia Sigea of Toledo, still more celebrated than the three
former, who, besides Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, understood Arabic and Syriac;
who wrote a letter in these five languages to pope Paul III. who was afterward
called to the court of Portugal, where she composed several pieces, and died
young.

In France we see several women possessed of all the learning of the times,
particularly the duchess of Retz, who under Charles IX. was celebrated even in
Italy, and who astonished the Polish nobility when they came to demand the duke
of Anjou for their king. They beheld with wonder, at court, a young lady so
intelligent, and who spoke the ancient languages with no less purity than grace.

In England we meet with the three Seymours, sisters, nieces to a king, and
daughters to a protector, all celebrated for their learning, and for their
elegant Latin verses, which were translated and repeated all over Europe; --
Jane Gray, whose elevation to the throne was only a step to the scaffold, and
who read before her death, in Greek, Plato's Dialogue on the Immortality of the
Soul; -- nor can we pass by the eldest daughter of the illustrious chancellor,
Sir Thomas More, whose learning was almost eclipsed by her virtues; who
corresponded in Latin with the great Erasmus, who styled her the ornament of
Britain; and who, after she had consoled her father in prison, had rushed
through the guards to snatch a last embrace, had obtained the liberty of paying
him funeral honors, had purchased his head with a bribe, -- accused herself,
and loaded with fetters for two crimes -- for having watched the head of her
father as a relic, and for having preserved his books and writings --
appeared with unconcern before her judge; justified herself with that eloquence
which virtue bestows on injured merit, commanding admiration and respect, and
spent the remainder of her life in solitude, in sorrow, and in study.

We behold in Scotland Mary Stuart, heir of that crown, the most beautiful
woman of her age, and one of the most learned, who could write and speak six
languages; who made elegant verses in French; and who, when very young,
delivered an oration in Latin to the court of France, to prove that the study
of letters is consistent with the female character. So lovely, and so happy an
example of the truth which she advanced, could not fail to convince. Mary added
to her learning, a delicate taste in the polite arts, particularly music, and
adorned the whole with the most feminine and courtly manners.

Several women were even desirous of uniting every species of learning, and
some succeeded.

What has since been called SOCIETY was not then indeed so much known. Luxury,
and the want of occupation, had not introduced the custom of sitting five or
six hours before a glass, to invent fashions. Some use was made of time. Hence
that variety of languages, arts, and sciences, which were acquired by women.

It is but just, however, to observe, that the vanity of being universal is
peculiar to the infancy of letters. In childhood, all the world over-rate their
powers. It is only by measuring them that we come to know them. The desires
themselves were then more easily satisfied than the thirst of learning. People
were more anxious to know than to think; and the mind, more active than
extended, unable yet to comprehend the secret, or reach the depth of the
sciences, ought naturally to have considered them as a sacred deposit in books,
which the memory would necessarily impair.

SECTION III. Of the Books written in Honor of WOMEN, and on the Superiority
of the Sexes.
IF the women of those ages were ambitious of arraying themselves in the
knowledge of men, the men were at all times ready with their panegyrics to
return the compliment to the women. It was the sequel of the general spirit,
which carried gallantry into letters as it had introduced it into arms.

Italy in particular was overrun with performances of that kind. The first who
gave the example was Boccace. He passionately loved and was beloved by the
women; and composed in Latin a treatise in honor of the sex. It is entitled,
OF ILLUSTRIOUS WOMEN. In search of these he wanders through the whole circuit
of fable; through the Greek, Roman, and Sacred Histories; and places together
Cleopatra and Lucretia, Flora and Portia, Semiramis and Sappho, Athalia and
Dido.

Boccace undertook above all things to re-establish the reputation of Dido, in
opposition to Virgil. The panegyrist proves against the poet, that the widow of
Sichaeus was never unfaithful to his memory.

It is humorous to hear Boccace afterward, in an eloquent and vigorous sequel
to that treatise, harrangue against the Christian widows who married again. The
author of the Decameron cites St. Paul, and explains the text of that Apostle
to a young widow, who excused herself on account of her age for not imitating
Dido. This piece, which affords so much pleasantry, is of a serious cast; and,
what will scarcely be credited, the moral of Boccace is severe.

The example being now set, a multitude of writers published successively
panegyrical catalogues of the illustrious women of all nations.

Joseph Betussi, translated into Italian the Latin treatise of Boccace; and, in
the ardour of his zeal, he enriched it with fifty new articles. Francis
Serdonati, thinking the work not yet complete, collected from historians,
sacred and profane, barbarous and polished, the names of all the women of
eminence which had been omitted, and added to the catalogue a hundred and
twenty panegyrics.

But this was not all. Philip de Bergamo, an Augustine monk, published a volume
in Latin OF ILLUSTRIOUS WoMEN. Another performance on the same subject was
published by Julius Caesar Capacio, secretary to the city of Naples; -- one by
Charles Pinto, in Latin, and in verse; -- one by Ludovico Domenichi; -- one by
James Philip Thomassini, bishop of Venice; -- and one by Bernard Scardioni, a
canon of Padua, OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS WOMEN OF PADUA.

Francis Augustine della Chiesa, bishop of Saluca, wrote a treatise on THE
WOMEN FAMOUS IN LITERATURE; -- Lewis Jacob de St. Charles, a Carmelite, wrote
another on THE WOMEN ILLUSTRIOUS BY THEIR WRITINGS; and Alexander Van
Denbusche, of the Low Countries, wrote one on THE LEARNED WOMEN.

The celebrated Father le Moine published a volume under the title of GALERIE
DE FEMMES FORTES; and Brantome wrote THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS WOMEN. But it is
to be observed that Brantome, a French knight and a courtier, speaks only of
queens and princesses. It is in his writings that we find the panegyric of
Catherine of Medicis, and of the famous Joan of Naples. In his prolix style,
simple and plain, Brantome justifies the conduct of these two queens. He tells
us that the second was without weakness, and the first free of guilt. He
absolves the one of her incontinence, and the murder of her husband; and the
other of the civil wars, and the massacre of St. Bartholomew.

After Brantome Hilario da Costa, a Minim, published two volumes in quarto,
each volume consisting of eight hundred pages, containing, as he tells us, the
panegyrics of ALL the women of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
distinguished by their valor, their talents, or their virtues. But the pious
ecclesiastic has, in fact, only given us the panegyrics of the CATHOLIC women
of that period. He does not say a word, for example, of queen Elizabeth; but he
has made a long and elaborate eulogy on her sister queen Mary, who began her
reign with shedding the blood of the amiable Jane Gray; and who, in the five
years which she sat on the throne, devoted to the flames on account of religion
between six and seven hundred persons, of all ranks, ages, and sexes.

The eulogies of this monkish panegyrist amount to a hundred and seventy. No
small number. But all must yield to the indefatigable Italian, Peter Paul de
Ribera, who published in his own language, a work entitled, The immortal
Triumphs and heroic Enterprises of Eight hundred and forty-five women. It would
certainly be difficult to make a more complete collection.

Besides these large compilations dedicated to the honor of the whole sex,
many of the writers of those times, men of taste and gallantry, addressed
panegyrics to individuals, to women who were the living ornaments of their age.
This practice was most common in Italy, where every thing conspired to favor
it. The world perhaps had never seen, at one time, so many shining princesses
as then appeared in that part of Europe. The courts of Naples, of Milan, of
Mantua, of Parma, of Florence, and several others, formed so many schools of
taste, between which reigned an emulation of glory and of talents. The men
distinguished themselves by their address in war, or in love; the women, by
their knowledge and accomplishments. Almost every one of these little courts
was the residence of some man of high reputation in literature.

In a country, however extensive, which forms only one great kingdom, or state,
men of genius are scarce; because there is only one capital, one court, and one
center of luminaries. The distant provinces have neither the same activity, nor
the same taste. But in a country like Italy, divided into a number of states,
and where almost every city is a capital; the mind gathers energy, and expands
itself amazingly. This was certainly one cause of the superiority of the
Italians to the rest of Europe. What was their misfortune in politics, was
their glory in arts and in letters.

Those men of wit or genius attached themselves to the celebrated women, the
ornaments of the courts where they resided. Some of them, estimating human
conditions only by the mind, and conceiving talents to be equal to all things,
had even the boldness to entertain the warmest passions for great princesses
Boccace at the court of Naples, and Tasso at the court of Ferr^ra.
. To them they addressed their glowing sentiments, in verse or in prose.
Others, who had imagination without feeling, substituted for passion the sport
of fancy; and, mingling with it the Platonic ideas which then prevailed,
composed for those princesses, in a metaphysical style, respectful hymns under
the notion of panegyrics.

But of all the panegyrics, or collections of panegyrics, in honor of women,
in verse, in prose, in sermons, or in sonnets, the most singular, without
exception, is that which was published at Venice, in 1555, under the title of
The Temple of the divine Seigniora Joan of Arragon; erected in honor of her by
all the greatest wits, and in all the principal languages of the world. She was
one of the most extraordinary women of the sixteenth century; and, married to a
prince of the house of Colonna, was mother to Mark Anthony of Colonna, who
signalized himself in the battle of Lepanto, against the Turks.

This ideal temple was erected in consequence of a decree passed at Venice, in
the year 1551, in the academy of the DUBBIOSI. One of the members of that
society had conceived the notion of such a deification; but the idea was too
happy not to be adopted by the body. They had only one dispute, which divided
them much; viz. whether Joan of Arragon should possess alone the honors of the
temple, or if they should associate with that divinity the marchioness de Guast
her sister, and no less celebrated. But after mature deliberation and many
learned arguments on both sides, it appeared to the academy, that two
divinities, two sovereigns, and two women would not much love to dwell
together; it was therefore resolved, That the marchioness de Guast have
separate worship; and that Joan of Arragon, her sister, remain in the sole and
exclusive possession of her altars. They next proceeded to the building of the
temple; and the Latin, Greek, Italian, French, Spanish, Sclavonic, Polonize,
Hungarian, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and many other languages, were made use of in the
fabrication of that monument; -- one of the most extraordinary that ever
gallantry raised to beauty.

SECTION IV. The subject continued.
THE same spirit which in that era gave birth to so many panegyrics on women,
produced a number of books on the merit of the sex in general. The important
question of the equality, or superiority, of the sexes was agitated: -- and,
during five hundred years, there was a kind of literary combination for
assigning the pre-eminence to the women.

At the head of that conspiracy was the famous Cornelius Agrippa; who, born at
Cologn in 1486, studied all the sciences, embraced all conditions, traveled
all countries; who bore arms with distinction, and was afterward divine,
doctor of law, doctor of physic; who commented on the Epistles of St. Paul in
England, gave lectures on the philosopher's Stone at Turin, on divinity at
Pavia, and practiced physic in Switzerland; who was successively connected with
three or four princes and princesses, and was only the more unfortunate; who
bore injuries with courage, and without complaining; who was twice in fetters;
who was always wandering, because always guided by a warm and weak imagination,
-- because unfit either to be free or to be a slave; because he could neither
endure poverty nor dependence; and who, after having excited by turns, or at
once, pity, admiration, and hate, died in France in the forty-ninth year of his
age, loaded with reputation, and oppressed with misfortunes.

He had published, in 1509, his treatise Of the Excellence of Women above the
Men. He had then the misfortune to please the famous Margaret of Austria, who
governed the Low Countries. It is a pity that little circumstance should have
mingled itself with so gallant a cause. The book is divided into thirty
chapters; and, in each chapter, he demonstrates the superiority of the women by
theological, physical, historical, cabalistical, and moral proofs. He calls to
his assistance scripture and fable, the historians, the poets, the civil and
canon laws, cites a great deal more than he reasons, and concludes with
protesting, that he had no human motive for writing but a sense of duty;
because every man who knows the truth holds it in trust, and consequently
silence would be a crime.

The Italians, on reading that work, must have considered it as a robbery,
which had been committed in their territories by a native of Germany. But they
soon reimbursed themselves. Cardinal Pompoeia Colonna, Portio, Lando,
Domenichi, Maggio, Bernado, Spina, and a great many others, all wrote on the
perfection of women.

But the most singular work on the subject is that of Ruscelli. It appeared at
Venice in 1552. Ruscelli came after all the rest; and dissatisfied, as he says,
with the manner in which they had supported a cause so evident, he conceived
new proofs, so positive, that henceforth there could not be the possibility of
a doubt. After having copied, criticized, and commented upon Agrippa, he throws
in some sublime speculations of his own, and endeavors to prove, that the
contemplation of beauty alone can render man happy on earth, and raise him to
the contemplation of the divinity.

Such is the scope of Ruscelli's composition. But the effect of his reasoning
is destroyed by the consused impression which is made on the mind of the
reader, by the mixture of divinity and Platonism; by blending through the whole
the name of God and of woman; by placing Moses by the side of Petrarch and of
Dante; and by giving in the same page, and even in the same period, quotations
from Boccace and from St. Augustine, from 0 Homer and from St. John.

Nothing, in my opinion, can exhibit a truer picture than this performance does
of the spirit of the sixteenth century, particularly in Italy; where the same
man was or would be, in good earnest, a lover, a devotee, a christian, a pagan,
a divine, and a philosopher. Perhaps even that extravagant combination of ideas
and of characters must necessarily be found in a country, where we often meet
with the ruins of a temple of Jupiter in the neighborhood of a church, a
statue of St. Peter upon a column of Trajan, and a Madona beside an Apollo.

It appears, that even after Ruscelli had written, there were still infidels to
persuade, and that the work of conversion was not thought complete; for we find
a great many future performances published in Italy, in France, and in Spain,
on the same subject.

In 1593, a celebrated Venetian, already mentioned, MODESTA DI POZZO DI ZORZI,
maintained the superiority of her sex to ours. Her performance had great
success: and, unfortunately for her, what perhaps added to its celebrity was,
that one might commend without jealousy. She died just as it was published. The
men, however, always viewed with pleasure those kind of compositions by women.
Pride, which construes every thing to its own advantage, regarded as so many
proofs of its pre-eminence, the very efforts which were made to demonstrate its
inferiority.

Lucretia Marinella, another Venetian lady, supported the same cause. Her
performance is entitled, The Dignity and Excellence of Women, with the Faults
and Imperfections of Men. The men, at least, will not be accused of the fault
of injustice to her; for she had all the success which beauty can give to
genius.

In 1628, yet another Italian performance appeared upon The Dignity of Women.
The author of that book was one Christopher Bronzini. The work is in dialogue,
and divided by Days. We may judge by the extent of his plan how rich the
subject appeared to him: his division is twenty-four Days. The eighth Day, in
which nothing is treated of but marriage, occupies upwards of two hundred
pages. Bronzini, in praiseing the women, has assigned them no rank, and has
left the dispute of the sexes undecided.

But, in 1650, a book appeared, in which the controversy was treated very
prettily. The title of the piece was, Woman better than man; a paradox, by
James del Pozzo. It seems doubtful how far the women would be flattered with
the word Paradox.

In Spain, in the sixteenth century, John Spinosa wrote a dialogue in praise of
women. We may believe that he extolled them with all the imagination of his
country, and with all the majesty of his language.

The French women were (...) less zealous than the Italian to support the
honor of their sex. Margaret queen of Navarre, and first wife to Henry IV. by
turns devout and gay, and more celebrated for the sprightliness of her wit than
the purity of her manners, undertook to prove, in a piece in the form of a
letter, that Woman is much superior to Man.

Mademoiselle de Gournay, who deserved to be adopted by Montagne, wrote also
upon her sex; but, more modest, or more timid, she confined her pretensions,
and was contented with equality. That modesty however did not hinder Mary
Schurman, -- born at Cologn, and who in her lifetime had a prodigious
reputation, -- to say, after she had read M. de Gournay's book in honor of her
sex, I neither would nor dare approve all that is contained in this
performance. Yet, if any woman ever had a right to aspire at the superiority,
it was perhaps that lady. She was a painter, musician, engraver, sculptor,
philosopher, geometrician, divine, and understood and spoke nine different
languages,

In 1643, a piece appeared at Paris under this title: The Generous Woman; who
shows that her Sex is more noble, more patriotic, more brave, more learned,
more virtuous, and more oeconomical than that of man.

In 1665, another lady published at Paris a book entitled, The illustrious
Dames; where, by good and strong Reasons, it is proved, that the Women surpass
the Men.

In 1673, a performance appeared entitled, The Equality of the two Sexes:
Discourses philosophical and moral, in which are shown the Importance of
divesting ourselves of Prejudices.

In 1675, the Author of the last-mentioned piece refuted himself, in a treatise
on The Excellency of Men, against the Equality of the Sexes. But he reasons
feebly, as if afraid of refuting himself, and overturning his former system.

A lady of Languedoc, in the same century, was willing to repossess herself of
the superiority, and endeavored to establish it by GOOD and SURE reasons. In
short, that opinion, or that controversy, produced a kind of war among writers
otherwise obscure, and gave birth to Dissertations, to Answers, and to Replies,
now equally unknown: and it is but just to remark, that few of them deserve to
be read, and that the question has not been properly treated in any of them.
Authority is always substituted for argument. Such pedants should be told, that
twenty citations will not make a reason.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
ESSAY ON THE CHARACTER, MANNERS, AND GENIUS OF WOMEN IN DIFFERENT AGES.

Enlarged from the French of M. THOMAS, By Mr. RUSSELL.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. AITKEN, BOOKSELLER, OPPOSITE THE
LONDON-COFFEE-HOUSE, FRONT-STREET. M, DCC, LXXIV.

CONTENTS.
PART II. SECT. V. Of the comparative Merit of the two sexes. Page 1 PART II.
SECT. VI. Of the Decline of serious Gallantry, and of the Progress of Society
in France. Page 46 PART II. SECT. VII. Of the Progress of Society in Britain,
and of the Character, Manners, and Talents of the British Women. Page 72 PART
II. SECT. VIII. Conclusion. Page 117
ESSAY ON THE CHARACTER, MANNERS, and GENIUS OF WOMEN. PART II.
SECTION V. OF THE COMPARATIVE MERIT OF THE TWO SEXES.
TO determine this grand question of self-love and rivalry between the sexes,
it would be necessary to examine the strength or weakness of their organs; the
education of which they are capable; the end of nature in forming them; how far
it is possible to correct or to change her purpose; which would gain, and which
would lose by departing from her; and, in short, to mark particularly the
influence which the difference of duties, of occupations, and of manners, must
unavoidably have on the genius, on the sentiments, and on the character of the
two sexes.

In comparing the intellectual powers of the sexes, it would be necessary to
consider distinctly the philosophical talent, which meditates; the talent of
memory, which collects; the talent of imagination, which creates; the moral and
political talent, which governs.

It would further be necessary to inquire, to what degree women possess these
four kinds of genius: If the natural weakness of their organs, which is the
cause of their beauty; if the inquietude of their character, which arises from
their imagination; if the multitude and the variety of their sensations, which
are numbered among their charms, may not deprive them of that vigorous and
continued attention which is requisite to connect a numerous train of ideas --
an attention, which excludes all other objects, to view and contemplate one;
which out of a single idea produces a multitude, all chained to the first; or
which, out of a number of scattered ideas, selects one primitive and vast idea
which combines all the rest.

This philosophical spirit is rare, indeed, even among men; but still there are
many great men who have possessed it -- who have raised themselves to the
height of nature to become acquainted with her works; who have shown to the
soul the source of its ideas; who have assigned to reason its bounds, to motion
its laws, and to the universe its harmony; who have created sciences in
creating principles, and who have aggrandised the human mind in cultivating
their own. If there is no woman found on a level with those illustrious men, is
it the fault of education, or of nature?

Descartes, abused by envious men, but admired by two generous princesses,
boasted of the philosophical talents of women. I am far however from thinking
that his gratitude could lead him into a voluntary error, even in compliment to
beauty. He would no doubt find in Elizabeth and in Christina a docility which
prided itself in listening to so great a man, and which seemed to associate
itself with his genius in following the range of his ideas. He might perhaps
even find in the compositions of women perspicuity, order, and method; but did
he find that strong discernment, that depth of intellect, that dissidence which
characterises the real philosopher? -- Did he find that cool reason which,
always inquisitive, advances slowly, and remeasures all its steps? -- Their
genius, penetrating and rapid, flies off, -- and is at rest. They have more
sallies than efforts. What they do not see at once, they either cannot see at
all, or they disdain, or they despair to see. It is therefore little wonder
they should want that unremitted assiduity, which alone can pursue and discover
important truths.

Imagination might seem rather to be their province.

It has been observed, that the imagination of women has in it something
unaccountably singular and extraordinary. All things strike it; all things
paint themselves on it in a lively manner. Their volatile senses embrace every
object, and carry off its image. Some unknown powers, some secret sympathies
enable them rapidly to seize the impressions. The material world is not
sufficient for them: they love to create an ideal world of their own; which
they embellish, and prodigies -- whatever transcends the ordinary laws of
nature, is their creation, and their delight. They enjoy even their terrors.
Their feelings are fine, and their fancy always approaches to enthusiasm.

But it would be necessary to inquire, how far that fancy, when applied to the
arts, can unfold itself in the talent of creating and of painting: if their
imagination is as vigorous, as it is lively and versatile; if it does not
unavoidably partake of their occupations, of their pleasures, of their tastes,
and even of their weaknesses. I suspect that their delicate fibers are afraid
of strong sensations, which fatigue them, and that they seek the soft, on which
they may repose.

Man, always active, is exposed to storms. The imagination of the poet enjoys
itself on the ridge of mountains, on the brink of volcanoes, in the middle of
ruins, on seas, and on fields of battle; and it is never more susceptible of
voluptuous and tender ideas, than after having experienced some great emotion.

But women, by means of their delicate and sedentary life, less acquainted with
the contrast of the gentle and the terrible, may be supposed to feel and to
paint less perfectly, even the agreeable sensations, than those who, thrown
into opposite conditions, pass rapidly from the one sentiment to the other.
Perhaps too, from the habit of resigning themselves to the impression of the
moment, which with them is very strong, their minds must be more replenished
with images than pictures: -- or perhaps their imagination, though lively, may
be compared to a mirror, which reflects fairly, magnifies, multiplies,
distorts, or diminishes, like their good humor, their hopes, their fears,
their jealousies, their envies, the forms of all things, but creates nothing.

Love is without dispute the passion which the women feel the strongest, and
which they express the best. They feel the other passions more feebly, and by
rebound: but love is their own; it is the charm and the business of their life;
it is their soul. They should therefore know well how to paint it.

But do they know, like the author of Othello, of The Revenge, or of Zara, to
express the transports of a troubled soul, which joins fury to love; which is
sometimes impetuous, and sometimes tender; which now is softened, and now is
roused; which sheds blood, and which sacrifices itself? Can they paint these
doublings of the human heart, these storms of emotion and passion? -- No:
nature herself restrains them. She has given to one of the sexes bold desires,
and the right of attack; to the other she has assigned the province of defense,
and timid desires, which attract by resisting. Love in the one sex is a
conquest, in the other a sacrifice.

It therefore follows, that the women of all countries, and in all ages, must
have known better how to paint a delicate and tender sentiment, than a violent
and turbulent passion. Obliged, in short, by their duty, by the reserve of
their sex, by the desire of a certain charm, which is more bewitching than wit,
and more attractive than beauty, always to conceal a part of their sentiments,
-- must not these sentiments, by being continually constrained, become weaker
by degrees, and have less energy than those of men, who, at all times, bold and
extravagant with impunity, give to their passions what tome they please, and
which are invigorated by exercise?

A temporary constraint inflames the passions; but a continued constraint cools
or extinguishes them.

With regard to the talent of order and memory, which classes facts, and ideas
when necessary, as it depends a good deal upon method and habit, there seems
little reason why the two sexes may not possess it in an equal degree, Yet it
would still be necessary to examine, if the women would not be deficient in the
quantity of materials, which are so essential to erudition; if excessive
application would not more easily disgust them. Is it not true, that their
impatience and natural desire of change, which arise from fleeting and rapid
impressions, prevent them from following for a course of years the same kind of
study, and consequently from acquiring profound or extensive knowledge? We are
sensible they have qualities of mind which atone for it. It is not the same
hand which polishes the diamond, and which digs the mine.

We come now to a more important object, the moral and political talent; which
consists in the regulating of ourselves and of others. To compare the
advantages and disadvantages of the two sexes with regard to this object, it
would be necessary to observe the same talent in society, and when applied to
government.

The women in society, by being continually upon the look-out, from the double
motive of curiosity and of policy, must have a perfect knowledge of men. They
must be able to disentangle all the folds of self-love; to discover the secret
weaknesses, the false modesties, and the false grandeurs; what a man is, and
what he would be; the qualities which he shows, even by an effort to conceal
them; his esteem marked even in his satires, and by his satires themselves.
They must know and distinguish characters: -- the cool pride, which enjoys
itself in state; the warm and impetuous pride, which is easily inflamed; the
vain sensibility, the tender sensibility, the sensibility which is veiled under
an appearance of indifference; the pretended levity, and the levity of the
heart; the diffidence which proceeds from character, from vice, from
misfortune, or from the mind; in short, all the sentiments, and all their
shades.

As women set a high value on opinion, they must reflect much upon what can
produce it, destroy it, or confirm it. They must know how far one may direct,
without appearing to be interested; how far one may presume upon that art, even
after it is known; in what estimation they are held by those with whom they
live, and to what degree it is necessary to serve them that they may govern
them.

In all matters of business women know the great effects which are produced by
little causes. They have the art of imposing upon some, by seeming to discover
to them what they already know; of diverting others from their purpose, by
confirming their most distant suspicions. They know how to captivate by
praises, those who merit them; and to raise a blush, by bestowing them where
they are not due.

These delicate sciences are the leadingstrings in which the women conduct the
men. Society to them is like a harpsichord, of which they know the touches:
they can divine the sound which every one will produce. But the men, bold and
free, supplying address by force, consequently having less call for
observation, and hurried along besides by the continual necessity of acting,
can scarcely be possessed of that crowd of little notices and polite
attentions, which are every moment necessary in the commerce of life: their
calculations therefore on society must be more slow, and less sure, than those
of women.

It would afterward be necessary to compare the genius of the two sexes, as
applied to government.

In society men are governed by their passions, and the least motives often
produce the greatest consequences. But, in the government of states, it is by
comprehensive views, by the choice of principles, and, above all, by the
discovery and the employment of talents, that success can be obtained. Here,
instead of taking advantage of foibles, we must fear them; we must raise men
above their weaknesses, not lead them into them.

The art of governing in society may therefore be said to consist in flattering
vice and folly with address; and the art of administration, in combating them
with judgment. The knowledge of mankind required in the two cases is very
different: In the one, they must be known by their weakness; in the other, by
their strength. The one takes part with failings, for little ends; the other
discovers great qualities, which are mingled with those very faults. The one,
in short, seeks little blemishes in great men, and the other, in dissecting
great men, must often perceive the same spots: for perfect characters exist
only in Utopia.

Let us now examine, if this kind of genius and observation agrees equally with
the character of the two sexes. I know that there are women who have reigned,
and who still reign with luster. Christina in Sweden, Isabella of Castile in
Spain, and Elizabeth in England, have merited the esteem of their age, and of
posterity. We saw, in the war of 1741, a princess, whom even her enemies
admired, defend the German empire with no less genius than courage; and we
behold, at this day, the Ottoman empire shaken by a woman. But, in general
questions, we should beware of taking exceptions for rules; we ought to attend
only to the ordinary course of nature.

It therefore becomes necessary to inquire, if in society the women being less
engaged in action, and in general less fit for it, can know so well as the
other sex, the talents of men, their use, or their extent; if great views, and
the application of great principles, including the habit of seizing at a glance
the result of things, correspond not ill with the prolixity of their
imagination, or at least with the arrangement of their ideas. It is character
chiefly which governs; it is the vigor of the soul which gives impulse to
genius, which strengthens and extends political capacity. But this character is
seldom formed but by great commotions, by great hopes, by great fears, and by
the necessity of being continually engaged in action. Is not then the character
of women in general, better calculated for elegance than for sway? -- for
attraction than for command? -- Does not their rapid imagination, which often
makes sentiment precede thought, render them more susceptible of prejudice or
of error in the choice of men? -- Would not one be in danger of abuse, would
not one even run the risk of their displeasure, if he should say, that in the
distribution of their esteem they would set too high a value upon external
accomplishments; and, in short, that they would perhaps be too easily led to
believe, that an agreeable man was a great man? --

Yet Elizabeth was not free from this censure. The inclinations of her sex
stole beneath the cares of the throne, and the grandeur of her character. We
are chagrined at certain times, to see the little weaknesses of a woman mingle
with the views of a great mind. If Mary queen of Scotland had been less fair,
perhaps her rival had been less cruel. This taste for coquetry, as is well
known, furnished Elizabeth with favorites; in the choice of which she judged
more like a woman than a sovereign. She was always too ready to believe, that
the power of pleasing her implied genius.

That so much celebrated queen exercised over England an almost arbitrary sway;
at which perhaps we ought not to be surprised. Women in general on the throne
are more inclined to despotism, and more impatient of restraint than men. The
sex to whom nature has assigned power by giving them strength, have a certain
confidence which raises them in their own eyes; so that they have no need of
manifesting to themselves that superiority of which they are sure. But
weakness, astonished at the sway which she possesses, shakes her scepter on
every side, to establish her dominion.

Great men are perhaps more carried to that species of despotism which arises
from lofty ideas; and women, above the ordinary class, to the despotism which
proceeds from passion. The last is rather a sally of the heart, than the effect
of system.

One thing which favors the despotism of female sovereigns is, that the men
confound the empire of their sex with that of their rank. What we refuse to
grandeur, we pay to beauty. But the dominion of women, even when arbitrary, is
seldom cruel. Theirs is rather a despotism of caprice, than of oppression. The
throne itself cannot cure their sensibility they carry in their bosoms the
counterpoise of their power Hence it follows, that in limited monarchies female
sovereigns will tend to despotism from their jealousy; and, in absolute
governments, will approach to monarchy by their mildness. This observation is
proved by experience.


If, after having compared the talents of the two sexes, we should compare
their virtues, we would receive very different informations.

Both experience and history attest, that in all sects, in all countries, and
in all ranks, the women have more religious virtues than the men. Naturally
possessed of more sensibility, they have more need of an object that may
unceasingly occupy their souls; they offer to God a sentiment which they cannot
contain, and which otherwise would be a crime. Greedy of happiness, and not
finding enough in this world, they launch into a life and a world abounding
with ineffable delights. Extreme in their desires, nothing limited can satisfy
them. -- More flexible in their duties than men, they reason less, and feel
more. More subjected to good opinion, they pay more attention to what concerns
themselves. Less occupied, and less active, they have more time for
contemplation. Less abstracted or absent, they are more strongly affected by
the same idea, because they see it continually. More struck by external
objects, they relish more the pageantry of ceremonies and of temples; and the
devotion of the senses has no inconsiderable effect on that of the soul.
Confined, in short, on all hands, denied the effusion of their sentiments to
men by the reserve of their sex, to women by an eternal rivalry, they may at
least talk of their pleasures and their pains to the great Being who knows
them, and they often pour into his bosom many dear weaknesses of which the
world are ignorant. In so doing they recall their beloved errors, they enjoy
even their sorrow, without reproaching themselves; and afflicted, yet free from
remorse, because under the eye of a benevolent Deity, they find secret delights
in repenting, and in combating their warmest wishes.

It should seem therefore, in consequence of the character of women, that their
religion must be more tender, and that of men more severe, the one consisting
more in practice, the other in principles; and, in exalting their religious
ideas, that the woman is more liable to superstition, the man to fanaticism.
But, if once fanaticism catch hold of the woman, her more lively imagination
will carry her a greater length; and, more austere even from the dread of
sensibility, what was formerly a part of her charms, will only contribute to
increase her fury.

The domestic virtues are intimately connected with those of religion. They are
doubtless common to both sexes: but the advantage seems still to be in favor
of the women. At least they have more need of virtues which they have more
occasion to practice.

In the first period of life, timid, and without support, the girl is more
attached to her mother: by seldom leaving her, she comes to love her more. The
trembling innocent is cheared by the presence of her protectress; and her
weakness, while it heightens her beauty, augments her sensibility. Become
mother, she has other duties, which all things invite her to fulfill. Then the
condition of the two sexes is widely different.

Man, in the middle of his labors, and among his arts, employing his powers,
and commanding nature, finds a pleasure in his industry, in his success, and
even in his toils. But woman, more solitary, and less active, has fewer
resources: her pleasures must arise from her virtues; her amusements are her
family. It is by the cradle of her child -- it is in viewing the smiles of her
daughter, or the sports of her son, that a mother is happy.

And where are the bowels, the cries, the powerful emotions of nature? -- Where
is the sentiment, at once sublime and pathetic, that carries every feeling to
excess? -- is it to be found in the frosty indifference, and the four severity
of so many fathers? -- No; but in the warm and passionate bosom of a mother. It
is she, who by an impulse, as quick as involuntary, rushes into the flood to
preserve a boy, whose imprudence had betrayed him to the waves. It is she, who,
in the middle of a conflagration, throws herself across the flames to save a
sleeping infant. It is she, who with dishevelled locks, pale, distracted,
embraces with transport the body of a dead child, pressing its cold lips to
hers, as if she would reanimate by her tears and her caresses the insensible
clay.

These great expressions of nature, these heart-rending emotions, which fill us
at once with wonder, compassion, and terror, always have belonged, and always
will belong, only to women. They possess in those moments an inexpressible
something, which carries them beyond themselves; they seem to discover to us
new souls, above the standard of humanity.

If we consider even the matrimonial duties, the obligations of husband and
wife; which of the two sexes is most likely to be faithful? -- which, in
violating them, has most obstacles to encounter? -- Is not woman best defended
by her education, by her reserve, by that modesty which silences even her
desires, and sometimes disputes the rights of the most tender love? -- To these
restraints we may add, the power of the first passion and the first ties over a
heart endowed with sensibility, and which had formerly been forbid to love; the
force of opinion, which reigns so despotically over the women, and which,
tyrant-like, applauds often the same weaknesses in the one sex, for which it
devotes the other to infamy.

Nature herself, attentive in this instance to the manners of women, has taken
care to surround them with the strongest, yet the gentlest barriers. She has
made inconstancy more painful, and fidelity more pleasing to their hearts: --
and it must be owned, that they have seldom begun the disorders of families.
Even in ages of general corruption, conjugal infidelity in women has been one
of the last of crimes.

After the religious and domestic virtues come the social virtues; and first
the virtues of sensibility, or the sweet and affectionate passions. The chief
of these are friendship and love.

It has long been a question, which of the two sexes is most capable of
friendship. Montaigne, who is so much celebrated for his knowledge of human
nature, has given it positively against the women; and his opinion has been
generally embraced: but he appears to have judged too hastily on this subject.
Through his whole Essays, indeed, he has done too little justice to the gentle
sex. Perhaps -- for we cannot accuse him of insensibility -- he was like that
judge who, conscious of his own weakness, was so much afraid of being partial,
that he decided every cause against his friends.

If I were to converse with Montaigne on this subject, I would say to him,

You undoubtedly agree, that friendship is the sentiment of two souls, which
seek and which have need of the support of each other. Now it should seem, that
the sex whose head and hands are most occupied; which is most independent;
which is most free; which has the greatest ability of expanding its ideas, and
of employing its sentiments; which in prosperity is better supported by pride;
which in adversity is more humbled than afflicted; which in all conditions has
a consciousness of its powers, and which glories in them -- it should seem that
man could more easily dispense with the commerce, and the sweet effusions of
friendship. But woman, delicate and feeble, and on that account having more
need of support; in herself more subject to chagrin, to private griefs, and to
that sorrow of heart which finds more relief in sensibility than pride; in the
world, obliged almost always to play a part, and to carry along with her a load
of sensations and of ideas, which she hides, and which oppress her -- woman, in
short, to whom externals are nothing, and her feelings every thing; woman, in
whom every thing produces a sentiment, to whom indifference is violence, and
who knows almost only to love and to hate, must feel more exquisitely the
liberty and the pleasure of a secret commerce, and the tender considence which
friendship gives and receives.

Montaigne would not fail to reply,

You judge of women according to nature; judge of them likewise according to
society, as they exist in the world, and particularly in great cities. Examine
if their general desire to please, a sentiment more slight than deep, and more
vain than tender, has not withered their hearts, and in a great measure blasted
sensibility itself; if, intoxicated with eternal flattery, and accustomed to
the sweetest dominion, they could submit to continual sacrifices, and to that
happy equality which friendship imposes; if, in short, in their friendship with
us, they would not have too much reserve: -- and how contemptible is a
friendship which is on its guard, where the sentiments are always covered with
a slender veil, and where the naked heart is never seen!

I speak not of their friendship between themselves: there was no such thing
known in my time; and, I suppose it is the same in yours. But I should be glad
to know how they can love, or repose confidence in each other, in a world where
they are continually compared, and are continually comparing themselves; where
their attachments divide them; where their pretensions interfere; where they
are rivals in rank, in beauty, in fortune, in wit, in their talent for society,
and in their societies themselves: for selflove always calculating, always
measuring, views all things, is offended at all things, and is fostered even by
what offends it.

No!" -- Montaigne might add, Friendship does not consist in empty show, in
jargon, in vain phrases, more ridiculous even in their motive than their
meaning. It is a sentiment which requires energy of soul, and a solidity of
mind as well as of character; it is a sacred and almost a holy union, which by
a devotion peculiar to itself, consecrates a heart entirely to a heart; it is a
passion which transforms two wills into one, and gives to two beings the same
life and the same soul.

Friendship is bold and severe: for, properly to fulfill its duties, it must be
able to speak and to hear the harsh and ungrateful language of truth. It must
possess a courage, which is neither alarmed at sacrifices nor at dangers: and
it demands, above all things, that unity of character which, from the variety
and the eternal fluctuation of their passions, we seldom find in women, and
which only can enable us to feel, to think, and to act as a friend, at all
times, and upon all occasions.

What do I say? -- Are not friends more strongly associated by great interests,
and by great trials? -- But women, by their condition, are destined to repose.
Nature has formed them, like the flowers, to bloom sweetly on the parterre
which gives them birth; but the trees, produced and reared in the middle of
storms, and in more danger, even from their strength, of being broken by the
winds, have more need of support from each other, and they are sustained by
union.

From these objections, it may perhaps follow, that friendship in women must be
more rare than among men; but it will also be allowed at the same time, that it
must be more delicate and more tender. Men have in general more of the parade
than the elegance of friendship. They often wound while they serve; and their
warmest sentiments are not sufficiently illuminated with those little
attentions which are of so much value in the intercourse of souls. But women
have a sensibility which is never absent, which never forgets or omits any
thing. Nothing escapes them: they divine the hidden friendship; they encourage
the bashful or timid friendship, and they offer their sweetest consolations to
friendship in distress. Furnished with siner instruments, they treat more
delicately a wounded heart; they compose it, and prevent it from feeling its
agonies: and they know, above all things, to give an importance to
circumstances which have none in themselves. We ought therefore perhaps to
desire the friendship of a man upon great occasions; but, for general
happiness, we must prefer the friendship of a woman.

Women in love have the same delicacies and the same weaknesses. Their passions
are keen: they either love at once, or do not love at all. Men are less easily
inflamed, and by degrees. The passions of women, by being more constrained, are
perhaps more ardent: they are nursed by silence, and roused by opposition. Fear
and modesty mingle inquietude with love in their gentle hearts, and by
exercising it, double its force. -- When a man is sure of his conquest, his
passion is tinctured with pride; but a woman is then only more tender. The more
her confession has cost her, the more dearly she loves the man to whom it was
made. She attaches herself by her sacrifices. Virtuous, she enjoys her denials;
guilty, she glories in the favors she bestows.

Women therefore, when love is a passion, are more constant than men; but, when
it is only an appetite, they are more libertine. For then they feel no more
those anxieties, those struggles, and that sweet shame, which impressed the
delicious sentiment so strongly on their hearts. Nothing remains but the senses
and imagination: -- senses guided by caprice; an imagination wasted by its own
ardour, and which is every moment inflamed and extinguished.

After love and friendship come benevolence, and that generous compassion which
interests the heart in the missortunes of others. These are more particularly
the portion of women. Every thing inclines them to generosity and Their
delicate senses revolt at the presence of distress and pain. Objects of misery
and aversion discompose the soft indolence of their minds. Their souls are more
hurt by images of sorrow and of spleen than tormented by their own sensibility.
They must therefore be very anxious to afford relief. -- They possess besides
in a high degree, that instinctive feeling, which operates without reasoning;
and they often relieve, while men deliberate. Their benevolence is perhaps less
rational, but it is more active. It is also more attentive, and more tender.
What woman has ever been wanting in commiseration to the unfortunate?

But it would be necessary to examine if women, so susceptible of friedship, of
love, of piety, of benevolence to individuals, can elevate themselves to that
patriotism, or disinterested love of one's country, which embraces all its
citizens, and to that philanthropy, or universal love of mankind, which
embraces all nations.

I would not be thought to undervalue patriotism. It is the noblest sentiment
of the human mind; at least it is that which has produced the greatest men, and
which gave birth to those ancient heroes, whose history still astonishes our
imagination, and accuses our weakness. But if we should trace its source, and
examine in what it consists, we would find that this boasted virtue is almost
always a composition of pride and selfishness, generated by the ideas of
interest and property, by the remembrance of past services, by the hope of
future honors or rewards, and a certain factitious enthusiasm which robs men
of themselves, to transform their existence entirely into the body of the state.

These sentiments, it will readily be perceived, do not correspond with the
condition of women. In almost all governments, excluded from honors, and from
offices, they can neither obtain, nor hope to obtain, nor attach themselves to
the state, from the pride of having held a place of eminence. Possessed of
little property, and restrained by the laws even in what they have, the form of
legislation in all countries must make them in a great measure indifferent to
public welfare. Never acting or fighting for their country, they have not one
flattering remembrance to tie them to it, by vanity, by labors, or by virtues.
Existing, in short, more in themselves, and in the objects of their
sensibility, and being perhaps less fitted than men by nature for the civil
institutions in which they have less share, they must be less susceptible of
that enthusiasm, which makes a man prefer the state to his family, and the
collective body of his fellow-citizens to himself.

The example of the women of Rome and Sparta, I am sensible, may be urged in
objection to these observations; but those ancient republics are not to be
compared with our modern establishments. The wonders performed by the Dutch
women, in the revolution of the Seven Provinces, will likewise perhaps be
urged. To which I answer, that the glorious enthusiasm of liberty can do all
things; that there are times when nature is astonished at herself; and that
great virtues spring from great calamities. But of such there is no reasoning.

If the love of their country is little suited to women, that universal love of
mankind, which extends to all nations, and to all ages, and which is a kind of
abstract sentiment, seems to correspond still less with their character. They
must have an image of what they love. It is only by the power of arranging his
ideas, that the philosopher is able to overleap so many barriers; to pass from
a man, to a people; from a people, to human kind; from the time in which he
lives, to ages yet unborn; and from what he sees, to what he does not see.

The tender sex do not love to send their souls so far a-wandering. They
assemble their sentiments and their ideas about them, and confine their
affections to what interests them most. Those strides of benevolence to women
are out of nature. A man to them, is more than a nation; and the hour in which
they live, than a thousand ages after death.

There are certain qualities, which have generally been ranked among the social
virtues, but which may more properly be called THE VIRTUES OF POLISHED LIFE.
They are the charm and the bond of company; and are useful at all times and
upon all occasions. They are in the commerce of the world, what current money
is in trade: they are sometimes not absolutely necessary, but one can never
safely be without them; and they always procure the possessor a more favorable
reception. Such is that mild complacency, which gives a softness to the
character, and an attractive sweetness to the manners; that indulgence, which
pardons the faults of others, even when it has no need of pardon itself; the
art of not seeing the weaknesses which discover themselves, and of keeping the
secret of those who hide it; of concealing our advantages, when we humble our
rivals or opponents; of dealing gently with those, who cannot submit without
being offended: that facility, which adopts ideas which it never had; that
delicate foresight, which divines the fears of those with whom we converse, and
encourages the display of thought and sentiment; that freedom, which inspires
confidence; and all that politeness, in short, which perhaps is not virtue, --
nay, which is sometimes no more than a happy lie, -- but which gives laws to
self-love, and makes pride sit easy by the side of pride, which would otherwise
every moment be wounded.

We shall not trace the parallel of the sexes through all these sentiments; but
it is necessary to observe in general, that the women correct that rudeness
which pride and passion introduce into the company of men. Their delicate hand
smooths the asperities of human life. Politeness is a part of their character;
it is connected with their mind, with their manners, and even with their
interest. To the most virtuous woman society is a field of conquest.

Few men have formed the project of making every body happy, and so much the
worse for those who have: but many women have not only formed such a scheme,
but have succeeded in it. The more general the intercourse of the sexes, the
more the talent of pleasing is perfected; the more general this species of
merit; for then there are more little interests to conciliate, and characters
to unite. Society becomes a complicated machine, and demands more dexterity to
regulate its movements.

*We are, in general, so much the more polite, as we are less devoted to
ourselves and more to others; as we are more attentive to opinion; as we are
more zealous to be distinguished; and, perhaps, in proportion as we have fewer
resources and great means of being so. But these are not all: among individuals
and among a people, between the sexes and between the ranks, politeness
supposes a certain degree of idleness; for it supposes the habit and the
necessity of living together. Hence the art of regulating our behavior, of
adjusting our looks, our words, and our motions; the need of attentions, and
all the little gratifications of vanity. We are naturally inclined to pay that
homage which we receive, and to exact that which we pay. Thus the delicacy of
self-love produces all the refinements in society; as the delicacy of the
senses produces all the refinements in pleasure; and as the delicacy of taste,
which is perhaps only the result of the other two, produces all the refinements
in literature, arts, and sciences. -- It will be easy to discern how these
objects are connected with one another, and how they are all related to women.

But refined politeness, it may be said, is allied to falsehood. It substitutes
the expression of sentiment too often for sentiment itself. Hence the reproach
so common against women: -- and it must be owned, that they are by nature more
disposed to every kind of dissimulation than men. Power and independance
display all their motions with freedom; but weakness and the art of pleasing,
must observe and measure all theirs. The timid sex therefore learn to hide the
sentiments which they have, and exhibit those which they have not.

A man may be open without being on that account entitled to praise; for he is
often so without effort, nay from an impetuosity of soul which he cannot
restrain; but sincerity in a woman, when real, is never without merit. Men are
sometimes frank by design: women seldom affect that species of hypocrisy; and
when they do, to please the better, they give to their frankness the air of
confidence. It is a sacrifice which they make to friendship.

Men owe their frankness to pride, women to address. The one sex often utters a
truth without any other view than truth itself; in the mouth of the other, even
truth itself has an aim. The falsity of man almost always regards his interest;
it is only for himself: that of woman generally proceeds from a desire to
please; she refers every thing to others. The one cheats, the other seduces you.

Flattery is common to both sexes. But the flattery of men is often gross to a
degree that is base: that of women is more light, and has more the appearance
of sentiment. Even when it is overdone, it is generally amusing, and is never
disgusting. The motive and the manner save them from contempt.

To conclude this parallel, (which is already too long) it would be necessary
still to examine the rigid virtues of the two sexes which are connected with
justice, and the bold and nervous qualities which are allied to courage.

But almost all the distinctions, which can be made on these subjects, proceed
upon the same principles. Thus, for instance, in regard to equity, whence arise
the duties of a severe and impartial justice; if there is one of the sexes
which almost always feels before it judges, and which is led by an imagination,
that gives it aversions or likings for which it cannot account; whose caprices
an uniform and inflexible rule would fatigue; and whose decisions have at all
times been more governed by particular ideas, than by general views: it must be
owned, that such a character agrees ill with that rigid equity which pays less
regard to circumstances than to facts, and to persons than to things. Hence
women rarely resemble the law, which pronounces without love or hate. Their
justice has always some head-mark, to distinguish those whom it condemns or
absolves. Consult the annals of history, and you will find them generally
bordering on excess of pity, or excess of vengeance. They want that cool
deliberation which knows where to stop: to them moderation is torment.

A woman of some genius has said Madame de Grassini, Lettres Peruviennes.
, that the French seem to have escaped from the hands of nature, since they
have nothing in their composition but air and fire. She might have said as much
of her sex; but she, no doubt, was unwilling to betray her secret.

It might seem bold, to presume to determine how far the two sexes are by
nature susceptible of courage. But the word Courage is so vague, that to give
it any determinate idea we must distinguish that virtue into its different
species.

The distinction of mental and animal courage, is well known: but these two
kinds subdivide themselves again. In the courage of mind, for example, we find
a courage of principle, which defies opinion; a courage of will, which gives
energy to the soul, and spurns constraint; a courage of constancy, which
supports the idea of toil, and toil itself; a calm courage, which, in the most
delicate circumstances, views all things deliberately. In the animal courage,
in like manner, we find a courage against pain, which knows how to suffer; a
courage against danger, whether it consists of that hardiness which encounters,
or that firmness which keeps its post; an habitual courage, which is always the
same, and which discovers itself at all times, and upon all occasions; and that
enthusiastic courage, which is a kind of fine fever of the soul, which rages
and ceases by fits, and which meets with intrepidity at one time, what it would
shrink from at another.

It would not be necessary to make a particular application of these, details;
the reader's own reflections will be sufficient. We ought, however, to observe,
that the courage which the women possess in the highest degree, is that of
supporting pain; which is no doubt owing to the variety of ills to which they
are subjected by nature. But whatever it proceeds from, the fact is certain:
they would sooner suffer than displease, and would a thousand times rather
endure pain than reproach.

We have likewise seen women demonstrate an extraordinary courage in danger;
but it is always owing to some strong passion, or great idea, which rouses
their minds, and elevates them above themselves. Then their inflamed
imagination gives a new direction to the imagination of their sex; and their
ardent sensibility, tending to one object, attracts the little sensibilities of
character, which are the sources of fear and of weakness. Under such agitations
they possess a courage which nothing can withstand, and which in effort exceeds
even habitual valor; which, by reason of its experience, has less impetuosity,
as it borders less upon extravagance.

These are some of the subjects which should be discussed and compared, in
settling the dispute of the Equality, or Superiority of the Sexes. To treat the
question properly, it would be necessary to be at the same time a physician, an
anatomist, and a philosopher; to be equally rational and sentimental; and,
above all these singular seize, one must have the misfortune to be
perfectly disinterested.

SECTION VI. Of the Decline of serious Gallantry, and of the Progress of
Society in FRANCE.
THE sixteenth century, in which the dispute of the superiority of the sexes
was so much agitated, appears to have been the most brilliant era in the annals
of women. After that period we find fewer champions, either literary or
warlike, enlisted under their banners. The enthusiasm of serious gallantry was
somewhat abated. The entire extinction of chivalry in Europe; the abolition of
tournaments; the religious wars in Germany. and in France, which drew the women
of rank to court; and the manners which necessarily flow from idleness, from
intrigue, and from beauty being regarded as an instrument of fortune -- in
short the new taste of society which began universally to prevail, a taste
which polished the manners in corrupting them, and which, by mingling the sexes
advantageously, taught them to seek one another more, but esteem one another
less; -- all contributed to diminish a sentiment, which, to gather strength,
stands in need of obstacles, and of a certain state of the soul in which it is
honored by its desires, and respected even from its weakness.

The progress of this revolution, however, was for some time slow in France.
Under Francis I. who gave the signal of corruption, we find still in the
affairs of love a jealousy, a revenge, a hate, and crimes which prove the
manners,

Under Catherine of Medicis, love was a mixture of gallantry and fury. The
Italian ardour mingled itself with the French voluptuousness. All was intrigue.
They talked of carnage in the rendezvous of beauty, and meditated in dancing
the ruin of nations. In the mean time, the attention to policy and war, the
factions, the parties, and a romantic something which still remained, gave an
energy to the soul, which discovered itself even in the sentiments which the
women inspired.

The reign of Henry IV. displayed a milder gallantry. That prince joined the
courteous manners of a knight, to the weaknesses of a great king. It was
thought an honor to imitate him; and his courtiers, bold and brilliant,
accustomed to glory and to conquest, carried into love a species of that noble
courage which they had displayed in the combats of war. They were corrupted,
but not debased.

Under Lewis XIII. genius, which began to unfold itself, mingled metaphysics
with gallantry. Every body knows the famous thesis which Cardinal Richlieu
caused to be supported on love. That ludicrous injunction, which some may
suppose was given in jest, and intended as a burlesque on the misapplication of
learning and talents, was no more than a serious expression of the manners of
those times in France. The religious contests had brought controversy into
fashion. The infant taste in letters made them take the scholastic forms for
science. A false wit sprung from a desire of being witty, and the inability to
be so. The gallantry, which mingled itself with all things, and which disturbed
nothing, because it was not deep -- the gallantry, which was rather a twist of
the fancy than a sentiment of the heart, adopted the whole mass of absurdities,
and formed a jargon equally mystical, metaphysical, and romantic. There was
nothing written or talked of, but dissertations upon the delicacies and the
sacrifices of love.

Though we generally descant little upon what we feel much, yet these
conversations and reasonings discovered a turn of mind, which, in permitting
gallantry, connected it with tenderness, and which always joined to the idea of
woman the ideas of sensibility and respect.

The regency of Anne of Austria, and the war of the minority, formed a singular
era. France was a scene of anarchy: but the taste of the times mingled
pleasantry with battles, and ballads with factions. All things then were
conducted by women. They had in that period all the restless agitation which is
communicated by the spirit of party; a spirit which is less foreign to their
character than is commonly supposed. Some produced the shock, others received
it. Every one according to her interest and her views caballed, wrote, and
conspired. Their assemblies were at midnight. A woman in a bed, or on a sopha,
was the soul of the council. There she determined to negociate, to fight, to
embroil or accommodate matters with the court.

Love presided at all their consultations. They conspired to ruin a lover in
the affections of his mistress, and a mistress in the favor of her lover, with
as much solemnity as to lay waste a city, or assassinate a prince; and not
without reason: for a revolution in love almost always announced a revolution
in politics.

Each woman had her department, and her dominion. Madame de Montbazon, fair and
shewy, governed the duke of Beaufort; Madame de Longueville, the duke of
Rochefoucault; Madame de Chatillon, Namours and Conde; Mademoiselle de
Chevreuse, the Coadjutor; Mademoiselle de Saujon, devout and tender, the duke
of Orleans; and the duchess of Bouillon, her husband. -- In the mean time
Madame de Chevreuse, lively and warm, resigned herself to her lovers from
taste, and to politics occasionally; and the Princess Palatine, in turns the
friend and the enemy of the great Conde, by means of her genius more than by
her beauty, subjected all whom she desired to please, and whom she had either a
whim or an interest to persuade. She possessed at once a passionate heart and a
sound head; and she was no less romantic in love, than politic in the affairs
of the state.

Women often appeared publicly at the head of factions, in camps, and in
councils of war. Then, to the ornaments of equipage and dress, they joined the
ensigns of their party. At such a sight one must have supposed himself
transported to the regions of romance, or carried back to the times of ancient
chivalry. On the field, and in the fortress, instruments of music were mingled
with instruments of war; curiasses with violins; lutes with spears; and the
polished features of beauty bloomed by the side of the war-worn soldier.

Devotion, among the women, blended itself with the spirit of faction, as the
spirit of faction did with gallantry. They plotted one hour and prayed the
next. So many women of rank never became Carmelites, as at this time. It seemed
as if the soul, roused by violent commotions, applied itself to all things with
greater impetuosity; and that imagination, inflamed by so much exercise, rushed
with equal rapidity to war, to love, to religion, and to rebellion.

The spirit of gallantry, during the regency, had nearly the same character,
and the same symptoms, as under Louis XIII. except that the civil war, and that
extravagance which great commotions give to the soul, warmed the little
tincture of chivalry which still remained in the cup of love.

Anne of Austria had brought to the court of France, a part of the manners of
her country. It was a mixture of coquetry and pride, of sensibility and
reserve; that is to say, a remnant of the ancient and shining gallantry of the
Moors, joined to the pomp and the stateliness of the Castillians. Then dances,
romances, plays, intrigues, all were Spanish. Disguises and nocturnal scenes
became the fashion: but the French vivacity substituted the violin in place of
the languishing guitar. That polite and loyal people, affected passions which
they had not, and counted it an honor publicly to gibbet those which they had.
A sacred homage to beauty, was numbered among the duties of men. Every thing
that related to women was viewed with an eye of importance: the most
inconsiderable trifles had a value; and a present of a bracelet, or a
complimentary card, made an event in life. They talked as seriously of an
affair of gallantry, as of the progress of a negotiation, or the issue of a
battle The verses of the duke of Rochefoucault to Madame de Longueville, are
well-known.

Pour meriter son coeur, pour plaire a ses beaux yeux,
J'ai fait la guerre aux rois, je l'auroit faite aux ^i^ux.
"To merit that heart, and to please those bright eyes,
"I warred against kings, I Would make war'gainst the skies.
The duke de Be'legard^, who declared himself the sublime lover of the queen,
in taking leave of her majesty to take upon him the command of an army, begged,
as a particular favor, that she would condescend to touch the hilt of his
sword; -- and, during the civil war. M. de Chatilion, enamoured of Mademoiselle
de Guerchi, wore one of her garters tied round his arm in a battle.


.

It was this spirit which formed the character of the first romances of the age
of Lewis XIV: -- eternal romances, because the writers supposed that all
passion must be durable; serious, because they considered love as an important
concern in life; full of adventures, because they imagined it must turn the
brain; full of conversations, because they made it a science, which had its
principles and forms; heroic, above all things, because it must throw the
greatest men at the feet of the women, and because they then believed that true
passion is inseparable from honor, and will elevate itself to its object, in
place of seeking to debase it.

It was that spirit likewise which formed the French theater; and which made
the great Corneille himself blend love with the interest of states, with
massacre, conspiracy, and parricide.

It was the same general spirit perhaps, which, reigning during the infancy of
Lewis XIV. obtained to that monarch among the women the character of being at
once great and tender; by which, when young, and passionately in love, he would
have placed one of his subjects upon the throne, and was afterward able to
conquer his weakness; by which he conceived a passion, not less warm, for
Henrietta of England, yet curbed its violence; by which, always a king, though
always a lover, he from his youth knew to preserve dignity in his pleasures.
But, though he covered sensuality with decency, the manners of the women, by a
concurrence of circumstances, must have been much altered under his reign.

Hitherto the vices of the court had not been those of the nation. The
different orders of the state were more separated. The nobility still retained
a remnant of that feudal grandeur, which had made them at once, the formidable
rivals of the prince, and the imperious tyrants of the people. The greater
their power, the greater the distinction of ranks. Family pride kept even
wealth at a distance. Vanity had not yet given the signal of union. The crown,
no longer jealous, removed its barriers; but the nobility multiplied theirs, to
separate themselves more completely from those who might have the insolence to
pretend to equality.

In those times, licentiousness and freedom of manners were almost always
regarded as the privilege of rank. The vices of the great were even a part of
the oppression of the common people: we are seldom inclined to imitate those
whom we hate. The manners of the court therefore could only be communicated to
the chief magistrates, and to the rich. But the magistrates were secure in
their austerity: living in the study, and in the exercise of justice, they
astonished the court, and disdained its vices. With regard to the people of
wealth, few were really wealthy; the shameful, or the recent acquisition of
certain fortunes, did not permit the familiarity of pride with those who were;
and luxury, which only can place the rich on a level with the great, was by no
means general. The nobility had not yet need of trading with their names; and
the traders had still less thought of purchasing titles.

As people of business and commerce were then much occupied in their respective
employments, they had little time to lose; and, consequently, little knowledge
of society. The manners of all who did not belong to the court were very
unpolished; and that species of ancient rusticity was the greater bar to
coalition, because it was an object of ridicule among the courtiers. The
contrast of behavior marked the limits of pride: the line was too strongly
drawn to be mistaken; and neither party was willing to cross it.

Between the capital and the provinces there were not fewer barriers than
between the ranks in life. The insecurity of traveling, the scarcity of great
roads, of carriages; and, above all, the absence of luxury and factitious
wants; and, of course, the absence in a great measure of that restless
dissipation which hurries the present inhabitants from place to place, and
which makes them run in crowds to the capital in quest of gold, of slavery, and
of vice; by retaining every one under the roof of his fathers, contributed to
preserve the manners of the nation.

But, under Lewis XIV. all things changed. The people of the court, having only
titles without power, and being reduced from a real to an imaginary grandeur,
mingled more freely in general society, and with the people of the city. The
inequality of fortunes increased with the inequality of taxes. More value was
set upon wealth. The great had more wants, the rich had more state; the poor,
corrupted by their desires, had less virtue: all ranks approximated.

The magnisicence and luxury of the prince fostered these ideas. His courtiers,
involved in debt by their loyalty, and ruined by their pride, soon came to
caress those whom they despised. To preserve their titles, it was necessary to
share them with families of inferior condition. Gold, extorted from the poor,
became the mediator between the rich and the great. The magistracy itself was
metamorphosed. All who resorted to Versailles partook of its manners. The
difference of accent was lost in the polish of society. The rust of ancient
manners disappeared. All orders of men mingled.

The provinces were deserted. The misery of the country, the luxury of the
city; the ambition, the amors, the reputation of the prince, and his
conquests; the romantic feasts of his court; the pleasures even of the mind
drew every body to the capital. They went there in crowds; quitted there
prejudices, blushed for their manners, and at once polished, enriched, and
corrupted themselves.

It is easy to see what influence all these changes, and this universal
intercourse must have had upon the women. Gallantry became the fashion, and
freedom of manners a grace. Every body imitated the court; and, from one end of
the kingdom to the other, the vices circulated with the accomplishments.

Another revolution accompanied that of the manners.

In a country where society and letters begin to be cultivated, a taste for
literature must prevail among the women. But, as that taste is slowly formed;
because the delicate feeling which discovers the natural and the graceful, and
which enables us to paint them with truth, is acquired by habit; as we are apt
to think that must be admired which has cost us much trouble, and that it must
be the more so the less it resembles any other composition; as what is false
often appears fine, because it presents a new coloring, and shades part of the
object to make the rest spring out; as, in short, whatever is the prevailing
humor is carried to extravagance, wit must at first be mistaken for genius; --
the women, who attempted to distinguish themselves, invented expressions which
were much admired, because they were little understood. They made use of
singular words, when they were at a loss for ideas; and, to avoid being common,
they became ridiculous.

Every thing contributed to this delirium: -- the Italian and Spanish books,
which were still much in vogue; the romances of Mademoiselle Scudery; the real
admiration of what they called the PRECIEUSES; the conversations of the hotel
de Rambouillet; in short, the society and the imposing name of Madame de
Longueville; who, after being in the sweep and at the head of factions, old,
and without lovers, as without cabal, amused herself in writing metaphysically
upon love, and logically upon wit; and who tastelessly preferred Voiture to
Corneille.

Moliere, by attacking with ridicule the learning of women, made not only its
extravagancies, but the taste itself, disappear. Some women afterward devoted
themselves to letters, and some cultivated the sciences; but that spirit was by
no means general.

In the most enlightened age, women were not permitted to be intelligent,
without becoming the objects of derision. They were obliged to hide themselves
to improve their minds; and they blushed on the discovery of their knowledge,
as much as, in ruder ages, they had blushed on the discovery of an intrigue.

AS all good has its excess, and a proverb cannot need a reason; by associating
what is ridiculous with what is respectable, the learning of women, like every
thing else, may be brought into contempt. To examine the question however
impartially, it appears, that in a country and in an age very remote from that
primitive innocence which attaches the heart to the pure pleasures of
retirement, and which makes us happy in the ignorance of every thing -- but our
duty; in an age when the general manners are corrupted by idleness; when all
the vices mingle by dissipation; and when the virtues cannot be replaced, or
supplied, but by the help of reason, instead of deterring women from
instructing themselves, it must be necessary to encourage them. Not all the
humor of Moliere had been able to raise a laugh against the lovely sex, on
account of their learning if he had not substituted folly for wisdom. Socrates
perished by such a misapplication of ridicule.

If Moliere, in place of ridiculing the abuse of learning in women, had
exhibited an example of its happy effects, opposed to thoughtless levity and
giddy amusement; if he had painted a woman, young and beautiful, whose mind was
opened by a liberal education, and who retained all the graces of her sex; who
could think deeply, but who assumed nothing; who covered her knowledge with a
gentle veil, and who always had a facility of temper, a presence of mind, and
an ease of manner, which made her most profound reasonings appear to be the
result of nature; who could estimate and feel the greatest concerns, without
being above the least; who prosecuted her speculations only to heighten the
commerce of friendship, and render more exquisite the intercourse of affection;
who, in studying and knowing the heart of man, had learned to have more
indulgence for his weaknesses, and more respect for his virtues; who, in short,
ranked her duties above all things, but her mental accomplishments next to her
duties, and who only employed in study what may be called the VOID of life --
the intervals of society, and the recess of domestic affairs, in bettering her
heart by embellishing her understanding; -- he would have done a real service
to women, to virtue, to his country, and to the world.

But though the women under Lewis XIV. were, in general, laughed out of their
passion for letters, the politeness of the age introduced a spirit somewhat
allied to it, and which was then much in fashion, particularly at court. It may
be called the TALENT OF SOCIETY: an amiable kind of genius which delights in
light graces, which is fonder of beauty than sublimity, and which borrows few
of its ornaments from science, or does it in so easy a way that ignorance
cannot be jealous, and knowledge dares not blame; which throws out agreeable
trifles, and which sometimes can bring itself to compose with elegance a few
facetious or sprightly verses; which always charms in conversation, without
seeming to aim at it; which pleases every body; which humbles nobody; and even
when it shines most, which has a manner that pleads its excuse, and makes us
perceive that it is free from ostentation or vanity. Such was the well-known
genius of la Fayette, of Ninon, of la Suze; of la Sabliere and of Sevigne; of
Thianges and of Montespan; of the duchess of Bouillon, and of the fair
Hortensa Mancini her sister; in short, of Madame de Maintenon; who, when young,
was the delight of Paris, and till she inhabited a court, and was condemned to
grandeur and to care Among those celebrated women, we always distinguish Madame
de la Fayette and Madame de Sevigne. Madame de la Fayette, so well known by her
it genious romances, full of sweet sensibility, joined to a sound understanding
all the graces of wit and character. It was she who first introduced into the
romance sentiment in place of adventure, and agreeable men instead of heroes.
She performed in her walk what Racine did in his. In substituting interest for
incident, and men for prodigies, she proved, that we love better to be moved
than astonished.

Madame de Sevigne has formed, without design, of her letters written
occasionally, a most enchanting book. Full of imagination in her style, she has
almost created a new language. She throws out every moment expressions, which
the head could not suggest, and which a sensible heart can only feel.

N. B. Most of those elegant women were celebrated by the poets of their age;
but it is remarkable, that in all the verses of (...) there is not to be found
the name of a single woman of his time.




After all these accomplished women, commended with levity by the poets, or
gravity by the orators, there are still two, who, though of a rank and order
different, arrived nevertheless at the highest celebrity. The one is the famous
Mademoiselle de Scudery, who lived to the age of eighty-five, sixty years of
which period she spent in writing with elegance some pretty verses, which are
still admired, and with an amazing facility voluminous romances, which are no
more read. These romances however were once able to turn heads; and the
prejudice in favor of her manner was almost a match for the satires and taste
of Boileau. The other is the learned Mademoiselle le Febvre, so well known
under the name of Madam Dacier. Her merit, it is true, was not that of a woman,
but she chose a good time to assume the character of a man; and, though she had
not the manner of Ninon, she did not want her admirers. The two languages
natural to her, were those of Terence and Homer; and madrigals were often sent
to her in Greek and Latin. The most learned men in Europe conspired to sound
her praise.

I say nothing of the other women who wrote about the same time. The catalogue
is every where to be found. Besides, I speak only here of the women whose
genius had a character, and who can serve to illustrate the ideas or the
manners of their age. This is a picture, not a history.

The result of the manners, and the general character of the women of that age
was, a voluptuousness united with decency; activity directed to intrigue;
little learning; many accomplishments; a refined politeness; a remnant of
empire over men; a respect for all the religious ideas, which mingled
themselves with that coquetry of manners, and remorse always by the side, or in
the train of love.

During the regency, and under the reign of Lewis XV. the manners underwent
another revolution. The latter years of Lewis XIV. had shed over the court, and
part of the nation, an air of dejection and melancholy. At bottom the
inclinations were the same; but they were more repressed. A new court and new
ideas changed all things. A bolder sensuality became the fashion. The desires
grew more confident and impetuous; and part of the veil which covered gallantry
was torn away. Decency, which had hitherto been respected as a duty, was not
even regarded as a pleasure. Shame was mutually communicated -- and mutually
pardoned. Levity joined itself to excess; and a corruption was formed at the
same time frivolous and deep, which laughed at every thing, that it might blush
at nothing.

The ruin of families, and the shifting of fortunes, precipitated this change.
Excessive misery and excessive luxury were the consequences; -- and the
influence of these is known. A sudden revolution rarely happens in the property
of a people, without a quick alteration in manners.

For upwards of six centuries, gallantry had formed the character of the
nation; but the spirit of chivalry always mingled itself with that sentiment;
which spirit, inseparably connected with honor, gave to gallantry at least the
RESEMBLANCE of love, and to vice as much of virtue as its nature is susceptible
of. But when few traces of ancient honor remained, gallantry itself was lost;
it became a sentiment which always supposed weakness, or endeavored to produce
it.

In the mean time, by that general sympathy which attracted all ranks, the
taste for the society of women increased, and the intercourse of the sexes
became more frequent. Hope grew more sanguine, as seduction grew more easy. The
men every day associated less with each other; the women, less timid, threw off
that decent reserve which is their honor. The two sexes changed characters;
the men set too high a value upon personal charms, the women on independence.

As the youths were more anxious to be men of the world than men of business,
they entered sooner into society. These young men, corrupted by the libertine
part of the other sex, joined the faults of their age to those of their
character. Having in general more desires than ideas, an empty head and an
unprincipled heart, -- inconstant through vanity, or multiplying their amors
from idleness, -- setting no value upon opinion, which for them indeed had no
existence, -- they communicated to a great number of women their vices and
irregularities.

The irksomness of time, and the universal desire to please, spread still wider
and wider the spirit of society, till the nation arrived at its present state
of sociability and general intercourse, where manners and character are
sacrificed to elegance and politeness, while virtue and sentiment are exchanged
for pleasure and amusement.

SECTION VII. Of the Progress of Society in BRITAIN, and of the Character,
Manners, and Talents of the BRITISH WOMEN.
WHAT polished nations understand by society, appears to have been little known
in England, before the reign of Henry VIII. This backwardness may in some
measure be ascribed to our continual wars with France and with Scotland: by our
quarrels with the one we were shut out from foreign intercourse, and by our
hostilities with both we were diverted from cultivating the arts of peace.

The spirit of chivalry, which produced such amazing effects on the Continent,
was more weakly felt here. Edward III. had indeed established the order of the
garter; but real wars allowed the knights little time for the mock encounter,
or the generous visions of romantic heroism; and love was still a simple
passion, which led the shortest way to its gratification, and generally in
conformity with law and custom. It partook little of imagination; and,
consequently, required few perfections in its object: it aspired neither at
angels nor goddesses.

The women, who still retained all their native innocence and modesty, were
regarded only as wives and mothers. Where qualifications are not demanded they
will never be found: the accomplishments of the sex entitled them to no other
character; and it had perhaps been happy for both sexes, if they could have
remained in such a state of simplicity.

The Scots, by means of their alliance with France, which had subsisted for
several centuries, and that spirit of adventure which has at all times led them
abroad in quest of reputation, civil or military, may be supposed at this time
to have been better acquainted with the elegancies of life than their wealthy
and powerful neighbors: -- and we actually find, in the court of James IV. a
taste in music, in letters, and in gallantry, to which the great monarch of the
house of Tudor and his haughty barons were yet strangers.

But the political state of both kingdoms was an insuperable bar to all liberal
intercourse. The barons, or chiefs, were hostile to the court, from which they
had every thing to fear, and nothing to hope; they were dreaded by it in their
turn; they looked from the walls of their castles with a jealous eye on each
other; they never went abroad but attended by a numerous train of domestics;
they visited each other with the state, and the diffidence of neighboring
princes; their marriages were contracted from family motives, and their
courtships were conducted with the greatest form, and the most distant respect.
They took liberties indeed with the women of inferior condition, and they
rioted in thoughtless jollity with their dependents: but the ideas of
inferiority and dependence are incompatible with those of society and gallantry.

Henry VII. by curbing the hostile spirit of the Barons, by abridging their
power, by diminishing their retainers; by extending commerce; by encouraging
agriculture; by securing peace to his subjects, at home and abroad, prepared
the way for learning, arts and elegance. But the taste of the nation was not
yet ripe for their reception; and the temper of his son Henry VIII. was not
highly favorable to such a revolution. That prince, however, by his taste for
tournaments, fostered the spirit of chivalry; and, by his passion for
controversy, he encouraged a species of learning, though not the most
agreeable: by his magnificence and profusion he drew the nobility to court;
who, since deprived of their judicial authority, had less business to detain
them in the country; and, by his interviews with the emperor and the French
King, he roused their emulation of foreign elegance: they were smit with the
love of letters and of gallantry. The earl of Surrey, in particular, celebrated
his mistress in his verses, and defended her honor with his sword, against all
who dared with unhallowed lips profane her immaculate name.

The women in this reign likewise began to discover a taste for literature and
politeness. The countess of Richmond, mother to Henry VII. and who survived
him, had shown the way. She translated two pious treatises from the French; and
was a great patroness of learning. Elizabeth Blount, mistress to Henry VIII.
was a woman of elegant accomplishments; and his last queen Catherine Parr,
wrote with facility both in Latin and in English, and appears besides to have
been a woman of address.

But the house of Sir Thomas Moore, whose eldest daughter, Mrs. Roper, has been
already mentioned among the learned women of this period, seems in a more
particular manner to have been the habitation of the Muses, and even of the
Graces. He was possessed of all the learning of antiquity; he was pious even to
weakness; for he appears to have given credit to the prophesies of the Maid of
Kent; but neither his religion nor his learning soured his temper, or blunted
his taste for society. His ideas of the female character would do honor to a
gentleman of the present age. In an elegant Latin poem to a friend on the
choice of a wife, he speaks to the following purpose. May you meet with a wife
not stupidly silent, nor always prattling nonsense; may she be learned, if
possible, or at least capable of being made so. A woman thus accomplished will
be always drawing sentiments and maxims out of the best authors. She will be
herself, in all the changes of fortune; neither blown up with prosperity, nor
broken in adversity. You will find in her an even, cheerful, good-humoured
friend, and an agreeable companion for life. She will infuse knowledge into
your children with their milk, and from their infancy train them up to wisdom.
Whatever company you are engaged in, you will long to be at home; and will
retire with delight from the society of men, into the bosom of a woman who is
so dear, so knowing, and so amiable. If she touches her lute, and more
particularly if she sings to it any of her own compositions, it will sooth your
solitude, and her voice will sound sweeter in your ear than the song of the
nightingale. You will spend whole days and nights with pleasure in her company,
and you will be always finding out new beauties in her mind. She will keep your
soul in perpetual serenity; she will restrain its mirth from being dissolute,
and prevent its melancholy from becoming painful. -- According to these ideas
he educated his three daughters, whose virtues and talents appear to have
merited all his care. They lived for some time in one house, with their father,
their husbands, and their children, and formed a society, all things
considered, which has seldom, if ever, been equalled, in any age or country; --
where morals were sublimed by religion; where manners were polished by a sense
of elegance, and softened by a desire to please; where friendship was warmed by
love, and strengthened by the ties of blood; -- while conversation, animated by
genius; enriched by learning, and moderated by respect, exulting in the dignity
of its objects, seemed to approach to that fine transport, which immortal
beings may be supposed to feel in pouring out their contemplations of the
wisdom and goodness of the Creator; and, when it condescended to treat of
lighter subjects, wit had a spring, humor a flow, and sentiment a poignancy,
which those who are eternally discoursing of trifles, who hover continually on
the surface of the earth, and rove like butterflies from sense to sense, both
in their lives and conversations, can have no conception.

The religious contests, the reformations, and the presecutions, which
disfigured the latter part of the reign of Henry VIII. and which continued,
with little intermission, till the death of queen Mary, were a great bar to the
progress of elegance and politeness in England: but it may be doubted how far
they were hurtful to learning or to manners. Both parties, and both sexes, were
uncommonly zealous to distinguish themselves by virtues and by talents. Lady
Jane Gray, and the three Seymours, who lived in this period, have already been
mentioned among the ornaments of the sixteenth century. Queen Mary herself was
a writer of no mean rank; and Mary Roper, granddaughter of Sir Thomas More,
and one of the GENTLE-WOMEN, as they were then called, of her majesty's
PRIVY-CHAMBER, is said to have possessed all the learning and accomplishments
of her mother. She must have done honor to the court.

The reign of Elizabeth is justly considered as one of the most shining periods
in English history; and for purity of manners, vigor of mind, vigor of
character, and personal address, it is perhaps unequalled.

The magnificent entertainments which that illustrious princess so frequently
gave her court, and at which she generally appeared in person, with a most
engageing familiarity, rubbed off the ancient reserve of the nobility, and
increased the taste of society, and even of gallantry: but the masculine
boldness of her character was unfavourable to famale graces. The women of her
court, like herself, were rather objects of respect than love. Their virtues
were severe; their learning, their talents were often great: they had passions,
but they knew to suppress them, or to divert them into the channel of interest
or ambition. They did not however want their admirers. Men were less delicate
in those days.

Spenser, by writing his Fairy Queen, revived in Britain the spirit of
chivalry, at a time when it began to expire on the continent, and Sir Philip
Sidney, in his Arcadia, refined on that sentiment. The Fairy Queen was intended
as a compliment to Elizabeth; and the Arcadia was dedicated by Sir Philip to
his sister, the countess of Pembroke, the most amiable and accomplished woman
of her time The following ingenious and well known verses were intended as part
of her epitaph. Underneath this sable hearse
Lies the subject of all verse;
Sidney's sister, Pembroke's mother --
Death! ere thou have killed another,
Fair, and learned, and good as she,
Time shall throw a dart at thee.



But the most remarkable women of this reign were the Lady Burleigh, the Lady
Bacon, the Lady Russel, and Mrs. Killgrew, all daughters of Sir Anthony Cook,
and all distinguished for learning, genius, and virtue.

Elizabeth herself was a great and singular character. But she had few
qualities to recommend her as a woman, though passionately fond of personal
admiration; nor were her talents as a writer either striking or elegant, though
she appears to have been ambitious of literary fame. Her ability as a soverign
has been already considered, in treating of the talent of women for government.
Her virtues were those of her rank, and of her age; and her weakness, those of
her sex: yet they failed to render her amiable.

Mary queen of Scotland, (whose learning and accomplishments have been already
mentioned) the cotemporary of Elizabeth, and her rival in beauty, in letters,
and in sway, though a less perfect, is a more attractive character. While we
blame her conduct she conciliates our affection. Even those who accuse her of
guilt, must weep for her misfortunes; and will feel their bosoms swell with
indignation against her inhuman subjects, and her persidious protectress, while
they read her unhappy story, as told by her enemies.

The return of Mary to her native kingdom, after the death of her husband
Francis II. with all the elegancies of France supperadded to the finest natural
endowments, made the Scots hope, and not without reason, that literature, arts,
and politeness, would arrive at perfection among them, as soon as in any
northern nation. But the spirit of fanaticism, which awaked in Scotland about
this time, which was attended with such amazing effects, and which spread
itself over the whole island; which produced the death of the lovely Mary, of
the pious Charles, and which terminated in the expulsion of the royal house,
threw a cloud over the manners and the studies of that country, which two
centuries have scarcely been able to dispel A bold spirit of liberty and
independence however, which has been productive of many great and beneficial
consequences, mingled itself with that fanatical spirit, and ought for ever to
free the Scots from the imputation of servility.
.

The accession of James VI. to the throne of England, contributed still farther
to obstruct the progress to civilization in Scotland, and to the decline of the
arts in that country. The removal of the court, drew the nobility to London, to
spend their fortunes, or obtain preferment; and men of genius and learning
likewise looked this way.

That event, however, must have contributed to the advancement of society in
England. Yet not so much as might be expected. The scantiness of James's
revenue, together with his want of economy, rendered him unable to support the
splendour of a court. It was besides inconsistent with his maxims of policy, and
with his temper. He loved to be social with his friends, but hated a crowd; and
had rather an aversion to the company of woman. A mean jealousy, which took
place of a generous emulation, between the Scots and English courtiers,
prevented still farther the refinement of manners; which can only be effected
by a liberal intercourse.

The nobility and gentry of England are still fonder of a country life than
those of any polished nation in Europe: it prevailed much more then, and was
highly encouraged by James. He even issued proclamations, containing severe
threatenings against the gentry who lived in town. By these means the ancient
pride of family was preserved. Men of birth were distinguished by a stateliness
of carriage: much ceremony took place in the ordinary commerce of life; and, as
riches acquired by trade were still rare, little familiarity was indulged by
the great.

The king's pacific, or rather pusilanimous disposition, though it sunk the
national character, was favorable to commerce, and not altogether unfriendly
to letters. James himself was a scholar; but he was unhappy in a bad taste,
which infected his whole court, and indeed the whole nation. He was fond of
metaphysical quibbles, the jingle of words, and every species of false wit.
Such a taste is in some measure inseparable from the revival of letters: we
admire what is glaring, before we can discern what is beautiful; but the
sanction, and even the example of the monarch, only could have carried it to
such a height at this time in England. What induces one particularly to this
opinion is, the comparative purity of the writers of the former reign. The
contrast between the composition of Spencer and Drayton, is as great as between
the character of Elizabeth and James.

The theater, that great former of manners, and which is formed by them, had
been founded by Shakespeare under the reign of Elizabeth: he was succeeded by
Jonson and Fletcher. These writers have seldom painted the manners of their own
country, and seldomer those of their own age; but, as they must have
endeavored to please the people for whom they wrote, and as they no doubt knew
the taste of the public, we may discern that taste more perfectly in their
compositions than in the barren records of the times.

In the writings of Shakespeare we find all the noble spirit of the
virgin-reign. Love has its native importance; and little more: it is productive
of the greatest events, when connected with circumstances: but, when a simple
passion, its effects are feeble and transient. He seldom attempts to be wanton;
but when his subject makes it necessary to reveal the secrets of Venus, he does
it with as much freedom as if she were a common prostitute: be expresses his
meaning in the plainest, and often in the broadest words.

But in the writings of Fletcher, -- for I shall omit Jonson, as being a
cotemporary of Shakespeare, and therefore less proper to mark the gradation of
taste, -- love has acquired an imaginary power: it is equal to every thing in
itself; and seems to disregard those circumstances which alone can give it
consequence; without which it is a boyish passion, that excites our contempt;
but, connected with which, it is the strongest sentiment of our nature, and
awakens most deeply the feelings of the human breast. He is frequently wanton,
with a grace peculiar to himself; -- for a genteel education and a good natural
taste conspired to render him the most elegant writer of his age -- he veils
his idea beneath the delicacy of his language, or toys with it so prettily,
that we often fall in love with a thought, which, rudely disclosed, could not
fail to disgust.

We may therefore conclude, that the passion, or rather the commerce, between
the sexes was increased; that it was ambitious of being thought more important
than it really was; that it had purposes to carry which made such exaggeration
necessary, that it had wishes to reveal which it durst not avow; and which,
consequently, suggested the disguise of delicate expression. The duel, we know,
had taken place of the tournament; and the intrigue, we may be certain, would
not be long behind.

Under Charles I. a good taste in letters, in arts, and in society, began to
prevail. The king himself was both a judge and an example of fine writing; and
he was a lover of painting, music, and architecture; all which he liberally
encouraged. But the religious and political disputes, which early in this reign
divided the nation, and which brought about the death of the king, and the
subversion of the monarchy, diverted the thoughts of men from every elegant
pursuit. The dread of popery and arbitrary power, of slavery and eternal
damnation, and the hope of heaven, and of liberty, threw the whole island into
the most violent convulsions, and gave birth to some of the greatest geniuses,
and called forth some of the greatest characters, in the history of mankind.

The cavaliers, or royal party, however, notwithstanding the horrors of civil
war, maintained a gaiety of temper which was altogether astonishing, and a
freedom of manners which too often bordered on licentiousness. But the
republicans, though perhaps not infected with fewer vices, and those of a less
amiable cast, discover so much vigor of mind, such a resolute spirit of
action, a love of freedom, and a contempt of death, that we almost despise the
polish of society, -- even while we detest the cant of hypocrisy.

The most distinguished women of this period, in Britain, were the Duchess of
Newcastle, Lady Pakington, and Lady Halket The Duchess of Newcastle has left us
a variety of compositions both in prose and verse, (tragedies, comedies,
essays, histories, orations, letters,) of no mean character. She appears to be
the first English lady who attempted what is now called polite literature;
which ought to be some apology for her want of correctness. Lady Pakington has
long been the reputed, and, from the proofs produced by Mr Ballard, it appears
the real author of The Whole Duty of Man, and several other moral and divine
treatises; which are written with so much temper, purity, piety, philosophy,
and good sense, that she may be justly reckoned the glory of her sex, and an
honor to human nature. What greatness of mind and goodness of heart must the
person be possessed of, who could deny herself the honor of such works, lest
the name of a woman should render them of less service to mankind!

Lady Halket was remarkable for her learning, and for her skill both in physie
and divinity. Her writings are all of the religious kind, and are voluminous
beyond all credibiliy.


.

Under the commonwealth the face of the nation was entirely changed; it
experienced a revolution, as complete in manners as in policy. One would have
imagined himself in a different world. The theaters were shut; games, sports,
shows, and amusements of every kind were prohibited. Instead of the voice of
mirth and joy, nothing was to be heard but groans, sighs, prayers, and
spiritual songs. All liberal knowledge, ornamental learning, gentility of
manner, elegance of dress, and all superfluity in eating and drinking were
proscribed, as carnal vanities, and as the accomplices of sin and Satan. All
ranks, ages, and sexes were confounded. The illuminations of the spirit placed
all on a level. The leaders of the republic prayed, or exhorted one while, and
listened the next to the meanest of the people. Women taught the brethren.

Those fair divines, by reason of their finer feelings and more vivid
imaginations, were often carried into the most extraordinary severities, and
the wildest enthusiasm. They were not contented with laying aside the
allurements of their sex, with making a covenant with their eyes that they
should not rove, and with crucifying their thoughts; they condemned themselves
to humiliation and fasting, for the wandering of their hearts. Many of them
considered clothes of any kind to be improper. Whether this opinion proceeded
from their looking upon dress as a luxury, or as unnecessary to the truly
regenerate, does not distinctly appear; but one of them, animated by that
persuasion, came into the church where the Protector sat, in the condition of
our original mother before she plucked the fig-leaf, 'to be,' as she said, 'a
SIGN to the people.'

The men in general held in contempt all books but the Bible; and some of them
were even above using that: they believed themselves illuminated by the same
spirit which inspired the sacred writings. One man, from the superabundance of
this inward light, and a certain resemblance between his countenance and the
common pictures of Christ, conceived himself to be the savior, -- no doubt
sent to earth a second time, to collect the faithful, and begin his millennial
reign Some have believed the millennium to be before, others after the
resurrection.
. He pretended to work miracles: to cure the sick, to raise the dead; and
entered Bristol mounted on a HORSE -- perhaps he thought an ASS too mean an
animal, and that he had now a right to assume more dignity -- while his
disciples spread their garments before him, crying, 'Hosanna! to the Highest.'

Love under the commonwealth, was a mixture of cant and hypocrisy. Never was
beauty so much in disgrace. It was not only denied all adventitious ornaments
and excellencies, but even the advantages of nature were subject of reproach:
-- it was forbid to please; and it was criminal to consider it as an object of
desire.

'Man,' said the godly. -- for so they called themselves, -- is conceived in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity; he is a slave to the flesh, till
regenerated by the spirit; it was his complacency in woman that first wrought
his debasement: let him not therefore glory in his shame, let him not worship
the fountain of his corruption!

The emotions of nature were considered as the struggles of original guilt; and
beauty was viewed as a spell in the hands of Satan, to seduce the hearts of the
faithful. The pleasures of the marriage bed were only indulged as the means of
preventing a greater evil, and of increasing the number of the saints; nor even
then without fear and trembling, humiliation, and prayer, that they might be
separated from the CURSE!

But the restoration of monarchy made ample amends to beauty for the
indignities of the commonwealth. The reign of Charles II. may be considered in
one light, as the most glorious era to women in the history of Britain, and as
the most debasing in another. They were never so much caressed; never so little
respected.

Charles himself had a susceptible, but changeable heart; a social temper; a
genteel manner; a lively wit: -- and his courtiers partook much of the
character of their master. They had all suffered the pressure of adversity, the
neglect of poverty, or felt the insolence of pious tyranny. They began to think
that Christianity was a fable; that virtue was a cheat; that friendship and
generosity were but words of course; and, in greedily enjoying their change of
fortune, they sunk themselves beneath the dignity of men. In avoiding spiritual
pride, and in retaliating selfishness, they departed from the essential
principles of religion and morals; and, by contrasting the language and the
manners of hypocrisy, they shamelessly violated the laws of decency and decorum.

Overjoyed at the return of their sovereign, the whole royal party dissolved in
thoughtless jollity; and even many of the republicans, particularly the younger
class. and the women, were glad to be released from the gloomy austerity of the
commonwealth. A general relaxation of manners took place. Pleasure became the
universal object, and love the prevailing taste: but that love was rather an
appetite than a passion. Beauty, unconnected with virtue, was its object: it
was therefore void of honor and attachment. In consequence of such manners,
famale virtue, robbed of its reward, became rather a mode of behavior, to
inflame desire, or procure elevation, than a sentiment or principle; and, of
course, sooner or later, was either sacrificed to inclination or to caprice.

But these observations, in their full extent, must only be understood of the
court. The greater part of the gentry still resided on their estates in the
country, equally strangers to the pleasures of the court and town; and one half
of the island was filled with indignation at the vices of Whitehall. Nor
without reason; for it was little better than one great brothel -- and the
stage, which generally takes its complexion from the court, was a continued
scene of sensuality, blasphemy, and absurdity.

The free intercourse, however of all ranks of men, from the king to the
commoner, improved the talent of society, and polished the language of
conversation; gallantry, licentious as it was, produced a habit of politeness;
and from the irregular, and even impious freedom of writing and thinking,
sprung many strokes of real genius, and a liberal spirit of inquiry, whose
researches and experiments have benefited mankind, and carried philosophy and
the sciences to a height that does honor to modern times The royal Society was
founded under Charles II.
.

The women of this reign, as may be expected from the taste of the men, were
more solicitous about adorning their persons, than informing their minds. But
the frequent intercourse between the sexes in some measure compensated that
neglect. By such a commerce they became more easy, more free, more lively, and
more capable of conversation, than the women of any preceding age. They had
less learning, but more accomplishments; and perhaps, more genius. They wanted
nothing but virtue to have made their memories immortal: and, notwithstanding
the general depravity, there were some who trod the narrow path; whose taste
and sentiments were uncorrupted, and whose names still live in their writings,
and in the verses of their cotemporaries. Katherine Philips, (celebrated under
the name of Orinda) Anne Killegrew, and Anne Wharton, employed their elegant
talents in a manner suitable to their sex. The female wantons of most genius
were Behn and Centlivre, whose writings are both their honor and their
disgrace From this censure however, may be excepted the History of Oroonoko,
and the Comedy of the Busy Body.
. -- Among the women of elegant, or spirited conversation, we should perhaps
distinguish the Duchess of York, the Duchess of Cleveland, Lady Chesterfield,
and the fair Hamilton.

The reign of James II. was too short to have any distinct character. It is
only singular for the blind bigotry, and blinder disposition of the prince;
which roused the minds of men from the delirium of pleasure, in which they had
been lost, and brought about the Revolution.

Under William III. the effects of that change were visible on the manners. The
nation returned to what may be called its natural state. An attention to just
politics, to found philosophy, and true religion, characterize the era of
British liberty.

William himself was of a gloomy temper, and had a dislike to the company of
women. The intercourse of the sexes, and those amusements which are its
consequence, were therefore little countenanced during his reign. By these
means the ladies had more time for the pursuits of learning and knowledge; and
they made use of it accordingly. Many of them became adepts in the sciences.
Lady Masham, and Mary Astell, in particular, discussed with judgment and
ability the most abstract points in metaphysics and divinity These two ladies
differed on a very delicate point. Mary affirmed, that we ought to love with
desire God only, every other love being sinful. Lady Masham opposed that
doctrine, as a dangerous refinement Each had her abettors, Miss Astell was
supported by Mr. Norris, and Lady Masham by Mr. Lock. -- They were both great
advocates for the learning of women; and their arguments and example appear to
have roused many of the sex to a more serious attention to religion and
morality.
; and Lady Grace Gethin, at the age of twenty, treated of life and morals with
the discernment of Socrates, and the elegance of Xenophon. She is celebrated by
Mr. Congreve.

The reign of queen Anne may be said to have been the summer, of which
William's was only the spring. Every thing was ripened; nothing was corrupted.
It was a short, but glorious period, of heroism and national capacity; of taste
and science, learning and genius; of gallantry without licentiousness, and
politeness without effeminacy.

We are in doubt which most to admire in the women of this reign, the manners,
the talents, or the accomplishments. They were religious without severity, and
without enthusiasm; they were learned without pedantry; they were intelligent
and attractive, without neglecting the duties of their sex; they were elegant
and entertaining, without levity; in a word, they joined the graces of society
to the knowledge of letters and the virtues of domestic life -- they were
friends and companions, without ceasing to be wives and mothers.

In support of the foregoing character of the British ladies under the reign of
queen Anne, we need only add the names of Lady Chudleigh, Lady Winchelsea, the
honorable Mrs. Monk, Mrs. Bovey, and Stella Of these ladies, Mrs. Bovey is
perhaps the least known, as she has left no writings, and had no poetical lover
to spread her name. She is, however, very handsomely complimented by Sir Richard
Steel, in the dedication of the second volume of The Ladies Library; and Mrs.
Manley, who wanted only virtue to have been an ornament to her age, and to her
sex, gives the following elegant character of her in The New Atalantis. Her
person has as many charms as can be desired; her air, her manner, her
judgment, her wit, her conversation, are admirable; her sense is solid and
perspicuous; and she is so perfect an oeconomist, that, in taking in all the
greater duties of life, she does not disdain to stoop to the most inferior; in
short, she knows all that a man can know, without despising what, as a woman,
she ought not to be ignorant of


Under George 1. the manners of the nation were sensibly changed; but not so
much as the national spirit. The South Sea scheme, and other mercenary
projects, produced a passion of avarice, and a taste of luxury, which prepared
the way for all the corruptions of the following reign.

The delirium of riches was beyond what the most extravagant imagination can
conceive. Any scheme, however absurd, met with encouragement, if it only
proposed sufficient advantages. All ranks and conditions, and even women,
resorted to 'Change-Alley, with the looks of harpies ready to seize upon their
prey; but, in reality, the victims of their own credulity and sordid passions.
The peers of the realm became stockjobbers, and its ministers brokers; public
virtue was lost in the visions of private benefit; letters fell into contempt,
though supported by the greatest examples of successful genius; love grew
covetous, and beauty venal.

There were however, in this reign, many women of liberal and elegant talents;
among the first of whom may be ranked Lady Mary W. Montague, so well known for
her spirited poems, and ingenious letters.

Under George II. and George III. the debasement of mind discovered itself more
fully in the manners. Corruption became general.

The Revolution had restrained the powers of the prince within such narrow
limits, that a coalition of parties, or the absolute superiority of one, was
essential to carry the measures of government; and, as the opposition, or
country party, began to gather strength, the political machine was in danger of
standing still by counteracting forces. It was therefore necessary that there
should be an ascendency;

The Revolution had restrained the powers of the prince within such narrow
limits, that a coalition of parties, or the absolute superiority of one, was
essential to carry the measures of government; and, as the opposition, or
country party, began to gather strength, the political machine was in danger of
standing still by counteracting forces. It was therefore necessary that there
should be an ascendency; it was likewise perhaps necessary that it should be on
the side of the court.

At this crisis Robert Walpole, an artful and able minister, a lover of peace
and an encourager of commerce, found means to increase the influence of the
crown without enlarging the prerogative. But he did it at the expense of the
virtues of the people: -- and his example has been followed by all succeeding
ministers. He took advantage of that spirit of avarice and luxury which he had
fostered; the treasury was let loose at elections. A majority was obtained of
the refuse of both parties; of men determined to support the measures of the
court in desiance of conscience, honor, and honesty -- and who were only
formidable by the number of their voices. Places and pensions were multiplied
to reward the mercenary tribe; and men of ability and integrity were deprived
of their employments, to make way for those who were destitute of both. When
virtue and talents are no longer the means of honor and preferment, they
naturally disappear in the public walks of life; they are only to be found in
the solitary shade. Character ceased to create distinction. The effect of such
a want of sentiment may easily be conceived. Patriotism became the common
object of ridicule; and virtue and genius were made the butt of ignorance,
dullness, and profligacy. But people must always have something to be the
foundation of self-applause. Instead of the essential qualities of men and of
citizens, they valued themselves on a smooth address, and an absurd mixture of
French levity and English gravity; on the splendour of their equipages; on the
magnificence of their houses; on the richness of their furniture; and on the
elegance and sumptuousness of their tables.

The ruin of many ancient families by the late visionary projects, and the
excessive fortunes acquired by trade, contributed still farther to increase the
general mass of manners. The pride of birth, the last barrier of corruption,
was broken down. While people value themselves upon their ancestors, it is to
be presumed, that their actions will not be altogether unworthy of them. The
nobility courted the alliance of the wealthy, to enable them to support their
state: they intermarried with the sons and daughters of commerce, without
regard to character or accomplishments. Riches became the only idol of worship,
and poverty the only object of contempt.

These however were not the only evils refulting from such a coalition. That
respect to the higher orders of men, which is so necessary to preserve due
subordination in a state, and that frugality and industry, which are so
essential to the prosperity of traders, were at once destroyed by the union of
the people of rank and commerce. The merchants soon vied with the peers of the
realm, and the princes of the blood, in all the luxuries of life; and, by
degrees, people of all conditions came to think themselves entitled to the same
indulgence; till, at length, the nation arrived at its present state of
sociability, luxury, and vicious refinement; in which all ranks, ages, and
sexes mingle, and all aspire at the same pleasures and the same amusements; in
which taste is a title to enjoyment, and money and admittance to every polite
circle, and to every august assembly; to the ruin of manners, industry, public
credit, and private faith; and to the increase of sensuality, idleness fraud
villainy, violence, and all the licentious disorders of a corrupted populace
Some of the foregoing observations may perhaps be thought foreign to the
subject of this essay; but the manners of women are so intimately connected
with the manners of men, and those of men with the state, in this country, that
it is impossible to separate them entirely, without omitting many particulars
necessary to be known for the perfect understanding of each.
.

The manners of the two sexes, as has been already observed, generally keep
pace with each other. In proportion as the men grew regardless of character,
the women neglected the duties of their sex. Though little inclined to
hoarding, they are not perhaps less disposed to avarice than men: gold to them
is desirable, as the minister of vanity, voluptuousness, and show. It became
their supreme object, and the only source of the matrimonial union, to the
exclusion of that tender sentiment which alone can give strength to the sacred
tie, or pleasure to the nuptial state. The young, the beautiful, the healthful,
were wedded -- though not always with their own consent -- to age, deformity,
and disease; virtue was joined to profligacy, and wantonness to severity.

Such marriages were necessarily destructive of domestic felicity. The want of
cordiality at home naturally leads us abroad, as the want of happiness in
ourselves leads us to seek it in externals, and to torture imagination for the
gratification of appetites, which, undepraved, are simple and uniform. New
amusements, and societies of pleasure, were every day formed; new modes of
dissipation were invented; the order of nature was changed; night and day were
inverted; and fancy and language were exhausted for names to the assemblies of
politeness and gallantry. Nothing is so oppressive as time to the unhappy, or
thought to the vacant mind: these were not all enough They seemed afraid of
themselves, and of each other. The husband had one set of visitors, the wife
another; he prosecuted his pleasures abroad, she entertained her friends at
home; or resorted to some place of public amusement, or private pleasure. In a
free country, it is unpardonable in a man to accuse his wife without evidence,
or to pretend to abridge her liberty; and the guilty are silent for their own
sakes. It was often morning before they met at their joyless home.

A spirit of gaming, which mingled itself with dissipation and pleasure,
afforded a new pretense for nocturnal meetings. Money lost at play must be paid
somehow; it is a debt of honor: and, to preserve family-peace, it is to be
feared that women of virtuous principles have often sacrificed something more
precious than their jewels. At any rate gaming discovers the temper, ruffles
the passions, corrupts the heart, and breaks down the strongest barrier of
virtue, -- a decent reserve between the sexes.

Love grew confident, as beauty became more accessible; and the freedom of
manners permitted the warmest declaration without offense. The opportunities of
gratification were infinite; the motives of restraint were few; and the
temptations were many and great. A general tensuality was the consequence.
Conjugal insidelity became common.

Men of spirit obtained divorces. But these, instead of enforcing the
obligation of the marriage-vow, by the fear of public shame, appeared to have a
quite contrary effect; they only propagated weakness: the seducing example of
human frailty remained, the odium was forgot; while the equity of the sentence
was disputed, or its severity blamed. Husbands were loudly accused of
libertinism, and justly of neglect. The women continued to make reprisals, or
make up their wants; the practice triumphed. Prudent men overlooked such
liberties, when conducted with decency, which it must be owned was seldom
violated; and good-natured husbands in general begin to adopt a polite opinion,
which will least be conducive to a private peace viz. That a man is not more
dishonored by the AMORS of his wife than by any other DEVIATION of taste, or
than she is by those of her husband.

In short, unless manners take a turn, there is reason to belive that our
British ladies, once so remarkable for modesty, chastity, and conjugal
fidelity, will soon equal their sisters of France in impudence, levity, and
incontinence; as we already rival our continental brethren in foppery,
falsehood, inconstancy, vanity, -- and in all their unmanly pleasures,
capricious appetites, and emasculating luxuries This character, in its full
extent, must only be applied to the court and the capital. Two women of the
distant counties still possess the domestic virtues in a considerable degree of
perfection; the men are comparatively sober and faithful; and the manners of
the whole northern part of the island, are only arriving at that degree of
refinement which is favorable to industry, to virtue, and to letters.
.

But the fears of virtue are often groundless: fancy magnifies future evil, and
overlooks present good: we have dwelt long enough -- some may perhaps think too
long -- on the dark side of the picture. Our fair country women still possess
many virtues, and more accomplishments. Their gallantries are at least
regulated by a sense of decency: voluptousness wears its loveliest form;
delicacy is the handmaid of pleasure: infidelity is oftener yet the effect of
passion than of appetite; and elopements are stronger proofs of sensibility
than the want of shame.

Notwithstanding the general relaxation of manners, the aversion to whatever is
serious, the thirst of admiration, and the neglect of esteem, are at least of
those qualities which produce it, there are in this age, in this island, and
even in this city, women who would have done honor to any age or country; who
join a refined taste and cultivated understanding to a feeling heart, and who
adorn their talents and their sensibility with sentiments of virtue, honor,
and humanity. We have women who could have reasoned with Lock, who might have
disputed the laurel with Pope, and to whom addison would have listened with
pleasure.

Even in the middle of opulence, and of that luxury which too often mingles
avarice with state, which narrow the heart, and makes it at the same time vain
and cruel, we see women who yearly set apart a portion of their substance for
the poor; who make it their business to find out abodes of misery, and who
number among their pleasures the relief of the orphan, and the tears shed in
the consolation of the widow.

We have still wives, young, beautiful, and affectionate, who honor their
vows, and in the most delightful of human connections offer the most enchanting
spectacle of innocence and love; who are not ashamed to be mothers; who devote
their happy hours to the tenderest cares of nature; who watch with anxiety, who
press with transport, by turns, in their lovely arms, to their lips, and to
their breast, the infant whom they nourish with their milk, while the husband,
in silent joy, divides his fond regards between the mother and the child.

O that these sweet examples could revive among us nature and manners! -- that
we could learn how much the virtues, even for our happiness, are superior to
the pleasures! -- how much a simple, cordial life, where nothing is affected,
where we live in ourselves, and in the objects of our sensibility, -- where we
enjoy by turns the delights of friendship, affection, and self-approbation, is
preferable to that giddy and dissipated life, where we court continually a
phantom which eludes our pursuit, or vanishes in our embrace! -- Then the women
would recover their empire; then beauty, adorned with virtue, would lead
captive the hearts of men, -- would restrain them from wandering, and teach
them to be faithful, -- happy in their servitude, and proud of their weakness;
then a sine and blameless sensuality would season every moment of existence,
and make life a delicious dream; then the pains of childbirth, unimpoisoned by
remorse, a mother's pains, sweetened by love and participated by friendship,
would be rather a conflict of tenderness than a torment.

Society, in such a world, would indeed be less busy; but there would be more
domestic peace. There would be less ostentation, and more pleasure; less
dissipation, and more happiness. We would talk less of pleasing, and we would
please more. Our days would flow, like a pure and quiet stream; -- and if, in
the evening of life, we had not the sorrowful satisfaction of having
reciprocated the softest feelings with a hundred persons -- of whom we were
unworthy, who were unworthy of us, or who had no share in our hearts -- we
would at least have the comfort to have lived with those we loved, and would
sweetly sink to rest, conscious of having extracted from the pleasures of
today a charm to mingle with the joys of tomorrow.

SECTION VIII. CONCLUSION.
LET us not however, dream of miracles; nor conclude, from the virtues of
individuals, that the manners of the age are pure, or the characters of women
in general respectable. Among a people where the spirit of society is carried
so far, as it is at present both in France and in England, the domestic life
must be little known. All the sentiments of nature, which spring up in
retirement, and which are nursed in solitude, must be weakened. The women must
therefore be less devoted to their original and most important duties; they
must be less wives and mothers.

The manners now direct the prejudices, as much as the prejudices formerly
directed the manners. The sacred attachments of love and friendship are
exploded; they are banished to the shepherd and the savage. Why? -- Because
they are unpolite: they show too great a preference; they pay to one, what is
due to all.

The more the general tie extends, the more the particular ties are relaxed. We
seem to be attached to all the world, and we are attached to nobody. Hence the
increase of dissimulation and falsehood. The less we feel, the more we appear to
feel.

By a strange contrast, we are enraptured at the word SENTIMENT; -- and all
genuine sentiment is ridiculed. Perhaps we imagine, what we do not feel, does
not exist; and, indeed, we sufficiently vindicate ourselves from the imputation
of real sentiment, by the artful declamation which we substitute in its place.

The word ROMANTIC was never so much in use. This happy term affords a double
feast to vanity: it excuses esteem, or justifies contempt, to the virtues which
we want; and it prevents shame for the vices or the weaknesses which we have.
It makes us content with our knowledge: we believe that we have estimated all
things; and that we see both what man is, and what he can be.

We talk a great deal about pleasure, and we taste very little. The soul
precipitates itself upon its objects, when it should keep them at a certain
distance; desire is gratified, before it can awake the divinity of passion; the
spell which enchanted the mind is too soon broke. Imagination turns cold,
because it has nothing to create; illusion vanishes; sense grows dead. But what
is sense, without passion and fancy?

The void which we experience, in consequence of false pleasure, and the want
of energy in the soul, must have given birth to AMUSEMENT. the resource of cold
hearts and empty heads; a word which is become important, and which must be
ridiculous to the serious every time they use it; a word which implies what has
no connection with virtue, and none perhaps with the senses.

That amusement, that inexpressible something, which is neither imagination,
reason, nor passion, and which consists principally in forms, being the
universal taste, all things must comply with it. The accomplishments are
supposed virtues, and the vices are pardoned. Almost nobody has the boldness to
censure guilt, when it wears the habit of the Graces. The mind is contracted;
the heart is shut; and attention is busied about trifles. To please or to
displease are become the great words of language.

As we are continually under observation, self-love, by being more roused, must
be more keen; but the same spirit which rouses it, likeways restrains it. It is
curbed, and it is stimulated; its secret is rather veiled than hid, -- and yet
is secure. The eyes of vanity are obscured by a mist, and the mutual feeling is
willing to seem blind. Society is a sencing school or field of combat, where
self-love encounters self-love, and where each are desirous to conquer without
the air of emulation: they disguise their efforts, that their pretensions may
not be suspected.

From this assemblage of folly, vanity, and falsehood, must spring a restless
levity in the commerce of the sexes, and a serious and busy mockery of passion.
But what above all characterises the manners of the present age, is the madness
of show; the frenzy of sacrificing every thing to appearance; the importance
assigned to little duties, and the value set upon little objects. We talk
gravely of the trifles of today, and of those of tomorrow. The soul has a
languid, and never satisfied activity, which expands it over a thousand objects
without interesting it in one, and which communicates motion without impulse.

But if a taste for letters, and a delirium of talents, mingle with the
giddiness of society, from such a combination must result other effects. Then a
general passion of appearing informed must prevail, without the time, or the
trouble to be so; then we must see a torrent of superficial knowledge, and a
crowd of half-learned pretenders to science; a multitude of philosophical
ideas, which men of genius throw out in retirement, and which are greedily
seized by people of fashion, disputed, repeated, and scattered in polite
circles; light conversations on profound subjects; the laws of genius settled,
and a genius of memory, when we have nothing original; the establishment and
the opposition of literary societies; pretensions of all kinds, and of all
denominations; bold pretensions, cool and high pretensions, and cautious
pretensions, with a mixture of reserve; the fury of reputation, oftener usurped
than real; intrigue, flattery, and little arts to obtain it; in short, the art
of praising, to be praised; the art of joining foreign merit to our own, and of
procuring renown either by ourselves or by others.

As the general system of luminaries is greater, and as they communicate their
influence more fully by motion, the women, without giving themselves any
trouble, must be more enlightened. But, faithful to their plan, they only covet
knowledge as an ornament to the mind, as jewels are to the person. They study
the arts rather from a desire to please, than a desire to know, or from the
pleasure of learning; and they read more for amusement, than for instruction.

Besides, in a state of society where the motion is rapid, and where there is
an eternal succession of objects and ideas, the women, constantly occupied in
following the scene, which changes and flies incessantly round them, must know
better the ideas of the present, than of past times, and those which are
fashionable than those which are just. They must therefore be better acquainted
with the language of the arts than which their principles, and have more
unconnected ideas than useful or systematic knowledge.

It might perhaps be thought curious now to examine, what must be the
consequence of such a mixture of ideas and manners, of levity and learning, of
philosophy in the head, and libertinism in the heart: that however is too
self-evident to afford room for much disquisition. It might likewise perhaps be
thought curious, to compare the characters of women, as they at present exist
in London, and in Paris, with those which they have had in different periods,
and which they now have in different countries; with their sweet modesty in
many parts of England; with their timid reserve in Scotland; with their
tameness and want of passion in Holland; with their mixture of devotion and
sensuality in Italy; with their warm imagination and keen sensibility in Spain;
with their profound retirement in China, where they have been separated during
four thousand years from the intercourse of men; in short, with the character
and the manners which must result from their confinement in Turkey, in Persia,
and over almost all Asia, where they only exist for one man; where they can
neither cultivate their character nor their reason; and, destined to have only
senses, where they are forced by the absurdity of their condition to join
modesty to wantonness, and coquetry to retirement: -- But, to complete such a
parallel, it is sufficient to have hinted it.

I shall therefore only observe, that in the present age there are fewer
panegyrics on women than in any former period. The poets seem to have lost that
delicate gallantry which was so long their character. They are either Cynics or
voluptuaries. The prevailing taste for women, indeed, which is neither love,
nor passion, nor even gallantry, but the cold and barren effect of a habit of
sensuality, can neither rouse imagination nor sentiment. In our numerous and
growing assemblies, in the eternal round of dissipation and amusement, where
the sexes mingle with freedom, we learn to admire less, because we learn to be
more severe. Self-love, judge and rival, sometimes indulgent through pride, but
always cruel from jealousy, was never more vigilant in spying faults, or sowing
ridicule. Praise is the result of enthusiastic passion; and never was there an
age in which there was less than in this, though perhaps we affect more than
our predecessors. Enthusiasm springs from a warm imagination, which creates
objects in place of seeing them, and which heightens what it has seen. At
present we see too much; in consequence of which we feel too little. Beauty
obtrudes itself on the view: its spots are too visible; passion is disgusted;
and fancy sickens for want of exercise. Female delicacy is lost. Vice is ranked
in the number of our accomplishments. The less we esteem the women, the more we
pretend to know them: -- and they at present make such a language necessary.
Every boy has more pride than to seem acquainted only with their virtues; and
would be rakes, whose experience really reaches no further, that they may
support a reputation with the sex, accuse them of more than human weakness, by
contemptibly assuming a knowledge and a character to which they have no right.

Such, with regard to women, is the influence of that general spirit of society
which they have inspired, and of which they do not fail to boast. They are like
eastern monarchs, who are never more honored than when they are least seen: by
discovering themselves too freely to their subjects, they have encouraged them
to revolt.

But, least the ladies should take offense at being compared to tyrants, I will
give them a gentler simile; which I shall introduce with a short analysis of
female society, as it progresses in countries where the soft affections
exercise their sweetest influence. -- In a state of nature, the company of
women is little desired; their beauties are unveiled to every eye; and their
favors are bestowed without courting. In the early periods of society, they
are principally valued on account of their utility; their condition approaches
to servitude; and little delicacy is observed in the commerce of love. As
society advances, they are prized as objects of pleasure: conscious of their
importance, they become more delicate of their beauties, reserved in their
manner, and nice of their favors. Love grows jealous, and beauty undergoes a
degree of restraint. But as the mind opens, and when society is better
understood, such restraint is thought unjust -- ungenerous to the partners of
our dearest interests, our sweetest pleasures! -- and inconsistent with that
confidence which is due to love, to virtue, to mankind, and which is essential
to our own peace. The freedom of nature is restored, within the pale of
society. Beauty becomes more brilliant, more alluring, -- but less engaging.
Man ceases to adore what is familiar to his eye. Like her emblematic flower,
the same sun that beholds the glory of woman may be said to be witness to her
disgrace: her nature is too delicate to support the beams of general
admiration; she opens her attractions too fully to the heart; she yields too
freely her sweetness to the breath of praise; and, if she does not sink into
her original neglect, she experiences a fate little more to be envied; she is
rudely plucked by every spoiler; and, when her virtues are evaporated, the pride
of creation is viewed with contempt.

I shall therefore conclude with advising the gentle sex, to leave a remnant of
authority in the hands of the men, and to keep a little reserve in their own;
as the best means of securing the hearts of those they love, and the esteem of
such as deserve it.

FINIS.
NEW PUBLICATIONS
Printed and sold by R. AITKEN, Bookseller, opposite the London Coffeehouse,
Front-Street. The second American Edition of DOMESTIC MEDICINE OR, THE FAMILY
PHYSICIAN, With the newest Improvements, and considerable Additions, by the
Author, WILLIAM BUCHAN, M. D. Of the Royal College of Physicians, EDINBURGH.
Sermons on Practical Subjects, by Robert Walker, one of the ministers of the
high church of Edinburgh. Poems on the Rising Glory of America, Watts's Divine
Songs for children. The Grave, a Poem: by Robert Blair, late minister of the
gospel near Haddington in Scotland. Aitken's general American Register, for the
year 1774. Caspipina's Letters. Sold at the above Store new Editions of A large
Family Bible, with professor Ostervald's annotations, cheap. Encyclopedia
Britannica; or, a complete dictionary of Arts and Sciences, 3 vols 4to. with
160 copper plates. Doddridge's Family Expositor, 6 vols 8 vo gilt and plain.
cheap, Scots and American editions of the Works of Laurence Stern 5 vols
Burkitt on the new Testament, a neat edition, folio. Pope's Works with cuts,
gilt and plain. Gil Blas, gilt and plain 4 vols. with cuts Thomson's Works do.
4 vols. Otway's Plays do, Humphry Clinker, 3 vols do. Don Quixote 4 vols do.
Spectator, Guardian, and Tatler, do. Gulliver's Travels, 2 vols Pope's Homer's
Iliad and Odyssey, 7 vols for the pocket Fable of the Bees, 2 vols. Young's
Works, 4 vols -- 's Night Thoughts Theobald's Shakespeare, 12 vols Fielding's
Works, 12 vols Rollin's ancient history, 10 vols -- 's Belles Lettres, 4 vols
A large and elegant collection of Books, London and Scots editions, and a neat
assortment of Stationary.

Books bound in the Best Manner.


