A SERIOUS ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE COLONY OF NEW YORK, Containing a
full and minute SURVEY of the BOSTON-PORT ACT, calculated to excite our
Inhabitants to conspire, with the other Colonies on this Continent, in
extricating that unhappy Town from its unparalleled Distresses, and for the
actual Redemption, and Security of our general Rights and Liberties.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, in DOCK-STREET, near the COFFEE-HOUSE. M, DCC,
LXXIV.

To the FREEMEN, FREEHOLDERS, and INHABITANTS of the Colony of NEW YORK.
My Friends, Fellow Countrymen, and Fellow Sufferers.
THE claim in favor of the parent state to raise a revenue on the colonies, by
parliamentary authority, has been repeatedly and unanswerably refuted. Not a
man among us, but the dependants on ministerial authority, whose sentiments
ever run in the same channel with their interest, wants arguments to convince
him that our happy constitution entitles us to give or withhold our money, at
our own discretions. In this, we are only on a f^oting with our fellow subjects
in Britain. Nor ^as any reason, of weight, been assigned, to show either cause
or authority to deprive us of the enjoyment of so invaluable a blessing Without
it liberty is a mere phantom; without it the horrid chains of slavery are
rivetted on us in reality. To effect this, and by that means, to raise a
revenue on the colonies, sufficient to place the minister on firm ground at
home, while he ^ramples on the liberty of the subject, both there and in
America, has been the steady pursuit of the ministry for many years past. To
this end, though doubtless not apparent to Parliament, acts have been framed,
imposing duties on our trade, for the express purpose of augmenting his
Majesty's revenue, and enacting forfeitures on a breach of those acts to be
recovered before a ministerial tool, in an admiralty court, and against the
genius of our (...) a trial by our peers. To avail himself (...) necessities,
the minister procured the mem^r^ble st^mp act, fabricated to execute itself as
it subjected us to the necessity either of a compliance, or a denial of private
justice, or a total stagnation of business. How conspicuous, on this occasion,
was the virtue of our colonists? We volun^^rily shut up our courts of justice,
and submitted to a suspension of all such intercourse, as could not be
maintained without the legal formality of certain written instruments. This
expedient* and the equally self-denying resolution against the importation of
dry goods, gave the keenest edge to the sufferings of individuals in the mother
country, and by that means compelled a total repeal of that, as well as a
partial revocation of what is emphatically called the revenue act. Had we
persisted a little longer, the duty on tea would doubtless have been ta^en off.
But flattered by our want of perseverance, a flagitious ministry are still
pursuing the design to levy that duty; not so much expecting it will afford any
important augmentation of the revenue, as to establish thereby, both in
principle and precedent, that parliament can constitutionally tax us at
discretion. The recision of the non importation agreement,(...) was not total:
Tea being left subject to duty, its importation was prohibited by a mercantile
resolve. To execute this, the ships in our dry good trade, were interdicted the
importation of tea. No expedient, therefore, was left to the ministry,
unwearied in their endeavors for the establishment of tyranny; but that of
engaging a body of men, on the other side of the water, to import the accu^sed
and bitter herb among us, subject to the duty imposed by the revenue act. To
execute the scheme, a base corrupt set of monopolists, the East India company,
who under the forms of law had long since engrossed to themselves the
importation of that, and many other valuable articles of commerce into the
British empire, lent their aid. Contrary to the principles upon which they were
incorporated, and in defiance of the commercial rights of all the rest of their
fellow subjects, they bec^me the sordid retailers of that commodity, throughout
the colonies. Like knaves they sold their property to a corrupt administration,
or like desperate bankrupts risked it in the wicked and peri^lous design of
improving their stock, by enslaving America: A number of ships loaded with that
dutied article, were sent to different colonies on the continent, purely to put
our virtue to the trial, and in hopes that their cargoes would be landed
without opposition. It is obvious, that had the designs of our enemies
succeeded, the right of parliament to tax us, had, by our own consent, been
established. -- Had those teas been landed, the duties must have been paid. --
The bare permission of the import would have implied our submission to the tax,
And the impossibility of preventing a sale of the commodity, have insured the
levy of that tax. Besides the ministry and the East India company were
apprized, in the fullest manner, of our fixed resolution against receiving tea
on those terms. Presumptiously, therefore, they undertook to execute a scheme,
highly unjust in it self, and which no individual dared to attempt. Should a
poll or land tax be imposed upon us by parliament, should an attempt be made to
levy it, would not resistance be the necessary consequence? It certainly would;
because in that case nothing but resistance could rescue us from the most
abject vassalage; upon such a principle of resistance, the British constitution
is founded, and to the authority of that principle do we owe the blessings of
the revolution, and the singular blessing of being governed by the august house
of Hanover. Now in what does the duty in question differ from a poll or land
tax? Tea is become a necessary of life to us* But were it only a convenience*
by what rule or (...) of our (...) can a revenue be raised on the
conveniences, or even the luxuries of life, without our consent. The attempt
to load us with the duty in question, however designed, was in reality, a stab
at the vitals of our liberty. The only alternative left us, is, to oppose with
prudence, and be free; or submit implicitly and be slaves. No man, therefore,
who coolly reflects on the necessary and destructive consequences, that must
attend the unopposed importation of any commodity for consumption, subject to a
duty, imposed not only without our consent, but against our express and avowed
constitutiona^ diss^^t, can wonder at the conduct of our spirited brethren, the
Bostonians; they were complimented with the first token of ministerial favor,
by the arrival of the tea ships destined for their port -- With a patience that
will always do honor to their prudence, they deferred its destruction to the
last moment: they demonstrated to the ship Captains and consignatories the most
determined resolution against the landing of the cargoes; remonstrated in the
most pressing terms, against every fruitless expectation on this head, and
urged every motive to hasten the departure of the ships: But in vain; those who
were entrusted with the care of the commodity, turned a deaf ear to every
argument and persuasion, either vainly hoping, that it might at last be landed
without opposition, or that it would be seized and sold for payment of the
duty, with as much advantage to the proprietors, through the favor and
connivance of government, as if it had been regularly entered and the duties
paid in conformity to the revenue act -- Little however did they imagine, that
the people would have resolution enough to sacrifice it to the liberty of their
country: The hour at length arrived, when the duty was payable, or the tea
confiscable; no alternative being left, it was thrown into the harbor: This
was not an act of wanton and lawless sport, but of inevitable necessity. The
tea could not have been landed without payment of the duty. This the revenue
act expressly forbade; the discharge of that duty, with the permission of the
people, would have been conclusive evidence, of their admission that a British
Parliament have a right to tax us, and the Bostonians, in that case, could with
little grace have disputed that right, on the arrival of future cargoes. It is
therefore obvious, that the subject of contest, between the ministry and those
injured subjects, is the parliamentary claim of taxation; a claim totally
untenable -- upon any principles in our constitution, and as totally
inadmissable by British subjects; the property sacrificed, is indeed made one
of the causes for punishing the Bostonians, but the supposed injury, done to
his Majesty's revenue, is the real and capital reason. The ability and the
honor of the colonies, are sufficient to reimburse the sufferers, with
interest. They will doubtless do it, when ever par^iament may think proper to
renounce the claim of taxation; sooner it can never be done, without admitting
the legality of the claim.

But if the destruction of the tea at Boston, the return of it from
Philadelphia, and the dismission N. B. It is confidently asserted that the
Ministry engaged to indemnify the East India Company.
of the tea ship and her cargo, and the destruction of Captain Chambers's tea
at New York were act^ not of choice, but necessity* the punishment inflicted on
the capital of the Massachusetts Bay, for their manly efforts in favor of
liberty, is a clear proof, that Americans can expect nothing but thunder from
the British senate, till they explicitly acknowledge the constitutional right
of that august body to tax them; or teach the mother country* by a a virtuous
retention of the profits of commerce from her, that any attempt to enslave us
would be as fruitless as it would be impolitic. The agitation in the cabinet,
on receiving the account of the tragi-comedy at Boston, is easy to be
conceived. While the minister enjoyed a large share of influence, in the senate
of one of the most powerful people under the sun, he found himself bravely
opposed, by the virtuous compatriots in America. He flattered himself,
nevertheless, on recollection, that terror would, on this side of the water,
produce that abject servility and compliance, which in some states, is
unhappily effected by corruption. In this view, at a late period in the present
session, he procured an act of Parliament to be passed, entitled, "An act to
discontinue, in such manner and for such time as are therein mentioned, the
landing and discharging* lading or shipping, of goods, wares, and merchandise,
at the town, and within the harbor of Boston, in the province of Massachusetts
Bay, in North America." (...)

An account of the progress of this memorable act through the House of Commons,
we have from an intelligent friend to America, in a letter* dated the 7th April
last, which has been published with a copy of the edict now under
consideration. -- "About a sortnight ago," says the gentleman, "an act of
Parliament of a most extraordinary kind, to ^hut up the port of Boston, was
passed in a most extraordinary manner, being smuggled through the House in 17
days only, from its introduction. The evidence before the Privy Council was
suppressed, the agents refu^ed a hea^ing at the bar; and no member for Boston
or America, in either House. Nor had he merchants or manufacturers in England,
who will be deeply affected by the execution of this (...), any proper no^^ce
of it, or opportunity to (...) against it." The letter writer then point out
(...) means (which I would not choose to repeat) by which this extraordinary
act was hurried through, before there could be time for opposition; so that, says
he, "when a body of merchants trading to Boston, and Ameri^a, waited on Lord
North, with a request that a petition might be heard against the bil^, before
it passed into a law, they had the mortification to find they were too late,
and that the bill had already passed." The preamble of the act See the annexed
copy of the Boston port act, Appendix No. I.
recites, That dangerous commotions and insurrections had been fomented and
raised within the town of Boston, by diverse ill-affected persons, to the
subversion of his Majesty's government, and to the utter destruction of the
public peace and good order of the said town, in which commotions and
insurrections certain valuable cargoes of teas, the property of the East India
company, on ship board, were seized and destroyed, and that in the present
condition of the town and harbor, the commerce of his Majesty's subjects
cannot be safely carried on there, nor the customs payable to his Majesty, duly
collected. A most horrible picture of lawless anarchy, and wild confusion this!
in which the masterly hands of Governor Hutchinson and the commissioners, mark
every figure. A person ignorant of the talents of those base informers, would
naturally imagine the town of Boston to be in a state of open rebellion; and
yet it is a truth, that there is not a more decent and orderly set of people in
the British empire. It is reasonable to expect that all the inducements for
passing this uncommonly severe edict, are particularly (...) in its preamble.
It is therefore to be presumed, as the fact really is, that those commotions
and insurrections consisted solely in the destruction of the tea. Nor is it
unnatural to enquire how by the demolition o^ privat^ property, of one
particular species, for a reason peculiar to the state of that property, and
the consequent loss of cert^^^ duties, unconstitutionally imposed on it, his
Majesty's government can be subverted, and the public peace and good order of
the town be utterly destroyed. While, in every other instance, the laws are
obeyed, justice administered, and public peace and order maintained? Or by what
kind of legal argumentation can private trespasses be fairly confirmed into
open acts of rebellion, and punished with penalties, to a free and generous
mind, to an Englishman, more terrible than death itself? Should the ministry,
even under color of a loan or (...), without the concu^rence of Parliament,
attempt to levy a tax on his Majesty's subjects in the capital of the British
empire, would resistance against such an attempt be deemed a subversion of
government, or the destruction of the public peace, and good order? And would
even a devoted Parliament, in that case, interdict the commerce of London, till
his Majesty in Privy Council* should condescend in some measure to open the
aven^es of trade? Would it be constitutionally right, on the contrary would it
not be flagrantly unjust, to bankrupt the merchants and mechanics, and starve
the poor of that opulent emporeum, because its inhabitants would not submit to
taxations unwarranted by, and flatly opposed to, the law, and the constitution*
And yet such, in my humble opinion is precisely the punishment inflicted on
Boston, for an offense exactly similar. For it is evident to a demonstration,
that the duty on t^a is as inconsistent with the ancient common ^aw of the
land, as any duty would be, imposed on the city of London, by the royal
proclamation, or by order of the King, and a select convention of his own
nomination.

It wants the most essential ingredient, the actual representation of the
people taxed, or, in other words, the reality of a free gift by them, to make
it a legal impost. Our constitution abhors every other tax; witness the statute
De Tallagi^ non concedendo, and the many other statutes against ^xtorted
benevolences and levies of money that are not the free gift of the people. All
those statutes are declarative of the (...) and truly venerable august common
law of England; to the penalties of which, ^^th many others of new invention,
Americans are held subject; while its (...) much their birthright as that of
their fellow subjects, are, it seems, denied them. Modern politicians have
forgot, or choose to consider as obsolete, the tenderness of the English law
with respect to Ireland, though a conquered country; and which, therefore, with
stronger reason, applies to the ca^se of America. In Calvin's case of Co. Rep.
in the arbitrary reign of James I, it (...) asserted that Ireland is a dominion
separate and divided from England, and therefore cannot be dependent thereon.
For proof of the assertion, the year books 20. H 6.8. -- 32. H. 6.25. -- Dier
360. -- plowd. Com. 360, are there cited. And therefore, in some of those
books, it is asserted That if a tenth, or a fifteenth (the ancient mode of
taxation in England) be granted here, this shall not bind Ireland. In the 2.
Ric. 3d, a most cruel arbitrary usurper, a case of the merchants of Waterford,
in Ireland, upon the English staple statute of Henry VI, passed in judgment. In
this case it was solemnly determined by all the judges (...) England, assembled
in the Exchequer Chamber, That Ireland has a Parliament of its own, which makes
and alters laws, and is not bound by the statutes of England; because the
people of that country have not Knights in Parliament here, but their persons
are subjects of the King, as were the inhabitants of Calais* Gascony, and
Guienne (territories belonging to the King of England, and yet feudatory to the
Crown of France.) In conformity to this doctrine, Lord Coke. 4. Inst. p. 35^,
asserts an ancient practice of the Kings of England to call his Nobles of
Ireland to the English Parli^ment, and assigns the following instanc^ from the
Parliament rolls, viz. On the tenth of October, 8. Edw. II, the King greatly
desiring the pacific state of the land of Ireland, commanded Richard de Burg,
Earl of Ulster, and other Nobles of the land aforesaid, to be at the
Parliament, which he had caused to be summoned to meet at Westminster, at the
Octaves of St. ^illary next, to treat there with the Nobles of his kingdom
concerning the state of that land. Upon this passage of law history, which
speaks a language vastly dissonant from that in which our frequent petitions
for redress of grievances have been rejected, the great oracle of the law
observes that it is an excellent example to be followed whenever any act of
Parliament shall be made in England concerning Ireland. An example which, as
appears from the same book, (...). III in which nine (...) with the laws of
(...) that no act of Parliament can be constitutional that affects a dominion
distant from Great Britain, though dependent on its Crown; if Americans are
entitled to the benefit of the English common law, and if by that law every tax
must be freely given by the people on whom it is imposed, how can Americans be
constitutional^y taxed by others? In vain do our modern politicians assert that
the powers of taxation With this doctrine agrees the memorable speech on the
subject, delivered in the House of Lords by Lord Camden, one of the greatest
lights and ornaments of the age. -- See Appendix, No. 2.
and the powers of legislation are inseparable. For if the authorities I have
adduced are of any weight, it would seem that neither of those powers can in
strict law be exercised over any people who are not actually represented.
Besides, the assertion is a plain petetio principii. It takes for granted the
very point in dispute, as far as concerns America. In Britain the same
identical people are the subjects both of legislation and taxation, and are
actually represented in the exercise of both powers. In that country, this
circumstance renders the two powers inseparable; but will it follow that they
are so considered in the abstract* and under all circumstances? Does not the
assertion prove too much for our adversaries? If the above authorities are law,
it excludes Great Britain both from legislative and taxative authority over
America, and works the very mischief which our enemies, with unspiring calumny,
charge upon us. The truth is* that by the ancient constitution of England, the
assent of the subject was necessary, in the formation of every law, whether for
the police, the distribution of justice, or the support of government. Since
the annexation of Ireland and the colonies to the imperial crown of the realm,
a new combination of circumstances has arisen, which makes a relaxation of the
rigid rule of law absolutely necessary, yet as little as may be, and with a due
attention to the ancient rights of Englishmen. The empire is no longer one
integral, but consists of many distinct parts, having their respective
different, and sometimes jarring, interests. Hence arises the necessity of
binding the empire together by one superintending great council. But the
authority of this council over all the parts of the empire, aggregately
considered, can only be exercised in cases of extreme necessity, and to prevent
a disunion in the regulation of our clashing interests in commerce, * and in
controlling the introduction of contrariety in our general system or law; it is
only necessary, and can therefore be constitutionally exercised only in those
cases. To this every wise American will most cheerfully submit Every further,
and of course unnecessary extent of it, I hope as it is our duty, it will ever
be our principle, by all just and prudent measures to oppose.

The act in question* after reciting the impossibility of carrying on commerce
safely, and collecting his Majesty's duties at Boston, absolutely shuts up the
port against all imports but the necessaries of life and the Kings stores, and
against all exports whatsoever; transfers the seat of commerce and the customs,
to Salem, an inferior town of the colony; and inforces its own execution, with
the most severe penalties and forfeitures. Nay to cut off their most distant
prospect, of any commercial intercourse with the rest of the world, it is
rendered highly penal, for any ships to be found at anchor in, or hovering
within a league of Boston bay. And any of the King's sea officers, and those of
his customs, are entrusted with the most extraordinary power of compelling such
ships, even by force, to such stations as the officer shall assign; and a six
hours delay in complying with the arbitrary mandate of the petty tyrant,
subjects to a forfeiture of vessel and cargo. There is indeed, in a proviso,
the seeming traces of sympathy, which are totally obliterated in an instant,
for while it admits their fellow subjects to supply them coastwise with fuel
and victual^, merely for the necessary use of the inhabitants of that unhappy
town, it clogs the manner of supply with such expenses, delays, and
difficulties, as were it the act of enemies, would indicate a resolution to
starve the Bostonians into a compliance. It requires every vessel thus
employed, to repair first to Marblehead, and there to be furnished with a
cocket and a let-pass, after search by the custom house officers, who of course
must be the absolute judges of what is necessary for the use and sustenance of
his Majesty's subjects of Boston. But this is not all, she must proceed to that
town under the command and control of one of those locusts, attended with his
life guard. Nay what was perhaps never heard of before in any country, from
which justice was not totally banished, those very locusts are in the act,
supposed to be the adversaries of the delinquents, as they were doubtless some
of their accusers. For by another clause in the act, his Majesty is inhibited
from opening the port, until it shall be certified to him in Council, by the
Governor or the Lieutenant Governor of the province, that the inhabitants of
the town, have among other reparations made reasonable satisfaction to the
officers of his Majesty's revenue, who suffered by the rio^ and insurrections
aforesaid. Was there ever an instance like this, (...) the annals of English
history? The The custom house officer empowered to starve the free born
subjects of Britain, into a recompense for supposed injuries done to himself!
Is this consistent with a known maxim in law, no man shall be a judge in his
own cause? Nemo potest esse judex in propria sua causa.
Besides this, a dependant Governor, armed with ministerial vengeance, is to
measure out the quantum of that recompense; and the King in Privy Council, at
last is made the absolute disposer of the fortunes of his subjects! How does
this act speak the language of magna charta, that boasted palladium of English
liberty? Nulli negabimus justitiam vel rectum, nec super ^um ibimus nec
curremus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel legem terrae.

Mag. Cart. Cap.
We will deny justice to no man, nor will we proceed against him but by the
lawful judgment of his peers, or the law of the land. The very same proviso,
with the like undistinguishing spirit with which the first enacting clause was
dictated, excludes all his Majesty's confessedly unoffending subjects from the
trade of Boston, subjects their ships and vessels, lying at anchor in the port,
as well as those hovering or riding at anchor, in or within a mile of the bay,
to the same hardships with the inhabitants of the t^wn, in the articles of fuel
and sustenance, and allows the former only fourteen days for their departure,
without the least saving to either, in case of want of repairs, desertion of
seamen, or other unavoidable casualties. An omission, which at least evinces
the precipitation with which the act was passed. The ministry indeed seem to
have been so who^ly intent on a complete blockade of the town of Boston, that
after the important period of the first of June, the unfinished voyage of every
trading ship* belonging to any part of his Majesty's realm or dominions, must
become a dead loss to the honest adventurer. In other words not only the
inhabitants of the town of Boston must be ruined, but every other subject who
lawfully rep^ired thither for traffic, before that day, and whose business
unhappily detained him there till its expiration, must be involved in the
calamity. They never probably had the leaft eye to the means of redress in such
instances, as well as in those numerous others, in which this fatal embargo may
compel the Bostonians through inability, or induce them in just retaliation, to
stop payment of the large sums which they owe to the merchants in Great
Britain. But certainly they did not extend their views to the other offending
colonies, who may soon expect to feel as great a weight of their resentment as
Boston sustains, no^ to ^ll the colonies in general, who either by compu^^ion
or voluntary engagement in the common cause, will without all peradventure,
from the same motives, either be compelled or induced to put an absolute stop
to the commercial intercourse* between them and Great Britain. In this state of
things, should they see the trade of the mother country laid prostrate, her
merchants and manufacturers made bankrupts, and their now oppressed poor,
starving for want of employ; should they hear the voice of the whole nation
raised against them as the voice of one man, and devoting them to i^evitable
destruction, they will then see, in reality, what my Lord Camden told them,
"that the boston bill will be productive of a train of evils, and that they
will certainly have cause to repent it." -- The seizures are directed by the
act to be made by the usual sea officers, and those of his Majesty's customs;
by implication to be prosecuted for in the unconstitutional admiralty courts,
and condemned on the evidence of interested witnesses, privately examined,
according to the usage of those courts, and without that security which a trial
by jury gives the subject; and the very custom house officers, who by the act
are supposed to have been injured by the Bostonians, are entitled to be
partakers of the spoil. How wantonly will seizures, under such circumstances,
be made, when those hirelings of administration, already exasperated by
supposed insults from the inhabitants, and prompted by a prospect both of gain
and revenge, see very little danger of miscarriage from an unequal bench, and
while the terror of treble costs is held up against the victims of their
resentment and avarice! But mark the conclusion of this singular and
unparalleled prohibition. By another clause it makes "void every charter party,
bill of lading, and other contract relating to voyages to and from Boston,
which have been entered into, and that shall be entered into, as long as the
act remains in force. It is easy to conceive that many hundreds of voyages may
thus be concerted in the various parts of his majesty's dominions, without the
possibility of knowing the existence of the act. In consequence of this clause,
therefore, how numerous and inevitable will the dissolutions of such contracts
be, and how ruinous to the honest unoffending sufferers? Should not the
incensed ministry, in the height of their rage against the Bostonians, have
provided against the manifestly numerous evils, re^u^^ing (...) the mother
country, and the other colonies, as well as foreigners, which this act carries
in its train? But beyond all this, the act in question is evidently (...) ex
post facto law, it respects all unexecuted contracts, made before the time in
which it was past, as is evident from the words* made or entered into, or which
shall be made or entered into. By which means the King's subjects, as well as
foreigners, will be punished for the breach of an act, committed before the act
for forbidding it existed.

These, my friends, are some of the evils under which our unhappy fellow
subjects in the Massachusetts Bay now labor; evils which, as a similar cause
usually in politics as in nature* produces similar effects, you must expect
soon to sustain with the Pennsylvanians in your turn. You are, doubtless, with
a sympathetic anxiety, desirous to know when, and by what means the suffering
Bostonians are to be eased of their present burden* I answer (if we may judge
from the act) never, till they submit to a worse, I mean an abject compliance
with the measures of an arbitrary Ministry; and of what nature this compliance
must be, the act plainly points out. It declares, that "whenever it shall be
made appear to his Majesty, in Privy Council, that peace and obedience to the
laws shall be so far restored in the said town of Boston, that the trade of
Great Britain may safely be carried on there, and his Majesty's customs duly
collected, and his Majesty in Council shall adjudge the same to be true, his
Majesty shall and may set limits to the port of Boston, and assign, within the
same, so many open places, quays, and wharfs, for the landing and lading goods
as he shall think proper," with severe penalties for landing and lading goods
at any other places. But the act expressly inhibits his Majesty from thus far
opening the port "until it shall sufficiently appear to him that full
satisfaction has been made by or on behalf of the inhabitants of the said town
of Boston" to the East India Company "for the destruction of their goods;" and
until it shall be certified to his Majesty, in Council, by the Governor or
Lieutenant Governor of said province, that reasonable satisfaction has been
made to the officers of his Majesty's revenue, and others who suffered by the
riots and insurrections above mentioned* in the months of November and December
1773, and the month of January 1774. Before the passing of this act, the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, by title derived under the charter of the
colony, were in the full possession and enjoyment of their right to the whole
bay and harbor of Boston, and the lands adjoining and contiguous thereto, to
be used by them as their own property, in such a manner as the law of the land,
before the passing of this act, permitted. In that state of things they were
not limited to any wharfs or quays for landing and shipping their goods; but
such places were used for that purpose, as superior convenience pointed out. By
this means many of the inhabitants of the town were induced, at a great
expense, to make proper improvements for the accommodation of trade, in which
probably the estates of many now chiefly consi^t. To these the intended
blockade of the port must be greatly injurious, and their property put in the
mercy and discretion of the Crown in perpetui^y; and the act being perpetual,
unless his Majesty shall think proper to exercise his known grace and clemency
in fully opening the port, as it now is, many of ^^s good subjects will
probably be ruined. With respect to such persons, therefore, the punishment
infl^cted on them* in a degree, a forfeiture of their estates, the restoration
of which will depend on the good pleasure of the Crown: a severe punishment;
which, considering how indiscriminately it is inflicted* may fall principally
on the innocent -- ^gain, it is evident from the act, that in the sense of
Parliament, the interruption of the trade of Great Britain to Boston, and of
the receipt of his Majesty's customs in that port* refers to no other matters
than the destruction of the East India Company's tea, and the loss of those
duties* to the Crown, with which it was charged. It therefore follows, that in
the intention of Parliament, the port is to continue shut until the inhabitants
fully and explicitly submit to the importation of dutied tea, and other imposts
from time to time, thus circumstanced or in other words, recognize the right of
the British Parliament to tax them. Should this expedient succeed, it is
evident that the submission required, w^ll not be confined to Boston only, New
York and Pennsylvania have already done acts which must of course draw from the
British Parliament an equal degree of resentment. ^. Should the other colonies
decline so explicit an opposition to the principle of parliamentary taxations
on the colonies, they must of course submit to the exercise of that authority;
since, whatever may be urged concerning the possibility of evading those laws,
by a virtuous resolution, against consuming the commodity thus charged, the
articles may be so varied and increased in their number, as to drive them at
length to the necessity of opposing their importation, or quietly submitting to
parliamentary taxations. It is, however, evident, that the Ministry are bent on
the establ^shment of an uncontrolable authority in Parliament over the property
of Americans; and should our virtue rise to such a pitch of self-denial as
totally to banish the consumption of all articles usually imported from Europe,
a poll, or a land tax, or a tax upon our personal property, or our callings and
occupations, will, if they po^^ess a discretionary power of taxing us,
effectually reach (...)* But the act not only respects the future conduct^ of
the Americans; it expressly retrospects to the past transactions of the
Bostonians, and by a parity of reason will be the rule of parliamentary conduct
toward New York and Pennsylvania. It exacts, in order to the opening of the
port of Boston, in the qualified manner* I have already pointed out, that it
shall sufficiently appear to his Majesty, that full satisfaction has been made
to the East India Company for the loss of their tea; and that it shall be
certified to his Majesty in Privy Co^^cil, by the Governor, that reasonable
satisfaction has been made to the custom-house officers, and others who have
suffered by the transactions of 1773 and 1774. It having been clearly shown
that the peace and good order of the town of Boston were, in the estimation of
the Parliament, broke by the destruction of the East India Company's tea, it
follows, as I have before hinted, that such peace and good order cannot be
restored till tea, and other dutied articles, are suffered to be imported, and
the duties thereon paid, without interruption or opposition. And it being
evid^^t that the port of Boston cannot be opened till it is made appear to his
Majesty that the trade of Great Britain may be safely carried on the^^* and his
Majesty's customs d^ly co^lected* it follows, that his Majesty can never be
^urnished with that evidence, which, consistent wi^h the term^ of the act, will
enable him to exercise his benevolence to the Bostonians, -- such evidence
being impossible but in a course of trade, which can never be had while the
port is shut up against every thing but necessary fuel and victual.

But even should his Majesty be supposed to have a discretionary power,
independent of any instance in a course of trade, to judge that peace and good
order, and an obedience to the laws, are so far restored as that the trade of
Great Britain may safely be carried on there, and his Majesty's customs be duly
co^lected; yet, does not the act of Parliament totally subject the liberty of
trade, and in that case, and its consequences, the property of all his
Majesty's subjects entirely to his mercy and discretion? And does not this so
far forth amount to an actual forfeiture, declared by act of Parliament? If
such punishment was really due to the Bostonians indiscriminately, for the
destruction of private property, and the consequential loss of certain duties
to his Majesty, in one instance, why was is not declared, by authority of
Parliament, in so many words, that their liberty of trade, and their property,
were and should be forfeited into the hands of the Crown? Had it been so
declared (though the Bostonians might then, as they now may, resort to the
grace of their sovereign) yet every freeman on this continent would, in that
case, doubtless, have taken the alarm, and been fired with indignation. The
virtue, the honor, and the clemency of our present most gracious sovereign,
are indeed greatly to be confided in; but none who have a proper sense of
liberty would think of parting with that security which the law and the
constitution give them, in exchange for the grace and favor of the Crown.

But what is still more astonishing, while the act thus far divested the
Bostonians of their rights, it is not left even in the power of the crown to
restore them at discretion* Before his Majesty can exercise his grace on the
subject, the Governor's certificate of recompense must be obtained. He must
certify, that reasonable satisfaction has been made to the officers of h^s
Majesty's custom^ and others* or his Majesty cannot open the port This check*
were not his Majesty's public and private character well known* might be
mistaken (...) ar^^e a d^^fidence which would do him as much injustice as
dishonor: and what mo^i^e could induce the inte^tion of this check in the act,
is difficult to concei^e.

But to what a hopeless state is liberty and property reduced, when in re^pect
to thousands of the King's subjects, those valuable enjoyments are put into the
power of one of their fe^l^w subjects? In the power of a gentleman ^ent from
abroad, and who without impeachment of his wisdom, or his ^^odness of heart,
must naturally be in^luenced by the prejudices of ad^inistration. He is not
only to assess, without the assurance of a jury, the damage which each sufferer
has sustained, he is also to ascertain their persons and their number. Beside
the custom house officers, the act speaks of other sufferers* without
identifying them* either by names or offices. Who they are, must therefore be
left to the Governor's discretion. The mode of proceeding, to ascertain the
sufferers and their losses, i^ left entirely to him. He may form his judgment
it he pleases, upon the oaths of the complainants, or of other interested or ex
part witnesses, and without giving an hearing to the town of Boston, or any of
its inhabitants. By virtue of the word others, he may grant to his Majesty
consequential damages, for the destruction of the tea in respect of the duties
that would have been paid had it been landed, to the confignatories an
equivalent for the commissions they would have earned on the sale of the tea,
to the owners of the tea ships a demurrage, to all others who may be otherwise
affected by the non completion of their voyages, to a recompense, and to his
Majesty a reimbursement of the extraordinary expenses of equipping a military
force, and sending it to Boston to enforce the execution of the act in
question. Such a depositum of power in one person, so absolute in its nature,
and so capable of mistake or abuse in its application, was never before made in
any country where the name of liberty was was ever heard. But to all this the
Bostonians, and most probably New York and Philadelphia, must submit; or trade,
and with it property, must for ever be banished from their shores. Moreover how
essentially must the merchant and manufacturer of Great Britain feel the
effects of this act? -- If our sea port towns are to be ruined, what becomes of
our creditors on the other side of the water? They must infallibly lose the
immense sum^ we owe them. If our ports are to be shut, the trade of the mother
country must sink, and beggary and distress overspread the land.

Thus then it appears, how severe and indiscriminate the punishment, ^how
uncertain the relief is, which the act provides; and how highly improbable it
is, that a restitution to the Bostonians of their former enjoyments will ever
be total, even if they should formally and ^^p^icitly recognize the authority
of Parliament to ^ax America.

It behooves us therefore, in behalf of ourselves and our posterity, to look to
another quarter for that perfect security to which Englishmen are entitled. We
have resources to which we may fly without the risk of being charged, in the
worst of times, with constructive treason or rebellion; resources that have
already been tried with success, and if employed again with due perseverance,
must prove effectual.

We have an extensive and fertile country, so far cultivated and not
overstocked with inhabitants, as abundantly to yield us all the necessaries,
and most of the comforts of life. Not such is the condition of our fellow
subjects in Britain. That country is over stocked. And notwithstanding their
extensive commerce and numerous manufactories, thousands of its inhabitants are
scarcely above perishing through want. The colonies annually consume near a third
part of their manufactures; and of their imports to a very great amount. A
total stop to such consumption must in a few months fill that island with
bankrupts and beggars, and cover its face with the utmost distress and
desolation. On our parts the commodities already imported among us, those which
we may manufacture ourselves, and the convenience which our extensive coast and
numerous inlets afford us, for risking the importation of commodities from
foreign countries, together with the cheapness of provisions, will enable us to
bear for a long time, a total suspension of commerce with Great Britain. This
expedient will divert the storm from our land, and repel it to the quarter from
whence it aro^e. There, distress will sharpen resentment, (...) the mouths of
all ranks with the loudest clamours against taxing America. Necessity from
every quarter will press with its usual irresistible force; the controversy
will no longer be with America; but between the ministry and the King's
subjects in Great Britain, headed by the respectable and truly virtuous party
in the opposition. The contest will be so unequal, that the ministry must soon
give way; and a total repeal of the revenue act must take place before the end
of the next session of Parliament. By these means the mother country will be
brought back to the constitutional and just standard of her supremacy,
consisting in her power to regulate the trade of the empire, in all its various
discordant parts, and superintend the whole political fabric; to prevent those
changes which may work a disunion, and of course a dissolution of the grand
machine. In this seat of supremacy, every wise, every virtuous American wishes
to see her so securely placed, that she may constitutionally sway her scepter
over her American children to the end of the world.

It is true that those means which are necessary for our relief, will be
peculiarly mischievous to our brethren in Great Britain. But the mischief will
not lie at our doors. We shall doubtless heartily lament their distresses; but
it is not our duty to prevent them by resigning our liberties. They have it in
their power to command redress. Let them in one body apply to the crown, not
through a minister, but in person, and with respectful decency. Let them assault
the royal and clement ear, with their cries and complaints -- He will doubtless
interpose for their and our relief; let the whole body of British electors
instruct their representatives, against the evils under which the whole empire
groans; let them behold and lament the dreadful consequences of bribery, and
let them resolve for the future, to be incorruptably virtuous.

Arts, my dear friends, the most malignant and poisonous to your liberties will
doubtless be practiced by dirty hirelings and base dependants on this side of
the water, to divert you from the glorious resolution, I have mentioned. To the
soft persuasions of such, turn a deaf ear, charm they ever so sweetly. If you
do not, they will allure you, and through your ears (can you bear the piercing
thought?) your dear, your unoffending posterity, in all ages to come, into the
most abject and disgraceful slavery.

Why would you be persuaded to leave a duty to be performed by your
descendants, which you owe to yourselves, to them, to the world? Why refuse to
extend the sacred barrier of virtuous liberty, that the nations of the earth
may admire it, and admiring catch the noble ardor of freemen? Why leave to your
children to do what you can better atchieve for yourselves and for them? You
are all anxious to make by the sweat of your brows, comfortable inheritances
for them; but can you leave them a better, a more inestimable inheritance on
this side of eternity, than that liberty to which the all wise, the all
bountiful author of universal nature has entitled them, by making them rational
creatures? Consider then if you devolve the arduous task on them, you
discourage them by your example. You establish against them a powerful
precedent, by your abject cession of your liberty. Born in less happy times,
totally ignorant of the experimental sweets of virtuous freedom, they will not
be so strongly impressed by those powerful motives to purchase it, as you are
to secure it. You know its true value; they will be ignorant of it. Besides,
freemen are naturally active, slaves as naturally inactive. In this view, those
who are to fill your places, will not enjoy that vigor which you possess, to
shake off the chains of slavery.

Consider again, that as far as the n^cessity of a commercial intercourse with
Great Britain can be urged to deter you, it will plead as forcibly with your
successors. This country is too extensive ever to have a redundancy of
inhabitants. And it is such redundancy alone, that can in any country give a
successful spring to arts and manufactories. ^ill up any parts of it to which
your fancy can direct you; their overflowing^ will not be employed in arts and
manufactures, while other parts are vacant and prepared for receiving
inhabitants The example of our sister colonies in New England is a striking
proof of the truth of this observation. Crowded for want of room, their
inhabitants are ^aily colonizing other tracts of the country.

Should you be flattered that the superior number of your future inhabitants,
will enable you to meet your fellow subjects in the field of battle; can you be
persuaded to (...) the cause of liberty on so dangerous an issue? Why leave it
to your sons to employ hostil^ force, to risk the dissolution of the British
empire, and to introduce among you an internal competition for superiority, and
perhaps slavery in the (...), when a virtuous self denial at present, will in a
short time place your liberties upon a basis on which they should always stand,
and under the protection of a due supremacy in the mother country?

Moreover you should do every thing in your power to encourage your brethren in
New England. The Bostonians are already, by being foremost in the struggle,
secluded from all commerce; the others stand ready to shut up their ports, and
with impatient eyes they all look to the westward for proper countenance and
support. The cause is a common cause; why should we not be seen active in it?
Can you expect that they alone should do the whole work? Why will you put even
their singular virtue to an unnecessary trial? I am confident you will not, and
I flatter myself that our brethren in the other counties will cheerfully
cooperate, with you.

You, my fellow citizens, are inhabitants of the metropolis of this colony; you
have appointed a committee of fifty one persons, with an indeterminate power to
correspond with the neighboring colonies: As far as you have enabled them, and
prudence would permit, they have executed their trust -- They have, among other
things, informed our brethren the Bostonians, that the late alarming measures,
relative to that ancient and respectable town, which has so long been the seat
of freedom, fill our inhabitants with inexpressible concern -- That they
consider their cause as the common cause; and that to the redress of their
injuries it is equally our duty and our interest to contribute; that we think
them justly entitled to the thanks of their sister colonies, for asking their
advice, in a case of such extensive consequence; that as the cause is general,
and concerns the whole continent, they conclude that a congress of deputies,
from the colonies in general, is of the ^tmost moment; that it ought to be
assembled without delay, and some unanimous resolutions formed, in this fatal
emergency, not only respecting the deplorable circumstances of Boston, but for
the security of our common rights; -- they entreat our friends of that town to
believe that we shall continue to act with firm and becoming regard to American
freedom, and to cooperate with our sister colonies, in every measure which
shall be thought salutary and conducive to the public good, and conclude with
an assurance that we sincerely condole with them in their unexampled distress,
and with a request of their speedy opinion of the proposed congress, that if it
should meet with their approbation, we may exert our utmost endeavors to carry
it into execution. The committee, while their duty remained undefined, could
not possibly go farther. It would be leaving too great a hardship on them, to
exact their continuance of so necessary a correspondence, without a public and
express declaration of our sentiments, on a subject of such infinite
importance. This will serve not only as a guide to our committee, who seem
fully disposed to speak the language of the inhabitants, but will afford our
sister colonies the most conclusive evidence of our ardour and sincerity in the
common cause. In this (...), I would (...) humbly to propose to the
consideration of you, my fellow citizens, a set of resolves, calculated. I
hope, to answer the important purpose, and cheerfully submit them for your
correction or rejection. But it is my most earnest request, that as you value
your liberty, which is the highest blessing on this side the grave, as you are
anxious to transmit that blessing to latest posterity* as you feel for the
pungent distresses of the much injured Bostonians, who are called to suffer in
the common cause, trials hitherto unheard of in a free state; you may at some
public meeting, to be convened without delay, publish to the world, your
unanimous sentiments, on the momentous occasion, in such a set of resolves, as
your zeal, tempered with prudence, will naturally dictate. Nor do I doubt that
you, our brethren in the other counties, to whom as well as to my fellow
citizens, I earnestly and with great deference recommend the measure, will
speedily follow their bright example.

(...) before I lay before you the resolves I propose^ (...) be proper to urge^
as a consideration, to show the propriety of subjecting our exports to some
proper restraints. With respect to those to Great Britain, besides the
remittance of money, they usually consist in lumber, iron, wheat, flower, pot
and pearl ashes* and other articles, which are absolutely necessary to her. The
article of tobacco, particularly a staple of Virginia and Maryland, affords not
only a very considerable revenue to the Crown, but yields great profits to the
British merchants in their trade with foreign nations. Our West India colonies
are wholly indebted to (...) this continent for the materials for transporting
their rum and sugars to the different parts of the British empire. On those
articles depend no inconsiderable part of the trade and revenue of the mother
country, as well as the whole wealth of our brethern the West-Indians. It is
well known that they have near eighty members in Parliament, who, as long
experience demonstrates, are unanimously in the Interest of the Ministry.
While, therefore, unhappy necessity obliges us to distress our mother country
by discontinuing both our exports and imports in relation to her, the same
necessity requires us to suspend our supply of staves, hoops, and heading, and
all kinds of lumber, without which the manufacturers of sugar and rum must
stop, and the whole weight of the West India interest in the House of Commons
by that means be forced into the scale on the side of America, making at the
same time a proper allowance for the shipping of such quantities of those
articles only as will enable us to support our commerce with the foreign
islands. Should it be objected that such an extensive suspension of our
commerce will excite Parliament to deprive us of our foreign trade, or shut up
our port: To this it may be answered, that before such a measure can possibly
take place, the necessities of the mother country will compel our relief.
Besides, for the reasons already assigned, the interdiction of that commerce
will effectually debar us of the profits we derive in a course of trade with
France, Spain, Portugal, and the ports of the Mediterranean in general; all
which ultimately center in our mother country. And as this will increase her
distresses, by the unavoidable impossibility which it will occasion, of paying
the immense load of our British debt already contracted, there is no reason to
fear she will deprive us of our foreign trade, or shut up our port. The
proposed resolves are as follows:

1st. That it is the clear and unquestionable right of his Majesty's subjects
in these colonies to be exempt from all taxes but those imposed on them
respectively, in their respective legislatures, with the consent of their own
representatives.

2dly. That therefore all taxes and duties imposed on the persons, estates,
trade, or occupations of his Majesty's subjects in the colonies, by authority
of Parliament, and for the purpose of raising a revenue, are totally
unconstitutional, and a manifest infringement of the most essential rights of
British subjects.

3dly. That therefore the act of Parliament commonly called the revenue act,
and all other acts of Parliament now in being, whereby the trade of the
colonies is subjected to duties for the purpose aforesaid, are altogether
unconstitutional, and in themselves absolutely null and void.

4thly. That the exercise of authority by the British Parliament, in imposing
taxes and duties on the colonies, for the purpose aforesaid, will render their
representations in Assembly useless and unnecessary in that most essential
department.

5thly. That the act of Parliament lately passed for shutting up the port of
Boston, or any other means or device under color or pretext of law, to compel
them, or any other of his Majesty's American subjects, to submit to
parliamentary taxations, are subversive of their just and constitutional
liberty.

6thly. Resolved, that we do fully approve of the measures hitherto pursued by
our brethren the Bostonians, for relieving themselves from the aforesaid
burdens, and that they are now suffering in the common cause of British
America.

7thly. That therefore it is the indispensible duty of every colony on this
continent to unite, and effectually exert themselves for the repeal of the said
act for shutting up the port of Boston, and every other act of Parliament
whereby they are taxed for raising a revenue.

8thly. That it is the opinion of this city, that a joint resolution of the
principal colonies on thi^ continent, totally to cease from all exports to, and
imports from Great Britain, and all supplies of lumber to the sugar colonies in
America, with an exception only of such as will be necessary to bring home the
returns of North American cargoes, from the foreign sugar colonies, will be the
only effectual means to secure a repeal of all the said acts of Parliament.

9thly. That therefore the inhabitants of this city, hereby declare to the
world, their readiness cheerfully to enter into a general association for that
purpose.

10thly. That to this end a general congress of deputies be convened, from the
colonies on this continent, without delay, to resolve on the most effectual
means for defending their common rights and liberties, at this most critical
and alarming crisis.

And lastly, that the committee of correspondence for this city, do immediately
communicate these resolves to our brethren in the other colonies, and do their
utmost endeavors to accelerate the meeting of such congress.

May the infinitely wise and beneficent sovereign of the universe, in this most
critical conjuncture, be the gracious director of all our counsels, and the
unerring conductor of all our ways. -- May ^e plenteously transfuse a spirit of
wisdom, fortitude, and unanimity throughout this wide extended continent -- May
his good providence ever be the guardian of our public liberties, and restore
union to all parts of the British empire. May our most gracious sovereign long,
happily, and gloriously reign over the mother country and her numerous
colonies, and may their united scep^re be (...) by a Prince of the illustrious
house of Hanove^ (...) long as sun, and moon, and earth, and star^ (...) endure.

These are the sincere, the fervent, the incessant prayers of

A CITIZEN OF NEW YORK.
May 30 th, 1774. There is reason to believe, that resolutions similar to the
above, or of a like tendency, have already, or will soon be passed by the
general body of the people in every British colony in America: For copies of
the resolves of many towns in New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island,
the General Assemblies of Connecticut and Virginia, and of several towns and
counties in Maryland, have been published; and measures to the same end, are
taking in Pennsylvania and New Iersey.

June 11 th, 1774.


APPENDIX, No. I. Anno Decimo Quarto GEORGII III. Regis.
An ACT To discontinue, in such manner, and for such time as are therein
mentioned, the landing and discharging, lading or shipping, of goods, wares,
and merchandise, at the town, and within the harbor of Boston, in the province
of Massachusetts Bay, in North America.
WHEREAS dangerous commotions and insurrections have been fomented and raised
in the town of Boston in the province of Massachusetts Bay, in New-Eng^and, by
diverse ill-aff^cted persons, to the subversion of his Majesty's government, and
to the utter destruction of the public peace, and good order of the said town;
in which commotions and insurrections certain valuable cargoes of teas, being
the property of the Last India company, and on board certain vessels lying
within the bay or harbor of Boston were seized and destroyed: And whereas, in
the present condition of the said town and harbor the commerce of his
Majesty's subjects cannot be safely carried on there, nor the customs payable
to his Majesty du^^ collected, and it is therefore expedient that the officers
of his Majesty's customs should be forthwith removed from the said town: May it
please your Majesty that it may be enacted; and be it enacted by the King's
most exce^lent Majesty by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
spiritual and ^emporal* and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same. That from and after the first day of June, 1774,
it shall not be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever to lade or put, or
cause or procure to be laden or put often from any quay* wharf* or other place,
within the said town of Boston* or in or upon any part of the shore of the Bay,
commonly called The Ha^bour of Boston* between a certain headland or point
cal^ed Nahant Point, on the eastern side of the entrance into the said bay* and
a certain other headland or point called Alderton Poi^t, on the western side of
the entrance into the said bay, or in or upon any island, creek, landing-place,
bank, or other place, within the said bay or headlands, into any ship, vessel,
lighter boat, or bottom* any goods, wa^^s, or merchandise whatsoever, to be
transported or carried into any other country province or place whatsover, or
into any other p^^t of the said province of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England; or to take up discharge, or lay on la^d, or cause or procure to be
taken up, discharged or laid on land, within the said town or in or upon any of
the places aforesaid, out of any boat, lighter, ship, vessel, or bottom, any
goods, wares, or merchandise whatsoever* to be brought from any other country,
province, or place, or any other part of the said province of the Massachusetts
Bay, in New England, upon p^in of the forfeiture of the said goods, wares, and
merchandise, and of the said boat, lighter, ship, vessel, or other bottom i^^o
which the same shall be put, or ^ut of which the same shall be taken, and of
the guns, ammunition, tackle, furniture and sto^es in or belonging to the same:
And if any such ^ood, wa^es, or merchandise, shall, within the said town, or in
any the places aforesaid, be laden or taken in from the shore into any barge,
hoy, lighter, wherry, or boat, to be carried on board any ship or vessel
outward bound to any other country or province, or other part of the said
province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, or be laden or taken into
such barge, hoy, lighter, wherry, or boat, from or out of any ship or vessel
coming in and arriving from any other country or province, or other part of the
said province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, such barge, hoy,
lighter, wherry, or boat, shall be forfeited and lost.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any wharfinger,
or keeper of any wharf, crane or quay, or their servants, or any of them, shall
take up or land, or knowingly suffer to to be taken up or landed, or shall ship
off, or suffer to be waterborne, at or from any of the said wharfs, cranes or
quays, any such goods, wares or merchandise; in every such case, all and every
such wharfinger, and keeper of such wharf, crane or quay, and every person
whatever who shall be assisting, or otherwise concerned in the shipping or in
the loading or putting on board any boat or other vessel, for that purpose, or
in the unshipping such goods, wares and merchandise, or to whose hands the same
shall knowingly come after the loading, shipping, or unshipping thereof, shall
forfeit and lose treble the value thereof, to be computed at the highest price
which such sort of goods, wares and merchandise, shall bea^ at the place where
such offense shall be committed, at the time when the same shall be so
committed, together with the vessels and boats, and all the horses, cattle, and
carriages whatsoever, made use of in the shipping, unshipping, landing,
removing, carriage, or conveyance of any of the aforesaid goods, wares and
merchandise.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any ship or
vessel shall be moored or lie at anchor, or be seen hovering within the said
(...), described and bounded as aforesaid, or within one league from the said
bay so described, or the sa^d headlands, or any of the islands lying between o^
within the same, it shall and may be lawful for any Admiral, chief commander*
or commissioned office^ of his Majesty's fleet or ships of war, or for any
officer of his Majesty's customs, to compel such ship or vessel to depart to
some other port or harbor, or to such station as the said officer shall
appoint, and to use such force for that purpose as shall be found necessary:
And if such ship or vessel shall not d^part accordingly, within six hours after
notice for that purpose given by such person as afores^id, such ship or vessel,
together with all the goods laden on board thereon, and all the guns,
ammunition, tackle, and furniture, shall be fo^^eited and lost, whether bulk
shall have been broken or not.

Provided always, that nothing in this act contained shall extend, or be
construed to extend, to any military or other stores for his Majesty's use, or
to the ships or vessels whereon the same shall be laden which shall be
commissioned by, and in the immediate pay of, his Majesty, his heirs or
successors; nor to any fuel or victual brought coastwise from any part of the
continent of America, for the necessary use and sustenance of the inhabitants
of the said town of Boston, provided the vessels wherein the same are to be
carried shall be duly furnished with a cocket and let-pass, after having been
duly searched by the proper officers of his Majesty's customs at Marblehead, in
the port of Salem, in the said province of Massachusetts Bay; and that some
officer of his Majesty's customs be also put on board the said vessel, who is
hereby authorized to go on board, and proceed with the said vessel, together
with a sufficient number of persons, properly armed, for his defense, to the
said town or harbor of Boston; nor to any ships or vessels which may happen to
be within the said harbor of Boston on or before the first day of June, 1774,
and may have either laden or taken on board, or be there with intent to load or
take on board, or to land or discharge any goods, wares, and merchandise,
provided the said ships and vessels do depart the said harbor within 14 days
after the said first day of June, 1774.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all seizures,
penalties and forfeitures, indicted by this act* shall be made and prosecuted
by any Admiral, chief commander, or commissioned officer, of his Majesty's
fleet, or ships of war, or by the officers of his Majesty's customs, or some of
them, or by some other person deputed or authorized, by warrant from the Lord
High Treasurer, or the commissioners of his Majesty's treasury for the time
being, and by no other person whatsoever: And if any such officer, or other
person authorized as aforesaid, shall, directly or indirectly, take or receive
any bribe or ^eward* to connive at such lading or unlading, or shall make or
commence any collusive seizure, information, or agreement for that purpose, or
shall do any other act whatsoever, whereby the goods, wares, or merchandise,
prohibited as aforesaid, shall be suffered to pass either inwards or outward
or whereby the forfeitures and penalties inflicted by this act may be evaded,
every such offender shall forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds for every such
offense, and shall become in^apable of any office or employmen^, civil or
military; and every person who shall give, offer, or promise, any such bribe or
reward, or shall contract, agree, or treat with, any person, so authorized as
aforesaid to commit any such offense, shall forfeit the sum of fifty pounds.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the forfeitures and
penalties inflicted by this act shall and may be prosecuted, sued for, and
recovered, and be divided, paid, and applied, in like manner as other penalties
and forfeitures inflicted by any act or acts of Parliament, relating to the
trade or revenues of the British colonies or plantations in America, are
directed to be prosecuted, sued for, or recovered, divided, paid, and applied,
by two several acts of Parliament, the one passed in the fourth year of his
present Majesty, (entitled, An act for granting certain duties in the British
colonies and plantations in America; for continuing, amending, and making
perpetual, an act passed in the sixth year of the reign of his late Majesty
King George the second, entitled, An act for the better securing and
encouraging the trade of his Majesty's sugar colonies in America; for applying
the produce of such duties, and of the duties to arise by virtue of the said
act, toward defraying the expenses of defending, protecting, and securing, the
said colonies and plantations; for explaining an act made in the twenty fifth
year of the reign of King Charles the second, entitled, An act for the
encouragement of the Greenland and Eastland trades, and for the better securing
the plantation trade; and for altering and di^allowing several drawbacks on
exports from this kingdom, and more effectually preventing the clandestine
conveyance of goods to and from the said colonies and plantations, and
improving and securing the trade between the same and Great Britain;) the other
passed in the eight year of his present Majesty's reign. (entitled, An act for
the more easy and effectual recovery of the penalties and forfeitures inflicted
by the acts of Parliament relating to the trade or revenues of the British
colonies and plantations in America.)

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every charter
party, bill of loading* and other contract for consigning, shipping, or
carrying any goods, wares, and m^rchandise whatsoever, to or from the said town
of Boston, or any part of the bay or harbor thereof, described as aforesaid,
which have been made or entered into, or which shall be made or entered into,
so long as this act shall remain in full force, relating to any ship which
shall arrive at the said town or harbor, after the first day of June, 1774,
shall be, and the same are hereby declared to be, utterly void, to all intents
and purposes whatsoever.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that whenever it shall
be made to appear to his Majesty, in his Privy Council, that peace and
obedience to the laws shall be so far restored in the said town of Boston, that
the trade of Great Britain may safely be carried on there, and his Majesty's
customs duly collected, and his Majesty, in his Privy Council, shall adjudge
the same to be true, it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty, by
proclamation, or order of Council, to assign and appoint the extent, bounds,
and limits of the port or harbor of Boston, and of every creek or haven within
the same, or in the islands within the precinct thereof; and also to assign and
appoint such and so many open places, quays, and wharfs, within the said
harbor, creeks, havens, and islands, for the landing, discharging, lading, and
shipping of goods, as his Majesty, his heirs or successors, shall judge
necessary and expedient; and also to appoint such and so many officers of the
customs therein as his Majesty shall think fit; after which it shall be lawful
for any person or persons to lade or put off from, or to discharge or land upon
such whar^s, quays, and places so appointed within the said harbor, and none
other, any goods, wares, and merchandise whatever.

Provided always, that if any goods, wares, or merchandise, shall be laden or
put off from, or discharged or landed upon, any other place than the quays,
wharfs, or places so to be appointed, the same, together with the ships, boats,
and other vessels employed therein, and the horses, or other cattle and
carriages used to convey the same, and the person or persons concerned or
assisting therein, or to whose hands the same shall knowingly come, shall
suffer all the forfeitures and penalties imposed by this or any other act on
the illegal shipping or landing of goods.

Provided also* and it is hereby declared and enacted, that nothing herein
contained shall extend, or be construed, to enable his Majesty to appoint such
port, harbor, creeks, quays, wharfs, places, or officers in the said town of
Boston, or in the said bay or islands, until it shall sufficiently appear to
his Majesty that full satisfaction has been made by or on behalf of the
inhabitants of the said town of Boston to the United Company of Merchants of
England trading to the East In^ies, for the damage sustained by the said
company by the destruction of their goods sent to the said town of Boston, on
board certain ships or vessels as aforesaid; and until it shall be certified to
his Majesty, in Council, by the Governor, or Lieut. Governor of the said
province, that reasonable satisfaction has been made to the officers of his
Majesty's revenue, and others, who suffered by the riots and insurrections
above mentioned, in the months of November and December, in the year one
thousand seven hundred and seventy three, and in the month of January, in the
year one thousand seven hundred and seventy four.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any action or
suit shall be commenced, either in Great Britain or America, against any person
or persons* for any thing done in pursuance of this act of Parliament, the
defendant or defendants, in such action or suit, may plead the general issue,
and give the said act, and the special matter in evidence, at any trial to be
had thereupon, and that the same was done in pursuance and by the authority of
this act: And if it shall appear so to have been done, the jury shall find for
the defendant or defendants* and if the plaintiff shall be nonsuited* or
discontinue his action, after the defendant or defendants shall have appeared*
or if judgment shall be given upon any verdict or demurrer, against the
plaintiff, the defendant or defendants shall recover treble costs, and have the
like remedy for the same, as defendants have in other cases by law.

APPENDIX No. II. LORD CAMDEN's SPEECH, On the declaratory Bill of the
Sovereignty of Great Britain over the Colonies.
WHEN I spoke last on this subject I thought I had delivered my sentiment^ so
fully, and supported them with such reasons, and such authorities, that I
apprehended I should be under no necessity of troub^ing your Lordships again;
but I am now compelled to rise up, and beg your further indulgence. I find that
I have been very ^njuriously treated; have been considered as the b^oacher of
newfangled doctrines, contrary to the laws of this kingdom, and subversive of
the rights of Parliament. My Lords, this is a heavy charge, but more so when
made against one stationed as I am in both capacities, as Peer and Judge, the
defender of the law, and constitution. When I spoke last, I was indeed replied
to, but not answered. In the intermediate time many things have been said. As I
was not present, I must now beg leave to answer such as have come to my
knowledge. As the affair is of the utmost importance, and in its consequences
may involve the fate of kingdoms, I took the strictest review of my arguments;
I re-examined all my authorities; fully determined, if I found myself mistaken,
publicly to own my mistake, and give up my opinion; but my searches have more
and more convinced me that the British Parliament have no right to tax the
Americans. I shall no^ therefore, consider the declaratory bill lying on your
table; for to what purpose, but loss of time, to consider the particulars of
this bill, the ^ery existence of which is illegal, absolutely illegal, contrary
to the fundamental laws of nature, contrary to the fundamental laws of this
constitution? A constitution grounded on the eternal and immutable laws of
nature; a constitution whose foundation and center is liberty, which sends
liberty to every subject that is or may happen to be within any part of its
ample circumference. Nor, my Lords, is the doctrine new, it is as old as the
constitution; it grew up with it; indeed it is its support; taxation and
representation are insepa^ab^y united; God has joined them, no British
Parliament can separate them; to endeavor to do it is to stab our very vitals.
Nor is this the first time this doctrine has been mentioned; seventy years ago,
my Lords, a pamphlet was published, recommending the levying a parliamentary
tax on one of the co^onies; this pamphlet was answered by two others, then much
read; these totally deny the power of taxing the colonies; and why? Because the
colonies had no representatives in Pa^liament to give consent. No answer,
pub^ic or private* was given to these pamphlets; no censure passed upon them;
men were not startled at the doctrine, as either new or illegal, or derogatory
to the rights of Parliament. I do not mention these pamphlets by way of
authority, but to vindicate myself from the imputation of having first br^^ched
this doctrine.

My position is this -- I repeat it -- I will maintain it to my last hour --
taxation and representation are inseparable This position is founded on the
laws of nature; for whatever is a man's own is absolutely his own; no man has
a right to take it from him without his consent either expressed by himself or
representative; whoever attempts to do it, attempts an injury; whoever does it,
commits a robbery; he throws down and destroys the distinction between liberty
and slavery. Taxation and representation are coeval with, and essential to this
constitution. I wish the maxim of Machiavel was followed, that of examining a
constitution, at certain periods, according to its first principles; this would
correct abuses and supply defects. I with the times would bear it, and that
men's minds were cool enough to enter upon such a task, and that the
representative authority of this kingdom was more equally seated. I am sure
some histories of late (...) have done great mischief; to endeavor to fix the
era when the House of Commons began in this kingdom, is a most pernicious and
destructive attempt: to fix it in an Edward's or Henry's reign is owing to the
idle dreams of some whimsical, ill-judging antiquarians. But, my Lords, this is
a point too important to be left to such wrong-headed people. When did the
House of Commons first begin? When, my Lords? It began with that constitution;
there is not a blade of grass, which, when taxed, was not taxed by the consent
of the proprietor.

There is a history written by one Carte, a history that many people now see
through; there is another favorite history, much read and admired. I will not
name the author, your Lordships must know whom I mean, and you must know from
whence he pilfered his notions concerning the first beginning of the House of
Commons. My Lords, I challenge any one to point out the time when any tax was
laid upon any person by parliament, that person being (...) in parliament. The
parliament laid a tax upon the palatinate of Chester, and ordered commissioners
to collect it there, as commissioners were ordered to collect it in other
counties; but the palatinate refused to comply, they addressed the King by
petition, setting forth, that the English parliament had no right to tax them;
that they had a (...) of their own; that they had always taxed themselves; and
therefore desired the King to order his commissioners not to proceed. My Lord,
the King (...) the petition; he did not declare them either seditious or
rebellious, but allowed their plea, and they taxed themselves. Your Lordships
may see both the petition and the King's answer, in the records in the Tower.
The clergy taxed themselves; when the parliament attempted to tax them, they
stoutly refused, said they were not represented there, that they had a
parliament of their own, which represented (...); that they would tax
themselves; they did so. Much stress has been laid upon Wales, before it was
(...) as it now is, as if the King, standing in the place of their former
Princes of that country, raised money by his own authority: But the real fact
is otherwise: for I find that, long before Wales was subdued, the northern
counties of that principality had representatives and a parliament or (...). As
to Ireland, my Lords, before that (...) had a parliament, as it now has, if
your Lordships will examine the old records, you will find, that when a tax was
to be laid on that country, the Irish sent over here representatives; and the
same records will inform your Lordships what wages those representatives
received from their constituents. In short, my Lords, from the whole of our
history, (...) the earliest period, you will find that taxation and
representation were always united; so true are the words of that consummate
reasoner and politician Mr. Lock. I before alluded to his book. I have again
consulted him; and, finding that he writes so applicably to the subject in
hand, and so much in favor of my (...), I beg your Lordships' leave to read a
little of his book. -- "The supreme power cannot take from any man any part of
his property without his own consent:' and B. II. 130-139, particularly 140,
Such are the words of this great man, and which are well worth your Lordships
serious attention. His principles are drawn from the heart of our constitution,
which he thoroughly understood, and will last as long as that shall last; and
to his immortal honor, I know not to what, under Providence, the revolution
and all its happy effects are more owing than to the principles of government
laid down by Mr. Lock. For these reasons, my Lords, I can never give my assent
to any bill for taxing the American colonies, while they remain unrepresented;
for as to the distinction of a virtual representation, it is so absurd as not
to deserve an answer; I therefore pass it over with contempt. The forefathers
of the Americans did not leave their native country, and subject themselves to
every danger and distress, to be reduced to a state of slavery; They did not
give up their rights; they looked for (...), and not for chains, from their
mother country: By her they expected to be defended in the possession of their
property, and not to be deprived of it; for, should the present power (...),
there is nothing which they can call their own; or, to use the words of Mr.
Lock, "what property have they, in that which another may be right (...) when
(...) pleases to himself."

FINIS.

