Mr. SHERWOOD's FAST SERMON, WITH Mr. BALDWIN's APPENDIX.

A SERMON, CONTAINING, Scriptural Instructions to Civil Rulers, and all
Freeborn Subjects.

In which the Principles of sound Policy and good Government are established
and vindicated; and some Doctrines advanced and zealously propagated by
NEW ENGLAND TORIES, are considered and refuted. Delivered on the public FAST,
AUGUST 31, 1774. With an Address to the FREEMEN of the Colony.

By Samuel Sherwood, A. M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in FAIRFIELD.

Also, An APPENDIX, Stating the heavy Grievances the Colonies labor under from
several late Acts of the British Parliament, and showing what we have just
Reason to expect the Consequences of these Measures will be.

By the Rev. EBENEZER BALDWIN, of Danbury.

And the chief Captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom; and
Paul said, but I was born free.

ACTS xxii, 28. Sit Denique Inscriptum in front unius Cujusque Civis quid De
Republica sen^^at.

CICERO. Patria mihi me^ vita multo est Cari^^.

CICERO. New Haven, Printed by T. and S. GREEN.

TO THE Respectable FREEMEN, of the English Colony of Connecticut.
MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN and FRIENDS,
THE ensuing discourse was delivered on a very solemn occasion, before an
auditory apparently serious and devout in their attention; and is now made
public at the desire of some of my public spirited friends. Such as it is, I
cheerfully offer it as my poor mite, into the public treasury; while others are
casting in of their abundance. And I hope and trust that your candor will be
such, amidst all the inaccuracies and imperfections that attend such an hasty
composition, as to accept it for a real token and proof of my undissembled love
and heartfelt concern for my dear country, under the dark and threatening
aspects of divine providence on our most invaluable liberties and privileges.
While I observe with the most sensible grief, and anxious concern, some of my
countrymen, sunk into a state of worse than brutal stupidity and insensibility,
who secretly rejoice in the distressing miseries and calamities brought on our
suffering brethren at Boston; and ardently wish and pray, in the most profane
manner, if I may be allowed the expression, that our charter and birth right
privileges may be taken from us; that we may be ruled by the iron rod of
oppression, and chained down to eternal slavery and bondage. Whose factious and
rebellious leaders improve every opportunity in their power, to impeach a loyal
people; and to send misrepresentations of us to their correspondents that have
access to the British court, to hasten our intended ruin and destruction. I
say, while these clandestine, mischievous operations are carrying on against
us, as black and ^ark ^s the powder treason plot; it revives my soul, and
rejoices my heart to find that the main body of the people, or at least, the
most sensible and judicious part of them, are in some degree, awakened by the
loud thunders in Providence, and have their eyes opened to the danger and ruin
we are threatened with; that they are so far raised above that infam^^s herd of
vile miscreants, as to know that they are men, and have the spirits of men; and
not an inferior species of animals, made to be beasts of burden to a lawless,
corrupt administration. This manly, this heroic, and truly patriotic spirit,
which is gradually kindling up in every free-man's breast, through the
continent, is undoubtedly a token for good; and will, if duly regulated by
Christian principles and rules, ensure success to American liberty and freedom.
No free state was ever yet enslaved and brought into bondage, where the people
were incessantly vigilant and watchful; and instantly took the alarm at the
first addition made to the power exercised over them. -- They are those only of
the tribes of Issachar, who keep in profound sleep; and like strong and stupid
asses, couch down between heavy burdens; that insensibly sink into abject
slavery and bondage. It is a duty incumbent upon us at all times, to keep a
watchful attention to our interests; (especially in seasons of peril and
danger,) to watch and pray that we fall not.

I do not mean to encourage evil jealousies and groundless suspicions of our
civil rulers, the guardians of our liberties; nor to countenance seditious
tumults in the state, so destructive to our civil happiness and peace. I am a
firm friend to good order and regularity; that all ranks of men move in strait
lines, and within their own proper spheres: That authority and government be
supported and maintained so as to promote the good of society, the end for
which it was instituted; perfectly consistent with which, a people may keep a
watchful eye over their liberties, and cautiously guard against oppression and
tyranny, which I detest and abhor, and solemnly abjure.

But you, Gentlemen Freemen, have been so well indoctrinated in the principles
of loyalty and good policy, have been so constantly taught from your infancy,
to fear God, and honor the King, that it is needless to add any particular
instructions on this head. However, as my heart, at this threatening period, is
so full of apprehension of danger, you will not, I trust, take it as any
reflection on your understanding and integrity as a body, should I drop the
hint, that there may possibly be some here and there in disguise, against whose
plausible pretenses, and artful insinuations, it might be well for you to
guard. Men, (says the truly ingenious and patriotic Farmer, in Pennsylvania,)
who either hold or expect to hold certain advantages by setting examples of
servility to their countrymen; men, who trained to the employment, or
self-taught by a natural versality of genius; serve as decoys, for drawing the
innocent and unwary, into snares; it is not to be doubted but that such men
will diligently bestir themselves on this, and every like occasion, to spread
the infection of their meanness as far as they can. On the plans they have
adopted, this is their course; this is their method to recommend themselves to
their patron: they act consistently in a bad cause. -- From them we shall learn
how pleasant and profitable a thing it is, to be, for our submissive behavior,
well-spoken of at St. James 's, or St. Stephen 's, at Guild Hall, or the
Royal Exchange. Specious fallacies will then be dressed up with all the arts of
delusion, to persuade one colony to distinguish herself from another by
unbecoming condescentions, which will serve the ambitious purposes of great men
at home; the way to obtain considerable rewards. -- It will be insinuated to us
with a plausible affectation of wisdom and concern, How prudent it is to please
the powerful -- How dangerous to provoke them. -- And then comes in the
perpetual incantation that freezes up every generous purpose of the soul, in
cold inactive expectation, that if there is any request to be made, compliance
will obtain favorable attention. -- Our vigilance, and our union are success
and safety. -- Our negligence and our division are distress and death; nay,
worse, they are shame and slavery. The persons here meant, (says the abovesaid
Gentleman) are those base spirited wretches, who may endeavor to distinguish
themselves by their sordid zeal in defending and promoting measures which they
know, beyond all question, to be destructive to the just rights and true
interests of their country. It is scarcely possible to speak of them with any
degree of propriety; for no words can truly describ^ their guilt and meanness;
but every honest bosom, on this being mentioned, will feel what cannot be
expressed.

Some of a narrow contracted turn of mind may think that by this quotation, and
some other expressions I have used, I aim to point out persons of a certain
religious profession, as objects of public odium and contempt. To which I
answer, no further than their temper and conduct render them worthy of it. I do
not think that piety, public virtue, and a love to one's country, are entailed
to, or inseperably connected with any one mode of professing christianity;
however some may have the advantage of others, in their tendency to promote
these christian and political virtues; yet I believe there may be mean, base
and mercenary wretches in every profession, who for one sweet delicious morsel
to themselves, might be tempted to sell their country with all its liberties
and privileges, as profane Esau sold his birthright. On the other hand, I
believe there are many good men, of sound integrity, of unblemished morals, and
truly lovers of their country in every denomination of christians. On this
subject, it matters not with me, whether a man be a stated member of this or
that church, whether he be in communion with that established in Old England,
or in New; provided he be a good man, actuated by evangelical principles and
motives, and will stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made him free.
I disdain the l^w singularities of a party. I desire that every man may ^^^nk
and judge for himself in religion, and enjoy all the sacred rights and
liberties of conscience in full. There is but one general distinction that is
of essential importance in the cause now depending, and that is to be made by
drawing the dividing line between the true friends to the rights of humanity,
-- our dear country, and constitutional liberties and privileges, civil and
r^ligious: And the base, traitorous and perfidious enemies thereto. Let the
first sort of such an amiable character be honored and beloved, and promoted
to all public offices and employments in the state: let the latter sort have a
public brand of infamy put upon them, to mark them out as the worst of
villains, the open and avowed enemies of mankind, and traitors of their
country, who are secretly hoping for ministerial favors. If any under pretense
of great moderation, or a pacific disposition, stand as neuters in this
important cause, skulking as behind the door, and undetermined on which side
they can serve themselves to best advantage, sometimes appearing friendly to
this party, and sometimes to that; we can have no safe dependence on them in a
day of extremity. He that will not stand forth firmly and boldly for his
country, when exposed so as to need his help; is no true friend to it. And as
there may possibly be some such secret dissembling enemies acting in disguise,
among us; it might be well for you, Gentlemen Freemen, ta be cautiously on your
guard against them: they cannot safely be trusted with the lowest office in the
state. -- As you have it in your power to choose your own rulers and officers,
from a governor even down to a tythingman, the present state of th^^ times
makes it requisite and necessary that you be very vigilant and watchful, and
get a thorough knowledge of men's political principles, before you advance them
to any seat in government, or any office in the state. If the office caths had
an additional clause to them, in this critical day, it might possibly be a
stronger safeguard and security to us, viz. That every person who comes into
office, solemnly swear, not only allegiance to the king, and faithfulness in
general; but that he will maintain and defend the constitutional rights, and
charter privileges of his country. I add but my best wishes and hearty prayers
to God for the continuation of these rights and privileges to us, and our
children after us, to the latest posterity. I remain your most cordial friend,
and devoted humble servant,

The AUTHOR.
Norfield, in Fairfield, September 8, 1774.
II SAMUEL, XXIII.3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.


GOD the sovereign Lord and supreme Ruler of all things, has made men in such a
manner, and placed them in such circumstances, as plainly to discover his will,
that they should unite and combine into societies for their mutual benefit and
advantage. He has not, by the light of nature, nor by any positive declarations
of his will, infallibly directed what form of society he would have to prevail,
nor prescribed any one particular species of civil government, as more
agreeable to him, than another. But has made mankind rational creatures; and
left them to choose that which they apprehend to be most perfect in its nature
and kind, and best suited to their state, situation and circumstances. The
divine constitution, and government of God over his intelligent creatures, is
fixed; and it does not become men to exercise their invention or wisdom in
seeking any alteration or change in it: but to study the most ready and
cheerful submission; as they may be assured, that whatever God requires, is fit
and right for his subjects to comply with. His authority and power over us is
unlimited and uncontrolable, and cannot be denied, or opposed without our being
guilty of the highest crime of rebellion. But no created being is invested with
such absolute, unlimited power, nor qualified for the exercise of it. Error and
imperfection belongs to every individual of the human race. The brightest
character that was ever justly drawn among mortal men, has this dark shade in
it: So that the will of none, is infallibly right in all things, and cannot
therefore be complied with in all instances, consistent with a good conscience,
and the superior obligations we are under to the sovereign Ruler of the world;
who still maintains his rightful authority over us, and has not given it by
delegation, to any one among created beings: all of whom were originally made
free-agents; and considered as in a state of nature, previous to their uniting
as members of society, have their liberty and free choice to agree upon such a
form of government, and mode of administration in their civil and temporal
affairs, as they judge most conducive to their happiness and good: any one of
which has no more claim than another to be, jure divino, or of divine right, on
any other principle, than its being more conformable to right reason and
equity, by the eternal rules of which, God has manifested it to be his will,
that his rational creatures be governed.

As societies and communities have their beginning and origin in voluntary
compact and agreement; when persons have entered by consent and free choice,
into society, they must acknowledge themselves under strict and sacred
obligations to act toward one another agreeable to the laws and constitution of
that society whereof they are members. There are certain duties required of
rulers, as well as of subjects; and their obligations faithfully and punctually
to fulfill them, rise in proportion to the dignity and importance of their high
and elevated stations; and the effect and influence which their conduct has on
the rest of the body. A man's being raised to honor and promotion above
others, is so far from releasing him from, or lessening his duty, that every
step he takes in ^^s advancement, proportionably enlarges it, and adds a new
and powerful obligation to the performance of it. The most absolute of
sovereign princes owe something to the meanest of their subjects; and may be
very criminal in the neglect or refusal of it. Subjects have rights, privileges
and properties; and are countenanced and supported by the law of nature, the
laws of society, and the law of God; in demanding full protection in the
enjoyment of these rights, and the impartial distribution of justice, from
their rulers. And when rulers refuse these, and will not comply with such a
reasonable and equitable demand from the subject; the society is dissolved; and
its fundamental laws violated and broken; and the relation between the ruler
and the subject ceases, with all the duties and obligations that arose from it.
For it must be supposed, and every one of common sense will readily allow, that
no man would ever have consented to place himself in the state of a subject, on
any other consideration or footing than that of his having protection and
justice from those to whom he submitted. The good of society in all its
individual members, is the end for which it is formed; and for which government
is instituted and appointed. And this cannot be obtained, unless rulers exert
their power, influence and authority to protect their subjects in all their
valuable rights and privileges; defend them against their enemies, both from
without, and within; and administer impartial justice among them. David, who
had, for many years, exercised an absolute sovereignty and dominion over the
kingdom of Israel, had no notion of aggrandizing himself, and his nobility, by
enslaving his subjects, and striping them of their property, at his own
arbitrary will and pleasure, contrary to law and right: but considers himself
as appointed to serve them, whose rights and privileges were esteemed by him,
more sacred and inviolable than those of the roy^l scepter and diadem. The best
and most illustrious part of his character consisted in this, That he approved
himself the faithful servant of God, and his generation. His ambition and
desire was to serve his generation; not to be served by them in the character
of abject vassals and slaves. A king or prince of his noble and heroic spirit
could have no pleasure or satisfaction in ruling over their fellow-mortals,
degraded to such a low, infamous state, so far beneath humanity. But to rule
over men that have the spirit of men, the spirit of loyalty and liberty; and
who possess some property too; is an honor to the most dignified king or
prince. And the more of this spirit of liberty, in conjunction with property
among the subjects, the greater is the honor of him that sways the scepter in
righteousness over them. This Jewish, or Israelitish prince was very sensible,
that kings and rulers were liable to do wrong, unjust actions, as well as
others; that the subjects had rights and properties that might be invaded or
encroached upon by them. We therefore find among his last words, the excellent
sentence now read, which he spoke just as he was leaving his earthly throne and
kingdom, and going to appear before a higher tribunal. -- He that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. David himself had been a ruler
over men: he was the man who was raised up on high; the anointed of the God of
Jacob, -- must therefore, from his own great experience and observation, be
supposed to have a thorough knowledge and understanding of the subject on which
he here speaks with so much seriousness and solemnity, as in the near view of
eternity, which consideration adds weight and importance to his expressions;
and might be sufficient to engage the attention of the most dignified rulers,
and sovereign princes, to them; who must be inexcusable if they refuse to
receive instruction from them, since a greater than David is here: The God of
Israel has said, the Rock of Israel has spoken. That glorious Being by whom
kings reign, and princes decree justice, is the author of this divine sentence
here given forth: to whom sovereign rulers are as strictly accountable for all
their conduct, as the meanest of their subjects -- May therefore properly be
called upon, and that, by the authority of the great Lord and governor of the
world, to attend to, and conscientiously practice their duty in such plain,
important instances of it. Be wise now therefore O ye kings, says God, be
instructed ye judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, rejoice with
trembling. Psalm. ii.10, 11.

In further discoursing from these words, I shall,

I. Consider the necessity and importance of justice in civil rulers.

II. Show that the fear of the Lord is the proper, effectual principle, to
influence such to the observation and practice of justice.

I. It Is highly necessary and important, that civil rulers should be just. Such
are concerned in the rules of justice and righteousness, as well as other men;
and indeed, more so, in proportion as they are raised above others; and have it
in their power to do greater good or evil, according as they are inclined. Was
the doctrine true, That all property is vested in the king, or chief rulers;
and that they can do no wrong to their subjects: Such scripture precepts and
directions from the sovereign Ruler of the world as that in my text, would be
entirely needless and impertinent; and seem, on this supposition, to argue his
want of wisdom and knowledge, on this important subject. But however bold some
conceited, ambitious mortals may be, in censuring others, when advanced a
little above them in wealth and power; yet, I would hope that few or none will
dare openly to attack divine revelation, and censure the ruling wisdom of God.
Let God be true, though every man be found a liar. Let God be wise, though every
man be found a fool. If those that rule over men, must be just; there is
certainly some rule of justice and righteousness for them to observe in this
office and character: and it may be infered by just consequence, That they are
capable of doing wrong; and as liable so to do as other men, -- That those who
stand related to them as subjects, have really something to call their own, --
that they have rights and properties distinct from their sovereign, -- are
capable of suffering injustice, oppression and wrong, even from them; and that,
in a greater degree than from any of their fellow subjects, in proportion to
the greater degree of their strength and power. The aforesaid doctrine
therefore, advanced by some, That kings and sovereign rulers with their
ministry, can do no wrong, is so far from being true, that it is the most
false, absurd doctrine that was ever preached in the world; and of most
pernicious bad consequence both to ruler and ruled, directly tending not only
to the temporal, but eternal destruction of both. As rulers are capable, when
they rightly improve the superior advantages of their high and elevated
stations, of doing more toward promoting justice and righteousness among their
fellow-men: so, when of a contrary temper and disposition, that it to say, when
they neglect, and refuse to attend to those good laws and rules of equity; and
take it into their heads to act in an arbitrary, tyrannical manner, to oppress
and enslave their subjects; they do the highest injustice and wrong, and the
greatest mischief and evil of any men in the world; and are the biggest
plagues, and heaviest judgments upon a society that can be sent upon them.

Corruption optimi est pessima. None therefore that are promoted to the office
and character of civil rulers, ought to think themselves above the observation
of the eternal rules of justice and righteousness, by which they themselves, as
well as their subjects, will be tried hereafter, and justified or condemned by
the righteous judge of the world.

BUT that I may, to better advantage, illustrate the great necessity and
importance of justice in civil rulers, I shall briefly consider them in their
several capacities, and show the necessity of their being just, while acting in
them.

Now, under the name of rulers, are comprehended; both those who enact laws,
and those who execute them; those who are clothed with legislative authority,
and those who have that which is judicial and ministerial.

WHEN men first joined in society, 'twas impossible for them to form at once, a
complete, perfect system of laws, to suit all exigences, and particular cases
that might happen: they could not foresee all future events, and make provision
for them. The body politic, is like the natural body; subject to a variety of
distempers and diseases, -- it is sometimes strong, healthy and vigorous, and
every part performs its proper office and function, without impediment or
obstruction: -- At other times, it declines, grows weak and relaxed in all its
nervous parts; and to use the significant and beautiful language of
inspiration, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint; from the sole
of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness in it. And as it is
liable to be thus sickly and distempered; so it is liable to be dissolved and
die.

NOW, as a man finds it necessary to regulate himself in regard to diet,
exercise, physic, etc. and suit his way of living to the present condition of
his body, as will best serve to promote the health and activity of all the
members of it; so there is the necessity of the like wise, prudential methods
of administration in government, suited to the different state and
circumstances* of the body politic. And as circumstances vary, and new and
different scenes open to view; new laws become necessary for the health and
benefit of the community. All governments have therefore a legislative
authority lodged in some hand or other; not to be exercised at the arbitrary
will and pleasure of one or more individuals; but in the exercise of it to be
restrained and limited, at least by the eternal rules of justice and
righ^^ousness, as it is designed, not for the destruction, but ^^r the health
and preservation of the body. And as it is necessary for the well-being of
society, that good laws be made; so it is likewise necessary that they be duly
put in execution; and that, both in civil and criminal cases: this being the
life of the law, without which it signifies nothing toward answering the end
for which it was made. Now, in order to this, some persons must have authority
to judge between a man and his neighbor, and to put their judgments in
execution.

THUS rulers considered either in their legislative or executive capacity, are
designed for the general and public good of the community they serve; they are
the ministers of God, instituted and ordained to attend continually unto this
very thing; and in both these capacities, they must be just. Particularly,

1. There is justice to be observed in making laws. The legislative authority
is usually styled supreme. The power of making laws is undoubtedly the highest
in every society. The executive officers are obliged to observe the rule
prescribed them by the legislators; and all the subjects of every order, to
yield obedience to their laws; provided they are not prejudicial to, but
salutary and for the good of society; and do not interfere with the duty they
owe to the great Sovereign of all men; and do not contradict the end for which
men unite, as members of society; nor run counter to the fundamental
constitution on which they are settled. While a society subsists, no man, or
number of men, have authority to call to account those who are vested with
supreme authority: which makes it extremely difficult to correct disorders in a
state, when the foundations are out of course. But though sovereign rulers
cannot, while they continue in their high office and character, be called to
account, b^ any under them; yet it is possible for them, by acting contrary to
the design and intention of their office, to dissolve the society over which
they rule; and so, at once lose all their sovereign power and authority: after
which, they can have no more than other men, to screen them from such
punishment as their crimes deserve. And when such a melancholy event takes
place, that a civil society is dissolved, and men return to a state of nature;
They have the same liberty they at first had, to form themselves into society
again, in what form, and on what terms they please.

BUT notwithstanding the sovereignty of legislators, they are under strict and
sacred obligations to observe the rule of justice, in enacting laws. It Is a
great and very dangerous mistake to suppose, that legislators have a power
absolutely arbitrary; or that their authority is under no limitation or
restraint at all. Right and wrong, are founded in the nature of things; and
cannot be altered and changed, even by the voice of such kings and monarchs as
are betrusted with the power of making laws. The Psalmist mentions, A throne of
iniquity which frames mischief by a law. And if he had not mentioned such a
thing, any person of common sense and understanding, who considered things with
the least degree of attention, would soon be convinced, that 'twas in the
nature of things, possible to establish iniquity by a law. And any one who is
acquainted with the history of former ages; or even with the present state of
the world, cannot but know, that this has in fact, been often done. No
intelligent friends to the christian institution doubts, but the laws made by
the heathen emperors for extirpating christianity, and destroying the
professors of it, were unjust. All sound protestants, I suppose, will agree in
passing the same sentence on the laws which establish an inquisition in some
popish countries. And it must be a pleasure to all lovers of liberty and
virtue, to observe, that the number of those who wish that no penal laws might
be enacted in matters merely religious, -- that no person might be liable to
any penalty, or lie under any incapacity, on account of any opinion or practice
in religion, which does not at all ^ffect the peace and happiness of human
society, is daily increasing.

NOW, if there be any such thing as acting unjustly in making a law, it is plain
that rulers, considered in their legislative capacity, are obliged to observe
some rule of justice. For where there is no duty or obligation of this sort,
there can be no such thing as acting unjustly.

IT IS a part of justice in legislators to enact such laws as are suited to the
circumstances of the society for the regulation of which they are intended:
such as conduce to the public good: -- And such as, instead of destroying, will
secure and protect the just rights and privileges of every individual member:
-- such as will, in an equitable manner, decide controversies between
particular subjects; and defend the weak, and prevent their becoming an easy
prey to the strong: -- such finally, as may be a terror to evil doers, and an
encouragement to those that do well.

THERE is further, justice to be observed between the community and particular
persons; under which head, are to be reckoned the granting proper rewards to
those who faithfully serve the public in any capacity: paying public debts: and
sacredly observing the public faith. Here likewise may be mentioned the
penalties annexed to laws. Penal laws are intended for the public good: The
great intention of punishing the transgressors of them is, that others may be
kept in awe. And legislators have a right to annex such penalties to their just
and equitable laws, as are sufficient to maintain their authority, and secure
the observation of them. But yet, there is justice to be observed in
proportioning punishments to crimes: and no doubt, it would be unjust, cruel
and barbarous, to affix the most severe punishments that could be invented, to
small and trifling offenses.

2. RULERS considered in their executive capacity, as putting laws in
execution, must be just. Executive officers are obliged to proceed according to
the received and established laws of their country. By these, they are to judge
and determine all controversies, both of a civil and criminal natue, which come
before them; doing strict, impartial justice to all men, without respect of
persons. Their duty is not to oppress: but to deliver the poor that cry to
them; the fatherless, and him that has none to help. They ought to endeavor
that the blessing, not the curse of him that is ready to perish, may come upon
them: and to cause the widow's heart to sing for joy. It concerns them to put
on righteousness, and to clothe themselves with judgment, as with a robe and
diadem. They must be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and fathers to
the poor; and the cause which they know not, ought to be searched out. To them
it belongs to break the jaws of the wicked; and to pluck the spoil out of his
teeth; to curb and restrain the violent; and let the oppressed go free. But it
being so evident, and universally acknowledged, that those who put the laws in
execution, ought to be just men, I shall not enlarge upon this head: but
proceed briefly to show the necessity and importance of rulers being just; or
to mention some of the obligations they are under to this great duty. And here,

1. THIS is necessary to their answering the design of their office, and
promoting the welfare and good of human society. Public good is the end of
government of every sort. It Is with a view of promoting and securing this, that
men enter into society. It Is for obtaining this, that some are appointed to
rule over others; and that those submit to, and obey them. Now, this important
end cannot be obtained, unless rulers act uprightly and justly. When civil
rulers, forgeting the end of their institution, and the proper duties of their
station, neglect and trample upon the rules of justice; and consult only to
gratify their own pride and ambitious humor and passion: when they consider
their subjects as an inferior species of beings, made as beasts of burden, for
their pleasure or profit; when, instead of observing the reason and nature of
things, they make their own mere will and pleasure, the rule of acting; and
govern in an arbitrary, tyrannical manner; it is impossible to describe the
evils and mischiefs they bring on mankind. These have been so great and
terrible, that some have been ready to question, Whether civil rulers have not
done more hurt than good, in the world. When we see an haughty and ambitious
monarch, or corrupt Ministry spending the blood and treasure of their subjects,
in carrying on an unrighteous quarrel and contention with them, or against
their neighbors; from a mistaken notion of glory; distressing their towns and
cities with their troops and armaments, depopulating their country, and seeming
to aim at the universal destruction of mankind; we may well be shocked at the
sight, and look on such a lawless, arbitrary ruler, as the heaviest calamity
and judgment, that a righteous God can send upon a sinful people. But
notwithstanding the dark and dismal prospect which a scene of tyranny and
oppression affords; it is undoubtedly true, that civil government is designed
for the good of men; and when administered with justice and mercy, it does
excellently well answer this design. As tyrants are the greatest of temporal
judgments, as being the cause of all the most distressing evils that can be
imagined; so good rulers are the greatest blessings to the world, and the
instruments in God's hand, of securing all our other good things. But then, to
render them such, they must be just, considered both in a legislative and
executive capacity.

2. RULERS are obliged to be just, on account of the great trust reposed in
them. Sovereign authority is the greatest trust that can be reposed in any man.
The power of making laws is very great, and extensive in its nature, and of the
utmost importance in the exercise of it. And next to this, is that of putting
laws in execution. The man that is appointed to judge another, with authority
to decide all controversies among his fellow subjects: to determine and pass
sentence upon the lives and properties of such vast numbers of men; has a very
great and important trust reposed in him. And the weight and importance of the
trust reposed in any inferior executive officer, is proportioned to the
authority vested in him. Now, the receiving such a trust lays a man under very
great obligations to faithfulness in the discharge of it. Men in such high
places of trust and authority, instead of being released from the laws of God,
and having their obligations to faithfulness in the discharge of duty, lessened
and diminished; have them increased, in proportion to their advancement; and it
is not beneath the dignity of their stations, to attend very seriously to the
advice and exhortation of the Psalmist, Be wise now therefore, O ye kings; be
instructed ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear; kiss the son, lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little. It Is of importance, if men have but one talent, that they improve it:
but if they have ten, and neglect and refuse so to do; the punishment will be
tenfold greater. If a private man neglects his duty, he, and others connected
with him, may suffer. But if a chief ruler is unjust and unfaithful, the whole
community or body politic suffers. As much therefore as the welfare and
happiness of such a community, or body, is to be valued above, and preferred to
the happiness of an individual; so much higher and greater are his obligations
to faithfulness, than the obligations of a private member of society; and if he
refuses to discharge them uprightly and conscientiously, as in the fear of God;
a proportionably heavy and aggravated punishment must he expect to receive,
when judged by him.

3. THE exercise of justice is necessary in civil rulers, to their own present
comfort, and future happiness. It Is a common observation, that the greatest
tyrants are the greatest and most miserable slaves. Those rulers who invade the
rights and liberties of their own subjects, in an arbitrary, tyrannical manner,
and seek to oppress and enslave them; are always in fear of being themselves
destroyed by them. They are obliged, at vast expense, to keep up large armies
to distress and enslave their peaceable subjects; who, under such a grievous
yoke of bondage, cannot be easy and satisfied; but will be naturally struggling
after liberty; and be ready, when it galls their necks, to turn against and
depose such oppressing tyrants; and sometimes, to imbrue their hands in their
blood: of which, many instances are to be found in the histories of the Roman,
and of the Turkish empire. Whereas, when princes rule in a just and
constitutional way, with mildness and benignity; and seek the good and welfare
of their subjects; they may always put full, unreserved confidence in them, and
depend on being supported and defended by them, at the expense of all that is
dear and valuable to them; yea, at the expense of their lives, which will not
be thought too dear a sacrifice for the safety and honor of such a worthy
prince.

AGAIN. This justice and faithfulness in rulers is necessary to their having
peace in their own minds and consciences. Such have consciences as well as
other men, accusing or else excusing; who, upon the faithful discharge of the
high trust reposed in them, will have inward peace, security and joy, and
heartfelt satisfaction, such as the world can neither give, nor take away. But
on the other hand; if the rules of justice and righteousness be neglected and
trampled upon by them, and they practice high handed tyranny and oppression:
and seek to enslave and destroy their subjects; what dreadful horrors of
conscience must they necessarily feel, when awakened to any serious reflections
on their wicked, guilty conduct, which has been so distressing and ruinous to
thousands more innocent and righteous than themselves.

LASTLY. This justice and faithfulness is necessary to their future happiness.
Though civil rulers are styled gods, yet must they die like men; and at last,
give an account of themselves to the judge of the quick, and the dead.

I NOW proceed to the next thing proposed, which was in the second place, to
show, That the fear of the Lord is the proper, effectual principle to influence
civil rulers to the exact observance of justice.

HE that rules over men, must be just: And that he may be so, he must rule in
the fear of the Lord. If we consider human nature, as vitiated by the apostasy;
we shall find, that hardly any thing but the fear of punishment, is able to
keep men in awe, and due subjection. That it is thus with subjects, is evident
from the many severe laws, and terrible executions of them, which the wisest
and most merciful rulers in all nations, have found necessary to preserve the
peace, and promote the happiness of civil society. Now, it is certain that the
essential principles of human nature are the same in all men, whatever external
relations they sustain. There is therefore great danger, that rulers will
degenerate into tyrants; and of blessings, become plagues and curses to
mankind; unless there be some way to keep them in awe, some principle to excite
their fears, and by that means, keep them within their proper sphere, and
engage them to the observation of justice. Now, this is not always to be done
by a fear of men. Sovereigns are exempted from the common power of human laws;
there is no ordinary authority that may judge them; and this their security may
prove a strong temptation to them, to neglect the proper duties of their
exalted stations. They may trust in their forces and armies to defend them from
the resentment of an injured and oppressed people; and so imagine themselves
perfectly secure from punishment at present. And the nearer any subordinate
ruler approaches to sovereignty; the less has he to fear from men, and
consequently, the greater prospect has he, of indemnification in acting
unjustly. There is therefore the utmost need and necessity, that those who rule
over men, should rule in the fear of the Lord; that they should have a firm
belief of the being, perfections and providence of God; that they should not
only fear his vindictive punishing justice, but beyond this, as the text
requires, maintain an holy awe and reverence of him upon their minds; and
consider him as that righteous judge to whom they must at last, give an account
of the discharge of the great trust reposed in them; and from whom they shall
receive a righteous sentence of absolution or condemnation.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WHAT we have heard on this subject, should serve to excite our thankful
acknowledgments to the supreme Ruler of the world for his great favor to us,
in the happy constitution of government we have hitherto lived under. The
providence of God which rules the world, (though it does not neglect the lesser
affairs of men) especially concerns itself in more important things, which
respect more large societies and communities of men. Civil government is one of
the principal of these. God is the judge; he sets up one, and puts down
another; and orders all the changes (...) revolutions that come to pass in the
kingdoms and empires of the world: whose providence has been very
extraordinary, and in a manner, miraculous, in conducting our fathers into
this, once howling wilderness; in preserving them in their weak, infant-state,
when exposed to destruction many ways; and leading them to settle on such an
excellent constitution o^ ^ment; which affords such full protections, and (...)
security to the subjects, of their lives, liberties and properties; and in
providing for us in succession down to this day, such a wise, virtuous and
upright set of rulers; who we have reason to think, have, in the main, ruled in
the fear of the Lord. Our privileges in this respect, are very great, beyond
what any other people enjoy, in any part of the earth. The bigger part of the
world have had their liberties wrested out of their hands; been oppressed and
enslaved by lawless and cruel tyrants: while we are yet in the possession of
freedom. May God preserve it to us safe, and hand it down to the latest
posterity! Our fathers went through the greatest perils and dangers to procure
these privileges for us; and we ought to be willing to do our utmost to
preserve them, and hand them down to our children and offspring. Our treasure,
and our blood too, are not too dear and costly sacrifices for such valuable
things.

2. OF what importance is it, that civil rulers be men of uprightness and
integrity; men of real piety and religion; who fear the Lord, and keep up a
proper awe and reverence of him upon their minds? This is necessary to their
own comfort and happiness; to the peace of their consciences; and to their
having a well-grounded hope of a future crown of glory in the coming world. It
is likewise necessary to the good and happiness of the society, over which they
are appointed to rule. If a sovereign prince or ruler be destitute of integrity
and justice; and has not the fear of the great God before his eyes: all
inferior motives which might have influence on men in lower stations, will be
insufficient to restrain him from wicked acts of tyranny and oppression, and
keep him to his duty. As such cannot well be arraigned before any human
tribunal on earth, to account for their conduct; if they have no fear and dread
on their minds, of appearing before, and accounting to their supreme Judge, the
sovereign ruler of the world; they will be in the utmost (...), not only of
ruining themselves both for time and eternity; but also, of ruining their
subjects in all their dear and valuable interests; and of involving them in the
greatest conceivable distresses and troubles. It is so far from being true,
That such can do no wrong; that on the contrary, the experience of all ages
testifies, that they are capable, when they loose the principles of justice and
religion, of doing the greatest mischief and wrong, of any men in the world. As
a roaring lion, and a raging bear, says Solomon, So is a wicked ruler over a
poor people. He adds further, The prince that wants understanding is also a
great oppressor.

3. WHAT has been said on this subject, is perfectly agreeable to, and
justifies the principles on which the British nation acted, as a body, in
deposing king James the second, that tyrannical oppressive prince, when
pursuing measures tending to their destruction; and in introducing king William
of glorious memory, to the throne, to sway the scepter in righteousness. This
grand revolution happened between eighty and ninety years ago. The kings who
have reigned over us, since which period, in succession, can make out no just
claim and title to the throne, on any other principles than those advanced in
this discourse. If these are not well grounded and established; but fail; they
must fall with them, and be deemed only usurpers; and the pretender on the
other hand, the only rightful heir to the crown. If we embrace the abovesaid
doctrine, That kings with their Council and Ministry can do no wrong; but must
be obeyed in all their edicts and commands; we must of necessity, condemn the
conduct of the nation in general, in rising up against, and deposing king
James; and join with the rebels in the highlands of Scotland, in their
endeavors to overthrow the present constitution of Great Britain; and to bring
in one of the descendents of James, as our rightful king; and disown him that
now sits on the Throne; and look upon the aforesaid rebels, as the only loyal
people in the kingdom; if the nation had no right to oppose the measures of
that ancient king, when they evident^^ tended to deprive the subjects of their
dear liberties, and their best rights and properties. If the constitution of
England forbids them to resume, and take these things into their own power,
when they could not have protection from their Sovereign: if it was wrong and
unjustifiable for the people to think and judge for themselves, and seek the
best remedy in their power, when they found themselves grievously oppressed by
the unrelenting hand of arbitrary power: when they found their chief ruler fail
in all the essential points of his high office and character, and to act
contrary to the very end and design of its institution; then it will follow,
that the very foundation-principles of government have been subverted by the
revolution, and all, excepting a few that have been deemed rebels, both kings
and their subjects have been upon a wrong, wicked plan, for near a century
past. And to get right, we must throw up the present constitution of England
and the Hanover family, that is in present possession of the throne; and return
back in our allegiance to the Stuart family; and to their popish plan of
government. These are the genuine consequences of the doctrine of passive
obedience and non-resistance, so zealously preached up by some artful and
designing men, who act as creatures of the state, and probably expect high
honors and promotions from a corrupt ministry, as a reward for their labors,
to be gathered out of the spoils of their country. A doctrine as unfriendly and
injurious to the king, as it is dangerous to the rights and liberties of his
subjects. The crown and dignity of the king can be maintained and defended,
only on these just and equitable principles, on which the rights and privileges
of the people are secured and established. He that denies the right which the
body of the people have, to take care of their liberties when in danger, does
virtually dethrone our pres^ ^ing, and make him only a usurper; and acts the
most friendly and favorable part toward a popish pretender. For it was
certainly in consequence of the people's taking their rights and liberties into
their own hands, that the illustrious house of Hanover was advanced to the
throne of England.

4. IF the rules of justice and righteousness ever allowed a people, a right to
take care of their liberties and privileges, as all I trust, will readily
grant; they are still possessed of this right, and may lawfully use and exert
it for those salutary purposes, as they have occasion or call in divine
providence. On this sure ground and footing, the wise and judicious part of the
reputable inhabitants of America, proceed to consult the best measures of
safety and preservation in this critical and alarming situation of our public
affairs. I am sensible that the present controversy between Great Britain and
the American colonies stands upon a different footing from that between king
James and his subjects, at the revolution. That was a controversy between the
king and his subjects: This is a dispute between the parliament of Great
Britain, and the Colonies. We have no controversy with the king; nor in the
least, dispute his regal authority over us. -- The king, when at home, presides
in person, in the British parliament; but when he goes out of the kingdom (to
Hanover for instance) he appoints a regent as his representative, to preside in
his absence. In Ireland, the king presides not in person; but by his
representative, the lord lieutenant. And in like manner, the king presides in
the several colonies, by his representatives, the governors, which are
authorized by his charters, or immediate commissions. We have therefore no
controversy with our king, whose authority we cheerfully acknowledge, and most
loyally obey. But the point disputed is, Whether his majesty's legislative body
in Great Britain, has a right to exercise sovereign authority over his
majesty's legislative Assemblies in the Colonies, for taxation, or the
regulation of their internal policy. The kingdom of Ireland owes allegiance to
the king of Great Britain: but their internal policy is constitutionally
regulated only by their own parliament. And they have a right to deny the
authority of the British parliament to tax them; or to regulate the internal
policy of the kingdom. And it is a like case with the American colonies. We owe
allegiance to the king of Great Britain: but this will not oblige us to yield
ourselves ^p to the arbitrary control of the British parliament. The
parliament of Great Britain has no constitutional right to tax, (...) ^^gulate
the internal policy of the colonies; any more than the ^^gislative body of one
colony has to tax or regulate the internal policy of another colony. And
therefore the attempts of the British parliament to impose taxes on the
colonies, may be resisted by the colonies, perfectly consistent with their
allegiance to their king. Although therefore our present controversy with Great
Britain is on quite another footing than the contest of the nation in the days
of king James; yet revolution-principles in their general nature, will fully
justify the present constitutional opposition of the colonists to the arbitrary
proceedure of the British court.
The conduct of the several provinces through the continent, in sending
commissioners to meet in general congress, to secure the threatened liberties
and properties of the people, may be justified on these principles. If the
people in these American colonies, have really any property, any thing to call
their own; which cannot be denied without the most injurious reflection and
insult upon, and abuse of them, and their ancestors, who have been laboring
and toiling for this purpose, so many years: if this, I say, be granted; then
they have a right to secure and defend themselves in the possession of it; and
none have a right to take it from them without their consent. But as we hold
our properties and privileges by royal charter, has not the king and ministry a
right to take this charter from us, and to strip us of all? I answer. No more
than you that have wives, have a right to break the marriage covenant; and turn
them out naked and destitute, and set them adrift. Property is prior to all
human laws, constitutions and charters. God ha^^ given the earth to the
children of men. Our fathers ^^quired property in this land, and were
rightfully possessed of it, previous to their obtaining a royal charter; as can
easily be demonstrated. The (...) the most solemn stipulation and compact (...)
the parties, the sovereign and the subject, on certain terms. And the breaking
of charters, says a late excellent writer, is making the worst war upon
mankind. It involves the innocent, and those yet unborn. Every thing depends,
with men, on their constitution of government. Such a ^^^sure is therefore,
wantonly laying waste the territories of the earth, confounding and destroying
all private property, and endeavoring to prevent Providence itself to make
mankind happy thereon; unless he shall, for the undoing the works of
unreasonable, ill-judging men, perform immediate miracles, and suspend, or
counteract the established laws of nature, which is surely, not to be supposed,
or expected.

5. As all human counsels and endeavors may be insufficient for these
important purposes of securing and defending the rights and liberties of a
people, when in danger of being wrested out of their hands, by the violent
exertions of arbitrary power; we see the propriety, and the reasonableness of
the duty of looking to God, in a way of solemn fasting and prayer, at such a
time, for deliverance and safe protection. God, the sovereign ruler of the
world, has the great affairs of the kingdoms and empires of the earth, in his
own hands; and can dispose of them as seems good unto him. He has the hearts of
kings and ministers in his hands, and can turn them, as he turns the rivers of
water. In seasons of such danger and distress, our eyes and our hearts should
be lifted up to him, for that help and relief that we need. And as we are now
called to this important duty, by the pious rulers of the land; all that are so
far above the beasts that perish, as to know the rights, the liberties and
privileges that essentially belong to humanity; and withal, have any belief of
the being of a God, and of his governing providence, will, I trust, heartily
unite herein, with a very serious and devout frame of mind; while the ignorant,
the profane, and stupid infidals, may probably make a scoff and ridicule of
these sacred solemnities.

THE great controversy that has for some years, subsisted between the chief
rulers in the mother country, and the English colonies in America, has arisen
to a very great height: and let the fault be on which side it will, we have
reason to tremble at the consequences; as we are threatened with most awful
ruin and destruction in all that is dear and valuable to us. A neighboring
province begins to feel very sensibly, the distressing effects thereof; as
great numbers of its industrious inhabitants are reduced to a suffering state,
and become real objects of charity; being turned out of the means by which they
procured their daily bread. The chief rulers neither feed nor guide them: but
are using means that tend to devour and destroy them. And no other colony or
province on the continent has the least security from having the same cruel,
oppressive and tyrannical measures used toward them. All the most judicious
and sensible part of the inhabitants through the whole continent of America, view
themselves as interested and concerned in the consequences of this dispute; and
expect to stand or fall by the issue of it. The port and harbor of Boston has,
for some time been shut up; their trade and commerce stopped; their
charter-rights invaded; the security of their lives, liberties and properties,
taken away; with an armed force in the midst of them, to heighten their
distress, and bring on their complete ruin. Which respectable province, and
metropolis of New England, being once enslaved by the cruel exertions of
arbitrary power, and stripped of their property for which they, and their
ancestors have been, for so many years industriously laboring; some other
colony or province will, no doubt, be taken in hand: and so the horrid and
execrable scene of tyranny and oppression be vigorously prosecuted from place
to place, until it spread over the whole continent. The aspect of our public
affairs was never more dark and gloomy, than at the present day. The kingdom
under such a load of debt, -- in such a distracted, divided and convulsed
state, as forebodes its speedy ruin and destruction. -- The foundations of
government seem awfully out of course; and the righteous in a state of utmost
peril and danger, a^ they have no sure ground of safety to stand upon.

WE are certainly threatened with the loss of our precious liberties and
privileges, and of all our dear and valuable interests. Allowing that our
conduct as a body, has been loyal, dutiful and obedient to our earthly
sovereign; that we have given no just cause or provocation to resolve on such
severe, unprecedented measures, as these in the late acts of parliament: yet,
can we say, it has been strictly right and justifiable in the sight of the
sovereign Ruler of the world? Whose hand is to be considered in these dark
clouds that hang over, these distressing judgments that are coming on the land.
Have we done nothing to provoke his divine displeasure against us? It becomes
us, very seriously to inquire, What means the beat of his anger! Who, or what
has procured the tokens of his wrath and indignation; which some, as
instruments, stand ready to execute upon us? And how shall we obtain his
favor? -- Sins of any kind, when they become common; when they are openly
practiced, and that with impunity; bring public guilt; and it may be expected,
that if men don't testify against them, God himself will do it; and that, by
sending distressing judgments on a people. And God's judgments, and threatenings
of providence are sometimes of such a nature, as to point out the particular
kinds of sin by which he is offended. Let us try this rule in our present
circumstances.

THE first disadvantage people in general feel and complain of, from the late
judicial system of tyranny and oppression* and the severe, unexampled acts of
parliament that have been published in consequence of it, is, That ^e and
commerce, and the means of increasing our wealth and riches, are obstructed*
and great loss and damages sustained; and at the same time, public charges
increased, in supporting agents, and commissioners to consult, and look out a
way of safety and deliverance for us. Those who live at a distance in the
country, from those populous cities and towns that are the chief seat of trade
and commerce, are not so immediately affected at first, by the operation of
these cruel and inhuman acts. -- Yet m^st, i^ time, and in a very short time
too, feel the destressing and impoverishing effects of them: which, if carried
into execution in the full length and breadth of them, will not only diminish
our estates; but strip us of all our substance, and reduce us to the condition
of slaves that have no possession or property to call their own.

AND does not this point out our sins, as especially provoking to God, and
procuring the present tokens of his displeasure? Is it not a plain indication
that God is offended with that covetousness or excessive love of the world
which abounds? That inordinate love of money, which is the root of all evil? It
is owing to this, that men murmur and complain under that public charge which
the present state of things makes necessary; and which, after all our
complaints, is nothing like what the generality of men are subject to, in their
best times, when they have the greatest peace, and least public expense. It has
been represented, that some uneasy, dissatisfied persons, who are disaffected
to the privileges of their country, have gone so far as to say, They had rather
that the king and his ministry might come, and take away our
charter-privileges, and all that we have, than to pay such taxes for the
support of government over them. To such, if there are any such among us, I
would recommend a serious consideration of the awful sentence God pronounced
against the murmuring Israelites in the wilderness. Numb. xiv.28. As truly as I
live, says the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you. I
will here cite a passage from a sermon of the Rev. Mr. Trumbull, delivered at
the Freeman's-meeting, in the town of New Haven, April 12th, 1773, with his
note subjoined thereto. Speaking of the advantages of free states, arising from
their choosing rulers from among themselves, he observes concerning rulers thus
chosen, "Their government is mild and righteous. And as they do not govern to
get their bread, and advance their fortunes, at the ruin of ours; and as they
can lay no burdens on us, without bearing the same weight themselves, their
government is as remarkable for the little expense of it, as it is for its
gentleness, impartiality and righteousness. All our expenses, by way of salary
to civil officers, do not, I imagine, amount annually, by considerable, to the
one half of the salary of a king's governor, in any of the neighboring
provinces." "The whole amount of the salaries paid annually by the government
is only L.580. The Salary of the Governor is L.300. of the Deputy Governor L.
100, of the Secretary L. 20, and of the Treasurer L. 160. The Judges of the
Superior Court have no salary from the government. The Chief Judge is allowed
18 shillings per day, and the four side Judges have 17 shillings each per day.
This court is obliged by law, to set 14 weeks annually, and commonly sets,
by adjournment, much longer, and the cost of it is about L. 600 per annum. The
expense of it for three years and a half past, upon a careful examination,
appears to be about L. 2100, just L. 600 per annum. The avails of it,
together with the forfeitures, for the same term, with proper allowances for
such as may not be recovered, amount to L. 2200 So that the Superior Court is
of no cost, at present, to the Colony, considered as a Government. In short the
whole expense of government in Connecticut is trifling. The cost of the General
Assembly annually is about L. 1500. A rate of one penny on the pound, on the
Grand List, which raises about L. 6000 per Annum, near the one half of which
is annually taken out of the Treasury for Schooling, has of late years been
sufficient to defray all our public charges as a Government." Mr. Trumbull's
Discourse^ Page 28.
On the other hand, the present judgment, and threatening discover God's
displeasure against us, for indulging pride and vanity, luxury and
intemperance. The plain voice of providence is, that God is awfully offended
with all that practice these ruinous and destructive vices.

WE are further threatened with being deprived of all our civil privileges, and
brought under a most cruel, arbitrary and tyrannical kind of government. The
scheme of government planned out for Boston, is in its whole frame and
constitution, completely despotic and arbitrary. The will of the chief ruler is
law; and the subject holds his estate, and even life, only during his pleasure.
This arbitrary government will, no doubt, be carried to its greatest extent
through all the American colonies, and exercised in all its terrors and
cruelties upon them, if the present ministry are permitted to carry the point
they are contending for, in such a sanguine manner.

Now, does not this threatening point out some particular sins, as procuring it?
We have been greatly favored of God in respect to the constitution of the
government more immediately over us; and the administration of our public
affairs. We in this colony enjoy, not only the full liberties of Englishmen;
but even some peculiar privileges, confirmed by royal charter, which
distinguish us from the rest of our fellow subjects in the plantations. -- But
how far have we been from being truly thankful for such privileges? And how
ready to slight and abuse them? How earnestly have some wished themselves in
the condition of the poor tenants and slaves in a neigbouring province, rather
than pay a trifle to support their liberties, and freedom, and real estate, in
this? How apt have we been to despise the persons, and slight the authority of
the rulers of our people? To hearken to, and propagate reports prejudicial to
their character? To countenance and join with the disaffected, and begrudge
their reward; which is far less than magistrates in any other province have?
And after all the murmuring about it, is very inadequate to the public services
they perform, and the advantages we derive from their administration. There was
something of this disposition in the Jews of old: They refused the waters of
Shiloah that run softly -- they were discontented and unthankful under a mild
government, and gentle administration, that allowed them great privileges and
liberties; therefore God threatens to bring upon them the waters of the river,
strong and many, or to subject them to the tyrannical government of the king of
Assyria.

ONCE more. We are awfully threatened with being deprived of the liberty of our
consciences, the liberty of professing the important truths of the gospe^; and
attending those sacred ordinances which God has instituted with a view to
advance the glory of the Redeemer, and promote the salvation of his people.
This will most probably be the consequence of carrying those schemes and plans
into execution, which the present ministry have projected. -- And does not this
loudly declare, That our having neglected the worship, and turned our backs
upon the ordinances of God; our distrusting and despising the grace of the
gospel, and trifling away the day of salvation; are to be numbered among those
sins by which we have awfully provoked a righteous God to anger against us.
That omissions and neglects of this kind, have abounded to an unusual, and
indeed, to an astonishing degree, cannot be denied. That such sins are
provoking to God, and that especially, in a country which, like this, was
originally settled principally for the purposes of reformation and religion,
cannot reasonably be doubted. And therefore we may justly conclude, that God is
testifying against these kinds of sin in particular, and threatening us on
account of them. Shame and sorrow, humiliation and abasement become us for
these things. We ought, each one, to examine his own heart and life, and
enquire what has been done by, or among us, to provoke the Lord to such an
awful controversy; and speedily to return, by gospel-repentance, to his love
and service; and to the steady conscientious practice of all religious duties
he requires of us. Let us be deeply affected with the present critical and
alarming situation of our public affairs; and unite in fervent prayers to that
God who is higher than the kings of the earth, that he would graciously
interpose for our relief; that he would avert the impending storms of
vengeance, and favor us with peace and tranquillity, and the full enjoyment of
all our valuable liberties and privileges; that our rulers may feed us
according to the integrity of their hearts, and guide us by the skilfulness of
their hands.

And let us be at peace among ourselves. It is at all times contrary to the
temper and spirit of the gospel; but especially unsuitable and improper in such
a day as this, to be widening differences, laying unreasonable stress upon
disputable points, and to set on foot controversies that tend to alienate
people's love and affection from each other, and to increase a party separating
spirit, to sow the seeds of discord, and foment animosities. It rather becomes
us to fix our attention upon the common cause, the public good and general
interest of the land. Our strength, our glory, and our security depend very
much upon our friendly agreement and firm union together. If we get divided and
broken to pieces among ourselves, what will become of us? What advantage will
it give an enemy to our liberties, to bring distressing burdens upon us, and
lay such a yoke upon our necks that neither we, nor our posterity can bear.
That to which our special attention is at this day called, is not a private
by-interest, that concerns the men of one denomination only: but of a general,
public nature that concerns men of every persuasion, that are well-wishers to
their country's welfare. Even those who have gone off from the scheme and plan
of religion professed by the first fathers of this country, have great cause of
thankfulness for their liberties and privileges which they enjoy equally with
others that still retain it. They have the same advantages from that happy form
of civil government; the same protection from it, of their persons and
properties; have the same liberty of conscience, worship where they please
without control or oppression; or if they choose to stay at home on the
Lord's Day, and join with no worshipping assembly, it is seldom they meet with
any interruption or disturbance. What more can they desire? There does not
appear the least probability that either they, or we, should gain any advantage
on civil or religious accounts, by giving up our privileges; and submitting to
a new and different form of government in church and state; with a great
additional burden of taxes which would be unavoidably connected with it; under
which, who would groan and complain loudest, we cannot tell before trial be
made. I hope none of us wish for such a fatal experiment and proof of a public
spirit. We all doubtless think, whatever be our peculiar sentiments in
religion, that we are sufficiently burdened (...). The poor of the people are
groaning under poverty and distress: many have a load of debt upon them, and
know not which way to turn for the common daily necessaries: are loudly
complaining of difficulties, and looking out for relief, some in one way, and
some in another; plausible schemes are projected for this purpose, and set on
foot and encouraged, to serve a present turn, without looking to the
consequences; and very impolitic and imprudent measures taken by many, as a
remedy which proves worse than the disease, or will do so in the end, and
constantly increase the difficulties complained of. If our taxes at present,
are heavy; they do not grow lighter or easier by the people's breaking into
parties and divisions among themselves, and pursuing schemes that are in
opposition to the main, standing interest, and public good of the country; but
are evidently increased thereby to the disadvantage and hurt of all. If some
few individuals find their account herein, yet it is certainly distressing to
the public; and must, sooner or later, be so to all concerned in it. If, those
who stand in the gap, on whose shoulders the interest of the country stands for
its support and defense, should, in any future time, find the burden too heavy
for them to ^ear* and be overpowered by those who direct them, to promote a
contrary interest; and this building should fall; the ruin of it would be wide
and great. -- It might fall like a millstone upon some who least expect any
evil, and grind them to powder. Or if they survived this sad catastrophe,
instead of finding ea^ times, might be caught under such a yoke of bondage that
would be insupportably grievous to (...) and their children; from which, no
release or ^rance could be obtained. We are at present, (ble^ be God) a free
people in this land; and might be (...) happy as any in the known world, did we
duly attend to our public interest and welfare; and unite in all suitable ways
for the security and advancement o^ it. Had we union and good agreement among
ourselves in the management of our civil and religious affairs; our burdens
would grow lighter and easier; and the poor of the people find comfortable
relief in most of their difficulties.

CONSIDERING our present critical situation, it would, no doubt, be our wisdom
and prudence to make up, unite, and gather into one common interest, all the
good protestants in this land; notwithstanding lesser differences among them;
that we may stand or fall together: and not be devoured one of another; nor
become an easy prey to foreign enemies who may seek our ruin. What are those
things worth, that alienate people's affections, and cause divisions; in
comparison to our dear liberties and privileges that are endangered hereby? It
may be the policy of some in power, to encourage such a party-spirit, that we
may be weakened and distressed among ourselves; that the way may be prepared
without resistance or opposition, to bring us into bondage, and fasten the
chains of slavery upon us. And shall we be so infatuated and blind to our own
interest, and that of our children's, as to pursue measures that are
destructive of it? Measures that will rejoice the hearts of our enemies, and
forward the^^ ^chemes, to be put into execution against us to (...) our ruin?
Let us lay by passion and prejudi^^ (...) seriously and soberly consider this
important ^ubject of our common welfare; meddle with noth^ng that is
inconsistent therewith, any sooner than wi^^ the rankest poison. Let our
country's interest, glory and prosperity be uppermost in our hearts, and use
our best endeavors for the advancement of it. Let all (...) strength center
and unite in ^^is grand point. Let us remember, this in the common interest o^
all the colonies; and that each particular inhabitant is concerned herein* and
must expect to share the fate, in some degree, ^f the body he is connected
with. If the foundation of our public liberties and privileges be overturned,
all will be affected, and must expect to suffer in the sad ruin. Let the
melancholy prospect hereof, serve to unite our hearts and hands with all lovers
of the rights of humanity, in upholding and defending this most valuable and
important interest. Let us love as brethren and dear countrymen, that have but
one common interest to pursue. Let us act on principles of moderation, candor
and charity; and endeavor in meekness of wisdom to instruct those that oppose
themselves, and their country's good; and recover them to the paths of truth.
Let us prize and well improve our privileges, and use our influence to promote
the public good. We should be especially careful that we engage in no measures
or counsels, that we attend to no reasonings or pretenses, how plausible and
specious soever, which are inconsistent with the common interest and public
good. So far as any of us have influence on our public affairs, let us use it
for the promotion and advancement of the true friends to their country. We want
wise, steady, judicious rulers in such a day as this; men of sterling integrity
and real religion. It is of importance that all orders of men be faithful in
their several departments, for defending and promoting the public good. Let us
keep steadfastly fixed in the good old principles of our fathers, and cheerfully
take our lot and portion one with another; saying as Ruth to Naomi, Whether
thou go, I will go; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God. The
Lord's hand has been very conspicuous in the first settlement, and past
preservation of these plantations: He will take care of the generation of the
righteous; and break the yoke of their oppressors; and give them peace and
happiness. Blessed are the people that are under his care and conduct; yea,
blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. AMEN.

AN APPENDIX, Stating the heavy Grievances the Colonies labor under from
several late Acts of the British Parliament, and showing what we have just
Reason to fear the Consequences of these Measures will be;

By the REVEREND, EBENEZER BALDWIN, of DANBURY,

And in every province whithersoever the king's commandment, and his decree
came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting and weeping, and
wailing, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

Esther. Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gave
unto our fathers to eat the fruits thereof, and the good thereof behold we are
servants in it. And it yields much increase unto the kings whom thou have set
over us, because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over
our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.

Nehemiah. PREFACE.
THE substance of the following Appendix was composed, with a view to enlighten
the people of a country town, not under the best advantages for information
from the news papers and other pieces wrote upon the controversy, into the true
state of the present unhappy disputes between Great Britain and the colonies;
for this reason it still appears in the form of an address to the people. It
has been thought the publication of it might answer valuable purposes, to rouse
others in the western part of this colony, who are much in the same situation
with the people for whose information it was first composed, to a sense of the
danger in which their liberties are now involved. The Author is very willing to
contribute his mite to the common cause of liberty; and is very glad of an
opportunity to subjoin the following Address as an appendix to a discourse so
well adapted (as he imagines the foregoing is) to lead people to a sense of the
true nature of civil government, and of the absurdity of many ridiculous whims;
which some among us have the impudence to attempt to maintain in direct
opposition to those principles, which have seated the present Royal Family on
the British throne.

Should this appendix fall into the hands of any, that have been more awake to
a sense of our danger; than what has been the case in the western parts of
this colony; the author hopes they will readily overlook the mention of many
things, which must be trite and common to them; as the particular mention of
them was necessary to the design in view.

The silence of others on a subject of so much importance, and (as many think)
so necessary to be wrote upon at the present time, must plead in excuse of the
Clergy, if they write upon a subject by some deemed too political for their
province: But let it be remembered that clergymen are freemen as well as
others; have civil rights and privileges in common with their fellow subjects;
are capable of feeling oppression as well as others: why then is there not an
equal obligation on them, as on others, to stand forth in defense of their
country, and endeavor to sound the alarm* when they see every thing that is
dear and valuable in the utmost danger? Were a house on fire and the family
securely s^eeping while the flames were surrounding them; would it not be the
height of folly, for those that were by, to stand disputing who was the
properest person to give the alarm, and awake them from their dangerous repose?
Much like this is it, to dispute who are the properest persons, the clergy or
others, to point out to their fellow subjects the danger their country is in.
The present crisis calls for the vigorous exertions of every rank and order of
men.

The Author is not insensible that it is more fashionable to write anonimously
upon such subjects as these, and would it equally answer the end proposed, he
would very gladly lie concealed: But he thinks the public are liable to be
greatly imposed upon on the one side and the other by anonymous publications;
as in that case nobody is responsible for what is assert^d. And as there are
no sentiments in the following composition, which he is ashamed to own; or
unwilling the world should believe are his -- no facts asserted but what he
verily believes to be true. He cannot but think it may better subserve the
purpose for which it is published, to have his name prefixed; than to be
published without a name.

APPENDIX.
NEVER was there a period so alarming to the English American colonies as the
present is; never one that called for the careful attention, the prudent, yet
vigorous exertion of every freeman in the colonies as the present does! For
when our lives, and our property are subject to the arbitrary disposal of
others; what have we valuable we can call our own? The disposal of our property
is now openly claimed by others; by a body, in which we have no representation;
and upon which we have not the least check or control: and charters,
heretofore deemed sacred and inviolable; by which, we have been wont to
suppose, was secured to us the quiet possession of our lives and properties,
are now wantonly violated without even the form of a trial; and such modes of
judicial proceedings introduced into a neighboring province, as very much
subject the lives of the people to the arbitrary disposal of their governor.
And doubtless this is but a specimen of the plan adopted with regard to all the
provinces; which will soon be introduced, if this first attempt succeed. We
have to expect, if the measures adopted are carried into execution, we shall
hold both our lives and our property in coming time upon the most precarious
tenure. These measures you see are carrying into execution by the terror of
military force both by sea and by land. And if our lives and our property are
to be held by such a precarious tenure as the arbitrary will of those, who may
be set over us, what is there in life or property worth the possessing? Will
not the being in constant and perpetual fear of the deprivation of both,
imbitter all the comforts of life? Could you take a view of the nations which
are groaning under arbitrary and despotic government; you would never imagine
what I say to be chimerical. We have not (blessed be God) as yet experienced
the galling chains of slavery; though they have been shook over our heads. For
this reason few perhaps among us, realize the horrors of that slavery, which
arbitrary and despotic government lays men under.

Some possibly may think me extravagant in asserting there never was so
alarming a period to the English American colonies, as the present is: But I
cannot think any one needs any more, than to be thoroughly acquainted with the
present state of public affairs, to be wholly of my opinion. We have, it is
true, in times past, been alarmed with the horrors of war: the savages have
committed shocking murders and made terrible devastations upon our exposed
frontiers; but these were but temporary evils: while the present (if God
prevent not) will extend their influence to all succeeding generations. And is
the death of a number of individuals in war so great a calamity to the public,
as a whole country's being enslaved, and the lives and the properties not only
of the present, but of succeding generations subjected to the caprice of
arbitrary rulers?

Under the administration (...) Sir Edmund Andross, near ninety years ago, very
gloomy indeed was the prospect to our fathers: yet in many respects not so
gloomy as at the present day. Charters, it is true, were then taken away; but
they were taken away under color of law; upon trial in courts of justice: But
now they are taken away, without so much as a pretense of law; without so much
as a trial, or hearing of the party concerned, by the almost omnipotent power
claimed by the British parliament: And when only the courts of justice are
corrupted, there is more hopes things may revert to a right channel; than when
the corruption lies in the supreme legislative body. At that time the arbitrary
measures pursued proceeded only from an arbitrary prince; now, from an
arbitrary parliament. Then the nation was awake to the arbitrary measures
pursuing: now they supinely slumber. Then Britain felt the weight of the iron
hand of tyranny; while now they imagine their burdens relieved by the
oppression of America. Which circumstances rendered the continuance of
arbitrary government vastly less likely at that time, than at the present day.
It is not therefore, without a cause, that the whole continent seems as it were
struck with horror and amazement; that the attention of almost every American
is roused to the present state of our public affairs. And though some may be
transported with a wild and enthusiastic rage in the cause of liberty, and some
others may be stupid and insensible of real danger; yet all the more sober
thinking part feel impressed with a deep and solicitous concern for the event
of these things. But in a place remote from public intelligence as this is, few
comparatively can have opportunity to peruse the public papers, and otner
writings, which may open to us the present alarming situation of our country.
Many, therefore, are perhaps little acquainted with what our danger is. They do
not themselves as yet feel the weight of oppression. They hear the noise of
danger echoed round the country, but know very little of what gives the alarm.
For the information of such as have not been under advantages for proper
intelligence, I will briefly as I can relate to you what has been done by the
British parliament with regard to America, which gives the present alarm. --
What the grievances are we labor under from these acts of the British
parliament -- what we have just reason to fear the consequences of these
measures will be -- then just hint at a few things proper for us to do in the
present alarming crisis.

Here I may premise, that the English American colonies, at least I may say the
New England colonies were settled without any cost to the crown. Private
adventurers that they might enjoy the sweets of both civil and religious
liberty, in a great measure denied them in their native land, ventured into
this, then a howling wilderness; and a^ their own expense laid the foundation
of these flourishing colonies. All they received from the king was charters
securing to them the rights and privileges of Englishmen in this newfound
world: here amid numerous wars with the barbarous savages in their infant
state, they defended themselves without any expense to the crown. Afterward
when the nation was engaged in war, they complied with every requisition from
th^^king. They exerted themselves beyond their abilities in two expensive
expeditions against Canada, in the reigns of William and Anne, which proved
unsuccessful. In the war before the last, at their own motion, and almost
wholly at their own expense, they took the important fortress of Louisbourg,
which gave peace to Europe. In the last war it is fresh in every one's memory
how cheerfully they complied with every requisition of men or money from the
Crown: for several years near a quarter of the militia of New England were in
actual service. Yet, with what alacrity performed? Who ever heard a murmur or
complaint of our expense of blood and treasure, though Britain reaped the profit
of our conquest, as all the conquered lands were theirs? Britain was so
sensible of the spirited exertions of the Colonies at that time; -- sensible
they had contributed more than their proportion, that they refunded to them a
considerable part of their expense. Hitherto they had neither claimed, nor
exerted any right to tax the Colonies: and every one, who remembers that time,
knows how ardent our affections were to the mother country, we gloried in our
relation to Britain -- were ready to fight and bleed for her glory and honor.

As America was much the seat of the last war, the (...) sent here from the
mother country, opened a much from communication between Great Britain and the
Colonies, the state of the colonies was much more attended to in England, than
it had been in times past. And as in a country like this, where property is so
equally divided, every one will be disposed to rival his neighbor in go^dness
of dress, sumptuousness of furniture, etc. All our little earnings therefore
went to Britain to purchase mainly the superfluities of life. Hence the common
people here make a show, much above what they do in England. The luxury and
superfluities in which even the lower ranks of people here indulge themselves,
being reported in England by the officers and soldiers upon their return,
excited in the people there a very exalted idea of the riches of this country,
and the abilities of the inhabitants to bear taxes. The ministry soon conceived
hopes that a large revenue might be raised from America. -- A revenue that
would be solely at their own disposal, whereby they might provide for great
numbers of their dependants, and mightily enlarge their influence over the
parliament, to secure a majority in their measures. Accordingly in a few years
after the conclusion of the late war; the British parliament, for the first
time, laid a tax upon America, by what was called the stamp act: by which
almost every written instrument of a public nature was subject to a high duty.
Requisitions of men or money were no longer made as usual from the king to the
colonies: but their money is now to be extorted from them by an act of the
British parliament. It Is doubtless fresh in your memories, what an alarm this
new claim of parliament gave to the colonies; what unanimous and vigorous
opposition was made to the execution of the act: the stamped papers were either
destroyed, or kept from being distr^^buted throughout America: Trade with Great
Britain was in a good degree suspended: -- In short, a glorious struggle was
made against this first exertion of a parliamentary claim of taxation over
America. The issue of the struggle was happy. The parliament the next session,
repealed the act, though not upon the principles it could have been wished for,
i. e. of its being unconstitutional; but upon the footing of its being
inexpedient and ill-suited to the state of the colonies. The parliament still
claimed a right of making statutes to bind the colonies in all cases
whatsoever. They still claimed the right of taxing them at pleasure. Duties
were accordingly laid upon sundry articles of merchandise payable upon their
landing in America, as on tea, glass, painters colors, etc. part of which were
afterward taken off by parliament. There are also duties that have heretofore
been laid on other articles of trade; but as they were supposed to be laid only
to defray the expenses of regulating trade; the colonies acquiesced in them
without any complaint: but the duties on tea, etc. being for the express
purpose of raising a revenue to his majesty, and being in consequence of the
parliament's claim to make statutes to bind the colonies in all cases
whatsoever, excited continual murmurs and complaints in the colonies: however
as the tax was inconsiderable, it raised no considerable tumults. Soon after
this new admiralty courts were erected throughout America. The powers of which
courts were extended much beyond what they are in England, or what they had
been in America. But as I have not by me, the act of parliament constituting
those courts, I can only observe upon them in general as what Americans
complain of. An expensive Board of Commissioners for managing the revenue were
constituted with the most extravagant powers. -- They have power to constitute
as many under officers as they please; they are empowered to demand general
warrants from the judges of courts in America: i. e. warrants to search any
body, and any where for contraband goods; under pretense of which, they may
search any man's most private apartments; not even his desk or drawers, or any
thing would be secure. But as I am not possessed of the act constituting this
board, I cannot be further particular upon it. The judges of the admiralty and
the commissioners have both the most extravagant salaries; the former each six
hundred, the latter five hundred pounds sterling per annum, paid out of the
American revenue, besides the perquisites of their offices. And yet it has been
reported of one at least of these judges of admiralty, that for two years or
more he has had but one case to try. These, with a swarm of petty custom-house
officers appointed by the commissioners, exhaust almost the whole of the
revenue. It is said, there was but 86 l. the last year paid into the king's
exchequer. So that all the money raised is spent to maintain a set of idle
drones in ease and luxury, without doing any service to their king or country.
The colonies from a reluctance to pay these, as they deemed them,
unconstitutional duties, have, it is probable, purchased a considerable part of
their teas from the Dutch; by which means the quantity imported from Great
Britain has been much less since the duty was laid than before; which caused
an immense quantity of tea to lie upon the hands of the East India company.
With the approbation, if not by the proposal of the ministry, they resolve to
send a large quantity of it to America upon their own risk. Several ships
loaded with tea were accordingly sent to several different ports in America.
This gave a general alarm through the Colonies. They though it the mother country was
now resolved to fa^^^^ the chains of slavery upon them; as they would not leave
us at our own option whether we would import the Tea or not; but were resolved
to force it upon us. A general resolution seems therefore to have been come
into throughout the colonies, not to suffer the tea to be landed. Accordingly
at Philadelphia, New York and Portsmouth, and I am apt to think from some other
parts of America; also, they persuaded the masters of the ships to return to
England, without unlading. At Boston, the governor would not suffer the tea
ship to pass the castle without a clearance. A clearance could not be obtained
without she entered and unladed. So that there was no other alternative, the
people must either suffer the tea to be landed or destroy it; accordingly a
number of persons went in disguise and emptied it all into the sea. At New York
also a quantity of the same tea was destroyed in like manner. When news was
received in England, of the destroying of the tea in Boston; the ministry
thinking that a proper opportunity now presented, for carrying the designs they
had long since formed into execution, immediately hurried through the parliament,
the act for blocking up the harbor of the town of Boston. This act forbids the
shipping or landing any kind of merchandise whatsoever, (except fuel and
victuals for the necessary sustenance of the inhabitants of the town) any where
within Boston bay. Vessels, bound for Boston with provisions, must first be
searched at Marblehead, must take an officer on board, and enter at Salem,
before they may proceed to the town. By this act all the trade of the town of
Boston is stopped, which was the whole support of the town; and it is calculated
to dist^^^^ them much in procuring provisions. Any attempt to lade or unlade
merchandise is punished with a fine of treble their value; with a forfeiture of
the vessels or car^^ages used in lading or unlading. The officers on the
station are to be fined 500 l. if they so much as connive at any breach of this
act: and all forfeitures or penalties are to be recovered in the courts of
admiral^y, where the king is both party and judge. The repealing this act the
parliament have put out of their own power, by lodging it with the king; who
when he shall judge that peace is restored in the town of Boston, may appoint
so many wharve^ or landing places as he pleases; and if any goods or
merchandise be afterward landed upon any wharves or landing places not
appointed or licensed by him, the penalties of the act will notwithstanding
take place; and even this, i. e. the licensing any wharves the king is
restricted from doing, not only 'till it shall appear to his majesty that
satisfaction is made to the East India company for the tea destroyed; but till
the governor has certified that reasonable satisfaction has been made for all
the injuries done to the custom house officers in times past. This bill, so
pregnant with mischief, was hurried with the greatest precipitancy through both
houses of parliament; the design was for a while kept entirely secret, lest
there should be petitions against the bill. They never proposed to the
inhabitants of Boston whether they would make satisfaction for the injuries
done or not. They never gave them any opportunity to speak a word in their own
defense; -- a privilege allowed to the meanest criminal in every court of
justice. Although solicited in both houses, they would not so much as suffer
their agent to speak in their behalf.

This Act has been followed by two others respecting that province equally
alarming, hurried through the parliament with the same precipitant haste as the
other; without notifying the province to appear in their own defense, or
allowing their agent to speak in their behalf. The one is entitled An (...)
for the better regulating the government of the province of Massachusetts Bay.
Whereby in direct violation of the privileges granted by charter, the
appointment of the council is taken out of the hands of the general assembly
and vested with the king; the governor's power is greatly enlarged, so that he
may appoint all the judges, justices, sheriffs and other inferior officers, and
remove them at pleasure without any concurrence of council. The inhabitants are
forbid to assemble in town meeting except by special license obtained from the
governor; only in their annual meeting, and then to transact no other business
than just the appointment of town-officers. Jurors, that were before returned
by the impartial method of drawing them out of a box, are now to be summoned at
the pleasure of the sheriff. And left all this should not be sufficient to
screen the soldiers or the officers either of the governor or of the
custom-house, who should happen to commit murder upon the inhabitants, from
deserved punishment: There is another act passed, entitled An act for the
impartial administration of justice, etc. which impowers the governor upon the
indictment of any of the soldiers, officers, etc. for any capital offense, when
acting in execution of any of these laws, or under the direction of any
magistrate, to remove the trial into any other province, or if he sees fit,
into Great Britain: obliging the prosecutor and witnesses to appear there or to
drop the prosecution. This is the substance of the late acts respecting the
Massachusetts; which are now rigorously carrying into execution: A large fleet
blocking up their harbor, and six or seven regiments of soldiers quartered in
the town of Boston, beside some others in the neighborhood.

There is another act lately parted in the British parliament, for regulating
the government of the province of Quebec, which greatly alarms the nation in
general as well as America in particular. Thousands of English people have
settled in that province under the faith of a royal proclamation, that the
English laws should take place there, and a government like that of the other
colonies as soon as the circumstances of the province would permit. But by this
act all the French laws in being before the conquest are restored -- Popery is
established and provision is made for the legal support of the popish clergy by
the collection of tithes. -- Trials by jury are taken away, and the whole
legislative power lodged in a council appointed by the king; what aspect this
may have upon us shall be considered hereafter.

Thus I have related the principal facts with respect to America on which the
present grievances and dangerous prospects of the Americans are founded. I
proceed now to consider what those grievances are, which we have cause to
complain of, from these acts of the British parliament.

The first thing we complain of as a grievance is, that by taxing the colonies
for the purpose of raising a revenue, and claiming a right to make laws or
statutes in all cases binding on the Colonies, the parliament claim what they
have no right to, by the British constitution, and thereby deny us our natural
rights as men, and our constitutional rights as Englishmen. This I will
consider somewhat particularly, as it is at the foundation of our complaints:
for if the parliament have rightfully such a power as this, the Americans only
are to blame in the present disputes, that subsist between Great Britain and
the Colonies: In order to which we may with propriety advert a little to the
foundation of civil government in general, and the principles of the British
government in particular.

That, which induces any number of individuals to enter into compact for civil
government, is the greater security of their lives and properties; which in a
state of nature are exposed to every invader, and liable to be taken away with
impunity by any one that is stronger than we. In a society formed for the
purposes of government, there is the united power of the whole to suppress such
injurious invaders. It is the duty of those who thus combine together for
government to give up so much of their property into the hands of those who are
entrusted with authority, as is necessary to carry on government: But then it
would be very preposterous, when they entered into society to secure their
property, to give it up to be wholly at the disposal of any one man or body of
men: this would be to put their property in a worse state than the state of
nature. It Is therefore to be presumed that every body of people entering into
compact for civil government will keep the disposal of their property* in their
own hands, and make grants of it to their rulers as the exigencies of
government shall require: otherwise they put it into the power of their rulers
to exercise every kind of tyranny over them. And thus it is said with the
greatest propriety, that every man has a natural right to dispose of his own
property. And every man has a natural right to life, unless he has been
guilty of such conduct, that by the laws of nature he forfeits it; i. e. has
so conducted that it is evident others cannot be secure in the possession of
their lives and properties without life is taken from him: Another benefit of
society therefore is to have persons appointed, who can be trusted, to judge
when this is the case; that we may not be liable to have our lives taken away
at the capricious pleasure of every one, that may judge we have forfeited them;
as is the case in a state of nature: But then as life is our most darling
possession, no body of men acting rationally will entrust this power with any
man or number of men, without using every precaution for the right exercise of
it.

The English constitution most admirably provides for the security both of our
lives and our properties. In that great charter of liberties, commonly called
Magna Charta, which our ancestors obtained by the most painful struggles; it is
a fundamental article* that no man shall be taxed ^t by his own consent: But as
every individual of the nation cannot meet to grant taxes; there becomes a
necessity of their meeting by representation; and accordingly the British
parliament represent all the people of Great Britain; are chosen by them, and
the sole right of granting money is vested in them: Neither the king nor house
of lords have power to raise one penny of money upon the subject: And as the
parliament when they grant money to the king, tax themselves in common with
others, and as they are exposed to lose their places the next election, if they
do not conduct according to the mind of their constituents; the people have the
greatest security that can be, that they will grant no more money than what the
purposes of government, the good of the community, and the honor of the nation
require. So likewise are our lives most admirably guarded in that charter of
privileges which our forefathers obtained: In which it is provided that no man
shall be imprisoned but by the laws of the land -- No man's life shall be taken
away, (either by the king or judges appointed by him,) but by the voice of his
country represented by twelve honest men of the neighborhood where the crime
is committed, called together in some impartial manner; who, it is to be
presumed, can have no interest in acting otherwise than justly. These two. viz.
the right of taxing themselves, and trials by jury, especially in capital
cases, have ever been deemed by the people of England their fundamental
privileges; the violation of which was the principal cause of that dreadful
civil war in England about a century ago, which at last brought an arbitrary
king to the block. A violation of these, with other attempts to subvert the
constitution, dethroned king JAMES the second, and advanced WILLIAM and MARY to
the throne. So jealous have Englishmen ever been of these important rights and
privileges. Now the first of these the parliament go directly in the face of*
when they lay taxes on the Americans; as we are not represented in the British
parliament, and by reason of our distance can never have an equal
representation there. When they lay taxes on us, they feel none of the burdens
they impose; and we have no influence over them, as the people of England have,
by dropping the members of parliament, if they conduct wrong* at the next
election. They do in reallity take away our money from us by force, and make a
present of it to the king. It Is not that we are against contributing to defray
the expenses of government, that causes us to complain of these taxes: But
because our money is forced from us in an illegal manner, in direct violation
of that fundamental privilege of Englishmen, a right to tax themselves* The
colonies are represented in their respective general assemblies, and no where
else; and whenever the ^ing has made requisitions to them of men and money,
they have ever readily granted them: And would his majesty ask his good
subjects in America, as he does the people of Britain assembled in parliament,
for money to defray the charges of government, I am bold to say they would
readily grant it.

Although the privilege of trial by juries is not as yet taken away from the
colonies in general; yet the advantage of it is much lessened in the province
of the Massachusetts Bay; as it is in the power of the sheriff to pack such a
jury as he pleases; who being appointed solely by the governor, it may be
presumed will ever be a creature of his; and also by the governor's having
power to remove capital trials out of the province, or even to Britain, where a
jury cannot be supposed so adequate judges, as one collected from the
neighborhood where the crime was committed. The admiralty courts, it is
complained of, are in many cases an infringment upon this important privilege.
In Canada trial by juries is wholly taken away; and who but justly fears that
this is a sample by which the other colonies may e're long be modelled.

The late acts respecting the province of the Massachusetts Bay are looked upon
by Americans to be grie^ous in many respects; to that province immediately; to
the other colonies as they afford a precedent of the treatment they may expect
to receive, whenever they shall happen to fall under the resentment of the
British court, and as it opens to view the adopted plan for the government of
the colonies. To begin with that called the port act, or the act for blocking
up the harbor of the town of Boston.

And first, if we look into the preamble of this act, we shall find the reasons
assigned are, that diverse ill affected persons have fomented and raised
dangerous commotions, etc. in which certain valuable cargoes of tea were
destroyed." h^^e you see it is supposed that the whole people are not guilty,
but only diverse ill affected persons, yet the whole town is punished, men,
women, and children. Why did not the parliament enable his majesty to punish
those ill affected persons, and not bring ruin on a whole country for the crime
of a few individuals? It Is not probable that more than a hundredth part of the
inhabitants of Boston were concerned in this affair, yet this is the only
reason assigned for punishing the whole. Is it not the part of justice to sever
between the guilty and the innocent and not to punish all in the lump? And have
not other colonies been guilty of the like conduct? New York destroyed a^
considerable quantity of the same tea. Philadelphia forcibly sent back a large
cargo to the great detriment of the East India company; yet Boston only is
singled out to be the object of ministerial vengeance. It plainly appears they
mean to take but one at a time, and thus by dividing the colonies to bring them
one after another to submit to the yoke.

Again, if you look further into this monstrous production, you will find that
all the immense estates lying in wharves, water lots, etc. clear round Boston
bay are really confiscated to the king: for if ever satisfaction is made
according to the requirements of the act, it is expressly left with the king, to
license only such wharves and landing places as he pleases. Now wharves are
worth nothing, if there may be no landing upon them: their water lots are worth
very little, if they may not build wharves upon them; or may not use them when
built. So that the property of these estates, all in a manner that is valuable
in them, is wrested from the original owners and vested with the king: With
equal right might the parliament to vote the king the landed estate of any
person in this or any other province: And if because there has been a riot or
mischief done by some individuals, the parliament may vote to the king the
estate of any person that happens to lie in the town or country where
committed: In what a dreadful situation are we? Here is not only claimed, but
actually exercised; not merely a right of taxation, but of granting our
estates, just as the British parliament pleases. A precedent justly alarming to
all the colonies!

If you look still further into this oppressive act, you will find it enforced
by such penalties as never act was. If any goods are landed or shipped from any
wharf or landing-place within Boston bay; not only the vessel and cargoes, with
all the horses, carriages, cattle and and every utensil concerned in carrying
them are forfeit; but a fine treble the value of the goods at the highest price
is laid upon any person that shall be so much as aiding or abetting. What
shocking severity! And where are these fines to be recovered? Not in the common
courts of justice where there might be a fair trial by jury: but in the courts
of admiralty; where the king, who is to receive the fine, is both judge and
jury, as well as party concerned. And the difficulties every vessel is laid
under that goes in with provisions, seem as if designed, if not to starve them,
at least to raise the price of provisions so high, as to force them to yield.
And lest the officers on the coast should have some humane and compassionate
feelings toward their distressed fellow subjects in Boston; a fine of 500 l.
sterling is laid on any one that shall so much as connive at the least breach
of the act.

Again it is put out of the power of parliament to grant redress to Boston: it is
lodged with the king when to remove the rigours of the act: yet he is
restricted ^^ll full satisfaction is made for the tea destroyed by, or in
behalf of the town of Boston; but who can it be ^pected will do it in their
behalf? and the town can do it in no other way than by a tax upon the
inhabitants, thus involving the innocent with the guilty. The following
quotation I find in the London Magazine for July 1774. p. 345. From a pamphlet
entitled, Observations on the act of parliament commonly called the Boston
Port Bill, etc. By (...) Quincy, ju^r. Esquire Counselor at Law in Boston. Which,
as ^t contains a further difficulty to the inhabitants of Boston's complying
with the requirements of the act than what had occurred to my mind, I take the
liberty to add by way of note.

"It must again be noticed that no relief is to be had "until full satisfaction
has been made by or on behalf of the inhabitants of said town of Boston." Now
to suppose that any in England or Europe would make satisfaction on behalf of
said inhabitants was unnatural, if not absurd; but what is more to the point,
it was certainly unparliamentary. The remaining alternative is that
satisfaction must be made by Boston.

Every person knows that towns in this province cannot raise or appropriate any
moneys, but by the express provisions and direct authority of law: it is a
matter of equal notoriety, that all town assessments of money are expressly
confined by the 4 Wm. and Mar. c. 13. to the maintenance and support of the
ministry, schools, the poor, and defraying of other necessary town charges. A
law which received the royal approbation almost a century ago.

Will any now say, that the moneys appointed to be paid to the East India house
come within the words of necessary town charges? When did the town contract the
debt or how are they subject to the payment of it? Had the Parliament see^ fit
to enact, that moneys requisite to satisfy the India merchants should be so
considered, two questions (not of quick decision) might then have arisen: the
one touching the validity and obligatory force of the statute; the other,
whether it would th^n come within the intent and design of the province law.
For past do^bt, our provincial legislators had no such charge (as the one here
supposed) in view, when they made the law of Wm. and Mary* and in this way
therefore the matter could not be brought within its provision. Parliament must
then make a new act to enable and empower Boston to pay the India company,
before the town can comply with the terms of relief of their trade. In the mean
while, what is to be the situation of Boston, and the ^nhabitants of the globe,
with whom they have such extensive connections? But it is very apparent, that
the parliament have not as yet ^^acted the payment of this satisfaction as a
town charge. They have only placed it in the option of the town, to make that
payment or submit to the consequences. That payment, we affirm, they cannot
make, without breach of the law of the land. N^w and ^^^eard of therefore is
the state of this people. They (...) ^^^tain the severest afflictions, they
must stand the issue of (...) remedies or -- violate one of the most known and
practi^^d laws of the land. Let us search the history of the world; let us
inspect the records of a Spanish Inquisition; let (...) enter the excusses of
an ottaman court; nay, let us traverse the regions of romance and fable --
where shall we find a parrallel?


And not only so, but till the governor certifies satisfaction has been made
to the custom-house officers and others for all the abuses they have received
for several months before. Now how is it possible to know when they have
complied with the requirements of the act? Let them be ever so much disposed to
make satisfaction, no mortal can tell when it is done. They are left wholly at
the mercy of their governor; who by office, if not by inclination (as one
expresses it) is supposed to be a mere tool of arbitrary power. Never was there
a completer instrument of tyranny, (if any are wicked enough to make such an
use of it) than the Boston port act.

And over and above all this, this act which brings such an heavy calamity upon
the town of Boston and the whole province, and establishes such a fatal
precedent with respect to the parliament's power over the colonies, was passed
without ever allowing the party therein concerned, an opportunity to make their
defense, or even so much as their agents to speak in their behalf; and when (as
has been often reported) full satisfaction was offered by the merchants in
London for all damage the East India company had suffered from the destroying
of their tea.

"Here the sons of tyranny in America; the base advocates for parliamentary
power; may see the blessed fruit of their doctrine: may see a specimen of what
the other Colonies may expect from that exorbitant power they are at such pains
to justify." Strange that any should dare to hold up their heads among a free
people in defense of such oppressive claims, as are here exerted.

But let us attend to the other late acts respecting the province of the
Massachusetts Bay; both of which were hurried through the parliament with the
utmost precipitancy, without ever allowing the province condemned an
opportunity to speak in their own behalf. One of these in open defiance of the
royal charter, in which the word of the king most solemnly given had guaranteed
to them that form of government, they had enjoyed for near a century past,
essentially changes their form of government, -- vests the king with a power of
appointing another branch of their legislature beside the governor. -- Extends
the power of the governor to the most exorbitant lengths, and almost nullifies
that birth right of Englishmen, trials by jury, If charters, if the solemn
promises of kings are to be thus trifled with, what security can we have in any
thing? Under the faith of charters solemnly given, our fathers planted this
wilderness; built towns and cities -- extended the commerce, the power, the
glory of Britain. But now these sacred privileges thus solemnly confirmed are
to be subject to the caprice of an insolent minister. And then the principle
upon which the parliament avowedly proceeded, that whenever they judged it
expedient and advantageous to the public, they had a right to set charters
aside, greatly aggravates the evil. For upon this principle, if they judge it
expedient, they may set aside all grants of land, all patents from the king
(for none of these are more solemn (...) sacred than charters) and thus might
cause all our lands to revert into the hands of the king. This principle
nullifies all security of our property. In short, upon this principle the
parliament may in the plenitude of their power, deprive us of every valuable
enjoyment we possess.

The other act, which allows the governor to remove capital trials out of the
province even to England, seems calculated with a most barefaced design to
screen the soldiers and custom-house officers from punishment, when they should
be guilty of any excesses. As though a merciless soldiery and those harpies and
blood-suckers the officers of the customs would not be rigorous enough in
executing these arbitrary laws, without a promise of impunity. For who would
run the risk to cross the atlantic, more than 3000 miles to carry on a
prosecution against them? Or if adventrous end, how would it be possible to
procure evidence? The language of it therefore is nearly this, let the soldiers
commit what murders they please, they shall be liable to no punishment therefore.

Think now what dreadful situation a people must be in, with an army of
soldiers quartered among them; with another army of tax-gatherers encamped in
all their trading places: both of which know they are sent for the express
purpose of bearing down and humbling the people; and that to encourage them in
their insolence, they have the greatest prospect of impunity, let them commit
what crimes they please. These naturally insolent when under every restraint
the civil authority can put them, what may it be expected they will be, when
these restraints are taken away, and they as it were invited to be insolent and
overbearing to the people? What hopes of redress can a people entertain, let
them be injured ever so much? Let individuals in Boston be allowed as wicked as
any are disposed to make them; yet surely the people have reason to complain of
these acts, which inflict a punishment so far exceeding the crime; involve the
innocent with the guilty, and are such complete engines of tyranny in the hands
of any that shall be wicked enough to improve them as such.

Again the Quebec government act the colonies have just reason to complain of.
First as it establishes the popish religion: by the articles of capitulation
the inhabitants of Canada were indeed to have a toleration, but not an
establishment. But popery is now established, tithes are collected by law for
it is support; which shows such a disregard for the protestant religion as we
never should expect in the reign of one of the house of Hanover, who were
called to the British throne to be guardians of the protestant religion. And
though there are thousands of English settled in that province, yet no provision
is made for the support of a protestant clergy; there is only a reserve, that
the king may make such provision, if he sees fit. Now when such favor is shown
to the bloody religion of Rome, it argues either a favorable disposition in
the parliament toward that religion; or that it is done, in order to carry on
some other favorite scheme. Again trials by juries are abolished by this act:
which is injurious, at least to the English inhabitants, who under the faith of
a royal proclamation, promising English privileges have settled there. As the
government of Canada is now entirely after the model of the arbitrary
government of France, it is to be feared this is designed as a precedent for
what is to be done in the other colonies; or at least we may suppose, without
much conjecture, that the French inhabitants of Canada are gratified with an
establishment of popery and a restoration of their former laws; to engage them
to be true to the ministry in any future struggles with the colonies: A
military government is continued there; that they may always have a good body
of troops at hand, to join the Canadians and Indians to pour down upon the back
of us, if the ministry should find occasion to use them. And that this French
arbitrary government may take in as much of America as possible, it is limits
are extended southward to the Ohio, and westward to the Missisippi: so that it
comprehends an extent of teritory almost as large as all the other provinces.
When this vast extent of territory comes to be filled up with inhabitants, near
half America will be under this arbitrary French government. So that upon the
whole the Quebec act doubtless wears as threatening an aspect upon Americans as
any act that has been passed by the British parliament. Thus I have hinted to
you some of the principal grievances which the Americans judge they labor
under from the late acts of the British parliament.

Indulge me a little longer while I endeavor to point out what we have just
reason to fear the consequences of these measures will be. If we view the whole
of the conduct of the ministry and parliament, I do not see how any one can
doubt but that there is a settled fixed plan for inslaving the colonies, or
bringing them under arbitrary government, and indeed the nation too. The
present parliament have ever been (by all accounts) more devoted to the
interest of the ministry, than perhaps ever a parliament were. Now
notwithstanding the excellency of the British constitution, if the ministry can
secure a majority in parliament, who will come into all their measures, will
vote as they bid them; they may rule as absolutely as they do in France or
Spain, yea as in Turkey or India: And this seems to be the present plan to
secure a majority of parliament, and thus enslave the nation with their own
consent. The more places or pensions the ministry have in their gift; the more
easily can they bribe a majority of parliament, by bestowing those places on
them or their friends. This makes them erect so many new and unnecessary
offices in America, even so as to swallow up the whole of the revenue. The king
is not at all the richer for these duties. But then by bestowing these places
-- places of considerable profit and no labor, upon the children or friends,
or dependants of the members of parliament, the ministry can secure them in
their interest. This doubtless i^ the great thing the ministry are driving at,
to establish arbitrary government with the consent of parliament: And to keep
the people of England still, the first exertions of this power are upon the
colonies. If the parliament insist upon the right of taxing the colonies at
pleasure, the least we can expect is, to be taxed as heavily as we can possibly
bear, and yet support our lives; for as the members of parliament feel no
burdens themselves by what they lay upon us, and are under no danger of losing
their places by taxing us, so long as they can persuade the people of England
they are lightening their burdens thereby; they are under no motives at
interest to abstain from loading us with taxes as heavy as we can possibly
groan under. Doubtless they will be cautious enough, to introduce these heavy
taxes gradually, lest they excite too great commotions in this country: But let
the right be once fixed and established; it will be very easy to keep adding
tax to tax; till the loads grow so heavy and are so fast bound, that we can
never shake them off. Nothing most certainly but a principle of justice will
keep them from it; and what can we expect from this quarter, when in open
defiance of the English constitution, they claim a right to tax us, and thus
deprive us of our dearest privileges?

In the mean time we must expect our charters will fall a sacrifice to these
arbitrary claims. Charter governments have long been disagreable to the powers
in Britain. The free constitution of these colonies makes them such nurseries
of freemen as cannot fail to alarm an arbitrary ministry. They only wait a
favorable opportunity to abolish their charters, as they have done that of the
Massachusetts Bay. We know the principle the parliament have adopted and openly
profess to act upon, that they have a right to alter or annihilate charters
when they judge it convenient: And we may depend upon it, whenever they shall
think it can be done without raising too great commotions in the colonies, they
will judge it convenient. Some may imagine it was the destroying the tea
induced the parliament to change the government of the Massachusetts Bay. If it
was, surely it is very extraordinary to punish a whole province and their
posterity through all ages, for the conduct of a few individuals. How soon will a
roit or some disorder of a few individuals, afford them a pretext for the like
treatment of all the other charter governments. I believe, however, it may be
made very evident, that the destroying the tea was not the reason for altering
the government of the Massachusetts Bay; but that it was a fixed plan long
before, and they only waited a colorable pretext for carrying it into
execution. It has been reported by gentlemen of unquestionable veracity, that
they had incontestible evidence that the two bills for altering the government
of the Massachusetts Bay were ordered by the council to be drawn up by the
crown lawyers more than two years ago. Now if this be true (as it undoubtedly
is) it is quite certain the ministry were only waiting for some colorable
pretext for carrying their design into execution. The charter governments are
by this precedent reduced not merely to the greatest uncertainty of the
continuance of their charters; but may be quite certain, it the present plan is
prosecuted, they will be taken away, and these colonies reduced, (if nothing
worse) to the state of the royal governments; their governors, councils,
judges, etc. will be appointed from England, with high and extravagant salaries.

There is great reason to fear the next step will be the vacating all grants
and patents of land from the king; that all our landed property may revert to
his majesty; to be regranted under such quit rents and services as those in
power shall see fit to impose: Nor will this fear appear chimerical to any one
that duly considers what has been already done, and what the plan is, which
the ministry are doubtless pursuing. 'Twould be weak policy indeed for an
arbitrary ministry to push with all their horns at first. But certainly it does
not require very great sagacity to see that their measures are tending to this.
When it was resolved to introduce arbitrary and despotic government into the
colonies in the reign of king JAMES 2d. when Sir Edmond Andross was governor of
New England; the first step was to vacate the charters; the very next to revoke
the grants of land that had been made: The charter being vacated, the people
were told that their titles to their estates were of no value. The expression
in vogue was, that "the calf died in the cow's belly." "The fees for the
patents varied according to circumstances both of persons and estates. In the
complaint to king James, it is alleged that the sees of some amounted to 50l.
Prudence was used. Men's titles were not questioned all at once. Had this been
the case according to the computation then made, all the personal estates in
the colony, would not have paid the charge of the new patents." Gov.
Hutchinson's Hist. Mas. vol, i. p. 359.
which was done, in his short administration in a great number of instances;
and people were obliged to take out new patents at a most exorbitant price. We
see our charters are already struck at; a claim is advanced by the parliament
to dissolve them at pleasure: And what is there more sacred in grants of land,
than in charters; that the former may not be annulled with as much right as the
latter. Our fathers when they planted this wilderness, placed equal confidence
in the royal word pledged in their charters; as in the patents by which they
held their land: and deemed the privileges granted in the former of as much
worth; as the property granted by the latter. The principle upon which the
parliament proceeded in vacating the Massachusetts charter; will equally
warrant them, whenever they shall see fit, to vacate all our grants of lands,
i. e. when they shall judge it expedient, or for the good of the nation. If the
parliament should once take it into their wise heads, that it is expedient, or
for the general good, that all lands in America should revert to the crown,
that they may be regranted all upon the same tenure, -- upon large quit-rents
to defray the charges of government; what will hinder their carrying it into
execution? And indeed the Boston port act does actually afford us a precedent
of the exercise of this power: all their wharves and water-lots round the whole
of Boston bay, are really confiscated to the king (as we have already shown.)
Now what is this but a vote of parliament to take away our landed property. And
that power which has been once exercised have we not all reason to fear will
be exercised again.

And have we not just grounds to fear that all this will not be the completion
of their oppressive plan, if the ministry find themselves successful in their
first attempts? By the Quebec-Act we find the parliament claim a power to
establish in America, the same arbitrary government that takes place in France.
-- To take away trials by juries: -- to set aside general assemblies: -- to
vest the king with a power to appoint legislative councils etc. Now this act
not only respects the French inhabitants (who having been long used to slavish
subjection, and not knowing the benefit of any other form of government, are
possibly well eno' pleased with it, especially as the pill is gilded over with
a full establishment of that religion, of which they are such bigoted
professors;) but it respects thousands of English, who have settled there since
the conquest, and all such as may settle any where within that vast extended
province in future time. By the same right they could establish this form of
government over the English in Canada; they may do it in the other provinces.
In the province of the Massachusetts Bay, the important privilege of being
tried by a jury, is greatly lessened by setting aside the equitable and
impartial method by which juries were wont to be panel'd. Viewing the things
that have taken place, is it without foundation that I express my fears, that
the British ministry will ever long find our general assemblies troublesome
things? -- a hindrance to government and the like, and so set them aside, under
a notion of their being inexpedient, and lodge the whole legislative power in a
council appointed by the king. This is the very thing that took place in Sir
Edmond's time. The whole legislative power was lodged in him and his council.
And since the previous steps are so like what took place then, why may we not
expect the consequent ones will be so too? And very likely the ministry may
find juries equally a bar to the government they mean to establish: and so may
persuade the parliament, on the footing of expediency to abolish them likewise.

And when our civil rights and privileges shall have thus fallen a sacrifice to
tyranny and oppression, our religious liberties cannot long survive: for where
has it ever been known that civil and ecclesiastical tyranny and despotism
have not yet gone hand in hand together. The latter is so necessary to uphold
and support the former, that arbitrary princes or ministers of state have ever
found their interest in the encouragement of it. And should America be forced
to yield in the present struggle for civil liberty, we have no reason to expect
but ecclesiastical tyranny, in some shape or other, will like a mighty torrent
overspread our land. Those princes on the British throne since the reformation,
who have been most disposed to trample upon the rights of the people, and to
rule in an arbitrary and despotic manner; have ever caressed the papists and
shown a favorable disposition toward the bloody religion of Rome, as that
religion is the surest prop to tyranny and despotism. This is evident during
the reigns of all the several kings of the house of Stewart. Papists shared in
the royal favor and were sheltered under royal protection. Continual attempts
were made to bring the church of England to a greater conformity to the
despotic church of Rome; 'till James 2d. more adventrous than his predecessors
boldly attempts to subvert the constitution both in state and in church; -- to
introduce both tyranny and popery: which so alarmed the nation that they
dethroned the tyrant; and placed a confirmed protestant on the British throne.
Some late transactions show a very favorable disposition in the present
ministry and parliament toward the religion of Rome; how far they may attempt
to introduce into the English nation both in Britain and the colonies, God only
knows. But thus much we may safely guess, without much danger of erring, that
to introduce episcopacy with all those formidable powers with which it was
clothed (which indeed were no obscure resemblance of the church of Rome) before
the acts of parliament restraining and regulating prelative power and
ecclesiastical courts, passed in consequence of the revolution, will be a
darling object with the present ministry, if they see a prospect of being able
to carry their designs into execution. For ecclesiastical government must be
conformed to the civil, and nothing short of this would be in any measure
suited to the genius of that civil policy they are evidently aiming to
establish in the colonies. And though such an establishment might not introduce
fire and faggots; yet depositions of the clergy, fines, imprisonment,
disfranchisements, confiscations, etc. with various corporal penalties, you may
depend upon it, will be its dire attendants.

All these things, I make no doubt, will take place one after another, as fast
as the ministry can bring their measures to bear; unless something occur in
God's providence to hinder them.

View now the situation of America: loaded with taxes from the British
parliament, as heavy as she can possibly support under, -- our lands charged
with the most exorbitant quit rents, -- these taxes collected by foreigners,
steeled against any impressions from our groans or complaints, with all the
rapaciousness of Roman publicans -- our charters taken away -- our assemblies
annihilated, -- governors and councils, appointed by royal authority without
any concurrence of the people, enacting such laws as their sovereign pleasure
shall dictate -- judges appointed from the same source, without any check from
juries carrying their arbitrary laws into execution. -- the lives and property
of Americans entirely at the disposal of officers more than three thousand
miles removed from any power to control them -- armies of soldiers quartered
among the inhabitants, who know the horrid purpose for which they are
stationed, in the colonies, -- to subjugate and bear down the inhabitants --
who know what a chance they stand for impunity, though they commit the greatest
excesses. These will be ready, not only to execute every arbitrary mandate of
their despotic masters; but self-moved (if like others of their profession) to
commit every outrage upon the defenseless inhabitants. -- Robber^ies, rapes,
murders, etc. will be but the wanton sport of such wretches without restraint
let loose upon us. -- These will be at hand by force and arms to quell every
rising murmur, to crush every rising groan or complainte'er it be uttered. And
whenever the iron hand of oppression shall excite opposition or raise
insurrections among the people: (which will ever be the case under arbitrary
and despotic government, till long use has rendered their necks callous and
insensible to the galling yoke) Blood-thirsty soldiers will be let loose upon
them. Those who survive their murdering hands and have the misfortune to be
taken captive by them, will soon be dragged, by the sentence of more merciless
judges, to the place of execution. -- Nothing shall then be heard of but
executions, forfeitures of estates, families reduced to beggary, orphans crying
for bread, and such like scenes of distress. The spirits of the people soon
grow depressed -- Industry and public spirit die away -- Learning, Virtue and
Religion are soon extinguished. -- No comfort or happiness to be enjoyed in
social life, every one will be jealous and distrustful (...) his nearest
friends and neighbors. To such a dreadful state as this, my countrymen, the
present measures seem to be swiftly advancing. What freeborn Englishman can
view such a state of abject slavery as this, though at the greatest distance,
without having his blood boil with indignation?

Some perhaps may be ready to think the issue of these measures cannot be so
bad as has been described. No wonder men used to freedom cannot at once realize
all the horrors of slavery. But this is no worse a state, than what now
actually takes place in a great part of the world: and why will not the same
government produce the same effects in America?

Others may think the British ministry cannot have so bad a scheme as this in
view, that officers appointed by the crown cannot be so cruel and barbarous as
has been represented. Probably the ministry may not have it all in view at
present^ probably these officers would not at first be so cruel and barbarous,
but there is no telling what men will soon become when entrusted with arbitrary
power: such power will more surely intoxicate men than the strongest spirits:
the best of men cannot be safely trusted with it. Many men amiable in private
life have become monsters of cruelty when entrusted with arbitrary power: such
were many of the Roman emperors. Should governors and councils appointed by the
crown be entrusted with legislative power over the colonies, and be supported
by armies of soldiers quartered among the people, I see not what (according to
the ordinary course of things) would keep them from even greater excesses than
I have mentioned.

Or should the colonies refuse to receive the chains prepared for them, and the
present measures issue in a hostile rupture between Great Britain and the
colonies, which God forbid, and which I wish the ministry may not have in view
to promote, see what precautions they have early taken either to ruin us, or
force us to subjection. To the Canadians who have been long inured to arbitrary
government, and so are become fit tools for inslaving others, they have granted
an establishment of their religion, the restoration of their former laws, etc.
to attach them to their interest: -- have continued Canada a military
government that they may have store of forces at hand; that they may let loose
these with all the force of Canada and all the northern tribes of Indians upon
our exposed and helpless frontiers. What else can they have in view in trying
so much to gratify the French inhabitants of that province?

Now if the British parliament and ministry continue resolved to prosecute the
measures they have entered upon, it seems we must either submit to such a
dreadful state of slavery as has been shown will be the probable issue of
their measures, or must by force and arms stand up in defense of our liberties.
The thoughts of either of which is enough to make our blood recoil with horror.
Can any person survey the events that have taken place, and yet remain so
stupid as not to be shocked at the dreadful prospect before us? Is there a
wretch so unfeeling, as not to feel grieved and affected at the injured and
violated liberties of America? Is there that tool of arbitrary power among the
freeborn sons of America, that will dare hold up his head in defense of such
measures as these? If there be any such, I am sure I cannot find it in my heart
to wish them worse, than ^o feel the iron rod of slavery, that is now shook
over America, till they are brought to a sounder mind. Such wretches as can
meanly crouch to justify the late measures respecting the colonies may, for
aught I know, be justly taxed by the British parliament, as having given their
consent, and could they be separated from the rest, I should have no great
objection to their wearing the chains, they are so assiduously seeking to bring
upon themselves, at least for a while. This thought, with the mean servility
with which some few in the colonies justify the late unconstitutional acts of
parliament taxing the colonies, etc. brings to my mind a short story related in
Rider's History of England, vol. 22, p. 76.

"When Waller (the poet) was young, he had the curiosity to go to court; and he
stood in the circle, and saw (James the first) dine; where among other company
there were two Bishops, Neile and Andrews. The king with an audable voice (...)
this question, Whether he might not take his subjects m^ when he wanted it,
without all this formality of parliament? Neile replied, "God forbid you should
not, for you are the breath of our nostrils." Andrews declined giving an
answer, as he was not, he said, conversant in parliamentary cases; but upon the
king's pressing him, and saying he would admit of no apology, the Bishop
replied with much humor, "Why then I think your majesty may very lawfully take
my brother Neile's money; for he offers it."




Having thus given a brief account of the late acts of the British parliament
respecting the colonies; -- of the grievances the colonies labor under
therefrom, and of what the probable consequences of these measures will be. I
will very briefly touch upon the last thing proposed viz. what can be done by
us in such an alarming crisis. -- Some perhaps may think me already too bold in
speaking thus freely of the acts of the most respectable legislature in the
British empire. But the more I consider the shocking tendency of them, the more
difficult I find it to restrain myself within the bounds of decency. -- I am
sure however there is nothing treasonable in feeling oppession when oppressed
-- nor in groaning under the anguish of it -- as yet I have done little more
than express this. -- Surely it cannot be treason to feel our burdens and weep
and mourn and pray on account of them. To pray to God for redress is certainly
innocent, and happy it is we have heaven to go to, though our prayers should be
denied oh earth. God has once and again in answer to prayer wrought eminent
deliverance for the oppressed. Remember how he delivered the Jews from Haman's
cursed devices. Often has he delivered his people of old; -- often the people of
New England; -- this affords great encouragement to be fervent in our
supplications to the throne of grace. The king's heart is in the hand of the
Lord, as the rivers of water: he turns it whithersoever he will. But little
will prayer avail us without unfeigned repentance and humiliation before God
under the heavy frowns of his righteous providence. We have more reason to be
afraid of the vice and wickedness that abounds among us, than of all the arms
of Britain. These give us reason to fear lest we have not virtue enough to make
use of the properest means of redress, and lest heaven should fight against us.
Were a general reformation to take place I make no doubt* heaven would find a
way for our relief. The present alarming situation of things therefore loudly
calls upon us to examine what sins in particular have provoked heaven thus to
come out in judgment against us; and perhaps there cannot be a better rule of
determining than to enquire what sins these calamities are properly retributive
of, and by this rule will not the enslaving the poor Africans in the colonies
stand forth in the front of the dreadful catalogue? Are not the colonies guilty
of forcibly depriving them of their natural rights? Will n^^ the arguments we
use in defense of our own liberties against the claims of the British
parliament, ^^ually conclude in their favor* And (...) i^ not easy (...) see
there is something retributive in the present judgments of heaven? We keep our
fellow men in slavery -- heaven is suffering others to enslave us. Again I must
mention worldliness, covetousness, selfishness, dishonesty, disobedience to
constitutional authority, and many other vices as contained in the dismal
train, and for which we need to repent and humble. ourselves before God; but as
this is a topic handled in the preceding sermon it is altogether needless for
me to en^ upon it.

But (...) ever we would hope for ^^dress from the grievances we labor under;
it is not only necessary that we repent, reform and pray; but that we unitedly
prosecute the most firm and prudent measures for the attainment of it. A very
little attention must convince every one of the necessity of our being united.
If the colonies are divided o^ the people in the several colonies are very
considerably divided, we are undone. Nothing but the united efforts of America
can save us: and if united, they must have that weight, which gives me the most
sanguine hopes of success. It should then be the concern of every one to labor
as far as his influence extends, to promote this necessary union. The
determinations of the congress of delegates from the several colonies may be
deemed the general voice of America. A concurrence with these we should every
one labor to promote. If in every particular we should not be entirely suited;
yet the dreadful consequences of disunion should make us cautious how we let it
be known. The Congress we hear have come into a conclusion that we import no
British goods. This is a measure for redress, of which we may very safely and
easily make trial. We can with a little self-denial do without the
superfluities we receive from Britain. This will doubtless be distressing to
the Mother Country and may convince them of the necessity of continuing to us
our dear bought rights and privileges. No friend of his country can hesitate a
moment in such a cause to deny himself the superfluities of Britain. And should
the Congress agree also upon non-exportation; and extend both this and the
other, not only to Great Britain but to Ireland and the West Indies; a general
compliance with which, will most certainly, according to the ordinary course of
things, ensure us redress, and of which necessity most certainly will be a
sufficient justification: Should this I say be agreed upon by the Congress;
none I hope will be so inimical to his country, as to attempt to break the
general union by refusing to comply therewith. But should there be any such; it
becomes every one, that has any regard to the liberties of his country, to
treat with deserved neglect and abhorrence the wretch, that thus meanly seeks
his own e^^lument upon the ruins of his country's liberties: -- To break off
all trade and dealings with such selfish miscreants; and make them sensible,
that without injuring their lives or property, their injured country can make
them feel the weight of her vengeance, and rue the day they ever suffered a
selfish spirit to banish all love to their country from their breasts. Here is
a sphere in which every one can contribute something to save his sinking
country from ruin. Suffer me then to entreat you (of the western parts of the
colony of Connecticut) in some proper way to show your hearty concurrence with
other parts of the continent in the cause of American liberty; and your
resolution to concur with, and endeavor to carry into execution the
conclusions of the American Congress; and to open your hearts to commiserate,
and contribute to the relief of the suffering poor of the town of Boston. What
has been said I trust makes it sufficiently appear, that they are suffering in
the common cause of American liberty. Allowing the conduct of those individuals
who destroyed the tea as criminal as any are disposed to make it, yet the
punishment is beyond all bounds disproportionate to the crime: -- the innocent
are involved with the guilty: -- the requirements of the act are such, that it
can never be known whether complied with or not: -- The act is as complete an
instrument of tyranny as ever was formed. -- If the requirements of the act
should be complied with; yet all their estates lying in wharves, water-lots,
etc. will still lie at the king's mercy. So that the act cannot be complied
with without giving up the struggle for liberty. The design in bearing thus
hard upon one colo^^ is evidently to divide the colonies; and thus to bring
them one after another to submit to the arbitrary claims of parliament. All
their means of subsistence depended on their trade, which by this act is wholly
taken away. So that without assistance from the other colonies, they must
inevitably yield, unless* so very patriotic, as (...) be willing to starve to
death. Our turn may soon come when we may want the like kind assistance from
our brethren. Only apply the golden rule of "doing to others as we would that
they should do unto us," and surely we cannot hesitate to contribute to their
relief. We in this colony are situated nearer to them and on various accounts
are more nearly connected with them than most of the other colonies. Our trade
has been principally with them; -- our religion and manners are very similar
to theirs: -- We originated mainly from the same ancestors; most of our towns
derived their first inhabitants from that province; the rest are descended from
ancestors that left their native land for the same cause with the Massachusetts
planters: So that it will be to our lasting shame, if more backward to
contribute to their relief, than other colonies much more remote, and under no
such special connections as we are. Many towns in the eastern and northern
parts of this colony have sent very generously to their relief, others are now
making collections for this purpose. But I hear nothing of any collections for
Boston either in Fairfield or New Haven counties. I have heard since writing
the above, that a handsome collection is likely to be made in the town of
Faitfield* and that subscriptions are opened for the like purpose in the town
of S^^atf^^d
I should be very sorry if we in the western parts of the colony should prove
the most backward. Providence has blessed us with plentiful crops, and thereby
has amply furnished us with the means of contributing to their relief, if we
have hearts to use them I wish the importance of contributing to the relief of
^oston might ^e duly attended to, and that some mea^s might be come into in all
our towns for trying the generosity of people for this purpose. I am sure they
that have a sense of the worth of liberty and the importance of making a firm
yet decent and harmless opposition to these oppressive measures, which are
calculated to rivit the chains of slavery both upon us and our posterity,
cannot hesitate a moment to contribute something generous for the relief of
that suffering people. May Americans be united in a just sense of the worth of
their civil rights and privileges, and in every laudable and righteous method
for obtaining redress; and God grant their struggles in so glorious a cause may
be crowned with happy success.

FINIS
Errata in the Sermon.
PAGE 1, line last, for Cario, read carior. Page. 7, line 17, for ingenuous,
read ingenious. P. 7, l. 17, from the bottom, for versality, read versatility.
Page 9, line 2, from the bottom, for ths, read these. Page 19, line 2, from the
bottom, for effect, read affect.

Errata in the Appendix.
P. 5* l. 4, for goodness, read gaudiness. P. 53, l. 5, from the bot. dele; P.
60. l. 11 from bot. r. plan adopted. P, 61, l. 7 from bot. for to vote, read
vote to. P. 63. l. 3, from bot. for excesses, read recesses. P. 66. l. 1, for
what dreadful, r. what a dreadful. P. 73 l. 19, after introduce insert it.. l.
15. from bot. for prelative, read prelatic.


