AN ADDRESS, OCCASIONED BY THE Late INVASION of the LIBERTIES OF THE AMERICAN
COLONIES BY THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, Delivered in Charlestown, South Carolina.

BY WILLIAM TENNENT, A. M.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London
Coffee-House. MDCCLXXIV.

PREFACE.
THIS Address was designed originally only for the Use of the worthy Members of
the Author's Church in Charlestown, to whom it was delivered, but it is equally
adapted to the present State of the American Colonies in general. A few Things
have been added for this Purpose, but Nothing material has been omitted. The
Author's Design, in publishing, was to oblige his Friends, who advised it, and
to do some Good to his Country.

W. TENNENT.

An ADDRESS, etc.
LAMENTATIONS iii, 22. It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed,
because his Compassions fail not.


MY BRETHREN,
THE Prophet Jeremiah, from whose Lamentations our Text is taken, lived to see
the Ruin of his Nation. His patriotic Soul glowed with an enthusiastic Love for
his Country, and he felt all her Miseries by Anticipation. The Man suffers
doubly whose Eyes are open to foresee future Calamities. This holy Patriot's
Heart was broken long before the Miseries, which he bewails, came upon his
Countrymen; insomuch that it is difficult to tell which is the most melancholy,
his Prophecy or his History of the Destruction of Jerusalem. His Lamentations
were evidently written with a Pen dipped in Tears. Every Line is full of
Sorrow, and every Word seems big with Distress. But in the Midst of his
Complaints we find that he justifies GOD, and confesses that it is because his
Compassions fail not, that they are not entirely consumed. Afflictions, whether
public or private, always bring good Men to a Sense of their Sins, and the
first Efforts of their Resentments are against themselves.

POLITICAL Subjects do not belong to the Pulpit, but to direct to a right
Improvement of the Times is the Duty of every Minister of the Gospel. An
unnatural Dispute has arisen between Britain and the American Colonies, and
the Question is of no less Magnitude than whether we shall continue to enjoy
the Privileges of Men and Britons, or whether we shall be reduced to a State of
the most abject Slavery. It is equally beyond my Province and Inclination to
enter into the Merits of this Controversy. It will be sufficient for my Purpose
to remark, that we have lived to see our Country involved in a common Calamity.
The Cry of Oppression is already heard in one Corner of our Land. The Groans of
many Thousands of our Brethren have reached our Ears, and GOD only knows how
soon they will be echoed back from every Part of the Continent. A dark Cloud
hovers over us. We are threatened with Slavery. War, Pestilence and
Earthquakes, those ordinary Ministers of GOD's Vengeance, are transient,
partial or local Evils. Slavery is a general and perpetual Evil. It includes
all Ages, Classes and Sexes. It reaches to every Corner of a Land. It includes
the present and all future Generations. It precludes all Hopes of Redress, for
it entails those Crimes and that Depravity of Soul which at first procured it.
In a Word, it is the prime Minister of GOD's Vengeance, and it has been called
upon only in those Cases where less Scourges were unequal to the Demerit of
Crimes, or when they had been used to no purpose.

THE first Dictates of blind Passion are to imprecate Vengeance upon the guilty
Instruments of our Calamities, and to resolve to endure the greatest Hardships
rather than surrender the Privileges we have derived from Nature and our
Ancestors.

IT is true, the impartial Judge of the World will vindicate the Cause of the
oppressed, and although in righteous Judgment he may leave them to sink under
the Load of their Oppressions, yet will he not forget the Oppressor. He has
assured us in his Word, that he will "vindicate the Poor, and break in Pieces
the Oppressor. This is the Portion of the wicked Man with God, and the Heritage
of the Oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty. If his Children be
multiplied, it is for the Sword, and his Offspring shall not be satisfied with
Bread. Those that remain of him shall be buried in Death, and his Widow shall
not weep. Though he heap up Silver as Dust, and prepare Raiment as Clay, yet
shall the just put it on, and the innocent shall divide the Silver. He builds
his House as a Moth, and as a Booth that the Keeper makes. The rich Man shall
lie down, but he shall not be gathered. He opens his Eyes, and he is not.
Terrors take hold of him as Waters. A Tempest steals him away in the Night;
for GOD shall cast upon him, and shall not spare. He would fain flee out of his
Hand. Men shall clap their Hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his Place."

NOR is the Use of Means to obtain Relief from our Oppressions inconsistent
with the necessary Principles of human Nature, or contrary to the Word of GOD.
But there is too much Reason to fear, that while we exclaim against the
Instruments of our Calamities, and deliberate about the best Measures to
extricate ourselves from them, we forget to exclaim against the prevailing
Iniquities of our Country, and to consider them as the only Causes which have
drawn down the Frowns of Omnipotence upon us. The Experience of all Ages shows
that the surest Way for any Nation to obtain or perpetuate public Blessings, is
to acknowledge that GOD who alone can bestow them. It was never known, that a
People became unhappy until their Iniquities ripened them for the divine
Vengeance. The History of the Jewish Nation is, in this Respect, a striking
Lesson to all Mankind. Their Piety and Prosperity always kept Pace with each
other, and their Defection from GOD was always a Prelude to their Desolation.

IT should be an invariable Rule with Christians to regard the Hand of GOD in
every Thing which happens, but especially in public Calamities. Not a Blade of
Grass is trodden down, nor does a Hair fall from your Heads without his Notice.
He overrules likewise the grand Machine of the Universe, and however confused
it may appear, yet let Christians remember that there is Order in this
Confusion. Not one Event is vain, and God's Glory will be the Result of the
vast Combination.

THE corrupt Passions of Men, while they aim only at their own Gratification,
are the Means whereby God accomplishes his Purposes in the Government of the
World. Even the Wrath of Man, the most malevolent of all Passions, "works his
Will." Devils follow the Malignity of their Natures in all their Actions, but
the Almighty carries on, through their Instrumentality, the most valuable
Purposes of his Wisdom and Goodness.

NATIONS, like Individuals, have their Vices, which call for Punishment. The
Vices of Individuals are seldom fully punished in this World, but it is in this
World only that GOD has erected a Tribunal for the Trial and Punishment of
national Vices. As Individuals have their Day beyond which GOD's Patience will
not wait, so likewise have Nations. Though he may forbear long, yet the Time
will come when he will either reduce them to Obedience, or utterly destroy
them. The Measure of the Iniquity of the Amorites was more than four hundred
Years in filling up, but at length it was full, and they were destroyed.

THERE can be no Sign of a Nation's approaching Destruction more certain than
its universal Corruption. Ten pious Souls might have saved Sodom, and the other
Cities of the Plain, from Fire and Sulphur, but many more might not have saved
them from some heavy Judgments. We cannot certainly tell when the Day of
Vengeance will come, yet we have always Reason to fear it; and it becomes us in
a particular Manner, when we behold the Hand of GOD lifted up, to tremble and
bow down before him.

IF we examine the religious and moral Character of the Inhabitants of the
British Empire, we have the utmost Reason to conclude that a Time of general
Correction is not far from us. Our Lord found Fault with the Pharisees of his
Day for being blind to the Signs of the Times. When we behold the western Sky
red in the Evening, we expect a fair Day. When we behold the Fields yellow, we
know that Harvest is at Hand. These Signs, in the natural World, are not less
certain and invariable than the Sign of universal moral Depravity in a People
being a Prelude to their Destruction. GOD has not thrown the Reins of the
Universe out of his Hands, nor will he leave the World to go on at Random. Good
Men, who have made it their Business to find out and bewail the Iniquities of
our Nation and Country, have been, for Years past, looking for some great and
dismal Catastrophe to befall them. The Words of our Text form a Part of their
daily Confessions: "It is of the Lord's Mercy that we are not consumed, because
his Compassions fail not."

IN order to illustrate the Truth of the Proposition contained in our Text, I
shall point out in a few Words the religious and moral Character of our Nation
and Country. It will be necessary to include the British Nation in this
Picture, as their Liberty and Happiness are as much at Stake as the Liberty and
Happiness of the Colonies in the present Controversy.

WE cannot survey the religious Character of our Nation and Country without
complaining, in the first Place, of the universal Prevalence of Infidelity. It
has infected not only our recluse Philosophers, but every Rank and Profession.
Even the Coxcomb and Petit Maitre affect to treat the Christian Revelation with
Ridicule. It is some Consolation to reflect that this Evil will in Time cure
itself, for the principled Infidel will soon be ashamed of Opinions which are
now no longer singular, and which cease to raise him above the most vulgar and
contemptible Part of Mankind.

WHAT strange Heresies prevail in our National Churches! What a general
Defection from Articles and Confessions of Faith! What insidious
Interpretations of the Word of God! There cannot be a more awful Sign of our
general Corruption than this Treachery in the Ministers of the Gospel! How
little do we find even of the Form of Religion among us! I do not mean here
that there are few who go to Church, or have their Children baptized, or call
themselves Christians. There was a Time indeed when these Things were
considered as true Badges of the Christian Profession, but in our wiser Age the
very Ideas of these things are changed. They are now considered only as Matters
of Custom, and in some Cases are complied with only to secure a Title to an
Estate, or as legal Qualifications for holding civil Offices.

How few are there that keep the Incense of Prayer daily smoking in their
Families! The Heathens had their Lares and Penates. The Want of Family Worship
would have been esteemed a Mark of the Want of Religion in ancient Rome and
Athens.

How shamefully is the religious Instruction of our Children neglected in this
Country. It is one of those new Paradoxes in which the present Age is fruitful,
that the Mind should be left unprincipled in Religion, until it is able to
choose a System for itself. It would be an Affront to your Understandings to
show the Absurdity of this Conduct. Would to God there was the same Zeal among
us to transmit to our Children the Religion, as there is to transmit the
Liberty we derived from our pious Ancestors!

How little do we find of the Influence of the Gospel among those whom Charity
obliges us to hope are real Christians! Lukewarmness has taken the Place of
Zeal, and there is little to distinguish the Disciples of Jesus Christ from the
rest of the World. The Love of GOD has waxed cold in many, and if our Nation
and Country were to be judged by the Conduct of GOD's People alone, we should
have Reason to forebode the most dreadful Calamities. Yes, my Christian
Friends, I am sure you subscribe to our Text with Respect to yourselves, "that
it is of the Lord's Mercies that you are not consumed."

LET us now examine the moral Character of our Nation and Country.

FORMERLY Vices were described by the Classes of Mankind to which they
belonged, but we find they have spread themselves so universally among all
Ranks in the British Empire, that we can no longer describe them in that Manner.

WE shall begin by mentioning the universal Profanation of the Sabbath Day.
This is a true Mark of national Impiety, and hence we find that it never was
forgotten when the Jews were reproached, or punished for their national Sins.
The Sabbath is now the fixed Day with some for Entertainments and Jaunts of
Pleasure, as being most free from the Interruptions of Company, and the
Inconvenience of meeting the ordinary Vehicles of Business. The Merchant is now
no longer ashamed to own in Company, that he spends his Sabbath in posting his
Books, or writing his Letters. I must not except here the Manner in which
public Worship is performed among us from being a Profanation of the Lord's
Day. A Gentleman would think you injured him greatly if you took his going to
Church as a Profession of Religion, or his saying AMEN as an Evidence of his
Belief in the Prayers of the Church. Surely it is of the Lord's Mercies that we
are not consumed for this Crime!

HOW much does swearing and cursing abound, and how often is the sacred and
eternal NAME profaned among us. Formerly this was the Vice of low Life only,
but it has now infected the Army, the Navy, the Bar, the Court, and every Order
of Men in the higher Ranks of Society. Formerly it was a Vice of the Men only,
but it is now common to both Sexes. An affecting Story, a Fly, or any other
Insect, will sometimes produce Exclamations from our Ladies, which are equally
shocking to Religion and Delicacy. I might here enter into a Detail of the
Abuse of Oaths in those Cases where Government has made them lawful and
necessary. It will only be sufficient to name the Custom-House, our Courts of
Justice, and our popular Elections, to remind us that general Perjury belongs
to the Catalogue of our national Crimes. It is indeed of the Lord's Mercy that
we are not consumed!

DRUNKENNESS, and Intemperance in eating and drinking, form another Class of
our Vices. It would take up too much Time to show the mischievous Effects of
these Sins upon our Souls, Bodies, Families, and upon Society in general. When
we reflect upon the universal Prevalence of this Vice in this Country in
particular, we have Reason to say, that it is because the Compassions of the
Lord fail not, that we are not consumed!

LET me here draw a Veil over the secret Vices of our Nation and Country. I
shall not poison your Imaginations by going into a Detail of what the Eye of
GOD beholds covered only by the Curtain of Night. It would profane the Pulpit
to mention some of these Crimes. If Sodom and Gomorrah, if Zeboim and Admah in
the untaught Ages of the World had Showers of burning Sulphur rained down upon
them, it is surely of the Lord's Mercy that our Cities, our Nests of Iniquity,
are not consumed!

TALK not of the public Charities of our Nation and Country. The highest
Monuments, we can erect to the Honor of Charity, can never atone for that
general Want of Piety, Sobriety, Justice, and Chastity which characterize us.

I conclude our religious and moral Character, therefore, by agreeing with
those who declare that Infidelity, Irreligion, Venality, and Vices of every
Kind, have never prevailed in a greater Degree, and cannot well rise to a
higher Pitch than they have lately gained in our Nation and Country. They
prevailed, it is true, in a great Degree, in the dissolute Reign of Charles the
Second, but they were confined chiefly to the Channel of the Court. The middle
and lower Classes of People, and the Inhabitants of Villages and Country Places
continued Strangers to them. But this cannot be said of the present Generation.
Our common and Country People seem to vie with the first Classes of Mankind in
Vices, which were formerly peculiar to them alone.

IF there is any Virtue in the American Colonies, or laudable Attention to
divine Things among every Class of People, it must be confessed that they are
to be found chiefly in that Colony where GOD has begun to lay his Hand upon us.
It is true they have degenerated greatly from the Piety, and pure Manners of
their Ancestors, but still I am bold to say, from my own Knowledge, that there
is more Appearance of the Gospel in New England than in any other of the
Colonies. And if "Judgment has begun at the House of GOD," what more dreadful
Calamities await those who have no Pretense to the Character of his People!
Lord enter not into Judgment with us!

WHEN we take a Survey of all the Circumstances which aggravate our Guilt, we
have Reason to be confounded. Our Light, Mercies and Privileges have been
superior to those of almost any People on the Face of the Earth. The Sun of
Prosperity has shone without a Cloud on our American Hemisphere. GOD has given
us a fruitful Soil, plentiful Harvests, profitable Commerce, free Governments,
and repeated Victories over the native Enemies of our Country; and to all these
Blessings of Nature and Society he has added the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The
Treasures of Heaven have been exhausted for us. Our Crimes, therefore, have
been committed against the greatst Profusions of Love and Grace. Surely it is
because "GOD's Compassions fail not," or we should long ago have been consumed
for such unparalleled Ingratitude!

BUT further, should you ask, why is the Blow which is aimed at our Liberties
so long delayed? Why is the Sword of civil War still at rest in its Scabbard?
Why are not our Cities in Flames, and our Streets streaming with Blood, and why
is not the Yoke of Bondage riverted on our Necks? I answer once more, it is
because the Compassions of the Lord have not failed toward us!

WHEN the mere Politician weighs the Danger or the Safety of his Country, he
computes them in Proportion to its Fortresses, Arms, Money, Provisions, Numbers
of fighting Men, and its Enemies; but when the Christian Patriot weighs the
Danger and Safety of his Country, he computes them by its Numbers of sinful or
praying People, and its Degrees of Holiness and Vice. It is not the Threats or
Boastings of our Adversaries, that should make Melancholy sit upon our
Countenances. We have more to dread from our Iniquities than our Enemies.

I Do not mean to propose in a little Christian Assembly, Measures of
Reformation to be adopted by a whole Nation and Country. It will be more to our
Purpose to mention the Duty of Individuals upon this alarming Occasion.

CONFESSION, PRAYER, and REFORMATION, are Duties to which every Individual is
called, as well for the Welfare of his Country, as for the Sake of his own
Salvation. Say not that you are but one, and can do Nothing. -- It is of single
Persons that Kingdoms are composed, and that Argument pleads equally against
all Reformations. If you cannot save your Country, is it not worth while to
save your Souls?

GOD will ever be a Shield to the Righteous, to cover them in the Day of
Trouble. It is said that few or no Christians perished in the Destruction of
Jerusalem. Personal Reformation gives personal Safety; and if GOD does not find
a Way for the Christian's entire Escape in a Time of Calamity, yet he will make
that very Calamity the Means of enlarging his Happiness; and Death itself the
immediate Door to Glory.

CONFESSION is the first Step to Safety. A Sense of our Crimes is a hopeful
Dawn of Deliverance. And here I cannot help repeating a Passage of a Letter
which I lately received from an aged Servant of Jesus Christ, whom it becomes
me to revere; "If (says my honored Correspondent) I could hear our People
exclaim against their Sins as warmly as against Lord North, I should have Hopes
of Deliverance. Alas, they hug their Crimes while they decry the Executioner!
Were we as harmonious in our Remonstrances against ourselves, as we are against
the late oppressive Acts, our Case would not be so doubtful!"

LET us then bow down before the Hand of GOD, and confess our Iniquities with
the deepest Prostration of Heart. In three Days (without Repentance) Nineveh
would have been destroyed. It will be impossible to bring us to the Feet of a
boasting Minister of State, if we first humble ourselves properly at the Feet
of the Lord.

PRAYER to ALMIGHTY GOD is a powerful Defense against public Calamities. This
is a Duty not of more private than public Benefit. To whom does Nature or
Revelation encourage us to go in all Times of Distress but to him who holds the
Hearts of Kings in his Hands, and wields the Scepter of the Universe. It can be
the Business of but a small Part of our Community to plan Schemes for our
Deliverance, but we may all cooperate in the Duty of Prayer; and let the
Christian Patriot remember, that in an Age and Country when Petitions and
Remonstrances to earthly Rulers have lost their Efficacy, Prayer to GOD still
possesses, I had almost said, an Almighty Efficacy. The Prayer of one Man once
saved a City devoted to Destruction; and it is not attributing too much to it
to add, that the Prayers of one Christian Society may yet save our sinking
Country.

BUT in vain are Confessions and Prayers, unless we turn from our evil Ways by
a thorough Reformation. To this the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ calls you
at the Peril of your Souls, as well as of your Country. To this every Motive
from Heaven, Earth, and Hell invites you. A general Reformation, my Brethren,
would be a greater Act of Benevolence to our suffering Brethren in the North
than all your generous and spirited Contributions. Take GOD, therefore, for
your GOD, and become the Disciples of Jesus Christ, and be assured of Safety
here, and of Crowns of immortal Glory hereafter.

THE END.

