AN ORATION, DELIVERED FEBRUARY 4, 1774, BEFORE THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL
SOCIETY, HELD AT PHILADELPHIA. CONTAINING, An Enquiry into the Natural History
of MEDICINE among the INDIANS in NORTH AMERICA, AND A comparative View of their
DISEASES and REMEDIES, with those of civilized NATIONS. Together with an
APPENDIX, containing, PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in the College of Philadelphia.

Les Hommes se servent toujours de leur yeux pour se conduire, et ils ne
servent presque Jamais de leur Esprit pour decouvrir la verite. Leur but
principal est de scavoir ce qu'il a cru, sans se soucier de ce qu'il faut
croire.

-- MALEBRANCHE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK in Market-Street,
between Second and Third Streets.

TO DR. RICHARD HUCK, OF LONDON, THE FOLLOWING ORATION, AS A SMALL TRIBUTE TO
HIS ABILITIES AND VIRTUES, AS A SCHOLAR, A PHYSICIAN, AND A GENTLEMAN, IS
INSCRIBED BY HIS SINCERE FRIEND,

THE AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MANY of the facts contained in the natural history of medicine among the
Indians in the following oration, are taken from La Hontan's and Charlevoix's
histories of Canada: But the most material of them are taken from persons who
had lived, or traveled among the Indians. The author acknowledges himself
indebted in a particular manner to Mr. Edward Hand, surgeon in the 18th
regiment, who during several years residence at Fort Pit, directed his
enquiries into their customs, diseases, and remedies, with a success that does
equal honor to his ingenuity and diligence.

AN ORATION, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
I RISE with peculiar diffidence to address you upon this occasion, when I
reflect upon the entertainment you proposed to yourselves from the eloquence of
that learned member Mr. Charles Thompson.
, whom your suffrages appointed to this honor after the delivery of the last
anniversary oration. Unhappy for the interests of literature, his want of
health has not permitted him to comply with your appointment. I beg therefore
that you would forget for a while, the abilities necessary to execute this task
with propriety, and listen with candor to the efforts of a member, whose
attachment to the society, was the only qualification that entitled him to the
honor of your choice.

THE subject I have chosen for this evening's entertainment, is An enquiry into
the natural history of medicine among the Indians in North America, and a
comparative view of their diseases and remedies with those of civilized
nations. You will readily anticipate the difficulty of doing justice to this
subject. How shall we distinguish between the original diseases of the Indians
and those contracted from their intercourse with the Europeans? By what arts
shall we persuade them to discover their remedies? and lastly, how shall we
come at the knowledge of facts in that cloud of errors, in which the credulity
of the Europeans, and the superstition of the Indians have involved both their
diseases and remedies? These difficulties serve to increase the importance of
our subject. If I should not be able to solve them, perhaps I may lead the way
to more successful endeavors for that purpose.

I SHALL first limit the tribes of Indians who are to be the objects of this
enquiry, to those who inhabit that part of North America which extends from the
30th to the 60th degree of latitude. When we exclude the Esquimaux, who inhabit
the shores of Hudson's bay, we shall find a general resemblance in the color,
manners, and state of society, among all the tribes of Indians who inhabit that
extensive tract of country.

CIVILIANS have divided nations into savage, barbarous, and civilized. The
savage, live by fishing and hunting. The barbarous, by pasturage or cattle; and
the civilized, by agriculture. Each of these are connected together in such a
manner that the whole appear to form different parts of a circle. Even the
manners of the most civilized nations partake of those of the savage. It would
seem as if liberty and indolence were the highest pursuits of man; and these
are enjoyed in their greatest perfection by savages, or in the practice of
customs which resemble those of savages.

THE Indians of North America partake chiefly of the manners of savages. In the
earliest accounts we have of them, we find them cultivating a spot of ground.
The maize is an original grain among them. The different dishes of it which are
in use among the white people still retain Indian names.

IT will be unnecessary to show that the Indians live in a state of society
adapted to all the exigencies of their mode of life. Those who look for the
simplicity and perfection of the state of nature, must seek it in systems, as
absurd in philosophy, as they are delightful in poetry.

BEFORE we attempt to ascertain the number of history of the diseases of the
Indians, it will be necessary to enquire into those customs among them which we
know influence diseases. For this purpose I shall,

First, Mention a few facts which relate to the birth and treatment of their
children.

Secondly, I shall speak of their diet.

Thirdly, Of the customs peculiar to each of the sexes. And,

Fourthly, Of those custom which are common to them both.

I. Of the birth and treatment of their children.

MUCH of the future health of the body depends upon its original stamina. A
child born of healthy parents always brings into the world a system formed by
nature to resist the causes of diseases. The treatment of children among the
Indians, tends to secure this hereditary firmness of constitution. Their first
food is their mother's milk. To harden them against the action of heat and cold
(the natural enemies of health and life among the Indians) they are plunged
every day in cold water. In order to facilitate their being moved from place to
place, and at the same time, to preserve their shapes, they are tied to a
board, where they lie on their backs for six, ten, or eighteen months. A child
generally sucks its mother till it is two years old, and sometimes longer. It
is easy to conceive how much vigor their bodies must acquire from this simple,
but wholesome nourishment. The appetite we sometimes observe in children for
flesh, is altogether artificial. The peculiar irritability of the system in
infancy, forbids stimulating aliment of all kinds. Nature never calls for
animal food till she has provided the child with those teeth which are
necessary to divide it. I shall not undertake to determine how far the wholesome
quality of the mother's milk is increased by her refusing the embraces of her
husband, during the time of giving suck.

II. THE diet of the Indians is of a mixed nature, being partly animal and
partly vegetable; their animals are wild and therefore easy of digestion. As
the Indians are naturally more disposed to the indolent employment of fishing
than hunting in summer, so we find them living more upon fish than land
animals, in that season of the year. Their vegetables consist of roots and
fruits, mild in themselves, or capable of being made so by the action of fire.
Although the interior parts of our continent abound with salt springs, yet I
cannot find that the Indians used salt in their diet, till they were instructed
to do so by the Europeans. The small quantity of fixed alkali contained in the
ashes on which they roasted their meat, could not add much to its stimulating
quality. They preserve their meat from putrefaction, by cutting it into small
pieces, and exposing it in summer to the sun, and in winter to the frost. In
the one case its moisture is dissipated, and in the other so frozen, that it
cannot undergo the putrefactive process. In dressing their meat, they are
careful to preserve its juices. They generally prefer it in the form of soops.
Hence we find, that among them, the use of the spoon preceded that of the knife
and fork. They take the same pains to preserve the juice of their meat when
they roast it, by turning it often. The efficacy of this animal juice in
dissolving meat in the stomach, has not been equalled by any of those sauces or
liquors, which modern luxury has mixed with it for that purpose.

THE Indians have no set time for eating, but obey the gentle appetites of
nature, as often as they call them. After whole days spent in the chase or in
war, they often commit those excesses in eating, to which long abstinence can
not fail of prompting them. It is common to see them spend three or four hours
in satisfying their hunger. This is occasioned not more by the quantity they
eat, than by the pains they take in masticating it.

III. WE come now to speak of those customs which are peculiar to the sexes.
And, first, of those which belong to the WOMEN. They are doomed by their
husbands to such domestic labor as gives a firmness to their bodies, bordering
upon the masculine. Their menses seldom begin to flow before they are eighteen,
or twenty years of age, and generally cease before they are forty. They have
them in small quantities, but at regular intervals. They seldom marry till they
are above twenty. The constitution has now acquired a vigor, which enables it
the better to support the convulsions of childbearing. This custom likewise
guards against a premature old age. Doctor Bancroft ascribes the haggard looks
-- the loose hanging breasts -- and the prominent bellies of the Indian women
at Guiana, entirely to their bearing children too early Natural history of
Guiana.
. Where marriages are unfruitful (which is seldom the case) a separation is
obtained by means of an easy divorce; so that they are unacquainted with the
disquietudes which sometimes arise from barrenness. During pregnancy, the women
are exempted from the more laborious parts of their duty -- Hence miscarriages
rarely happen among them. Nature is their only midwife. Their labors are short,
and accompanied with little pain. Each woman is delivered in a private cabin,
without so much as one of her own sex to attend her. After washing herself in
cold water, she returns in a few days to her usual employments; so that she
knows nothing of those accidents which arise from the carelessness, or ill
management of midwives, or those weaknesses which arise from a month's
confinement in a warm room. It is remarkable that there is hardly a period in
the interval between the eruption and the ceasing of the menses, in which they
are not pregnant, or giving suck. This is the most natural state of the
constitution during that interval; and hence we often find it connected with
the best state of health in the women of civilized nations.

THE customs peculiar to the Indian MEN, consist chiefly in those employments
which are necessary to preserve animal life, and to defend their nation. These
employments are hunting and war, each of which is conducted in a manner that
tends to call forth every fiber into exercise, and to ensure them the
possession of the utmost possible health. In times of plenty and peace, we see
them sometimes rising from their beloved indolence, and shaking off its
influence by the salutary exercises of dancing and swimming. The Indian men
seldom marry before they are thirty years of age: They no doubt derive
considerable vigor from this custom; for while they are secured by it, from the
enervating effects of the premature dalliance of love, they may ensure more
certain fruitfulness to their wives, and entail more certain health upon their
children. Tacitus describes the same custom among the Germans, and attributes
to it the same good effects. Sera juvenum venus, eoque inexausta pubertas; nec
virgins festinantur; eadem juventa, similis proceritas, pares validique
miscentur; ac robora parentum liberi referunt. (a)

AMONG the Indian men it is deemed a mark of heroism to bear the most exquisite
pain without complaining; upon this account they early inure themselves to
burning part of their bodies with fire, or cutting them with sharp instruments.
No young man can be admitted to the honors of manhood or war, who has not
acquitted himself well in these trials of patience and fortitude. It is easy to
conceive how much this contributes to give a tension to the nervous system,
which renders it less subject to the occasional causes of diseases.

IV. WE come now to speak of those customs which are common to both sexes:
These are PAINTING, and the use of the COLD BATH. The practice of anointing the
body with oil is common to the savages of all countries: In warm climates it is
said to promote longevity, by checking excessive perspiration. The Indians
generally use bear's grease mixed with a clay; which bears the greatest
resemblance to the color of their skins. This pigment serves to lessen the
sensibility of the extremeties of the nerves: It moreover fortifies them
against the action of those exhalations, which we shall mention hereafter, as a
considerable source of their diseases. The COLD BATH likewise fortifies the
body, and renders it less subject to those diseases which arise from the
extremes and vicissitudes of heat and cold. We shall speak hereafter of the
Indian manner of using it.

THE state of society among the Indians excludes the influence of most of those
passions which disorder the body. The turbulent effects of anger are concealed
in deep and lasting resentments. Envy and ambition are excluded by their
equality of power and property: Nor is it necessary that the perfections of the
whole sex should be ascribed to one, to induce them to marry. The weakness of
love (says doctor Adam Smith) which is so much indulged in ages of humanity and
politeness, is regarded among savages as the most unpardonable effeminacy. A
young man would think himself disgraced for ever, if he showed the least
preference of one woman above another, or did not express the most complete
indifference, both about the time when, and the person to whom he was to be
married Theory of moral sentiments.
. Thus are they exempted from those violent or lasting diseases, which
accompany the several stages of such passions in both sexes among civilized
nations.

IT is remarkable that there are no deformed Indians: Some have suspected from
this circumstance, that they put their deformed children to death; but nature
here acts the part of an unnatural mother. The severity of the Indian manners
destroys them. (b)

FROM a review of the customs of the Indians, we need not be surprised at the
stateliness, regularity of features, and dignity of aspect by which they are
characterized. Where we observe these among ourselves, there is always a
presumption of their being accompanied with health, and a strong constitution.

HAVING finished our enquiry into the physical customs of the Indians, we shall
proceed now to enquire into their diseases.

A CELEBRATED professor of anatomy has asserted, that we could not tell by
reasoning a priori, that the body was mortal, so intimately woven with its
texture, are the principles of life. Lord Bacon declares, that the only cause
of death which is natural to man, is that from old age; and complains of the
imperfection of physic, in not being able to guard the principle of life, until
the whole of the oil that feeds it, is consumed. We cannot admit of this
proposition of our noble philosopher. In the inventory of the grave in every
country, we find more of the spoils of youth and manhood, than of age. This
must be attributed to moral as well as physical causes.

WE need only recollect the custom among the Indians, of sleeping in the open
air in a variable climate -- the alternate action of heat and cold upon their
bodies, to which the warmth of their cabbins exposes them -- their long marches
-- their excessive exercise -- their intemperance in eating, to which their
long fasting, and their public feasts naturally prompt them: And, lastly, the
vicinity of their habitations to the banks of rivers, in order to discover the
empire of diseases among them in every stage of their lives. They have in vain
attempted to elude the general laws of mortality, while their mode of life
subjects them to these remote, but certain causes of diseases.

FROM what we know of the action of these potentiae nocentes upon the human
body, it will hardly be necessary to appeal to facts to determine that FEVERS
constitute the only diseases among the Indians. These fevers are occasioned by
the sensible and insensible qualities of the air. Those which are produced by
cold, are of the inflammatory kind, such as pleurisies, peripneumonies, and
rheumatisms. Those which are produced by the insensible qualities of the air,
or by putrid exhalations, -- are intermitting, -- putrid, -- and inflammatory,
according as the exhalations are combined with more or less heat or cold. The
DYSENTERY (which is an Indian disease) comes under the class of fevers. It is
the febris introversa of Dr. Sydenham.

THE Indians are subject to ANIMAL and VEGETABLE POISONS. The effects of these
upon the body, are in some degree analogous to the exhalations we have
mentioned. When they do not bring on sudden death, they produce according to
their malignity, either an inflammatory or putrid fever.

THE SMALL POX and the VENEREAL DISEASE were communicated to the Indians in
North America by the Europeans. Nor can I find that they were ever subject to
the SCURVY. Whether this was obviated by their method of preserving their
flesh, or by their mixing it at all times with vegetables, I shall not
undertake to determine. Doctor Maclurg ascribes to fresh meat an antiseptic
quality Experiments on the bile, and reflections on the biliary secretion.
. The peculiar customs and manners of life among the Indians, seems to have
exempted them from these, as well as all other diseases of the fluids. The
leprosy -- elephantiasis -- scurvy -- and venereal disease, appear to be
different modifications of the same primary disorder. The same causes produce
them in every age and country. They are diversified like plants by climate and
nourishment. They all sprung originally from a moist atmosphere, and unwholesome
diet: hence we read of their prevailing so much in the middle centuries, when
the principal parts of Europe were overflowed with water, and the inhabitants
lived entirely on fish, and a few unwholesome vegetables. The abolition of the
feudal system in Europe by introducing freedom, introduced at the same time
agriculture; which by multiplying the fruits of the earth, lessened the
consumption of animal food, and thus put a stop to these disorders. The
elephantiasis is almost unknown in Europe. The leprosy is confined chiefly to
the low countries of Africa. The plica polonica once so common in Poland is to
be found only in books of medicine. The venereal disease will probably in a few
years cease to be a tax upon unlawful embraces. The small pox is no longer a
fatal disorder, when the body is prepared for its reception, by a vegetable
regimen. Even the plague itself is losing its sting. It is hardly dreaded at
this time in Turkey; and its very existence is preserved there by the doctrine
of fatalism, which prevails among the inhabitants of that country. It may serve
as a new and powerful motive against political slavery to perceive, that it is
connected with those diseases which most deform and debase the human body. It
may likewise serve to enhance the blessings of liberty, to trace its effects,
in eradicating such loathsome and destructive disorders. (c)

I HAVE heard of two or three cases of the GOUT among the Indians, but it was
only among those who had learned the use of rum, from the white people. A
question naturally occurs here, and that is; why does not the gout appear more
frequently among that class of people, who consume the greatest quantity of rum
among ourselves? To this I answer, that the effects of this liquor upon those
enfeebled people, are too sudden and violent, to admit of their being thrown
upon the extremities; as we know them to be among the Indians. They appear only
in visceral obstructions, and a complicated train of chronic diseases. Thus
putrid miasmata are sometimes too strong to bring on a fever, but produce
instant debility, and death. The Gout is seldom heard of in Russia, Denmark or
Poland. Is this occasioned by the vigor of constitution peculiar to the
inhabitants of those northern countries? Or is it caused by their excessive use
of spirituous liquors, which produce the same chronic complaints among them,
which we said were common among the lower class of people in this country? The
similarity of their diseases, makes the last of these suppositions the most
probable. The effects of wine, like tyrranny in a well formed government, are
felt first in the extremities; while spirits, like a bold invader, seize at
once upon the vitals of the constitution.

I CANNOT find any accounts of diseases from WORMS among the Indians. Worms are
common to most animals; they produce diseases only in weak, or increase them in
strong constitutions. -- Hence they have no place in the nosological systems of
physic. Nor does DENTITION appear to be a disorder among the Indians. The
facility with which the healthy children of healthy parents cut their teeth,
among civilized nations, gives us reason to conclude that the Indian children
never suffer from this quarter.

THE employments of the Indians subject them to many accidents; hence we
sometimes read of WOUNDS, FRACTURES, and LUXATIONS among them.

HAVING thus pointed out the natural diseases of the Indians, and shown what
disorders are foreign to them; we may venture to conclude, that FEVERS, OLD
AGE, CASUALTIES and WAR are the only natural outlets of human life. War is
nothing but a distemper; it is founded in the imperfection of political bodies;
just as fevers are founded on the weakness of the animal body. -- Providence in
these diseases seems to act like a mild legislature, which mitigates the
severity of death, by inflicting it in a manner the least painful upon the
whole, to the patient and the survivors.

LET us now enquire into the REMEDIES of the Indians. These like their diseases
are simple, and few in number. Among the first of them we shall mention the
POWERS of NATURE. Fevers we said formerly, constituted the chief of the
diseases among the Indians; they are likewise, in the hands of nature, the
principal instruments to remove the evils which threaten her dissolution; (d)
but the event of these efforts of nature, no doubt, soon convinced the Indians
of the danger of trusting her in all cases; and hence in the earliest accounts
we have of their manners, we read of persons who were entrusted with the office
of physicians.

IT will be difficult to find out the exact order, in which the Indian remedies
were suggested by nature; or discovered by art; nor will it be easy to arrange
them in proper order. I shall however attempt it, by reducing them to NATURAL,
and ARTIFICIAL.

To the class of NATURAL REMEDIES belongs the Indian practice, of abstracting
from their patients all kinds of stimulating aliment. The compliance of the
Indians with this dictate of nature, in the early stage of a disorder, no
doubt, prevents in many cases, their being obliged to use any other remedy.
They follow nature still closer, in allowing their patients to drink
plentifully of cold water; this being the only liquor a patient calls for in a
fever.

SWEATING is likewise a natural remedy. It was probably suggested by observing
fevers to be terminated by it. I shall not enquire how far these sweats are
essential to the crisis of fevers. The Indian mode of procuring this evacuation
is as follows; the patient is confined in a close tent, or wigwam, over a hole
in the earth, in which a red hot stone is placed; a quantity of water is thrown
upon this stone, which instantly involves the patient in a cloud of vapor and
sweat; in this situation he rushes out, and plunges himself into a river; from
whence he retires to his bed. If the remedy has been used with success, he
rises from his bed in four and twenty hours, perfectly recovered from his
indisposition. This remedy is used not only to cure fevers, but to remove that
uneasiness which arises from fatigue of body.

A THIRD natural remedy among the Indians, is PURGING. The fruits of the earth,
the flesh of birds, and other animals feeding upon particular vegetables, and
above all, the spontaneous efforts of nature, early led the Indians to perceive
the necessity and advantages of this evacuation.

VOMITS constitute their fourth natural remedy. They were probably like the
former, suggested by nature, and accident. The ipecacuana is one of the many
roots they employ, for this purpose.

THE ARTIFICIAL REMEDIES made use of by the Indians, are BLEEDING, CAUSTICS,
and ASTRINGENT medicines. They confine bleeding entirely to the part affected.
To know that opening a vein in the arm, or foot, would relieve a pain in the
head, or side, supposes some knowledge of the animal economy, and therefore
marks an advanced period in the history of medicine.

SHARP stones and thorns, are the instruments they use, to procure a discharge
of blood.

WE have an account of the Indians using something like a POTENTIAL CAUSTIC, in
obstinate pains. It consists of a piece of rotten wood, called punk, which they
place upon the part affected, and afterward set it on fire; the fire gradually
consumes the wood, and its ashes burn a hole in the flesh.

THE undue efforts of nature, in those fevers which are connected with a
diarrhoea, or dysentry, together with those hemorrhages to which their mode of
life exposed them, necessarily led them to an early discovery of some
ASTRINGENT VEGETABLES. I am uncertain whether the Indians rely upon astringent,
or any other vegetables, for the cure of the intermitting fever. This disease
among them probably requires no other remedies than the cold bath, or cold air.
Its greater obstinacy, as well as frequency among ourselves, must be sought for
in the greater feebleness of our constitutions; and in that change which our
country has undergone, from meadows -- mill-dams -- and the cutting down of
woods; whereby morbid exhalations have been multiplied, and their passage
rendered more free, through every part of the country. (e)

THIS is a short account of the remedies of the Indians. If they are simple,
they are like their eloquence, full of strength; if they are few in number,
they are accommodated, as their languages are to their ideas, to the whole of
their diseases.

WE said formerly that the Indians were subject to ACCIDENTS, such as wounds --
fractures -- and the like. In these cases, nature performs the office of a
surgeon. We may judge of her qualifications for this office, by observing the
marks of wounds, and fractures, which are sometimes discovered on wild animals.
But further, what is the practice of our modern surgeons in these cases? Is it
not to lay aside plasters and ointments, and trust the whole to nature? Those
ulcers which require the assistance of mercury, bark, and a particular regimen,
are unknown to the Indians.

THEIR practice of attempting to recover DROWNED PEOPLE, is irrational and
unsuccessful. It consists in suspending the patient by the heels, in order that
the water may flow from his mouth. This practice is founded on a belief, that
the patient dies from swallowing an excessive quantity of water. But modern
observation teaches us, that, drowned people die of an apoplexy. This discovery
naturally suggests a method of cure, directly opposite to that in use among the
Indians; and shows us that the practice of suspending by the heels is hurtful.

WE have heard much of their specific antidotes to the VENEREAL DISEASE. In the
accounts of these antivenereal medicines, some abatement should be made for
that love of the mavelous, and of novelty, which are apt to creep into the
writings of travelers, and physicians. How many medicines which were once
thought infallible in this disorder, are now rejected from the materia medica!
I have found upon enquiry, that the Indians always assist their medicines in
this disease, by a regimen which promotes perspiration. Should we allow that
mercury acts as a specific in destroying this disorder, it does not follow that
it is proof against the efficacy of medicines which act more mechanically upon
the body. (f)

THERE cannot be a stronger mark of the imperfect state of knowledge in
medicine among the Indians, than their method of treating the SMALLPOX. We are
told that they plunge themselves in cold water, in the beginning of the
disorder, and that it generally proves fatal to them.

TRAVELERS speak in high terms of the Indian ANTIDOTES to POISONS. We must
remember, that many things have been thought poisonous, which later experience
has proved to possess no unwholesome quality. Moreover the uncertainty and
variety in the operation of poisons, render it extremely difficult to fix the
certainty of their antidotes, to them. How many specifics have derived their
credit for preventing the hydrophobia, from persons being wounded by animals,
who were not in a situation to produce that disorder! IF we may judge of all
the Indian antidotes to poisons, by those which have fallen into our hands, we
have little reason to ascribe much to them in any cases whatever.

I HAVE heard of their performing several remarkable cures upon STIFF JOINTS,
by an infusion of certain herbs in water. -- The mixture of several herbs
together in this infusion calls in question the specific efficacy of each of
them. I cannot help attributing the whole success of this remedy, to the great
heat of the water, in which the herbs were boiled; and to its being applied a
long time to the part affected. We find the same medicine to vary frequently in
its success, according to its strength, or to the continuance of its
application. De Haen attributes the good effects of electricity, entirely to
its being used for several months.

We are sometimes amused with accounts of Indian remedies for the DROPSY --
EPILEPSY -- COLIC -- GRAVEL and GOUT. If with all the advantages which modern
physicians derive from their knowledge in ANATOMY -- CHEMISTRY -- BOTANY and
PHILOSOPHY, if with the benefit of discoveries communicated from abroad, as
well as handed down from our ancestors, by more certain methods than tradition,
we are still ignorant of certain remedies for these diseases; what can we
expect from the Indians, who are not only deprived of these advantages, but
want our chief motive, the sense of the pain and danger of those disorders, to
prompt them to seek for such remedies to relieve them? There cannot be a
stronger proof of their ignorance of proper remedies for new or difficult
diseases, than their having recourse to enchantment. But to be more particular;
I have taken pains to enquire into the success of some of these Indian
specifics, and have never heard of one well attested case of their efficacy. I
believe they derive all their credit from our being ignorant of their
composition. The influence of secrecy is well known in establishing the credit
of a medicine. The sal seignet was an infallible medicine for the intermitting
fever, while the manufactory of it was confined to an apothecary at Rochelle;
but it lost its virtues as soon as it was found to be composed of the salt of
tartar, and a fossil alkali. Doctor Ward's famous pill and drop, ceased to do
wonders in scrophulous cases, as soon as he bequeathed to the world his
receipts for making them.

I FORESEE an objection to what has been said concerning the remedies of the
Indians, drawn from that knowledge which experience gives to a mind intent upon
one subject. We have heard much of the perfection of their senses of seeing and
hearing. An Indian we are told, will discover not only a particular tribe of
Indians by their footsteps, but the distance of time in which they were made.
In those branches of knowledge which relate to hunting and war, the Indians
have accquired a degree of perfection that has not been equalled by civilized
nations. But we must remember that medicine among them does not enjoy the like
advantage, the arts of war and hunting, of being the chief object of their
attention. The physician and the warrior are united in one character; to render
him as able in the former, as he is in the latter profession, would require an
entire abstraction from every other employment, and a familiarity with external
objects, which are incompatible with the wandering life of savages.

THUS have we finished our enquiry into the diseases and remedies of the
Indians in North America. -- We come now to enquire into the diseases and
remedies of civilized nations.

NATIONS differ in their, degrees of civilization. We shall select one for the
subject of our enquiries which is most familiar to us; I mean the British
Nation. Here we behold subordination and classes of mankind established by
government -- commerce -- manufactures, and certain customs common to most of
the civilized nations of Europe. We shall trace the origin of their diseases
through their customs, in the same manner as we did those of the Indians.

I. IT will be sufficient to name the degrees of heat -- the improper aliment
-- the tight dresses, and the premature studies children are exposed to, in
order to show the ample scope for diseases, which is added to the original
defect of stamina, they derive from their ancestors.

II. CIVILIZATION rises in its demands upon the health of women. Their
fashions, their dress and diet -- their eager pursuits and ardent enjoyment of
pleasure -- their indolence and undue evacuations in pregnancy -- their
cordials -- hot regimen and neglect or use of art, in childbirth, are all so
many inlets to diseases.

HUMANITY would fain be silent, while philosophy calls upon us to mention the
effects of interested marriages -- of disappointments in love, increased by
that concealment which the tyranny of custom has imposed upon the sex; and
lastly, the effects of the long delay of the marriage bed. (g) All these
exaggerate the natural, and increase the number of artificial diseases among
women.

III. THE diseases introduced by civilization extend themselves through every
class and profession among men. How fatal are the effects of idleness and
intemperance among the rich -- and of hard labor and penury among the poor!
What palid looks are contracted by the votaries of science from hanging over
the "sickly taper." How many diseases are entailed upon manufacturers, by the
materials in which they work, and the posture of their bodies! What monkish
diseases do we observe from monkish continence, and monkish vices! We pass over
the increase of accidents from building -- sailing -- riding and the like. War
as if too slow in destroying the human species, calls in a train of diseases
peculiar to civilized nations. What havoc have the corruption and monopoly of
provisions -- a damp soil, and an unwholesome sky, made in a few days in an
army! The achievements of british valor at the Havannah, in the last war, were
obtained at the expense of 9,000 men, 7,000 of whom perished with the
West India fever. (h) Even our modern discoveries in geography, by extending
the empire of commerce, have likewise extended the empire of diseases. What
desolation have the East and West Indies made, of British subjects! It has been
found upon a nice calculation, that only ten of an hundred Europeans, live
above seven years after they arrive in the island of Jamaica. (i)

IV. IT would take up too much of our time to point out all the customs both
physical and moral, which influence diseases among both sexes. The former have
engendered the seeds of diseases, in the human body itself; hence the origin of
catarrhs -- jail and miliary fevers; with a long train of contagious disorders,
which compose so great a part of our books of medicine. The latter likewise
have a large share in producing diseases. I am not one of those modern
philosophers, who derive the vices of mankind from the influence of
civilization: but I am safe in asserting, that their number and malignity
increase with the refinements of polished life. To prove this, we need only
survey a scene too familiar to affect us: it is a bedlam, which injustice --
inhumanity -- avarice -- pride -- vanity and ambition have filled with
inhabitants.

THUS have we briefly pointed out the customs which influence the diseases of
civilized nations. It remains now that we take notice of their diseases.
Without naming the many new fevers, fluxes, haemorrhages, swellings from water,
wind, flesh, fat, pus and blood; foulnesses on the skin from cancers, lepras,
yaws, poxes, itch; and lastly, the gout, the hysteria, and the hypochondriasis,
in all their variety of known and unknown shapes: I shall sum all that is
necessary upon this subject by adding, that the number of diseases which belong
to civilized nations, according to Doctor Cullen's nosology, amounts to 1,387:
the single class of nervous diseases form 612 of this number.

BEFORE we proceed to speak of the remedies of civilized nations, we shall
examine into the abilities of NATURE in curing their diseases. We found her
active and successful in curing the diseases of the Indians. Is her strength,
wisdom, or benignity, equal to the increase of those dangers which threaten her
dissolution among civilized nations? In order to answer this question, it will
be necessary to explain the meaning of the term nature.

BY NATURE, in the present case, I understand nothing but physical necessity:
this at once excludes every thing like intelligence from her operations: these
are all performed in obedience to the same laws, which govern vegetation in
plants and the intestine motions of fossils: they are as truly mechanical as
the laws of gravitation, electricity, or magnetism. A ship when laid on her
broadside by a wave, or a sudden blast of wind, rises by the simple laws of her
mechanism: but suppose this ship to be attacked by fire, or a water-spout, we
are not to call in question the skill of the ship-builder, if she is consumed
by the one, or sunk by the other. In like manner the author of nature has
furnished the body with powers to preserve itself from its natural enemies; but
when it is attacked by those civil foes which are bred by the peculiar customs
of civilization, it resembles a company of Indians, armed with bows and arrows,
against the complicated and deadly machinery of firearms. To place this
subject in a proper light, we shall deliver a history of the operations of
nature in a few of the diseases of civilized nations.

I. THERE are cases in which nature is still successful in curing diseases.

IN fevers she still deprives us of our appetite for animal food, and imparts
to us a desire for cool air and cold water.

IN haemorrhages she produces a faintiness, which occasions a coagulum in the
open vessels; so that the further passage of blood through them is obstructed.

IN wounds of the flesh and bones, she discharges foreign matter by exciting an
inflammation, and supplies the waste of both with new flesh and bone.

II. THERE are cases where the efforts of nature are too feeble to do service,
as in putrid and nervous fevers.

III. THERE are cases where the efforts of nature are over-proportioned to the
strength of the disease, as in the cholera morbus and dysentery.

IV. THERE are cases where nature is idle, as in the atonic stages of the gout,
the cancer, the epilepsy the mania, the venereal disease, the apoplexy and the
tetanus. Hoffman de Hypothesium Medicarum Damno Sect. xv.


V. THERE are cases in which nature does mischief. She wastes herself with an
unecessary fever, in a dropsy and consumption. She throws a plethora upon the
brains and lungs. She ends a pleurisy and peripneumony in a vomica, or empiema.
She creates an unnatural appetite for food in the hypochondriac disorder. And
lastly she drives the melancholy patient to solitude, where by brooding over
the subject of his insanity, he increases his disease.

WE are accustomed to hear of the salutary kindness of nature in alarming us
with pain, to prompt us to seek for a remedy. But,

VI. THERE are cases in which she refuses to send this harbinger of the evils
which threaten her, as in the aneurism, scirrhus, and stone of the bladder.

VII. THERE are cases where the pain is not proportioned to the danger, as in
the tetanus, consumption and dropsy of the head. And,

VIII. THERE are cases where the pain is over-proportioned to the danger, as in
the paronychia and toothach.

THIS is a short account of the operations of nature, in the diseases of
civilized nations. A lunatic might as well plead against the sequestration of
his estate, because he once enjoyed the full exercise of his reason, or because
he still had lucid intervals, as nature be exempted from the charges we have
brought against her.

BUT this subject will receive strength from considering the REMEDIES of
civilized nations. All the products of the vegetable, fossil and animal
kingdoms, tortured by heat and mixture into an almost infinite variety of
forms; bleeding, cuping, artificial drains by setons, issues, and blisters;
exercise active and passive; voyages and journies; baths warm and cold, waters
saline aerial and mineral, food by weight and measure, the royal touch,
enchantment, miracles, in a word, the combined discoveries of natural history
and philosophy, united into a system of materia medica, all show, that although
physicians are in speculation the servants, yet in practice they are the
masters of nature. The whole of their remedies seem contrived on purpose to
arouse, assist restrain and control her operations.

THERE are some truths like certain liquors which require strong heads to bear
them. I feel myself protected from the prejudices of vulgar minds, when I
reflect that I am delivering these sentiments in a society of philosophers.

LET us now take a COMPARITIVE VIEW of the diseases and remedies of the
Indians, with those of civilized nations. We shall begin with their diseases.

IN our account of the diseases of the Indians we beheld death executing his
commission, it is true; but then his dart was hid in a mantle, under which he
concealed his shape. But among civilized nations we behold him multiplying his
weapons in proportion to the number of organs and functions in the body; and
pointing each of them in such a manner, as to render his messengers more
terrible than himself.

WE said formerly that fevers constituted the chief diseases of the Indians.
According to Dr. Sydenham's computation above 66,000 out of 100,000 died of
fevers in London about 100 years ago; but fevers now constitute but a little
more than one tenth part of the diseases of that city. Out of 21,780 persons
who died in London between December 1770 and December 1771, only 2273 died of
simple fevers. I have more than once heard Dr. Huck complain, that he could
find no marks of epidemic fevers in London as described by Dr. Sydenham. London
has undergone a revolution in its manners and customs since Dr. Sydenham's
time. New diseases, the offspring of luxury, have supplanted fevers; and the
few that are left, appear so complicated with other diseases, that their
connection can no longer be discovered with an epedemic constitution of the
year. The pleurisy and periupneumony, those inflammatory fevers of strong
constitutions, are now lost in catarrhs, or colds; which instead of challenging
the powers of nature or art to a fair combat, insensibly undermine the
constitution, and bring on an incurable consumption. Out of 22,434 who died
between December 1769 and the same month in 1770, 4594 perished with that
british disorder. Our countryman Dr. Maclurg has ventured to foretell that the
Gout will be lost in a few years, in a train of hypochondriac, hysteric and
bilious disorders. In like manner, may we not look for a season when fevers,
the natural diseases of the human body, will be lost in an inundation of
artificial diseases, brought on by the modish practices of modern civilization?

IT may not be improper to compare the PROGNOSIS of the Indians, in diseases,
with that of civilized nations, before we take a comparative view of their
remedies.

THE Indians are said to be successful in predicting the events of diseases.
While diseases are simple, the marks which distinguish them, or characterize
their several stages, are generally uniform and obvious to the most indifferent
observer. These marks afford so much certainty, that the Indians sometimes kill
their physicians for a false prognosis, charging the death of the patient to
his carelessness, or ignorance. They estimate the danger of their patients by
their degrees of appetite; while an Indian is able to eat, he is looked upon as
free from danger. But when we consider the number and variety in the signs of
diseases, among civilized nations, together with the shortness of life, the
fallacy of memory, and the uncertainty of observation; where shall we find a
physician willing to risk his reputation, much less his life, upon the
prediction of the event of our acute diseases? We can derive no advantage from
the simple sign, by which the Indians estimate the danger of their patients;
for we daily see a want of appetite for food in diseases which are attended
with no danger; and we sometimes observe an unusual degree of this appetite to
precede the agonies of death. I honor the name of HIPPOCRATES: But forgive me
ye votaries of antiquity, if I attempt to pluck a few gray hairs from his
venerable head. I was once an idolater at his altar, nor did I turn apostate
from his worship, till I was taught, that not a tenth part of his prognostics
corresponded with modern experience, or observation. (k) The pulse, (l) urine
(m) and sweats (n) from which the principal signs of life and death have been
taken, are so variable in most of the acute diseases of civilized nations, that
the wisest physicians have in some measure excluded the prognosis, from being a
part of their profession.

I AM here insensibly led to make an apology for the instability of the
theories, and practice of physic. The theory of physic is founded upon the laws
of the animal economy. These (unlike the laws of the mind, or the common laws
of matter) do not appear at once, but are gradually brought to light, by the
phenomina of diseases. The success of nature, in curing the simple diseases of
Saxony, laid the foundation for the ANIMA MEDICA of Dr. STAHL. The endemicks of
Holland (o) led Dr. BOERHAAVE to seek for the causes of all diseases in the
FLUIDS. And the universal prevalence of the diseases of the NERVES, in
Great Britain, led Dr. CULLEN to discover their peculiar laws, and to found a
SYSTEM upon them. A system, which will probably last till some new diseases are
let loose upon the human species, which shall unfold other laws of the animal
economy!

IT is in consequence of this fluctuation in the principles, and practice of
physic, being so necessarily connected with the changes in the customs of
civilized nations, that old and young physicians so often disagree, in their
opinions and practices. And it is by attending to the constant changes in these
customs of civilized nations, that those physicians have generally become the
most eminent, who have soonest emancipated themselves from the tyranny of the
schools of physic; and have occasionly accomodated their principles, and
practice, to the changes in diseases. (p) This variety in diseases, which is
produced by the changes in the customs of civilized nations, will enable us to
account for many of the contradictions which are to be found in authors of
equal candor, and abilities, who have written of the materia medica.

IN forming a comparative view of the REMEDIES of the Indians, with those of
civilized nations, we shall remark, that the want of success in a medicine, is
occasioned by one of the following causes.

FIRST, our ignorance of the disorder. Secondly, an ignorance of a suitable
remedy. Thirdly, a want of efficacy in the remedy.

CONSIDERING the violence of the diseases of the Indians, it is probable their
want of success, is always occasioned by a want of efficacy in their medicines.
But the case is very different among civilized nations. Dissections daily
convince us of our ignorance of the seats of diseases, and cause us to blush at
our prescriptions. What certain or equal remedies have we found for the gout,
the epilepsy, apoplexy, palsy, dropsy of the brain, cancer and consumption? How
often are we disappointed in our expectations, from the the most certain and
powerful of our remedies, by the negligence or obstinacy of our patients! What
mischief have we not done under the belief of false facts, and false theories!
We have assisted in multiplying diseases. -- We have done more -- we have
increased their mortality. (q) --

I SHALL not pause to beg pardon of the faculty, for acknowledging in this
public manner the weaknesses of our profession. I am pursuing truth, and while
I can keep my eye fixed upon my guide -- I am indifferent whiter I am led,
provided she is my leader.

BUT further, the Indian submits to his disease, without one fearful emotion,
from his doubtfulness of its event; and at last meets his fate without an
anxious wish for futurity; except it is of being admitted to an "equal sky"
where "His faithful dog shall bear him company." But among civilized nations,
the influence of a false religion in good, and of a true religion in bad men,
has converted even the fear of death into a disease. It is this original
distemper of the imagination which renders the plague most fatal, upon its
first appearance in a country.

UNDER all these disadvantages, in the state of medicine, among civilized
nations, do more in proportion die of the diseases peculiar to them, than of
fevers, causualties and old age, among the Indians? If we take our account from
the city of London, we shall find this to be the case. Near a twentieth part of
its inhabitants perish one year with another. Nor does the natural increase of
inhabitants supply this yearly waste. If we judge from the bills of mortality,
the city of London contains fewer inhabitants, by several thousands, than it
did forty years ago. It appears from this fact, and many others of a like
nature, which might be adduced, that although the difficulty of supporting
children, together with some peculiar customs of the Indians, which we
mentioned, limit their number; yet they multiply faster, and die in a smaller
proportion than civilized nations, under the circumstances we have described.
The Indians we are told were numerous in this country, before the Europeans
settled among them. Travelers agree likewise in describing numbers of both
sexes, who exhibited all the marks of extreme old age. It is remarkable that
age seldom impairs the faculties of their minds.

THE mortality peculiar to those Indian tribes who have mingled with the white
people must be ascribed to the extensive mischief of spirituous liquors. When
these have not acted, they have suffered from having accomodated themselves too
suddenly to the European diet, dress, and manners. It does not become us to pry
too much into futurity; but if we may judge from the fate of the original
natives of Hispaniola, Jamaica, and the provinces on the continent, we may
venture to foretell, that, in proportion as the white people multiply, the
Indians will diminish; so that in a few centuries they will probabl be entirely
extirpated. (r)

IT may be said, that health among the Indians, like insensibility to cold and
hunger, is proportioned to their need of it; and that the less degrees, or
entire want of health are no interruption to the ordinary business of civilized
life.

To obviate this supposition we shall first attend to the effects of a single
distemper in those people, who are the principal wheels in the machine of civil
society. Justice has stopped its current -- victories have been lost -- wars have
been prolonged, and embassies delayed, by the principal actors in these
departments of government, being suddenly laid up with a sit of the gout. How
many offenses are daily committed against the rules of good breeding, by the
tedious histories of our disorders, which compose so great a part of modern
conversation! What sums of money have been lavished in foreign countries in
pursuit of health! (s) Families have been ruined by the unavoidable expenses of
medicines, and watering places. In a word, the swarms of beggars which infest
so many of the European countries, urge their petitions for charity chiefly by
arguments derived from real or counterfeit diseases, which render them
incapable of supporting themselves. (t)

BUT may not civilization while it abates the violence of natural diseases,
increase the lenity of those that are artificial; in the same manner that it
lessens the strength of natural vices by multiplying them? To answer this
question, it will only be necessary to ask another: Who would exchange the
heat, thirst and uneasiness of a fever, for one sit of the colic or stone?

THE history of the number, combinations and fashions of the remedies we have
given, may serve to humble the pride of philosophy; and to convince us that
with all the advantages of the whole circle of sciences, we are still ignorant
of antidotes to the chief of the diseases of civilized nations. We sometimes
sooth our ignorance by reproaching our idleness in not investigating the
remedies peculiar to this country. We are taught to believe that every herb
that grows in our woods, is possessed of some medicinal virtue, and that heaven
would be wanting in benignity if our country did not produce remedies, for all
the different diseases of its inhabitants. (u) It would be arrogating too much
to suppose, that man was the only creature in our world for whom vegetables
grow. The beasts, birds and insects, derive their sustenance either directly,
or indirectly from them; while many of them were probably intended from their
variety in figure, foliage and color, only to serve as ornaments for our globe.
It would seem strange that the author of nature should furnish every spot of
ground, with medicines adapted to the diseases of its inhabitants, and at the
same time deny it the more necessary articles of food and clothing. I know not
whether heaven has provided every country with antidotes even to the natural
diseases of its inhabitants. The intermitting fever is common in almost every
corner of the globe. But a sovereign remedy for it has been discovered only in
South-America. The combination of bitter and astringent substances which serve
as a succedaneum to the Peruvian bark is as much a preparation of art, as
calomel, or tartar emetic. Societies stand in need of each other as much as
individuals: and the goodness of the deity remains unimpeached when we suppose,
that he intended medicines to serve (with other articles) to promote that
knowledge, humanity and politeness among the inhabitants of the earth, which
have been so justly attributed to commerce. (w)

WE have no discoveries in the materia medica, to hope for from the Indians in
North America. It would be a reproach to our schools of physic, if modern
physicians were not more successful than the Indians, even in the treatment of
their own diseases. (x)

DO the blessings of civilization compensate for the sacrifice we make of
natural health, as well as of natural liberty? This question must be answered
under some limitations. When natural liberty is given up for laws, which
enslave instead of protecting us, we are immense losers by the exchange. Thus,
if we arm the whole elements against our health, and render every pore in the
body an avenue for a disease, we pay too high a price for the blessings of
civilization.

IN governments which have departed entirely from their simplicity, partial
evils are to be cured by nothing, but an entire renovation of their
constitution. Let the world bear with the professions of law -- physic -- and
divinity, and let the lawyer, physician and divine yet learn to bear with each
other. They are all necessary, in the present state of society. In like manner,
let the woman of fashion, forget the delicacy of her sex, and submit to be
delivered by a man-midwife. (y) -- Let her snatch her offspring from her
breast, and send it to repair the weakness, of its stamina, with the milk of a
ruddy cottager. (z) Let art supply the place of nature in the preparation and
digestion of all our aliment. (a a) Let our fine ladies keep up their color
with carmine, (b b) and their spirits with ratafia; and let our fine gentlemen,
defend themselves from the excesses of heat, and cold, with lavender and
hartshorn. These customs have become necessary in the corrupt stages of
society. We must imitate in these cases, the practice of those physicians who
consult the appetite only, in diseases which do not admit of a remedy.

THE state of a country in point of population, temperance and industry, is so
connected with its diseases, that a tolerable idea may be formed of it, by
looking over its bills of mortality. HOSPITALS, with all their boasted
advantages, exhibit at the same time monuments of the charity and depravity of
a people. (c c) The opulence of physicians, and the divisions of their offices,
into those of surgery, pharmacy and midwifery, are likewise proofs of the
declining state of a country. In the infancy of the Roman Empire, the priest
performed the office of a physician; so simple were the principles and practice
of physic. It was only in the declension of the empire that physicians vied
with the emperors of Rome in magnificence and splendour. (d d)

I AM sorry to add in this place, that the number of patients in the HOSPITAL
(e e) and incurables in the ALMSHOUSE of this city show, that we are treading
in the enervated steps of our fellow subjects in Britain. Our bills of
mortality likewise show the encroachments of British diseases upon us. The
NERVOUS FEVER has become so familiar to us, that we look upon it as a natural
disease. Dr. Sydenham so faithful in his history of fevers, takes no notice of
it. Dr. Cadwallader informed me, that it made its first appearance in this
city, about five and twenty years ago. It will be impossible to name the
CONSUMPTION without recalling to our minds the memory of some friend, or
relation, who has perished within these few years by that disorder. Its rapid
progress among us has been unjustly attributed to the growing resemblance of
our climate to that of Great Britain. (f f) The HYSTERIC and HYPOCHONDRIAC
DISORDERS, once peculiar to the chambers of the great, are now to be found in
our kitchens, and workshops. All these diseases have been produced by our
having deserted the simple diet, and manners, of our ancestors. (g g).

THE blessings of literature, commerce and religion, were not originally
purchased at the expense of health. The complete enjoyment of health is as
compatible with civilization, as the enjoyment of civil liberty. We read of
countries, rich in every thing that can form national happiness and national
grandeur, the diseases of which are nearly as few and simple as those of the
Indians. We hear of no diseases among the Jews, while they were under their
democratical form of government, except such as were inflicted by a
supernatural power.(h h) We should be tempted to doubt the accounts given of
the populousness of that people, did we not see the practice of their simple
customs, producing nearly the same populousness in Egypt, Rome, and other
countries of antiuqity. The empire of China, it is said contains more
inhabitants than the whole of Europe. The political institutions of that
country have exempted its Inhabitants from a large share of the diseases of
other civilized nations. The inhabitants of Swisserland, Denmark, Norway (i i)
and Sweden, enjoy the chief advantages of civilization without having
surrendered for them the blessings of natural health. But it is unnecessary to
appeal to ancient or remote nations to prove, that health is not incompatible
with civilization. The inhabitants of many parts of New England, particularly
the province of Connecticut, are strangers to artificial diseases. -- Some of
you may remember the time, and our fathers have told those of us who do not,
when the diseases of PENNSYLVANIA were as few and as simple as those of the
Indians. The food of the inhabitants was then simple: their only drink was
water: their appetites were restrained by labor: religion excluded the
influence of sickening passions: private hospitality supplied the want of a
public hospital: nature was their only nurse: temperance their principal
physician. But I must not dwell upon this retrospect of primeval manners: and I
am too strongly impressed with a hope of a revival of such happy days, to
pronounce them the golden age of our province.

OUR esteem for the customs of our savage neighbors will be lessened when we
add, that civilization does not preclude the honors of old age. The proportion
of old people is much greater among civilized, than among savage nations. It
would be easy to decide this assertion in our favor, by appealing to facts in
the natural histories of Britain, Norway, Sweden, the province of Connecticut,
and several of the West India islands. (k k)

THE laws of decency and nature, are not necessarily abolished by the customs
of civilized nations. In many of these, we read of women among whom nature
alone still performs the office of a midwife (l l) -- and who feel the
obligations of suckling their children, to be equally binding with the common
obligations of morality.

CIVILIZATION does not render us less fit for the necessary hardships of war.
We read of armies of civilized nations, who have endured degrees of cold,
hunger and fatigue, which have not been exceeded by the savages of any country.
(m m)

CIVILIZATION does not always multiply the avenues of death. It appears from
the bills of mortality, of many countries, that fewer in proportion die among
civilized, than among savage nations.(n n)

EVEN the charms of beauty are not necessarily given up in civilization. We
read of stateliness, proportion, and fine complexions in both sexes, forming
the principal outlines of national characters.

THE danger of many diseases, is not proportioned to their violence, but to
their duration. America has advanced but a few paces in luxury and effeminacy.
There is yet strength enough in her vitals, to give life to those parts which
are decayed. She may recall her steps. -- For this purpose,

I. LET our children be educated in a manner more agreeable to nature.

II. LET the common people (who constitute the wealth and strength of our
country) be preserved from the effects of intemperance. The increase of the
price of spirituous liquors for this purpose, is a remedy as unequal to the
design, as it is destructive to liberty and commerce. Sir William Temple tells
us, that in Spain no man can be admitted as an evidence in court, who has once
been convicted of drunkenness. I do not call for so severe a law in this
country. Let us first try the force of severe manners. Lycurgus governed more
by these, than by his laws. "Bonae mores non bonae leges," according to
Tacitus, were the bulwarks of virtue among the ancient Germans.

III. LET us be cautious what kind of manufactures we admit among us. What is
patriotism in one country may be treason in another. The same public spirit
which leads a Hollander to promote all kinds of manufactories in his country
overgrown with inhabitants, should lead us to oppose them, as hurtful to the
true interest of our own. The rickets made their first appearance in the
manufacturing towns in England. Dr. Fothergill informed me, that he had often
observed, when a pupil, that the greatest part of the chronic patients in the
London-Hospital were Spitalfield weavers. I would not be understood, from these
facts, to discourage those manufactures which employ women and children: these
suffer few inconveniences from a sedentary life: nor do I mean to offer the
least restraint to those manufactories among men, which admit of free air and
the exercise of all their limbs.

IV. I DESPAIR of being able to call the votaries of Bacchus from their bottle,
and shall therefore leave them to be roused by the more eloquent twinges of the
gout.

V. I PASS over likewise the ravages which TEA is making upon the health and
populousness of our country. Had I a double portion of all that eloquence which
has been employed in describing the political evils which lately accompanied
this East India herb, it would be too little to set forth the numerous and
complicated diseases which it has introduced among us. To encounter this hydra,
requires an arm accustomed, like that of Hercules, to vanquish monsters.

THE population of a country is not to be accomplished by rewards and
punishments. And it is happy for America, that the universal prevalence of the
protestant religion -- the checks lately given to negro slavery -- the general
unwillingness among us to acknowledge the usurpations of primogeniture -- the
addition of Canada to the British empire -- the universal practice of
inoculation for the smallpox -- and the absence of the plague, render the
interposition of government for that purpose unnecessary.

THESE advantages can only be secured to our country by AGRICULTURE. This is
the true basis of national health, riches and populousness. Nations, like
individuals, never rise higher than when they are ignorant whither they are
tending. It is impossible to tell from history, what will be the effects of
agriculture -- industry -- temperance and commerce, urged on by the competition
of colonies, united in the same general pursuits, in a country, which, for
extent -- variety of soil -- climate -- and number of navigable rivers, has
never been equalled in any quarter of the globe. America is the theater where
human nature will probably receive her last and principal literary, civil and
military honors.

BUT I recall myself from the ages of futurity. The province of Pennsylvania
has already showed her sister colonies, the influence of agriculture and
commerce upon the number and happiness of a people. It is scarcely an hundred
years since our illustrious legislator, with a handful of men, landed upon
these shores. Although the perfection of our government, the healthiness of our
climate, and the fertility of our soil, seemed to ensure a rapid settlement of
the province; yet it would have required a prescience bordering upon divine, to
have foretold, that in such a short space of time, the province would contain
above 300,000 inhabitants; and that near 30,000 of this number should compose a
city, which should be the third, if not the second in commerce in the British
empire. The pursuits of literature, require leisure and a total recess from
clearing forests, planting, building, and all the common toils of settling a
new country: But before these arduous works were accomplished, the SCIENCES,
ever fond of the company of liberty and industry, chose this spot for the seat
of their empire in this new world. Our COLLEGE, so catholic in its foundation,
and extensive in its objects, already sees her sons executing offices in the
highest departments of society. I have now the honor of speaking in the
presence of a most respectable number of philosophers -- physicians --
astronomers -- botanists -- patriots -- and legislators; many of whom have
already seized the prizes of honor, which their ancestors had allotted to a
much later posterity. Our first offering had scarcely found its way into the
temple of fame, when the oldest societies in Europe turned their eyes upon us,
expecting with impatience to see the mighty fabric of science, which like a
well built arch, can only rest upon the whole of its materials, completely
finished from the treasures of this unexplored quarter of the globe.

IT reflects equal honor upon our society and the honorable assembly of our
province, to acknowledge, that we have always found the latter willing to
encourage by their patronage, and reward by their liberality, all our schemes
for promoting useful knowledge. What may we not expect from this harmony
between the sciences and government! Methinks I see canals cut -- rivers once
impassable, rendered navigable -- bridges erected -- and roads improved, to
facilitate the exportation of grain. -- I see the banks of our rivers vieing in
fruitfulness with the banks of the river of Egypt. -- I behold our farmers,
nobles -- our merchants, princes. -- But I forbear -- Imagination cannot swell
with the subject.

I BEG leave to conclude, by deriving an argument from our connection with the
legislature, to remind my auditors of the duty they owe to the society.
Patriotism and literature are here connected together; and a man cannot neglect
the one, without being destitute of the other. Nature and our ancestors have
completed their works among us; and have left us nothing to do, but to enlarge
and perpetuate our own happiness.

AN APPENDIX: CONTAINING PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

APPENDIX.
(a) Page 17.

CAESAR, in his history of the Gallic war, gives the same account of the
ancient Germans. His words are: "Qui diutissime impuberes permanserunt, maximam
inter suos ferunt laudem: hoc ali staturam, ali vires, nervosque confirmari
putant." Lib. vi. xxi.

(b) p. 19.

SINCE the intercourse of the white people with the Indians, we find some of
them deformed in their limbs. This deformity, upon enquiry, appears to be
produced by those accidents, quarrels, etc. which have been introduced among
them by spirituous liquors.

(c) p. 24.

MURATORI, in his antiquities of Italy in the middle ages, describes the
greatest part of Europe as overflowed with water. The physicians and historians
of those ages, are full of the physical and political miseries which prevailed
during those centuries. The whole of the diseases we have mentioned, raged at
one time in all the countries of Europe. In the ninth century, there were
19,000 hospitals for lepers only, in Christendom. Lewis VIII. king of France,
in the year 1227, bequeathed legacies to 2000 leprous hospitals in his own
kingdom. The same diet, and the same dampness of soil and air, produced the
same effects in South-America. The venereal disease probably made its
appearance at the same time, in South-America and Naples. Precis de l'Histoire
physique des tems, par M. Raymond. The leprosy and scurvy still prevail in the
northern parts of Europe, where the manner of living, among the inhabitants,
still bears some resemblance to that which prevailed in the middle centuries.
Pontoppidan's Natural Hist. of Norway. Between the years 1006 and 1680, we read
of the plague being epidemic fifty-two times throughout all Europe. The
situation of Europe is well known during the fourteenth century: every country
was in arms; agriculture was neglected; nourishment of all kinds was scanty and
unwholesome; no wonder, therefore, that we read of the plague being fourteen
times epidemic in Europe during that period. In proportion as the nations of
Europe have civilized, and cultivated the earth, together with the arts of
peace, this disorder has gradually mitigated. It prevailed only six times in
the sixteenth, and five times in the seventeenth centuries: it made its last
general appearance in the year 1680: it has occasionally visited several cities
in Europe within the last century; but has raged with much less violence than
formerly. It is highly probable its very existence would be destroyed, could
the inhabitants of Turkey (where it is at all times endemic) be prevailed upon
to use the same precautions to prevent its spreading, which have been found
successful in other parts of Europe. The English, and other foreigners, who
reside at Constantinople, escape the plague more by avoiding all intercourse
with persons -- houses -- clothes, etc. infected with the disorder, than by any
peculiarities in their diet or manners. That the use of wine alone does not
preserve them from the infection, we learn from the history of the Armenians,
who drink large quantities of wine; and yet, from their belief in the doctrine
of fatalism, perish in the same proportion as the Turks.

(d) p. 27.

"LICET enim commotio ista [febris] perturbato circulations systemate,
gravibusque symptomatis molesta, haud raro perniciem inferat, hinc merito
morbus appelletur; faepe tamen et mirifice adeo salutaris est, ut certius aliud
potentiusve cum ad sanandos, tum ad praecavendos morbos auxillium natura, vel
ars, vix agnoscat." Gaubii Institutiones Pathologiae. 641.

(e) p. 31.

IT has been remarked, that the intermitting fevers which follow the building
of a grist-mill, appear only on the west side of the mill-dam: this is probably
occasioned by our easterly winds (which carry the exhalations) being generally
accompanied with rain. Formerly, intermitting fevers were confined to the
shones of Susquehannah -- Schuylkill -- and the other rivers of our province;
but since the country has been so much cleared of woods, we often meet with
them eight or ten miles from the rivers.

(f) p. 33.

I CANNOT help suspecting the antivenereal qualities of the lobelia --
ceanothus and ranunculus, spoken of by Mr. Kalm, in the memoirs of the Swedish
academy. Mr. Hand informed me, that the Indians rely chiefly upon a plentiful
use of the decoctions of the pine-trees, against the venereal disease. He added
moreover, that he had often known it prove fatal to them.

(g) p. 39.

"MARRIED women are more healthy and long-lived than single women. The
registers, examined by Mr. Muret, confirm this observation; and show
particularly, that of equal numbers of single and married women between fifteen
and twenty-five years of age, more of the former died than of the latter, in
the proportion of two to one: the consequence, therefore, of following nature,
must be favorable to health among the female sex." Supplement to Price's
Observations on Reversionary Payments. p. 357.

(h) p. 40.

THE modern writers upon the diseases of armies, wonder that the Greek and
Roman physicians have left us nothing upon that subject. But may not most of
the diseases of armies, be produced by the different manner in which wars are
carried on by modern nations? The discoveries in geography, by extending the
field of war, expose soldiers to many diseases from long voyages, and a sudden
change of climate; which were unknown to the armies of former ages. Moreover,
the form of the weapons, and the variety in the military exercises of the
Grecian and Roman armies, gave a vigor to the constitution, which can never be
acquired by the use of muskets, and artillery.

(i) p. 40.

THE Hon. Dr. Young, a curious botanist, and ingenious physician at St.
Vincent's, took a particular account of the height -- age -- and temperament of
each of the soldiers that arrived in that island, in the late war that was
carried on against the Caribbs; and upon examining his list at the close of the
war, he has ascertained, with a good deal of exactness, the figures -- ages --
and constitutions of men, which are most proper for the West India climate.
When he has added a few more facts to his calculation, we hear he intends to
oblige the public with a sight of it.

(k) p. 51.

THE uniformity in the signs of diseases so carefully described by Hippocrates,
was produced by the uniformity of the climate of Greece. Dr. Sydenham long ago
complained of the variety in the signs of diseases, which was produced by the
variable climate of Britain. The same variety, together with the gradual
changes of the climate in North America, render it impossible to perfect the
Hippocratic art in this country.

(l) p. 51.

DR. CULLEN used to inform his pupils, that after forty years experience, he
could find no relation between his observations on the pulse, and those made by
Dr. Solano. The climate and customs of the people in Spain being so different
from the climate and customs of the present inhabitants of Britain, may account
for the diversity of their observations. Dr. Heberden's remarks upon the pulse,
in the second volume of the Medical Transactions, are calculated to show how
little the present state, or issue of diseases can be learnt from it.

(m) p. 51.

THE urine has been examined by physicians, with the same scrutiny as if it was
the book of fate, or possessed of the power of Aaron's breastplate; virginity,
conception, and fruitfulness, have been decided by it Sir Thomas Brown.
. It indicates the degree and duration of simple diseases; each of which may be
determined by less equivocal signs. But where shall we find diseases so simple,
as not to be, in some measure, influenced by some peculiar custom of civilized
life? In diseases which are of a mixed nature, or altogether artificial, so
many circumstances from diet -- drinks -- exercise -- passions of the mind --
and temperature of the air, alter the color, consistence and quantity of the
urine, that the wisest physicians of the present day have agreed, that neither
the diagnosis or prognosis of diseases can be improved by the nicest
observations that can be made upon it.

(n) p. 51.

THE crisis of fevers is generally accompanied with sweating; which is now
looked upon as the effect, and not the cause of the solution of the disease.
But there are fevers which terminate favorably without sweating. Wintringham
Comment. Nosolog. "Experience, not reason, (says Dr. Sydenham) teaches what
kind of fever is to be cured by sweats, and what by purging and the like: yea,
we may suppose, that there are some sorts of fevers which nature cures by a
peculiar method of her own, without any visible evacuation." Sect. v. chap. 11.
There are fevers in which general sweats usher in death, while the physician is
expecting from them a happy solution, of the disease. Morgagni de Causis and
sedibus Morborum. Epis. vii. 11. 16.

(o) p. 51.

"THE scurvy is very frequent in Holland; and draws its origin partly from
their strong food -- seafish -- and smoaked flesh, and partly from their dense
and moist air, together with their bad water." Hoffman on Endemial Distempers.

"WE are now in North-Holland; and I have never seen, among so few people, so
many infected with the leprosy as here. They say the reason is, because they
eat so much fish." Howell's Familiar Letters.

(p) p. 52.

WE may learn from these observations, the great impropriety of those Egyptian
laws which oblige physicians to adopt, in all cases, the prescriptions which
had been collected, and approved of, by the physicians of former ages. Every
change in the customs of civilized nations, produces a change in their
diseases, which calls for a change in their remedies. What havoc would
plentiful bleeding, purging, and small-beer, formerly used with so much success
by Dr. Sydenham in the cure of fevers, now make upon the enfeebled citizens of
London! The fevers of the same, and of more southern latitudes, still admit of
such antiphlogistic remedies. In the room of these, bark -- wine, and other
cordial medicines, are prescribed in London in almost every kind of fever.

(q) p. 54.

IN the most refined and spiritual modes of worship among Protestants, we find
many people still leaning upon some of the peculiar tenets of the church of
Rome, under a new or hidden form. In like manner, we find among regular bred
physicians some who still lean upon the practices of quackery, without being
conscious how much in so doing they undervalue and injure our profession.
Physic, like religion, will not suffer by undeceiving the common people. On the
contrary, by acknowledging the imperfections of our science, we invite the
professors of every other branch of philosophy to unite their enquiries with
ours, to bring it to perfection. It would require a volume to mention all the
mischiefs which the archaeus -- the pleura furens -- the anima medica -- and
the acid, alkaline and muriatic humors have done in medicine. Each of these,
like the hot regimen in the smallpox, has slain its thousands. Even theories,
founded upon facts, have done harm by their misapplication. It is necessary to
view human errors at the distance of forty or fifty years, to discover their
absurdity. Have we more industry, or sagacity, than our ancestors? Are we not
obstructed by their prejudices, and difficulties in our researches after truth?
It becomes us, therefore, by a modest skepticism in our opinions, to deprecate
the censure and ridicule of posterity. The late successful enquiries into the
laws of the nervous system, and the theories we have built upon them, will
probably appear like the outlines of a picture, compared with that COMPLETE
SYSTEM of physic which remains to be unfolded hereafter, when we arrive at a
full knowledge of the structure and economy of the brain.

"We think our fathers fools -- so wise we grow:
"Our wiser sons, no doubt, will think us so."
(r) p. 56.

EVEN the influence of CHRISTIAN principles, has not been able to put a stop to
the mortality introduced among the Indians, by their intercourse with the
Europeans. Dr. Cotton Mather, in a letter to Sir William Ashurst, printed in
Boston in the year 1705, says, "That about five years before, there were about
thirty Indian congregations in the southern parts of the province of
Massachusetts Bay." The same author, in his History of New England, says, "That
in the islands of Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard there were 3000 adult
Indians, 1600 of whom professed the christian religion." At present there is
but one Indian congregation in the whole Massachusetts province.

IT may serve to extend our knowledge of diseases, to remark, that epidemics
were often observed to prevail among the Indians in Nantucket, without
affecting the white people.

(s) p. 57.

IT is said, there are seldom less than 20,000 British subjects in France and
Italy; one half of whom reside or travel in those countries upon the account of
their health. The loss to the British nation of the money spent in this manner
is trifling, compared with the relaxation of national virtues, which is brought
on by residing too long among foreigners.

(t) p. 57.

TEMPLEMAN computes, that Scotland contains 1,500,000 inhabitants; 100,000 of
whom, according to Mr. Fletcher, are supported at the public expense. The
proportion of poor people is much greater in England -- Ireland -- France, and
Italy.

(u) p. 58.

IN describing the goodness of Providence in providing against natural evils,
we are too apt to forget that he has endowed man with reasonable and social
qualities. To suppose that God has provided a natural remedy for all the
artificial diseases, produced by the vice and sloth of mankind, would be as
absurd as to suppose, that the final cause of diseases was to afford sustenance
to physicians.

(w) p. 60.

FOR a particular account of the beneficial effects of commerce in civilizing
mankind, see Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, book xx. chap. 1. -- And Dr.
Robertson Hist. of Charles V. vol. I. note xxix. -- Medicines are a most
important link in this chain of commerce; hence we find, that they are
generally excepted articles in those suspensions of trade, which are produced
by war.

(x) p. 60.

SINCE the intercourse of the white people with the Indians, they have acquired
several of our artificial methods of curing diseases, particularly the art of
phlebotomy. What Indian remedies ever equalled the efficacy of bleeding -- and
a blister to the side, for the cure of the pleurisy?

(y) p. 61.

WHEN nature is banished from every thing, it is high time for priests to enter
into the temple of Lucina. When the female constitution is so enervated, that
childbearing becomes a work of art, the office should be entrusted to persons
possessed of more knowledge and intrepidity, than generally fall to the share
of midwives. In the enervated age of Athens, a law was passed which confined
the practice of midwifery only to the men: it was, however, repealed, upon a
woman's dying in childbirth, rather than be delivered by a man-midwife. It
appears from the bills of mortality in London and Dublin, that about one in
seventy of those women die in childbirth, who are in the hands of midwives; but
from the accounts of the lying-in hospitals in those cities, which are under
the care of man-midwives, only one in an hundred and forty perishes in
childbirth.

(z) p. 61.

THERE has been much commonplace declamation against the custom among the
great, of not suckling their children. Nurses were common in Rome, in the
declension of the empire: -- hence we find Cornelia commended as a rare example
of maternal virtue, as much for suckling her sons, as for teaching them
eloquence. That nurses were common in Egypt, is probable from the contract
which Pharoah's daughter made with the unknown mother of Moses, to allow her
wages for suckling her own child. The same degrees of civilization, require the
same customs. A woman, whose constitution has been enfeebled by the fashionable
customs of pregnancy, and whose times for eating, sleeping, etc. are constantly
interrupted by the calls of enervating pleasures, must always afford milk of an
unwholesome nature. It may truly be said of a child doomed to live on this
aliment, that as soon as it receives its -- "breath,
It sucks in "the lurking principles of death."


(a a) p. 61.

OUR diet should be either altogether natural or artificial. When the digestive
organs are relaxed by habits of indolence and intemperance, milk and vegetables
should be banished from our tables. Our animal food should be prepared for
digestion, by a slight putrefaction; and large sideboards of wine, spices, etc.
should supply the want of the natural tone and juices of the stomach, to
enables us to digest it.

(b b) p. 61.

WE repair the ravages of diseases, by artificial hair -- eyes -- teeth -- and
even limbs. When we consider how great a proportion of beauty a fine complexion
forms in a female face; wherein consists the impropriety of repairing the
natural want of this complexion, by having recourse to art? The taste for
beauty is universal; and remains uncorrupted, after the simplicity and love of
nature are banished from every thing else in society. -- Our prejudices against
this custom, should be founded chiefly upon the mischief which the different
paints, that have been applied to the face, have done to the constitution.

(c c) p. 62.

I SHALL beg leave, in this place, to transcribe a few sentences from
Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, upon the subject of hospitals.

"AURENGZEBE, Emperor of Persia, being asked, Why he did not build hospitals,
said, I will make my empire so rich, that there shall be no need of hospitals.
He ought to have said, I will begin by rendering my subjects rich, and then I
will build hospitals."

"AT Rome, the hospitals place every one at his ease, except those who labor
-- those who are industrious -- those who have lands, and those who are engaged
in trade."

"I HAVE observed, that wealthy nations have need of hospitals, because fortune
subjects them to a thousand accidents; but it is plain, that transient
assistances are better than perpetual foundations. The evil is momentary: it is
necessary, therefore, that the succor should be of the same nature, and that
it be applied to particular accidents." Spirit of Laws. Book XXIII. chap. 29.

(d d) p. 62.

THE first regular practitioners of physic in Rome, were women and slaves. The
profession was confined to them above six hundred years. The Romans during this
period lived chiefly upon vegetables, particularly upon PULSE; and hence they
were called, by their neighbors, PULTIFAGI. They were likewise early inured to
the healthy employments of war and husbandry. Their diseases, of course, were
too few and simple to render the cure of them an object of a liberal
profession. When their diseases became more numerous and complicated, their
investigation and cure required the aids of philosophy. The profession from
this time became liberal; and maintained a rank with the other professions,
which are founded upon the imperfection and depravity of human institutions.
Physicians are as necessary in the advanced stages of society, as surgeons,
although their office is less ancient and certain. There are many artificial
diseases, in which they give certain relief; and even where their art fails,
their prescriptions are still necessary, in order to smooth the avenues of
death.

(e e) p. 62.

HOSPITALS were intended originally to accommodate strangers, who might happen
to meet with accidents: they are therefore necessary in all large and
commercial cities. Philadelphia claims the honor of being the first and only
city in America, that has founded an institution for that purpose. The
Pennsylvania-Hospital is as perfect as the wisdom and benevolence of man can
make it. The following account, drawn up by the judicious Mr. James Hutchinson,
the apothecary of the hospital, of some of the diseases of the patients, who
were admitted into it between February 24, 1773 and the 24th of the same month
1774, may serve to show the other cities in America how far our example is
worthy of their imitation. Out of 435 patients, only thirty were admitted upon
the account of accidents: 138 were afflicted with fevers; in which are
included, haemorrhages and dysenteries: 152 were admitted with dropsies -- sore
(...) -- and the lues; diseases evidently (...) on by (...) our city, it is
necessary to add, that many of the last number were strangers; particularly
sailors, who were allured to our hospital from all parts of the continent.

IT will not be foreign to our subject to take notice in this place, that the
air -- diet, and attendance in hospitals, render them extremely improper in
fevers; hence we always find them attended with more malignity or obstinacy in
such places, than in private houses. The author of the "Police of France" says,
that one-fifth of the patients die, who are sent to the Hotel Dieu; and
supposes, that one-third of the people who die in Paris every year, perish in
hospitals. It must be acknowledged however, that much of this mortality in the
hospitals in Paris, is occasioned by the patients being too much crowded
together; for in St. Thomas and St. Bartholomew's Hospitals in London, where
the patients are less crowded, and better accommodated with nurses --
physicians -- diet, etc. only one-thirteenth of them die. In the Pennsylvania
Hospital the proportion is some (...) less. The (...) Emperor VALENTINIAN
supported fourteen physicians at the public expense, to take care of the poor,
in the city of Rome, at their own houses. The same practice has been since
adopted in many countries, with singular advantages to individuals and the
community: the most considerable to the former, is the preservation of an
independance of spirit; which is always laid aside after a patient has had his
poverty exposed to public view in an hospital. Nothing abridges a man more of
his liberty, than a sense of his obligations to the public. It was probably to
maintain a spirit of freedom, so essential to just sentiments and actions, that
our Savior enjoins us not to let our left hand know what our right hand does,
in our acts of charity: it is in other words, to command us, not to make a
slave of a fellow creature. A German prince, whose extraordinary character has
long fixed the attention of all Europe, has forbidden, from an affected
sympathy, the operation of amputation to be performed upon the limbs of his
soldiers, who are wounded in battle. The design of this edict is to relieve the
state from the burden of supporting a number of useless members. A virtuous
man with but one limb, never burdened any society. A maimed but industrious
soldier, might be employed in an hundred ways, whereby he might support himself
and serve the public. But what advantage does society derive from creatures,
whose diseases have been brought on by intemperance; particularly in drinking
spirituous liquors? How rarely do we see poor men reformed from this vice! Does
not the length of time, which is necessary to cure their diseases, increase
their habits of idleness? Do not these people infect the healthy and the
virtuous, with their diseases and vices? Are they not, therefore, to be looked
upon as rotten limbs in the political body? -- Humanity may plead in their
favor, for they are still men; but does not society suffer by the prolongation
of their lives?

(f f) p. 63.

MOIST climates may increase, but we have no reason to believe that they
dispose to consumptions. In proportion as we become enervated, we may expect
this disorder from accidents, which formerly were attended with no danger.
There are many facts which show the infectious nature of consumptions. In
Portugal the clothes, bed, etc. of people, who have died of consumptions, are
destroyed. The Italians act as if they believed the infection could be retained
and communicated like the Jewish leprosy, by the walls of their houses: --
hence a house, in which a consumptive patient has died, often remains
uninhabited for a twelvemonth. This disorder has not yet acquired such a degree
of malignity among us; but we have many proofs in this city of its being
communicated by the breath.

(g g) p. 63.

IN speaking of the causes of the increase of artificial diseases in
Philadelphia, it may not be improper to mention, that there is probably more
flesh meat eaten in this city, than in any two cities of the same size in the
whole world. It is not because our markets do not abound with a plentiful
variety of wholesome fish and vegetables.

(h h) p. 64.

THE principal employments of the Jews, like those of the Romans in their
simple ages, consisted in war and husbandry. Their diet was plain, consisting
chiefly of vegetables. Their only remedies were plasters and ointments; which
were calculated for those diseases which are produced by accidents. In
proportion as they receded from their simple customs, we find artificial
diseases prevail among them. The leprosy made its appearance in their journey
through the wilderness. King Asa's pains in his feet, were probably brought on
by a fit of the gout. Saul and Nebuchadnezzar were afflicted with a melancholy.
In the time of our Savior, we find an account of all those diseases in Judea,
which mark the declension of a people; such as, the palsy -- epilepsy -- mania
-- blindness -- haemorrhagia uterina, etc. It is unnecessary to suppose, that
they were let loose at this juncture, on purpose to give our Savior an
opportunity of making them the chief subject of his miracles. They had been
produced from natural causes, by the gradual depravity of their manners. It is
remarkable, that our Savior chose those artificial diseases for the subject of
his miracles, in preference to natural diseases. The efforts of nature, and the
operation of medicines, are too slow and uncertain in these cases to detract in
the least from the validity of the miracle. He cured Peter's mother-in-law, it
is true, of a fever; but to show that the cure was miraculous, the sacred
historian adds, (contrary to what is common after a fever) that "she arose
immediately, and ministered unto them." Dr. Mead's attempt to account for these
cures from natural causes, is as foreign from the ingenuity of infidelity, as
it is from the spirit of true philosophy.

(i i) p. 64.

IN the city of Bergen, which consists of 30,000 inhabitants, there is but one
physician; who is supported at the expense of the public. -- Pontoppidan's
Natural Hist. of Norway.

(k k) p. 66.

LONGEVITY, perhaps, depends less upon climate, than upon the practice of
simple customs; hence we find the longest lived people in those countries where
temperance and industry are practiced in the greatest perfection.

IT has been urged against the middle and northern colonies of America, that
there are fewer old people to be found in them, than in several of the European
countries. This has been attributed to the weakness of our stamina; which
appears chiefly in the premature DECAY of our TEETH. In order to confute this
opinion, it will not be foreign to our purpose to enquire into the cause of
this disorder, and to show that it is no proof of the weakness of our stamina.
1. Bad teeth are observed in all middle latitudes, which are subject to
alternate heats and colds. The inhabitants of Norway and Russia are as
remarkable for their sound teeth, as the inhabitants of Africa. 2. The teeth
are provided with nerves and blood vessels; and hence they are subject to
inflammation, in common with other parts of the body; and in a more especial
manner, from the alternate application of hot and cold liquors to them; and
from the practice of sleeping with our heads uncovered in the winter season,
while, at the same time, every other part of the body is involved in a bath of
warm perspiration. 3. The pain and inflammation of the teeth generally precede
their decay. The pain is soon succeeded by the ordinary termination of
inflammation in a bone, that is by a caries. The carious teeth are afterward
more exposed to inflammation; which generally extends itself to the sound teeth
which adjoin them. 4. The toothache happens in the period, and seasons of
inflammatory disorders. 5. We observe those people, who are most subject to
inflammatory diseases, to be most afflicted with the toothache: hence we find
more bad teeth in the country, than in our cities. From these facts we infer,
that the decay of the teeth in the Americans, is not occasioned by the peculiar
weakness of their stamina. It does not come on in the decline, but in the most
robust period of life. It can prove the means of shortening life, only by
rendering the mastication of our food less complete. The Europeans, who pass
the season for inflammatory diseases in this country, are as subject to the
toothache as the Americans. They alone are not subject to it, who arrive here
beyond the thirtieth or thirty-sixth year of their lives.

WE may learn from what has been advanced, that sugar -- salt -- tea -- animal
food, and spirituous liquors, which have, all in their turns, been accused of
rotting the teeth, act only by weakening the system; and thus rendering it more
liable to those partial colds or inflammations, which precede the decay of the
teeth.

IT must be allowed, that the teeth sometimes decay without being accompanied
with any pain. This must be attributed to a scrophula: -- a disease not unknown
to the bones in other parts of the body.

I CANNOT dismiss this subject, without suggesting an hint for preventing the
teeth from decaying. The Indians, even in the middle latitudes of
North America, while they live agreeable to nature, are never troubled with the
least disorder in their teeth; but become subject to the toothache as soon as
they accommodate themselves to our modes of life. It is in vain to attempt to
harden ourselves against the action of the cold, while we continue enslaved to
so many enfeebling customs. This is the reason why the cold bath has often been
used for many years to the head, without having any effect in preventing the
decay of the teeth. Instead of this; would it not be a better practice, to
afford the head the same security from the action of of the cold, which we give
to the other parts of the body? It is a fashion among both sexes in France, to
sleep in LARGE WOOLLEN CAPS. I hope I do not attritribute too much to these,
when I add, that the French people owe their fine teeth entirely to them.

IT has been said further against the state of longevity in America, that the
Europeans, who settle among us, generally arrive to a greater age than the
Americans. This is not occasioned so much by a peculiar firmness in their
stamina, as by an increase of vigor, which the constitution acquires by a
change of climate. A Frenchman (caeteris paribus) outlives an Englishman in his
own country. An Hollander prolongs his life by removing to the Cape of Good
Hope. A Portuguese gains fifteen or twenty years, by removing to Brazil. And
there are good reasons to believe, that a North-American would derive the same
advantages, in point of health and longevity, by removing to Europe, which an
European derives from coming to this country.

FROM a calculation made by an ingenious foreigner, it appears, that a greater
proportion of old people are to be found in Connecticut, than in any colony in
America. This colony contains 180,000 inhabitants. They have no public
hospitals or poor houses; nor is a beggar to be seen among them: there cannot
be more striking proofs than these facts, of the simplicity of their manners.

IT was by the operation of natural causes, that the divine prediction was
accomplished, which reduced the ages of the children of Israel so much in the
wilderness, that out of 21,200 none of them were above sixty years of age,
except Moses -- Caleb and Joshua, who had not conformed to the enervating vices
of the heathen, among whom they had sojourned.

THE decay of the faculties of the mind in old people, is generally produced by
some adventitious causes, not necessarily connected with civilization. We find
no account of the amentia senilis, or second childhood among the Jews. Moses
read without spectacles, when he was 120 years of age; and the inimitable song
he composed a little before his death shows, that the historian spoke the truth
when he said, that his "natural force was not abated."

(l l) p. 66.

PARTURITION, in the simple ages of all countries, is performed by nature. The
Israelitish women were delivered even without the help of the Egyptian
midwives. We read of but one woman who died in childbirth in the whole history
of the Jews; and her death was probably brought on by the fatigue of her
journey in traveling from Bethel to Ephrath. Dr. Bancroft says, that
childbearing is attended with so little pain in Guiana, that the women seem to
be exempted from the curse inflicted upon Eve. These easy births are not
confined to warm climates. They are equally safe and easy in Norway and
Iceland, according to Pontoppidan's and Anderson's natural histories of those
countries.

(m m) p. 66.

CIVILIZED nations have, in the end, always conquered savages as much by their
ability to bear hardships, as by their superior military skill. Soldiers are
not to be chosen indiscriminately. The greatest generals have looked upon sound
constitutions to be as essential to soldiers, as bravery or military
discipline. Count Saxe refused soldiers born and bred in large cities; and
sought for such only as were bred in mountainous countries. The king of Prussia
calls young soldiers only to the dangers and honors of the field in his elegant
poem, Sur l'Art de la Guerre, Chant. I. Old soldiers generally lose the
advantages of their veteranism, by their habits of idleness and debauchery. An
able general, and experienced officers, will always supply the defect of age in
young soldiers.

(n n) p. 67.

BEFORE we compare the state of mortality of savages, with the bills of
mortality among civilized nations, we shall promise, that fruitfulness in
either sex, is not exchanged for the simple customs of civilization. Civilized,
have always been more populous than savage nations. The fruitfulness of the
Jews, although the consequence of a divine promise, was produced by the
operation of natural causes, which produce the same effects in all countries.
Let the unfruitful pair retire for a while from the pursuits and pleasures of a
city life: let them visit the cottage of the peasant, or walk along shores
inhabited by fishermen, and they will find that stimulating food -- wine --
spices -- physic -- voyages to sea, and journies to Bath -- Spaw --
Black-Point, etc. are not the proper remedies for barrenness; but that they are
to be found only in SIMPLE DIET and CONSTANT LABOR.

WE have no way of ascertaining the proportion of those who die yearly among
the Indians; but we may presume it to be considerable, when we reflect on the
mortality they are exposed to from accidents -- hunger, and fevers. The effects
of these are mitigated, or entirely prevented by civilization. Dr. Price
computes, that from one nineteeenth or one twentieth to one twenty-third or one
twenty-fourth perish yearly in large towns -- from one twenty-third to one
twenty-eighth in modetate towns, and from one thirtieth or one thirty-fifth to
one fiftieth or one sixtieth in country places. The bill of mortality in Boston
amounted last year to 533. -- which is about one thirty-fourth of the number of
inhabitants (said to be 18,000) contained in that town. The city of
Philadelphia buried last year near 1400: out of these 360 were buried in the
Strangers Grave Yard; the chief of whom were strangers from Britain, Ireland,
and Germany: they died of fevers contracted on their passage, or soon after
their arrival in the city. Many strangers, likewise, from the West Indies and
the southern colonies, were buried in the churchyards belonging to the
different denominations of Christians. The smallpox (which should not be
numbered in the stationary diseases of a country) contributed a good deal to
swell the last year's bill of mortality. One-fourth of all who died in Christ's
and St. Peter's parishes, and in the Scots Presbyterian congregation, perished
with that disorder. These circumstances, joined with our uncertainty of the
exact number of inhabitants, render it impossible, as yet, to ascertain the
proportion who die yearly in Philadelphia.

I HAVE already hinted at the means of restraining the artificial diseases of
our city: I shall conclude, by suggesting a few hints for restraining our
natural diseases. A large share of these, are composed of the intermitting --
remitting -- bilious and nervous fevers, which prevail chiefly in the months of
August, September, and October. Under the head of these fevers, we include the
VOMITING and PURGING of children. It comes on at the same season, is attended
with the same symptoms, and yields to the same method of cure. These facts are
sufficient to show, that it is not a cholera morbus, nor produced by teething
or worms.

DISEASES are generated in one season, and produced in another. To prevent this
dysenteric fever so fatal to children, they should be sent into the country
about the beginning of June, where they should stay till the middle of August,
or beginning of September. Their diet, during the sickly months, should be more
generous than is consistent with the common rules laid down in our systems of
education. It is worthy of notice, that the children of opulent families, who
are provided with country seats, and who indulge their children with sipping
the remains of a glass of sound wine now and then after dinner, are in some
measure exempted from this disorder.

THE intermitting fever prevails chiefly in the suburbs. To guard against this,
fires should be made in the common sitting rooms; and great care taken to avoid
the night air.

IT were to be wished, that strangers would embark for this part of America
earlier in the year, so that they might arrive here in the Spring, or beginning
of Summer. It has been remarked, that a crew, who have been healthy during the
greatest part of their passage, often become sickly when they come upon our
coast, or soon after they arrive in the city. This is probably occasioned by
their being exposed to exhalations from the land. To avoid these, it would be
proper to oblige the passengers to shun the night-air; and, at the same time,
to impregnate the hold and deck of the ship with the vapor of vinegar, as also
with brimstone -- gunpowder -- and the other substances commonly used to
correct a morbid atmosphere.

FINIS.

