A SPEECH INTENDED TO HAVE BEEN SPOKEN ON THE BILL FOR ALTERING THE CHARTER OF
THE COLONY of MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

BY THE Rev. JONATHAN SHIPLEY, LORD BISHOP of ST. ASAPH.

LONDON, Printed: Price 1s. Sterling. BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted, and Sold, for 6
Coppers, that every North American may be possessed of so valuable a pamphlet
for a small expense, at GREENLEAF'S Printing-Office.

A SPEECH INTENDED to have been SPOKEN on the BILL, etc.
IT is of such great importance to compose or even to moderate dissentions,
which subsist at present between our unhappy country and her colonies, that I
cannot help endeavoring, from the faint prospect I have of contributing
something to so good an end, to overcome the inexpressible reluctance I feel at
uttering my thoughts before the most respectable of all audiences.

The true object of all our deliberation on this occasion, which I hope we
shall never lose sight of, is a full and cordial reconciliation with North
America. Now I own my Lords, I have many doubts whether the terrors and
punishments, we hang out to them at present, are the surest means of producing
this reconciliation. Let us at least do this justice to the people of North
America, to own, that we can all remember a time when they were much better
friends than at present to their mother country. They are neither our natural
nor our determined enemies. Before the Stamp Act, we considered them in the
light of as good subjects as the natives of any county in England.

It is worth while to enquiry by what steps we first gained their affection,
and preserved it so long; and by what conduct we have lately lost it. Such an
enquiry may point out the means of restoring peace, and make the use of force
unnecessary against a people, whom I cannot yet forbear to consider as our
brethren.

It has always been a most arduous task to govern distant provinces, with even
a tolerable appearance of justice. The viceroys and governors of other nations
are usually temporary tyrants, who think themselves obliged to make the most of
their time; who not only plunder the people, but carry away their spoils, and
dry up all the sources of commerce and industry. Taxation in their hands, is an
unlimited power of oppression: but in whatever hands the power of taxation is
lodged, it implies and includes all other powers. Arbitrary taxation is plunder
authorized by law: It is the support and the essence of tyranny; and has done
more mischief to mankind, than those other three scourges from heaven, famine,
pestilence and the sword. I need not carry your Lordships out of your own
knowledge, or out of your own dominions, to make you conceive what misery this
right of taxation is capable of producing in a provincial government. We need
only recollect that our countrymen in India, have in the space of five or six
years, in virtue of this right, destroyed, starved and driven away more
inhabitants from Bengal, than are to be found at present in all our American
Colonies; more than all those formidable numbers which we have been nursing up
for the space of 200 years, with so much care and success, to the astonishment
of all Europe. This is no exaggeration, my Lords, but plain matter of fact,
collected from the accounts sent over by Mr. Hastings, whose name I mention
with honor and veneration. And I must own, such accounts have very much
lessened the pleasure I used to feel in thinking myself an Englishman. We ought
surely not to hold our colonies totally inexcusable for wishing to exempt
themselves from a grievance, which has caused such unexampled devastation; and,
my Lords, it would be too disgraceful to ourselves, to try so cruel an
experiment more than once. Let us reflect, that before these innovations were
thought of, by following the line of good conduct which had been marked out by
our ancestors, we governed North America with mutual benefit to them and
ourselves It was a happy idea, that made us first consider them rather as
instruments of commerce than as objects of government. It was wise and generous
to give them the form and the spirit of our own constitution; an assembly in
which a greater equality of representation has been preserved than at home; and
councils and governors, such as were adapted to their situation, though they
must be acknowledged to be very inferior copies of the dignity of this House,
and the Majesty of the Crown.

But what is far more valuable than all the rest, we gave them liberty. We
allowed them to use their own judgment in the management of their own interest.
The idea of taxing them never entered our heads. On the contrary they have
experienced our liberality on many public occasions: we have given them
bounties to encourage their industry, and have demanded no return but what
every state exact from its colonies, the advantages of an exclusive commerce,
and the regulations that are necessary to secure it. We made requisitions to
them on great occasions, in the same manner as our princes formerly asked
benevolences of their subjects; and as nothing was asked but what was visibly
for the public good, it was always granted: and they sometimes did more than we
expected. The matter of right was neither disputed, nor even considered. And
let us not forget that the people of New England were themselves, during the
last war, the most forward of all in the national cause; that every year we
voted them a considerable sum, in acknowledgment of their zeal and their
services; that in the pr^ceeding war, they alone enabled us to make the treaty
of Aix la Chapelle, by furnishing us with the only equivalent for the towns
that were taken from our allies in Flanders; and that in times of peace, they
alone have taken from us six times as much of our woollen manufactures, as the
whole kingdom of Ireland. Such a colony, my Lords, not only from the justice,
but from the gratitude we owe them, have a right to be heard in their defense;
and if their crimes are not of the most inexpiable kind, I could almost say,
they have a right to be forgiven.

But in the times we speak of, our public intercourse was carried on with ease
and satisfaction. We regarded them as our friends and fellow-citizens, and
relied as much upon their fidelity as on the inhabitants of our own country.
They saw our power with pleasure; for they considered it only as their
protection. They inherited our laws, our language, and our customs; they
preferred our manufactures, and followed our fashions with a partiality, that
secured our exclusive trade with them more effectually than all the regulations
and vigilance of the custom house. Had we suffered them to enrich us a little
longer and to grow a little richer themselves, their men of fortune, like the
West-Indians, would undoubtedly have made this country their place of education
and resort. For they looked up to England with reverence and affection, as to
the country of their friends and ancestors. They esteemed and they called it
their home, and thought of it as the Jews once thought of the Land of Canaan.

Now, my Lords, consider with yourselves what were the chains and ties that
united this people to their mother country, with so much warmth and affection,
at so amazing a distance. The colonies of other nations have been discontented
with their treatment, and not without sufficient cause; always murmuring at
their grievances, and sometimes breaking out into acts of rebellion. Our
subjects at home, with all their reasons for satisfaction, have never been
entirely satisfied. Since the beginning of this century we have had two
rebellions, several plots and conspiracies; and we ourselves have been
witnesses to the most dangerous excesses of sedition. But the provinces in
North America have engaged in no party, have excited no opposition; they have
been utter strangers even to the name of Whig and Tory. In all changes in all
revolutions, they have quietly followed the fortunes and submitted to the
government of England.

Now let me appeal to your Lordships as to men of enlarged and liberal minds,
who have been led by your office and rank to the study of history. Can you find
in the long succession of ages, in the whole extent of human affairs, a single
instance, where distant provinces have been preserved in so flourishing a
state, and kept at the same time in such due subjection to their mother
country? My Lords, there is no instance; the case never existed before. It is
perhaps the most singular phenomenon in all civil history: and the cause of it
well deserves your serious consideration. The true cause is, that a mother
country never existed before, who placed her natives and her colonies on the
same equal sooting; and joined with them in fairly carrying on one common
interest.

You ought to consider this, my Lords, not as a mere historical fact, but as a
most important and invaluable discovery. It enlarges our ideas of the power and
energy of good government beyond all former examples; and shows that it can act
like gravatation at the greatest distances. It proves to a demonstration that
you may have good subjects in the remotest corners of the earth, if you will
but treat them with kindness and equity. If you have any doubts of the truth of
this kind of reasoning, the experience we have had of a different kind will
entirely remove them.

The good genius of our country had led us to the simple and happy method of
governing freemen, which I have endeavored to describe. Our ministers received
it from their predecessors, and for some time continued to observe it; but
without knowing its value. At length, presuming on their own wisdom, and the
quiet disposition of the Americans, they flattered themselves that we might
reap great advantages from their prosperity by destroying the cause of it. They
chose in an unlucky hour to treat them as other nations have though it fit to treat
their colonies; they threatened and they taxed them.

I do not now enquire whether taxation is matter of right; I only consider it
as matter of experiment; for surely the art of government itself is founded on
experience. I need not suggest what were the consequences of this change of
measures. The evils produced by it were such as we still remember and still
feel. We suffered more by our loss of trade with them than the wealth flowing
in from India was able to recompense. The bankruptcy of the East India Company
may be sufficiently accounted for by the rapine abroad and the knavery at home;
but it certainly would have been delayed some years, had we continued our
commerce with them in the single article of tea. But that and many other
branches of trade have been diverted into other channels, and may probably
never return entire to their old course. But what is worst of all, we have lost
their confidence and friendship; we have ignorantly undermined the most solid
foundation of our own power.

In order to observe the strictest impartiality, it is but just for us to
enquire what we have gained by these taxes as well as what we have lost. I am
assured that out of all the sums raised in America the last year but one, if
the expenses are deducted, which the natives would else have discharged
themselves, the net revenue paid into the Treasury to go in aid of the sinking
fund, or to be employed in whatever public services parliament shall think fit,
is eighty five pounds. Eightyfive pounds, my Lords, is the whole equivalent, we
have received for all the hatred and mischief, and all the infinite losses this
kingdom has suffered during that year in her disputes with North America. Money
that is earned so dearly as this, ought to be expended with great aeconomy. My
Lords, were you to take up but one thousand pounds more from North America upon
the same terms, the nation itself would be a bankrupt. But the most amazing and
the most alarming circumstances is still behind. It is that our case is so
incurable, that all this experience has made no impression upon us. And yet, my
Lords, if you could but keep these facts, which I have ventured to lay before
you, for a few moments in your minds, (supposing your right of taxation to be
never so clear) yet (...) you must necessarily perceive that it cannot be
exercised in any manner that can be advantageous to ourselves or them. We have
not always the wisdom to tax ourselves with propriety; and I am confident we
could never tax a people at that distance, without infinite blunders and
infinite operession. And to own the truth, my Lord, we are not honest enough to
trust ourselves with the power of shifting our own burdens upon them. Allow
me, therefore, to conclude, I think, unanswerably, that the inconvenience and
distress we have felt in this change of our conduct, no less than the ease and
tranquillity we formerly found in the pursuit of it, will force us, if we have
any sense left, to return to the good old path we trod in so long, and found it
the way of pleasantness.

I desire to have it understood, that I am opposing no rights that our
legislature may think proper to claim: I am only comparing two different
methods of government. By your old rational and generous administration, by
treating the Americans as your friends and fellow-citizens, you made them the
happiest of human kind; and at the same time drew from them, by commerce, more
clear profit than Spain has drawn from its mines; and their growing numbers
were a daily increasing addition to your strength. There was no room for
improvement or alteration in so noble a system of policy as this. It was
sanctified by time by experience, by public (...). I will venture to use a bold
language, my Lords; I will assert, that if we had uniformly adopted this
equitable administration in all our distant provinces as far as circumstances
would admit, it would have placed this country, for ages, at the head of human
affairs in every quarter of the world My Lords, this is no visionary or
chimerical doctrine. The idea of governing provinces and colonies by force is
visionary and (...). The experiment has often been tried and it has never
succeeded. It ends infallibly in the ruin of the one country or the other, or
in the last degree of wretchedness.

If there is any truth, my Lords, in what I have said, and I most firmly
believe it all to be true: let me recommend it so you to resume that generous
and benevolent spirit in the discussion of our differences, which used to be
the source of our union. We certainly did wrong in taxing them: when the Stamp
Act was repealed, we did wrong in laying on other taxes, which tended only to
keep alive a claim that was mischievous, impracticable and useless. We acted
contrary to our own principles of liberty, and to the generous sentiments of
our sovereign, when he desired to have their judges dependant on the crown for
their stipends as well as their continuance It was equally unwise to wish to
make the governors, independent of the people for their salaries. We ought to
consider the governors not as spies entrusted with the management of our
interest, but as the servant of the people, recommended to them by us. Our ears
ought to be open to very complaint against the governors; but we ought not to
suffer the governors to complain of the people. We have taken a different
method, to which no small part of our difficulties are owing. Our ears have
been open to the governors and shut to the people. This must necessarily lead
us to countenance the jobbs of interested men, under the pretense of defending
the rights of the crown. But the people are certainly the best judges whether
they are well governed; and the crown can have no rights inconsistent with the
happiness of the people.

Now, my Lords, we ought to do what I have suggested, and many things more, out
of prudence and justice, to win their affection, and to do them public service.
If we have a right to govern them, let us exert it for the true ends of
governments. But, my Lords, what we ought to do, from motives of reason and
justice, is much more than is sufficient to being them to a reasonable
accommodation. For thus, as I apprehend, stands the case. They petition for the
repeal of an act of parliament, which they complain of as unjust and
oppressive. And there is not a man amongst us, not the warmest friend of
administration, who does not sincerely wish that act had never been made. In
fact, they only ask for what we wish to be rid of. Under such a disposition of
mind. one would imagine there could be no occasion for fleets and armies to
bring men to a good understanding But, my Lords, our difficulty lies in the
point of honor. We must not let down the dignity of the mother country; but
preserve her sovereignty over all the parts of the British Empire. This
language has something in at that sounds pleasant to the earn of Englishmen,
but is otherwise of little weight. For, sure my Lords, there are methods of
making reasonable concessions, and yet without injuring our dignity. Ministers
are generally fruitful in expedients to reconcile difficulties of this kind, to
escape the embarassment of forms, the competition of dignity and precedence;
and to let clashing rights (...), while they transact their business. Now, my
Lords, on this occasion can they find no excuse, no pretense, no invention, no
happy turn of language, not one colorable argument for doing the greatest
service, they can ever render to their country? It must be something more than
incapacity that makes men barren of expedients at such a season as this Do, but
for once, remove this impracticable stateliness and dignity and treat the
matter with a little common sense and a little good humor, and our
reconciliation would not be the work of an hour But after all, my Lords, if
there is any thing mortifying in undoing the errors of our ministers, it is a
mortification we ought to submit to. If it was unjust to tax them, we ought to
repeal it for their sakes; if it was unwise to tax them, we ought to repeal it
for our own. A matter so trivial in itself as a three penny duty upon tea, but
which has given cause to so much national hatred and reproach, ought not to be
suffered to subsist an unnecessary day. Must the interest, the commerce and the
union of this country and her colonies, be all of them sacrificed to save the
credit of one imprudent measure of administration? I own I cannot comprehend
that there is any dignity either in being in the wrong, or in persisting in it.
I have known friendship preserved and affection gained, but I never knew
dignity lost, by the candid acknowledgement of an error. And, my Lords, let me
appeal to your own experience of a few years backward (I will not mention
particulars, because I would pass no censures and revive no unpleasant
reflections) but I think every candid minister must own, that administration
has suffered in more instances than one, both in interest and credit, by not
choosing to give up points, that could not be defended.

With regard to the people of Boston, I am free to own that I neither approve
of their riots nor their punishment. And yet if we inflict it as we ought, with
a consciousness that we were ourselves the aggressors, that we gave the
provocation, and that their disobedience is the fruit of our own imprudent and
imperious conduct, I think the punishment cannot rise to any great degree of
severity.

I own my Lords, I have read the report of the Lords Committees of this house,
with very different sentiments from those with which it was drawn up. It seems
to be designed, that we should consider their violent measures and speeches, as
so many determined acts of opposition to the sovereignty of England, arising
from the malignity of their own hearts. One would think the mother country had
been totally silent and passive in the progress of the whole affair. I on the
contrary consider these violences as the natural effects of such measures as
ours on the minds of freemen. And this is the most useful point of view, in
which government can consider them. In their situation, a wise man would expect
to meet with the strongest marks of passion and imprudence, and be prepared to
forgive them. The first and easiest thing to be done is to correct our own
errors; and I am confident we should find it the most effectual method to
correct theirs. At any rate let us put ourselves in the right; and then if we
must contend with North America, we shall be unanimous at home, and the wise
and the moderate there will be our friends. At present we force every North
American to be our enemy: and the wise and the moderate at home, and those
immense multitudes, which must soon begin to suffer by the madness of our
rulers, will unite to oppose them. It is a strange idea we have taken up, to
cure their resentments by increasing their provocations; to remove the effects
of our own ill conduct, by multiplying the instances of it. But the spirit of
blindness and infatuation is gone forth. We are hurrying wildly on without any
fixed design, without any important object. We pursue a vain phantom of
unlimited sovereignty, which was not made for man; and reject the solid
advantages of a moderate, useful and intelligible authority. That just God,
whom we have all so deeply offended, can hardly inflict a severer national
punishment, than by committing us to the natural consequences of our own
conduct. Indeed, in my opinion a blacker cloud never hung over this Island.

To reason consistently with the principles of justice and national friendship,
which I have endeavored to establish, or rather to revive what was established
by our ancestors, as our wisest rule of conduct for the government of America;
I must necessarily disapprove of the Bill before us; for it contradicts every
one of them. In our present situation every act of the legislature, even our
acts of severity ought to be so many steps toward the reconciliation we wish
for. But to change the government of a people, without their consent, is the
highest and most arbitrary act of sovereignty, that one nation can exercise
over another. The Romans hardly ever proceeded to this extremity even over a
conquered nation, till its frequent revolts and insurrections had made them
deem it incorrigible The very idea of it implies a most total and abject,
slavish dependency in the inferior state. Recollect that the Americans are men
of like passions with ourselves, and think how deeply this treatment must
affect them. They have the same veneration for their Charters, that we have for
our Magna Charta, and they ought in reason to have greater. They are the title
deeds to all their rights both public and private. What? my Lords, must these
rights never acquire any legal assurance and stability? Can they derive no
force from the peaceable possession of near two hundred years? And must the
fundamental constitution of a powerful state, be forever subject to as
capricious alterations as you may think fit to make, in the charters of a
little mercantile company or the corporation of a borough? This will
undoubtedly furnish matter for a more pernicious debate than has yet been
moved. Every other colony will make the case its own. They will complain that
their rights can never be ascertained; that every thing belonging to them
depends upon our arbitrary will; and may think it better to run any hazard,
than to submit to the violence of their mother country, in a matter in which
they can see neither moderation nor end.

But let us coolly enquire, what is the reason of this unheard of innovation.
Is it to make them peaceable? My Lords, it will make them mad. Will they be
better governed if we introduce this change? Will they be more our friends? The
least that such a measure can do, is to make them hate us. And would to God, my
Lords, we had governed ourselves with as much economy, integrity and prudence
as they have done. Let (...) continue to enjoy the liberty our fathers gave
them. Gave them, did I say? They are coheirs of liberty with ourselves; and
their portion of the inheritance has been much better looked after than ours.
Suffer them to enjoy a little longer that short period of public integrity and
domestic happiness, which seems to be the portion allotted by Providence to
young rising states. Instead of hoping that their constitution may receive
improvement from our skill in government, the most useful wish I can form in
their favor is, that heaven may long preserve them from our vices and our
politics.

Let me add farther, that to make any changes in their government, without
their consent would be to transgress the wisest rules of policy, and to wound
our most important interests. As they increase in numbers and in riches, our
comparative strength must lessen. In another age, when our power has begun to
lose something of its superiority, we should be happy if we could support our
authority by mutual good will and the habit of commanding; but chiefly by those
original establishments, which time and public honor might have rendered
inviolable. Our posterity will then have reason to lament that they cannot
avail themselves of those treasures of public friendship and confidence which
our fathers had wisely boarded up, and we are throwing away. It Is hard, it is
cruel, beside: all our debts and taxes, and those enormous expenses which are
multiplying upon us every year, to load our unhappy sons with the hatred and
curses of North America. Indeed, my Lords, we are treating posterity very
scurvily. We have mortgaged all the lands; we have cut down all the oaks; we
are now trampling down the fences, rooting up the seedlings and samplers, and
ruining all the resources of another age. We shall send the next generation
into the world, like the wretched heir of a worthless father, without money,
credit or friend; with a stripped, incumbered, and perhaps untenanted estate.

Having spoke so largely against the principle of the bill, it is hardly
necessary to enter into the merits of it. I shall only observe, that even if we
had the consent of the people to alter their government, it would be unwise to
make such alterations as these. To give the appointment of the governor and
council to the crown, and the disposal of all places, even of the judges, and
with a power of removing them, to the governor, is evidently calculating with a
view to form a strong party in our favor. This I know has been done in other
colonies; but still this is opening a source of perpetual discord, where it is
our interest always to agree. If we mean any thing by this establishment, it is
to support the governor and the council against the people, i e. to quarrel
with our friends, that we may please their servants. This scheme of governing
them by a party is not wisely imagined, it is much too premature, and at all
events, must turn to our disadvantage. If it fails, it will only make us
contemptible; if it succeeds, it will make us odius. It is our interest to take
very little part in their domestic administration of government, but purely to
watch over them for their good. We never gained so much by North America as
when we let them govern themselves, and were content to trade with them and to
protect them. One would think, my Lords, there was some statute law,
prohibiting us, under the severest penalties, to profit by experience.

My Lords, I have ventured to lay my thoughts before you, on the greatest
national concern that ever came under your deliberation, with as much honesty
as you will meet with from abler men, and with a melancholy assurance, that not
a word of it will be regarded. And yet, my Lords, with your permission, I will
waste one short argument more on the same cause, one that I own I am fond of,
and which contains in it, what I think, must affect every generous mind. My
Lords, I look upon North America as the only great nursery of free men now left
upon the face of the earth. We have seen the liberties of Poland and Sweden
swept away, in the course of one year, by treachery and usurpation. The free
towns in Germany are like so many dying sparks, that go out one after another;
and which must all be soon extinguished under the destructive greatness of
their neighbors. Holland is little more than a great trading company, with
luxurious manners, and an exhausted revenue; with little strength and with les
spirit. Switzerland alone is free and happy within the narrow enclosure of its
rocks and valleys. As for the state of this country, my Lords, I can only refer
myself to your own secret thoughts. I am disposed to think and hope the best of
public Liberty. Were I to describe her according to my own ideas at present, I
should say that she has a sickly countenance, but I trust she has a strong
constitution

But whatever may be our future fate, the greatest glory that attends this
country, a greater than any other nation ever acquired, is to have formed and
nursed up to such a state of happiness, those colonies whom we are now so eager
to butcher. We ought to cherish them as the immortal monuments of our public
justice and wisdom; as the heirs of our better days, of our old arts and
manners, and of our expiring national virtues. What work of art, or power, or
public utility has ever equalled the glory of having peopled a continent
without guilt or bloodshed, with a multitude of free and happy common wealths;
to have given them the best arts of life and government; and to have suffered
them under the shelter of our authority, to acquire in peace the skill to use
them. In comparison of this, the policy of governing by influence, and even the
pride of war and victory are dishonest tricks and poor contemptible pageantry.

We seem not to be sensible of the high and important trust which providence
has committed to our charge. The most precious remains of civil liberty, that
the world can now boast of, are lodged in our hands; and God forbid that we
should violate so sacred a deposit. By enslaving your colonies, you not only
ruin the peace, commerce, and the fortunes of both countries; but you
extinguish the fairest hopes, shut up the last asylum of mankind. I think, my
Lords without being weakly superstitions, that a good man may hope that heaven
will take part against the execution of a plan which seems big, not only with
mischief, but impiety.

Let us be content with the spoils and destruction of the east. If your
Lordships can see no impropriety in it, let the plunderer and the oppressor
still go free But let not the love of lib(...) be the only crime you think
(...) thy punishment. I fear (...) soon make it a part of (...) character, to
ruin (...) that has the misfortune (...) pend upon us.

No nation has ever before contrived, in so short a space of time without any
war or public calamity (unless unwise measures may be so called) to destroy
such ample resources of commerce, wealth and power, as of late were ours, and
which, if they had been rightly improved, might have raised us to a state of
more honorable and more permanent greatness than the world has yet seen.

Let me remind the noble Lords in administration, that before the stamp act,
they had power sufficient to answer all the just ends of government, and they
were all completely answered. If that is the power they want, though we have
lost much of it at present, a few kind words would recover it all.

But if the tendency of this bill is, as I own it appears to me, to acquire a
power of governing them by influence and corruption; in the first place my
Lords, this is not true government, but a sophisticated kind, which
counterfeits the appearance, but without the spirit or virtue of the true: and
then, as it tends to debase their spirits and corrupt their manners to destroy
all that is great and respectable in so considerable a part of the human
species and by degrees to gather them together with the rest of the world.
under the yoke of universal slavery; I think, for those reasons, it is the duty
of every wise man, of every honest man, and of every Englishman, by all lawful
means, to oppose it.

FINIS

