The following Extracts from the Votes and Proceedings of the American
Continental Congress, we are induced to publish thus early purely to ease the
Impatience of our Readers.
ASSOCIATION, etc.
WE his Majesty's most loyal Subjects, the Delegates of the several Colonies of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Three Lower Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex,
on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, deputed to
represent them in a continental Congress, held in the city of Philadelphia, on
the fifth day of September, 1774, avowing our allegiance to his Majesty, our
affection and regard for our fellow subjects in Great Britain and elsewhere,
affected with the deepest anxiety, and most alarming apprehensions at those
Grievances and distresses, with which his Majesty's American subjects are
oppressed, and having taken under our most serious deliberation, the state of
the whole continent, find, that the present unhappy situation of our affairs,
is occasioned by a ruinous system of colony-administration adopted by the
British Ministry about the year 1763, evidently calculated for enslaving these
Colonies, and, with them, the British Empire. In prosecution of which system,
various Acts of Parliament have been passed for raising a Revenue in America,
for depriving the American subjects, in many instances, of the constitutional
trial by jury, exposing their lives to danger, by directing a new and illegal
trial beyond the seas, for crimes alleged to have been committed in America;
And in prosecution of the same system, several late, cruel, and oppressive Acts
have been passed respecting the town of Boston and the Massachusetts Bay, and
also an Act for extending the province of Quebec, so as to border on the
western frontiers of these Colonies, establishing an arbitrary government
therein, and discouraging the settlement of British subjects in that
wide-extended country; thus by the influence of civil principles and ancient
prejudices to dispose the inhabitants to act with hostility against the free
Protestant Colonies, whenever a wicked Ministry shall choose so to direct them.

To obtain redress of these grievances, which threaten destruction to the
lives, liberty, and property of his Majesty's subjects in North America, we are
of opinion, that a non-importation, non-consumption, and non-exportation
agreement, faithfully adhered to, will prove the most speedy, effectual, and
peaceable measure: -- And therefore we do, for ourselves, and the inhabitants
of the several Colonies, whom we represent, firmly agree and associate under
the sacred ties of virtue, honor, and love of our country, as follows:

First. That from and after the first day of December next, we will not import
into British America, from Great Britain or Ireland, any goods, wares or
merchandise whatsoever, or from any other place any such goods, wares or
merchandise, as shall have been exported from Great Britain or Ireland: nor
will we, after that day, import any East India tea from any part of the world;
nor any molasses, syrrups, paneles, coffee, or piemento, from the British
plantations, or from Dominica; nor wines from Madeira, or the Western Islands;
nor foreign indigo.

Second. That we will neither import, nor purchase any slave imported after the
1st day of December next, after which time, we will wholly discontinue the
slave trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire
our vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those who are
concerned in it.

Third. As a non-consumption agreement, strictly adhered to, will be an
effectual security for the observation of the non-importation, we, as above,
solemnly agree and associate, that, from this day, we will not purchase or use
any tea imported on account of the East India company, or any on which a duty
has been or shall be paid; and from and after the 1st day of March next, we
will not purchase or use any East India tea whatever, nor will we, nor shall
any person for or under us, purchase or use any of those goods, wares, or
merchandise, we have agreed not to import, which we shall know, or have cause
to suspect, were imported after the first day of December, except such as come
under the rules and diiections of the tenth article hereafter mentioned.

Fourth. The earnest desire we have, not to injure our fellow subjects in
Great Britain, Ireland, or the West Indies, induces us to suspend a
non-exportation until the tenth day of September, 1775; at which time if the
said Acts and parts of Acts of the British parliament, herein after mentioned,
are not repealed, we will not, directly or indirectly, export any merchandise
or commodity whatsoever, to Great Britain, Ireland or the West Indies, except
Rice to Europe

Fifth. Such as are merchants, and use the British and Irish Trade, will give
orders, as soon as possible, to their factors, agents and correspondents, in
Great Britain and Ireland, not to ship any goods to them on any pretense
whatsoever, as they cannot be received in America; and if any merchant residing
in Great Britain or Ireland, shall directly or indirectly ship any goods, wares
or merchandise, for America, in order to break the said non importation
agreement, or in any manner contravene the same on such unworthy conduct being
well attested, it ought to be made public; and, on the same being so done, we
will not from thenceforth have any commercial connection with such merchant.

Sixth. That such as are owners of vessels will give positive orders to their
captains, or masters, not to receive on board their vessels any goods
prohibited by the said non-importation agreement, on pain of immediate
dismission from their service.

Seventh. We will use our utmost endeavors to improve the breed of sheep and
increase their numbers to the greatest extent, and to that end, we will kill
them as sparingly as may be, especially those of the most profitable kind; nor
will we export any to the West Indies, or elsewhere; and those of us who are or
may become overstocked with, or can conveniently spare any sheep, will dispose
of them to our neighbors, especially to the poorer sort, on moderate terms.

Eight. That we will in our several stations encourage frugality, economy, and
industry; and promote agriculture, arts, and the manufactures of this country,
especially that of wool; and will discountenance and discourage, every species
of extravagance and dissipation, especially all horse-racing, and all kinds of
gaming, cock-fighting, exhibitions of shows, plays, and other expensive
diversions and entertainments. And on the death of any relation or friend, none
of us, or any of our families, will go into any further mourning dress, than a
black crape or ribbon on the arm or hat for Gentlemen, and a black ribbon and
necklace for Ladies, and we will discontinue the giving of gloves and scarfs at
funerals.

Ninth. That such as are venders of goods or merchandise, will not take
advantage of the scarcity of goods that may be occasioned by this association,
but will sell the same at the rates we have been respectively accustomed to do,
for twelve months last past. -- And if any vender of goods or merchandise,
shall sell any such goods on higher terms, or shall in any manner, or by any
device whatsoever, violate or depart from this agreement, no person ought, nor
will any of us deal with any such person, or his or her factor or agent, at any
time thereafter, for any commodity whatever.

Tenth. In case any merchant, trader, or other persons shall import any goods
or merchandise after the first day of ^ next, the same ought forthwith at the
election of the owner, to be either re-shipped or delivered up to the committee
of the county, or town wherein they shall be imported, to be stored at the
risque of the importer, until the non-importation agreement shall cease, or be
sold under the direction of the committee aforesaid; and in the last mentioned
case, the owner or owners of such goods, shall be reimbursed (out of the sales)
the first cost and charges, the profit if any, to be applied toward relieving
and employing such poor inhabitants of the town of Boston, as are immediate
sufferers by the Boston Port-Bill; and a particular account of all goods so
returned, stored, or sold, to be inserted in the public papers; and if any
goods or merchandises shall be imported after the said first day of February,
the same ought forthwith to be sent back again, without breaking any of the
packages thereof.

Eleventh. That a committee be chosen in every county, city, and town, by those
who are qualified to vote for Representatives in the Legislature, whose
business it shall be attentively to observe the conduct of all persons touching
this association; and when it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of a
majority of any such committee, that any person within the limits of their
appointment has violated this association, that such majority do forthwith
cause the truth of the case to be published in the Cazette, to the end that all
such foes to the rights of British America may be publicly known, and
universally contemned as the enemies of American liberty: and thenceforth we
respectively will break off all dealings with him or her.

Twelfth. That the committee of correspondence in the respective colonies do
frequently inspect the entries of their custom-houses, and inform each other
from time to time of the true state thereof, and of every other material
circumstance that may occur relative to this association.

Thirteenth. That all manufactures of this country be sold at reasonable
prices, so that no undue advantage be taken of a future scarcity of goods.

Fourteenth. And we do further agree and resolve, that we will have no trade*
commerce, dealings or intercourse whatsoever, with any colony or province, in
North America, which shall not accede to, or which shall hereafter vi^late this
association, but will hold them as unworthy of the rights of freedom, and as
inimical to the liberties of their country.

And we do solemnly bind ourselves and our constituents, under the ties
aforesaid, to adhere to this association until such parts of the several Acts
of parliament passed since the close of the last war, as impose or continue
duties on Tea, Wine, Molasses, Syrups, Paneles, Coffee, Sugar, Piemento,
Indigo, Foreign Paper, Glass, and Painters Colors, imported into America, and
extend the Powers of the Admiralty courts beyond their ancient limits, deprive
the American Subject of trial by jury, authorize the Judge's certificate to
indemnify the prosecutor from damages, that he might otherwise be liable to
from a trial by his peers, require oppressive security from a claimant of ships
or goods seized, before he shall be allowed to defend his property, are
repealed: -- And until that part of the Act of the 12. G. 3. chap. 24,
entitled, An Act for the better securing his Majesty's dock yards, magazines,
ships, ammunition, and stores, by which, any persons charged with committing
any of the offenses therein described, in America, may be tried in any shire or
county within the realm, is repealed -- And until the four Acts passed in the
last session of Parliament, viz. That for stopping the port and blocking up the
harbor of Boston -- That for altering the charter and government of the
Massachusetts Bay -- And that which is entitled "An Act for the better
administration of justice, etc. -- And that "For extending the limits of
Quebec, etc. are repealed. And we recommend it to the provincial conventions,
and to the committees in the respective Colonies, to establish such further
regulations as they may think proper, for carrying into execution this
Association.

The foregoing Association being determined upon by the CONGRESS, was ordered
to be subscribed by the several Members thereof; and thereupon we have hereunto
set our respective names accordingly.

In Congress, Philadelphia, October 20, 1774. Signed, PEYTON RANDOLPH,
President.
For New Hampshire. John Sullivan, Nathaniel Folsom.
Massachusetts Bay. Thomas Cushing, Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat
Pain.
Rhode Island. Stephen Hopkins, Samuel Ward.
Connecticut. Eliphalet Dyer, Roger Sherman, Silas Deane.
New York. Isaac Low, John Alsop, John Iay, James Duane, William Floyd, Henry
Wisener, S. Boerum.
New Jersey. James Kinsey, William Livingston, Ste^hen Crane, Richard Smith.
Pennsylvania. Joseph Gallaway, John Dickinson, Charles Humphreys, Thomas
Mifflin, Edward Biddle, John Morton, George Ross.
New Castle, etc. Caesar Rodney, Thomas M' Keane, George Read.
Maryland. Matthew Tilghman, Thomas Johnson, William Paca, Samuel Chase.
Virginia. Richard Henry Lee, George Washington, P. Henry, jun. Richard Bland,
Benjamin Harrison, Edmund Pendleton.
North Carolina. William Hooper, Joseph Howes, R. Caswell.
South Carolina. Henry Middleton, Thomas Lynch, Christopher Gadsden, John
Rutledge, Edward Rutledge.

Boston: Printed, by T. and I. Fleet.


