A SERMON, PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22d. 1773.

Being the Anniversary Thanksgiving, in commemoration of the Landing of the
FATHERS there, A. D. 1620.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22d, 1773.

Being the ANNIVERSARY THANKSGIVING, in Commemoration of the LANDING of the
FATHERS there, A. D. 1620.

By CHARLES TURNER, A.M. Pastor of the Church in DUXBURY.

O socii (neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum)
O passi graviora: dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Vos and Scylltaeam rabiem, penitusque sonantes
Accestis scopulos; vos and Cyclopea saxa
Experti: revocate animos, maestumque timorens
Mittite; forsan and haec olim meminisse juvabit.
Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in Latium; seeds ubi sata quietas
Ostendunt: illic fas regna resurgere Trojae.
Durate, and vosmet rebus servate secundis.
VIRG. Aen. lib. 1. BOSTON: Printed and Sold at GREENLEAF'S Printing-Office, in
HANOVER-STREET. M, DCC, LXXIV.

To the ancient and respectable town of PLYMOUTH, To all the descendants from
the first PLANTERS of the OLD PLYMOUTH COLONY, and To his native Country, The
following SERMON is inscribed,

By their assured Friend, and very humble Servant, C. TURNER.

AN ANNIVERSARY THANKSGIVING SERMON.
ZECH. IV.10. Who has despised the day of small things? For they shall
rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbable, with those seven,
they are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth.


THAT Isaiah should speak of Cyrus, as the person designed of God to restore
the jewish captivity, and call him by name near two hundred years before he was
born, is truly remarkable. It has been thought this extraordinary prophecy was
shown to Cyrus, by the prophet Daniel; which excited the Persian monarch to
favor the restoration of the jewish ecclesiastical and civil state.

ZERUBBABLE, He was called also, by the Chaldeans, Sheshbazzar, and so named,
perhaps on occasion of his being promoted to be one of the King of Babylon's
life-guards. It was an ancient custom for Princes to give new names to those
whom they saw fit to promote and distinguish; as appears by a number of
instances in the old testament; to which custom there may be an allusion in our
Lord's promise to the church in Perg^mos, that he would give to him that should
over come, a white stone, and in the stone a new name written.
is supposed to have been grandson to Jeconiah King of Judah, and the eldest
surviving branch of the royal family of David; and for that reason appointed by
the King of Persia, to be the first Governor of the returning Jews.

MANY of the Jews had so little confidence as to the success of the enterprise,
that they chose rather to continue still at Babylon, where they had formed
connections, and some of them had acquired estates, than to engage (...)
heartless, concerning the success of their enterprise, in it is infancy, should
have occasion of rejoicing, if their lives were spared, on seeing the temple
rise into a noble finished structure, in spite of all opposition, under the
conduct of Zerubbable, supported of God, and assisted by concurrent aids of the
divine super-intending gracious universal providence.

THE seven, here mentioned, are the seven eyes, before spoken of in this
prophecy, to be engraved on the head-stone of the temple, as emblems of the
Heavenly Angels, called the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the
whole earth, to signify, that he uses the instrumentality of Angels, in taking
the providential oversight of the world, and that his care and government of
the world, by their ministry, in concurrence with other methods, is universal.

THE jewish temple and commonwealth could not rise without the blessing of
providence. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.
This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbable, saying, not by might, nor by
power; but by my spirit [my providence] says the Lord of hosts,

THE Governer of Judah, and his people, accompanied with those seven, the eyes
of the Lord, i. e. aided by divine providence, might joyfully hope for
prosperity; and that, by divine assistance, they should succeed, is the
prophet's encouraging voice, in this passage of holy scripture?

SIMILAR, in their animating design and tendency, are the following expressions
of this public spirited Man of God. Who art thou oh great mountain? Before
Zerubbable thou shall become a plain; and he shall bring forth the head [chief]
stone thereof with shoutings, crying, GRACE! GRACE! unto it, in acknowledgment
of it is denoting the Messiah, that great instance and dispenser of grace to the
world, It has been supposed, that this head-stone with the seven eyes engraved
on it, was designed to represent Jesus Christ, attended by angels, in the
gracious care and government of the church and world. The thought may receive
an illustration from Christ's being called, the stone which is become the head
of the corner, and a chief corner stone, elect, precious, laid in Sion; as
also, from the following words in Revelation, And I beheld, and lo, in the
midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders,
stood a lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are
the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.
in testimony of desire, that the divine gracious blessing might ever attend
the temple service; and in demonstration of gratitude, for the savor of God, in
prospering the work. The hands of Zerubbable have laid the foundation of this
house; his hands shall also finish it.

WHEN our fathers crossed the atlantic, to escape being subjected, either to
the iron jaws of English civil and prelatical tyranny, or the insupportable
difficulties of residing on the eastern continent; and settled in this place*
to erect a temple of freedom and religion; it was indeed with them, in certain
respects, a day of small things. In emigrating from England, maintaining
themselves in Holland, and transporting themselves to these shores, their
interest was diminished. Their numbers were small: their company, when they
arrived, including every person pertaining to their families, scarcely
exceeding one hundred people; and nearly one half of them, God saw fit to
remove by death, within the space of a few months after their landing. Small
were their accommodations of life, and means of subsistence: it was, at times,
with great difficulty they could procure the essential necessaries of life. And
small was their power, compared with that of their cruel Indian neighbors, and
(I wish I could say less cruel) European persecutors.

BUT in other lights the day was great. Our ancestors are not to be represented
as perfect; but while they were not rude in knowledge, and in doctrinals not
inferior to the church of England, with regard to piety and virtue they in
general deserve an excellent character. For the great and fearful name of God,
and for the Lord's day, their veneration was truly great. They discoverd a
principle of strict justice, particularly toward the natives of the country.
Their willingness to communicate among themselves, resembled the spirit which
prevailed in the primitive church, when no man said that ought that he
possessed was his own; but they had all things common; a spirit which, in
extraordinary situations, may be most highly virtuous. They were temperate.

THEY were full in the great protestant principles, concerning the right of
private judgment, and making the word of God the only rule in religion. Their
desire was to build not on human inventions, but on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. So
far as they adopted the instructions and spirit of their excellent minister, Mr
Robinson, they were divested of bigotry, and friends to free inquiry. They were
zealous advocates for religious liberty. If they have been thought,
nevertheless, to have discovered a little too much asperity toward those who
differed from them in religious sentiment, we may be disposed to make an
apology for them, if not to justify them, in that regard, when we consider the
exasperating things they had suffered; and how easy it was for them to judge,
that severity was essential to their preservation, in their peculiar
circumstances. But if they deserve censure on this head, we shall be able to
administer it with a better grace when we have so thoroughly studied and
adopted the spirit of protestantism and charity, as not to attempt unscriptural
impositions on our fellow christians.

THEIR design, in coming over to this inhospitable shore, was great and
honorable; to enjoy for themselves and theirs, civil, and especially sacred
freedom, to worship God, without molestation, agreably to the dictates of their
own consciences, to enlarge the Kings dominions, and to pave the way for the
conversion of the heathen: They had an inward zeal and great hope of laying
some foundation, or making way for propagating the kingdom of Christ, to the
remote ends of the earth; though they should be but as stepping stones to
others: And they came to remove their children, their posterity, from the
snares, oppressions, and corruptions of the old world; which, however, have
been permitted to follow them hither, like a flood of waters, cast forth out of
the dragon's mouth.

THEIR ecclesiastical plan I have thought proper to insert it here, as I have
taken it from Mr. Prince's Chronology, 91st 92d and 93d pages.

As to ecclesiastical matters, they held the following articles to be agreeable
to scripture and reason.

1. That no particular church ought to consist of more members than can
conveniently watch over one another, and usually meet and worship in one
congregation.

2. That every particular church of Christ is only to consist of such as appear
to believe in, and obey him.

3. That any competent number of such, when their consciences ablige them, have
a right to embody into a church for their mutual edification.

4. That this embodying is by some certain contract or covenant, either
expressed or implied, though it ought to be by the former.

5. That being embodied, they have a right of choosing all their officers.

6. That the officers appointed by Christ for this embodied church, are in some
respects of three sorts, in others but two, viz.

(1.) Pastors or teaching elders, who have the power both of overseeing,
teaching, administering the sacraments, and ruling too: and being chiefly to
give themselves to studying, teaching and the spiritual care of the flock, are
therefore to be maintained.

(2.) Mere ruling elders, who are to help the pastors in overseeing and ruling;
that their offices be not temporary, as among the Dutch and French churches,
but continual: and being also qualified in some degree to teach, they are to
teach only occasionally, through necessity, or in their pastor's absence or
illness; but being not to give themselves to study or teaching, they have no
need of maintenance.

That the elders of both sorts form the presbytery of overseers and rulers,
which should be in every particular church: and are in scripture called
sometimes presbyters or elders, sometimes bishops or overseers, sometimes
guides, and sometimes rulers.

(3.) Deacons, who are to take care of the poor and of the church's treasure;
to distribute for the support of the pastor, the supply of the needy, the
propagation of religion, and to minister at the Lord's table, etc.

7. That these officers being chosen and ordained, have no lordly, arbitrary or
imposing power; but can only rule and minister with the consent of the
brethren; who ought not in contempt to be called the laity, but to be treated
as men and brethren in Christ, not as slaves or minors.

8 That no churches or church officers whatever, have any power over any other
church or officers, to control or impose upon them; but are all equal in their
rights and privileges, and ought to be independent in the exercise and
enjoyment of them.

9 As to church administrations, they held, that baptism is a seal of the
covenant of grace, and should be dispensed only to visible believers, with
their unadult children; and this in primitive purity, as in the times of Christ
and his Apostles, without the sign of the cross, or any other invented
ceremony: that the Lord's supper, should be received as it was at first even in
Christ's immediate presence, in the table posture: that the elders should not
be restrained from praying in public as well as private, according to the
various occasions continually offering from the word or providence, and no set
form should be imposed on any: that excommunication should be wholly spiritual,
a mere rejecting the scandalous from the communion of the church in the holy
sacraments, and those other spiritual privileges which are peculiar to the
faithful: and that the church or it is officers have no authority to inflict any
penalties of a temporal nature.

10. And lastly, as for holy days, they were very strict for the observation of
the Lord's day, in a pious memorial of the incarnation, birth, death,
resurrection, ascension and benefits of Christ; as also solemn fastings and
thanksgivings, as the state of providence requires: but all other times not
prescribed in scripture they utterly relinquished: and as in general, they
could not conceive any thing a part of Christ's religion which he has not
required; they therefore renounced all human right of inventing, and much less
of imposing it on others.

These were the main principles of that scriptual and religious liberty, for
which this people suffered in England, fled to Holland, traversed the ocean,
and sought a dangerous retreat in these remote and savage deserts of
North America; that here they might fully enjoy them, and leave them to their
last posterity.


was, in the main, rational and scriptural; it was noble, founded on the
principles of the perfect law of liberty. Whether their choice of mere ruling
elders, can be justified by the bible, may indeed be disputed.

THEIR dissapprobation of the established church, in respect to hierarchy
discipline and ceremonies, we are fully persuaded was reasonable: their
dissent, in respect to such things, was honorable. They have been reproached as
being schismatics, with as much reason as England might be stigmatized as
schismatical, for departing from the church of Rome; and no more. If the church
of England was schismatical in leaving Rome, we could heartily wish they had
carried their schism to a greater length. The punctilious tenacity, wherewith
the church of England establishment is retained and upheld, appears the more
surprising when we reflect, that the worthy English reformers lamented that
they could not carry the reformation to perfection, by reason of the peculiar
difficulties of the times.

WHEN we consider that Mr. Robinson, their minister, was a celebrated opposer
of the Brownists; and that the Brownists [at Amsterdam] would hardly hold
communion with the people at Leyden, our ancestors, having been charged with
Brownism appears wonderful.

THFY have been blamed as being independents; but we will forbear to censure
them, on that score, at least till it is a little more clearly determined, that
the plan of independency is disagreable to the christian institution. The Rev.
Mr. Cotton of Boston, in regard to Mr. Robinson's being called the author of
independency, said, That the new testament was the author of it; and it was
received in the times of purest, primitive antiquity, many hundreds of years
before Mr. Robinson was born. Vid. Prince's Chron. p. 90.


THEIR self-denials and deadness to the world, their magnanimity and
perseverance in troubles, straits and dangers, at once command our admiration,
and give us the highest pleasure. Let us reflect upon the hardships, and
remarkably disheartening circumstances of their voyage, their being
disappointed of their intended place of settlement, their being destitute of a
public engagement for the security of that freedom which was so near their
hearts, their landing at such a season as this, where the winters are more
severe, than they, in their early years, had been inured to; without an house
to screen them from the rigid inclemencies of the climate and season; all
friendless strangers; not having, at that juncture, an European within hundreds
of miles; but attended with natives, savage, and at certain times cruel as
beasts of prey! Let us reflect upon their being thrown,' by their hardships,
into a scene of mortal sickness; which did, at once, most sorrowfully diminish
their number, and weaken them in comparison with their heathen neighbors: let
us consider them moreover, as struggling through all these things, with such
fortitude, such spirit and patience, that we can scarcely discern in them, so
much as a symptom of discouragement, in their most perilous circumstances; and
then let us be charmed with the power of christianity, and praise the gospel;
let us adore the God of all grace, who was pleased to replenish them with such
love to liberty, and posterity, such faith and hope, and, as the effect of
these things, such astonishing firmness, in one of the grandest of causes. Mr.
Robinson and Mr. Brewster spoke with great sobriety, when they said of their
church in Leyden. It is not with us as with other men; whom small things can
discourage, or small discontents cause to wish ourselves at home again. Had we
generally inherited but a single portion of their spirits, we might not have
suffered so. But it has happened to us, in some measure, as to the church in
early ages: at first our graces were brightned by adversity; but when the
country became more prosperous, we have grown corrupted.

THE fortitude and heroism of our forefathers, when we consider them as
surmounting the peculiar difficulties and perils of making the first settlement
in New England, appear with distinguished luster: we do however, by no means
intend by this, to derogate from the high praises which are justly due to the
first planters of the Massachusetts Colony; we gladly acknowledge their
accomplishments and merits, and with great respect and affection think on them,
as brethren of our fathers, their companions in tribulation, and in the kingdom
and patience of Jesus Christ.

IN regard to wonderful appearances of providence, for the preservation and
success of our ancestors, it was truly a day of great things. Contrary to their
own intention, they were diverted from a place where the natives were numerous,
to a place where they had been a few years before greatly diminished by a
wasting sickness; and though the remaining numbers of the natives in the
vicinity, were sufficient to have swallowed up our infant settlement, as it
were in a moment; yet possibly, that God who knows the proper means for
restraining the wrath of man, by such a judgment on the savages, might abate
the ferocity of such of them as survived the calamity, and render them more
moderate and pacifick. Providence brought them to a place, where the woods were
stored with venison, and the waters happily enlivened with fish and covered
with foul, things of no trivial importance to them, in their critical
circumstances. Providence brought them to a place, where the soil, very near to
the shore, is good, as well as of easy culture; though the circumjacent
territory is poor. Providence preserved them through a long and hazardous
voyage! preserved them through the extreme perils of aproaching and landing
upon a coast, so dangerous at this season, that seamen who have been the
longest acquainted with it, find it sufficiently perilous to come upon it at
this time of the year, notwithstanding all the hospitable arms which are open
for their reception immediately in case of their arrival. Providence procured
them a patent from the King, when they entertained no expecttation of it. When
they were ready to perish, providence ever sent them seasonable supplies.
Providence was their safeguard by day and by night, and effectually prevented
their being destroyed by the sword of the wilderness, to which they were
exposed, in getting their bread, as well as in their sleeping hours; while it
equally prevented their being ruined, by insiduous foes, Some of the principal
of these were, Lyford a minister, and a man whose name was Oldham. Their
conduct resembled that of Rehum and Shimshai, Tatnai and Shethar, Boznal and
their companions the Apharsashites, in old time. They secretly wrote letters to
England, to subvert the immunities of the Colony. The letters were intercepted
by the vigilence of Governor Bradford. Lyford, who had before made the most
pious and friendly professions, and had been received into the New-Plymouth
church, made, after the discovery, as affecting an acknowlegement; and by it
the church was pacified. But, in a short time, he offended again in the same
way: such instances of hypocrisy the world has afforded* They were both
expelled. Oldham presuming to return, was remanded off; and having passed
through a guard, when each man gave him a blow, with the butt-end of his
musket, he was carried down to the boat, ready to receive him.
who crept in from Europe, among themselves. And providence has, by their
means, transmitted to us this fair inheritance we now enjoy; wherein we live in
ease and happiness; and though it be with pain, I must say, wherein many of us
live in great degrees of God-offending excess, profanely rioting on the dearly
bought fruits of our ancestor's toils, treasures and lives; and most
ungratefully requiting that benign providence, which supported them, and made
them the instruments of conveying to us the blessings we thus wantonly abuse.
On the whole, the spiritual grace and watchful care of Heaven, in the case of
our ancestors, have gained a triumph; manifesting in how gloomy scenes people
may sustain spirits, and in what extreme situations they may hope Heaven will
effectually interpose for the preservation of men. Unless we amuse ourselves
with vain ideas, concerning future excellence, the day was great, as being
pregnant with empire.

IN a retrospection upon the spirit wherewith God was pleased to animate our
fathers; their patience in the cause of God and freedom; and the singular care
he was pleased to take of them; while he intended to make them the first
planters of such a country as New England; in which we their posterity live in
so much felicity; and which promises to become so glorious; every little
circumstance, relating to them and their adventure, seems to contract a dignity
and importance, and is dwelt upon with satisfaction; we take a pleasure in
imitating, annually, the simplicity of their tables; and we glory in their very
infirmities and sufferings.

LET us, in the midst of these reflections, have our hearts enlarged in
thanksgiving to God, for his merciful favor to our fathers, and to us by their
instrumentality. Let us piously acknowledge the hand of God, in all that has
been done for them and us, and to the whole, cry, grace, grace. With what
strange gloom are our hearts filled, when we make the supposition, that all our
fathers had been left to perish in their attempt! Proportionable to the
dreadfulness of such a supposition, let our gratitude be, to our father's God
and our's. And, out of gratitude to God, let us improve the blessings of life
with sobriety, and maintain our liberties with an honorable christian firmness.

MAY we deeply imbibe the spirit of piety, charity, and liberty, wherewith our
fathers were blessed, dignified and adorned; and not, like children of
wantonness, for worldly triflles relinquish those privileges, which are so
sacred, and were so dearly purchased! And let us exercise such good judgment,
godliness, virtue, and merited filial respect to the precious honorable memory
of our forefathers, as to abhor the most distant thought of a reversion to
that politico-ecclesiastical, half reformed church, oppressive as well as
unscriptural, from whose cruelty they suffered such bitter things!

IT ought indeed to be noticed, to the reputation of the old Plymouth Colony,
that they have not relapsed to the established church, in so great a degree, as
some other parts of New England.

OUR beginnings may have been thought by some, not ill-affected toward us, to
be unpromising, and in certain respects inconsiderable; while we, like the Jews
on their re-settlement, have been attended with persons who have treated us and
our enterprise, with envenomed contempt. But, whosoever have despised our day
of small things, if they are now alive, and are enriched with a a christian
spirit of benevolence, may rejoice, in seeing that we, with our associates,
have indulged to us by Heaven, one of the fairest prospects that ever a
community was blessed with. Says the worthy Bishop of St. Asaph, In his
sermon, preached before the society for the propagation of the gospel in
foreign parts. Feb. 19. 1773.
Perhaps the annals of history have never afforded a more grateful spectacle to
a benevolent and philosophic mind, than the growth and progress of the british
Colonies in North America.

WE have a sufficient extent of territory, and variety of soils and climates.
Our manufactures prosper and increase in a pleasing manner, and promise to rise
to the highest perfection. Agriculture is studied. Arts and sciences in general
flourish. Literature, which has been journeying westward, has made at last, a
welcome visit to these shores: and perhaps having performed the tour of the
globe, it may here fix a more settled residence, and arise to singular
perfection. There is among us a prevalent spirit of inquiry concerning the
rights of the country, and a prevalent disposition to assert them; which things
afford a pleasure, proportionable to the known richness of liberty, and the
known destructive nature and tendency of slavery. The rapidity of our
population is surprising. Had our New-Plymouth settlers been told, that the
British North-American Colonies would contain several millions of people,
before their grandchildren should all of them be laid in their graves, Capt.
Samuel Alden, grandson to Mr. John Alden, who was one of the signers of the
covenant at Cape-Cod harbor, and was, for many years, chosen an assistant in
the government of New-Plymouth, is now living in Duxbury, aged 85. His father,
deacon David Alden, arrived to the age of 73. And his grandfather lived 88
years. He has a sister, now living as I suppose, in Barnstable county, whose
age is equal to that of her grandfather.
could they have believed the information? If it should please God to allow a
population for the future, in any measure similar to what is past, some of our
grandchildren may live to see more people in these Colonies, than are now in
Europe.

AS the country has been growing more populous, godliness and friendship have
decayed, and iniquities have prevailed. We trust in the God of all grace, that,
on the contrary, all christian and moral accomplishments, will for the future
increase with our growing numbers. We cheerfully hope, that all the absurd
popish doctrines and wicked devices of spiritual and civil oppression will fall
into utter contempt: that the spirit of liberty will be perfected; and that, as
there will be constant need of such a spirit, while any sons of pride, ambition
and avarice remain, so it will be perpetuated* that the country will be blessed
with magistrates, who shall esteem it their greatest glory and interest to
excel in piety and public virtues, and in the promotion of every thing
conducive to the prosperity and happiness of society; that the clergy of the
land (in the judgment of some, if one of their number may say it with decency)
deserving, at present, of an excellent character, will obtain the most correct
understanding of the truth as it is in Jesus, and arrive to all the highest
ministerial accomplishments; that the plummet for adjusting the line, between
the power of rulers and privileges of the people, in matters civil and
ecclesiastical, will be held with a steady, wise and unerring hand; and
North America rise unto the noblest structure the sun has ever beheld; and
which shall be a pattern and source of instruction and happiness, to the rest
of mankind. I cannot prevail with myself to censure it, as vanity and
enthusiasm, to form such an alotment. There is this at least in reason to
countenance it, that when God has seen fit to appear for a people, for several
ages, in a remarkable manner, there is a certain degree of probability,
according to the known rules of analogy, that he will continue thus remarkably
to favor them. When we consider Rome, as founded by a rude uncultivated
collection of people; but yet, without christian principles to form and animate
the patriot, arriving to such an eminent pitch of glory among the nations, we
stand amazed; and ought to consider ourselves as reproached: If God will grant
that North America, shall exceed Rome in it is highest perfection, as much as
our ancestry and our advantages exceed theirs, our highest expectations will be
answered; and the most sanguinary wishes of the warmest patriot will be
completely gratified. Imagining such happiness to be in reserve for future
generations, we may be tempted to regret that we were born so soon; but that
need give us no uneasiness. Enlarged with that christian spirit, whereby the
disciples of Jesus possess all things, we are trasported into futurity; we live
with posterity; we see all their religion, virtue, catholicism, love, peace,
unity, beneficence, sobriety, learning, liberty, wealth and greatness; and
enjoy all their happiness.

AFTER all, we are not to imagine that God sets before us any prospect, which
may not be blasted by our irreligion and vices; any hope, but such as may be
cut off, by a neglect to pursue the proper measures for the public welfare. I
rejoice in all the christian piety and holiness among us; am conscious of no
malevolent inclination to exaggerate the degeneracy of the times; but confess
myself unable to point out a country, founded in economy industry frugality
and temperance, that has arrived to such a degree of luxury, in so short a time
as ours. Our singularity, in this regard, may indeed be accounted for, in a
great measure, by our intaminating connections; but ought to be viewed as a
most melancholy threatening circumstance. In this fluctuating earthly scene,
states, when by various means they have arrived to power and wealth, are by
prosperity thrown into luxury; and luxury operates slavery and political death!
Such is the course of this world! No doubt, late and present dispensations of
providence toward us, have been designed in part, to put us in mind of such a
truth, for our warning to repent and become temperate; while they were designed
also, to quicken us to a laudable inquiry, into all the proper means for
establishing and perpetuating our freedom and happiness. May the divine
admonition be properly regarded; and oppression, which occasioned our being
planted, be made, in effect, to contribute to our safety and perfection. If no
additional laws are enacted, for a check to vicious extravagancies, we hope the
higher ranks of people will combine to lead in the necessary reformation. And
may God pour out his spirit upon his people, and his blessing on their
offspring; that the inhabitants of the land may return, to be a godly virtuous
temperate community; and have the singular honor among the nations, of knowing
how to abound; and the glory and happiness of pursuing that on which their
deliverance depends, and in which their life consists. Is it impossible that
there should once be a people, wise enough to withstand the temptations of
affluence?

WE admire at the growth of our loved country: freedom is a thing, which, under
God, has been principally instrumental of it is arriving to be what it is; and
freedom must still, in the hand of God, be one of it is main pillars; or it will
fall, with as great a celerity, as ever it has risen.

IN a view to the edification, and permanent liberty and happiness of our land,
it must be thought of the last importance, that the youth be educated, as in
general, in the principles of our most holy faith; so, particularly, in that
spirit of heavenly contempt of the pleasures of sin and wages of
unrighteousness, and in that spirit of freedom, which christianity naturally
inspires. Liberty is the happiness, and slavery the misery, depopulation and
destruction of any land. A spirit of liberty is necessary to the preservation
of the thing. And the character of the world, as to a spirit of liberty, and
every thing else, we cannot but perceive, is ever mainly formed by education.
In this light it may possibly appear to gentlemen of large estates and public
spirit, a disposition of the surplusage of their wealth not injudiciously made,
if they should found professorships of liberty in universities.


NOR is it by any means of trivial consequence, that a laudable care be taken
to prevent the establishment of an episcopal hierarchy among us. As episcopacy,
in the modern sense of the word, is disagreable to the gospel; so, it is to be
considered, as an engine of civil, as well as ecclesiastical slavery. NO
BISHOP! NO KING! was a maxim with a British Prince, whose ideas of royal power,
and what we call tyranny, appear to have been the same; and who, perhaps, had
no vast regard for Bishop, church or religion, farther than he thought they
might be subservient to his arbitrary views. It might not be greatly amiss if,
NO BISHOP, NO TYRANT! Should be ever held a sacred maxim with this people; and
a proportionable vigilence be used that episcopacy may never take place in this
country. When Bishops are immediately and highly dependant on the Prince, and
at the same time are Lords over the rest of the clergy, the whole power and
influence of the clergy is apt to be thrown into the prerogative scale; and
this, when a Prince is disposed for a stretch of power, may have a most unhappy
aspect on the liberties of a land.

Moreover, to prevent the appropriation and confinement of the landed interest,
and posts of honor, profit and influence, to a few particular families in the
country, demands the vigilence of the patriot. If such things are not
prevented, honor will be too apt to alight on those for whom it is not seemly:
power will be too apt to fall into the hands of those, who want the
understanding or the heart to make a good use of it: there will not be proper
encouragement for the geniuses, which the God of nature scatters promiscuously
among the people; hope of rising will be cut off; laudable and useful emulation
will be cramped: there will not be that exertion for liberty, which may be
seen, where there are great numbers of freeholders in a country, who have real
estates to preserve unembarrassed: bribery in elections (if any such things as
elections remain) will take place more easily and successfully, than it would
if the number of freeholders was very great: there will not be such a spur to
industry, as where men have a prospect of obtaining good farms, for themselves
and for their children: a great part of the people will be very poor, and
therefore ignorant, irreligious and vicious; they will be untaught to read, or
they will have but little leisure for reading the word of God, or other useful
writings; they will be callous and insensible; the friendly instructions and
warnings of the patriot's pen, will not reach their understandings and hearts;
they will be low lived, mean spirited and servile in their tempers, and they
will be slaves.

We ask leave to subjoin, that instead of endeavoring to keep the people in
ignorance, and under hard bondage, under a pretense of it is being necessary for
keeping them in order, and to prevent their ruining themselves; rulers, of any
kind, if they would act the truly human and christian part, should strive to
enlighten them as far as possible; and, leaving them in the enjoyment of their
liberty, endeavor to correct their morals, and bring them to choose that
respectfulness and submission to regular government, in which their interest
will forever be involved.

The care that has been taken to support more public or more private schools in
New England, is high praiseworthy; and we hope there will, in time to come, be
much larger room for commendation, in this respect.




WE please ourselves in a prospect of the future greatness and happiness of our
country, and devise means for perpetuating it is liberty and felicity; but when
we come to think of our present political embarrassments, together with our
sinfulness, our rejoicing is damped, and our hearts are filled with concern.
What further calamities may be in reserve for us, God only knows: however, if
we put away our sins by repentance, in conformity to the disciplining intention
of the rod of God; if we are believing, pious, just, holy, temperate; if we
wait on God with trust and prayer, and live in his fear; if we nourish that
spirit of christianity, which implies the spirit of liberty and union, and will
form us to such disinterested grandeur, and persevering firmness of mind, as
were possessed by our forefathers, we may humbly hope that God, by that
gracious providence which is essential to our relief and prosperity, will
appear for our deliverance out of all tribulation, so that we shall not be
ruined thereby; that he will make our adversities, in effect, to serve us; and
cause all things to conspire for our preservation, and becoming a great and
happy people! For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth,
to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

IN fine, might we suppose our ancestors present, raised from the dead; and all
their numerous descendants, who are now living, convened in attentive silence;
it is not unnatural to think, that one of the venerable sires should, in the
name of the whole, address the assembly, to the following purpose. It is, our
much respected offspring, parental affection, and therefore affection which is
real, that has brought us from the unseen world. We heartily congratulate you,
in a reflection upon all the great things which God has done for you; and (in
the sense, in which our present state of happiness will admit the exercise of
sympathy) we as heartily compassionate you under your present sufferings: for
the exercise of which sympathetic tenderness, we are in a better capacity, as
having learnt, by bitter experiment what oppressions mean. They are not
unimportant things, wherewith we are desirous to impress your hearts. You are
not insensible of the arduous difficulties we were called to encounter, the sea
of troubles we waded through, as advocates for Heaven-born liberty; and that
some of us lost our lives in freedom's sacred cause. It was, in a great
measure, for your sakes, that we thus suffered; and, in a benevolent regard to
your good, we suffered cheerfully. That the church, from whose bigotry and
malevolence our sufferings chiefly proceeded, is an imperfectly reformed one,
constitutionally calculated to serve the cause of spiritual and civil thraldom;
and that the cause of liberty is one of the noblest that can employ human
attention and care, are truths, which will endure the severest, and most
impartial scrutiny of all ages. Can you reflect upon such things, and with
unpained hearts relapse to the established church? Or can you sell the truth,
and relinquish your birthright liberty, for such things as captivate the
children of this world? With what care, with what pains, with what self-denials
and sufferings, with what tender zeal, with what alotments, did we lay up for
you! We know indeed that, in such a world as this, the provision made by tender
industrious frugal parents, is not seldom consumed, by the riot prodigality and
dissipation of their posterity: but, considering how near you live to our time,
with every other circumstance that merits attention in the case, if you are
found so immersed in worldly-mindedness and sensuality, so dead to a sense of
the importance of liberty, and so void of all religious and virtuous
principles, as to be now ripe for squandering away the inheritance which we
procured for you, we must beg leave to consider it as one of the most
astonishing of all events! If it might be a means of your standing fast in the
cause of liberty and dissenting religion, which is the cause of God, of truth
and righteousness; if it might be instrumental of your recovery from the
sinfulness into which many of you are fallen; if it might be instrumental of
the universal prevalence of those real regards to Christ, on which the relief
and lasting good of this our loved country, and the eternal happiness of
individuals, are suspended; we say it with great sincerity, that severe as our
sufferings were, we should be heartily willing to suspend our present
happiness, and undergo a repetition of those sufferings, or even submit
ourselves to much heavier woes. With all the respect, tenderness and fidelity
of the parental breast, we say, that if an effectual, speedy check, be not
given to your thriving luxury; but the vices, which come under that general
denomination, increase among you, and in the rest of the land, in time to come,
as they have done for a number of years past, you may look upon your ruin as
hastening on, and not extremely distant. Your effeminacy, intemperate drinking,
and other sinful extravagancies, have, in late times, occasioned a scene of
venality and prostration of principle, to the no small hazard of your valuable
liberties! But if you will return, penitently renouncing all your sinfulness;
if you will return to hope in God through Christ, and unitedly to love and fear
and serve him, with the whole heart; and to exert yourselves with honor and
perseverance for the public good, he will pardon your sins, and deliver and
heal your lana; he will raise you to singular eminence; he will give his
tutelar angels charge over you, and you will be protected free and happy, in
this good land, which God, in his mercy and grace, has been pleased to make us
instrumental of conveying into your possession. And, if your children forsake
not the gospel; but continue in God's covenant, they will be encircled with all
the blessings implied in having the divine father for their God, unto all
generations. Recalling to view all the wonderful things God has done for us and
you, and considering the great prospects he sets before you and yours, if you
reform, and you and they follow him fully and forever, we desire you, before we
part, to join with us in adopting the following sacred language: Alleluia;
salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God. Alleluia; for
the Lord God omnipotent, reigns. Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be
unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb forever and ever,
Amen: blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor and power,
and might be unto our God forever and ever, Amen. Farewell, our dear and greatly
honored progeny! Most ardently wishing, that you may enjoy the best
understanding of the blessed gospel, the largest communications of spiritual
grace, with the Almighty protection, and all the rich blessings of divine
providence. We return, earnestly desiring that you may all follow us, in due
time, to that world where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest; where, the man who sells his conscience and his country's liberty for any
worldly consideration, without repentance can never come; and where they, who
have lost their lives, in a well principled assertion of the cause of freedom
and of God, shall find them, in so sublime a sense, as cannot be adequately
expressed by mortal language, such as we are now obliged to use.

THE END.

