THE ASSOCIATION, etc.
WE, his Majesty's most loyal subjects, the Delegates of the several Colonies
of New Hampshire, Massachusett's Bay, RhodeIsland, Connecticut, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Three Lower Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex,
on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, deputed to
represent them in a continental Congress, held in the city of Philadelphia, on
the fifth day of September, 1774, avowing our allegiance to his Majesty, our
affection and regard for our fellow subjects in Great Britain and elsewhere,
affected with the deepest anxiety, and most alarming apprehensions at those
grievances and distresses, with which his Majesty's American subjects are
oppressed, and having taken under our most serious deliberation, the state of
the whole coutinent, find, that the present unhappy situation of our affairs,
is occasioned by a ruinous system of colony administration adopted by the
British Ministry about the year 1763, evidently calculated for inslaving these
Colonies, and, with them, the British Empire. In prosecution of which system,
various Acts of Parliament have been passed for raising a Revenue in America,
for depriving the American subjects, in many instances, of the constitutional
trial by jury, exposing their lives to danger, by directing a new and illegal
trial beyond the seas, for crimes alleged to have been committed in America:
And in prosecution of the same system, several late, cruel, and oppressive Acts
have been passed respecting the town of Boston and the Massachusett's-Bay, and
also an Act for extending the province of Quebec, so as to border on the
western frontiers of these Colonies, establishing an arbitrary government
therein, and discouraging the settlement of British subjects in that wide
extended country; thus by the influence of civil principles and ancient
prejudices to dispose the inhabitants to act with hostility against the free
protestant Colonies, whenever a wicked Ministry shall choose so to direct them.

To obtain redress of these grievances, which threaten destruction to the
lives, liberty, and property of his Majesty's subjects in NorthAmerica, we are
of opinion, that a non-importation, non-consumption, and non-exportation
agreement, faithfully adhered to, will prove the most speedy, effectual, and
peaceable measure: And therefore we do, for ourselves and the inhabitants of
the several Colonies, whom we represent, firmly agree and associate under the
sacred ties of virtue, honor and love of our country, as follows.

First. THAT from and after the first day of December next, we will not import
into British America, from Great Britain or Ireland, any goods, wares or
merchandise whatsoever, or from any other place any such goods, wares or
merchandise, as shall have been exported from Great Britain or Ireland; nor
will we, after that day, import any East India tea from any part of the world;
nor any molasses, syrrups, paneles, coffee or piemento, from the British
plantations, or from Dominica; nor wines from Madeira, or the Western Islands;
nor foreign indigo.

Second. THAT we will neither import, nor purchase any slave imported, after
the first day of December next; after which time, we will wholly discontinue
the slave trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we
hire our vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those who are
concerned in it.

Third. As a non-consumption agreement, strictly adhered to, will be an
effectual security for the observation of the non-importation, we, as above,
solemnly agree and associate, that, from this day, we will not purchase or use
any Tea imported on account of the East India company, or any on which a duty
has been or shall be paid; and from and after the first day of March next, we
will not purchase or use any East India tea whatever; nor will we, nor shall
any person for or under us, purchase or use any of those goods, wares or
merchandise, we have agreed not to import, which we shall know, or have cause
to suspect, were imported after the first day of December, except such as come
under the rules and directions of the tenth article hereafter mentioned.

Fourth. THE earnest desire we have, not to injure our fellow subjects in Great
Britain, Ireland or the West Indies, induces us to suspend a non-exportation,
until the tenth day of September 1775; at which time, if the said Acts and
parts of Acts of the British parliament herein after mentioned are not
repealed, we will not, directly or indirectly, export any merchandise or
commodity whatsoever to Great Britain, Ireland or the West Indies, except rice
to Europe.

Fifth. SUCH as are merchants, and use the British and Irish trade, will give
orders, as soon as possible, to their factors, agents and correspondents, in
Great Britain and Ireland, not to ship any goods to them, on any pretense
whatsoever, as they cannot be received in America; and if any merchant,
residing in Great Britain or Ireland, shall directly or indirectly ship any
goods, wares or merchandise, for America, in order to break the said
non-importation agreement, or in any manner contravene the same, on such
unworthy conduct being well attested, it ought to be made public; and, on the
same being so done, we will not from thenceforth have any commercial connection,
with such merchant.

Sixth. THAT such as are owners of vessels will give positive orders to their
captains, or masters, not to receive on board their vessels any goods
prohibited by the said non-importation agreement, on pain of immediate
dismission from their service.

Seventh. WE will use our utmost endeavors to improve the breed of sheep and
increase their number to the greatest extent, and to that end, we will kill
them as sparingly as may be, especially those of the most profitable kind; nor
will we export any to the WestIndies or elsewhere; and those of us who are or
may become overstocked with, or can conveniently spare any sheep, will dispose
of them to our neighbors, especially to the poorer sort, on moderate terms.

Eighth. THAT we will in our several stations encourage frugality, economy,
and industry; and promote agriculture, arts, and the manufactures of this
country, especially that of wool; and will discountenance and discourage, every
species of extravagance and dissipation, especially all horse racing, and all
kinds of gaming, cock fighting, exhibitions of shows, plays, and other
expensive diversions and entertainments. And on the death of any relation or
friend, none of us, or any of our families will go into any further mourning
dress, than a black crape or ribbon on the arm or hat for Gentlemen, and a
black ribbon and necklace for Ladies, and we will discontinue the giving of
gloves and scarfs at funerals.

Ninth. THAT such as are venders of goods or merchandise, will not take
advantage of the scarcity of goods that may be occasioned by this association,
but will sell the same at the rates we have been respectively accustomed to do,
for twelve months last past. -- And if any vender of goods or merchandise,
shall sell any such goods on higher terms, or shall in any manner, or by any
device whatsoever, violate or depart from this Agreement, no person ought, nor
will any of us deal with any such person, or his, or her factor or agent, at
any time thereafter, for any commodity whatever.

Tenth. IN case any merchant, trader, or other persons shall import any goods
or merchandise after the first day of December, and before the first day of
February next, the same ought forthwith at the election of the owner, to be
either reshipped or delivered up to the Committee of the county, or town
wherein they shall be imported, to be stored at the risque of the importer,
until the non-importation Agreement shall cease, or be sold under the direction
of the Committee aforesaid; and in the last mentioned case, the owner or owners
of such goods, shall be reimbursed (out of the sales) the first cost and
charges, the profit if any, to be applied toward relieving and employing such
poor inhabitants of the town of Boston, as are immediate sufferers by the
Boston Port-Bill; and a particular account of all goods so returned, stored, or
sold, to be inserted in the public papers; and if any goods or merchandises
shall be imported after the said first day of February, the same ought
forthwith to be sent back again, without breaking any of the packages thereof.

Eleventh. THAT a Committee be chosen in every county, city, and town, by those
who are qualified to vote for Representatives in the Legislature, whose
business it shall be attentively to observe the conduct of all persons touching
this association; and when it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of a
majority of any such Committee, that any person within the limits of their
appointment has violated this association, that such majority do forthwith
cause the truth of the case to be published in the Gazette, to the end, that
all such foes to the rights of British America may be publicly known, and
universally contemned as the enemies of American liberty; and thenceforth we
respectively will break off all dealings with him or her.

Twelfth. THAT the Committee of Correspondence in the respective Colonies do
frequently inspect the entries of their CustomHouses, and inform each other
from time to time of the true state thereof, and of every other material
circumstance that may occur relative to this association.

Thirteenth. THAT all manufactures of this country be sold at reasonable
prices, so that no undue advantage be taken of a future scarcity of goods.

Fourteenth. AND we do further agree and resolve, that we will have no trade,
commerce, dealings or intercourse whatsoever, with any colony or province, in
North America, which shall not accede to, or which shall hereafter violate this
association, but will hold them as unworthy of the rights of freemen, and as
inimical to the liberties of their country.

And we do solemnly bind ourselves and our constituents, under the ties
aforesaid, to adhere to this association until such parts of the several Acts
of Parliament passed since the close of the last was, as impose or continue
duties on tea, wine, molasses, syrups, paneles, coffee, sugar, piemento,
indigo, foreign paper, glass, and painters colors, imported into America, and
extend the powers of the Admiralty courts beyond their ancient limits, deprive
the American subject of trial by jury, authorize the Judge's certificate to
indemnify the prosecutor from damages, that he might otherwise be liable to
from a trial by his peers, require oppressive security from a claimant of ships
or goods seized, before he shall be allowed to defend his property, are
repealed -- And until that part of the Act of the 12. G. 3 chapter 24. entitled,
"An Act for the better securing his Majesty's dock yards, magazines, ships,
ammunition, and stores," by which, any persons charged with committing any of
the offenses therein described, in America, may be tried in any shire or
country within the realm, is repealed -- And until the four Acts passed in the
last session of Parliament, viz. that for stopping the port and blocking up the
harbor of Boston -- That for altering the charter and government of the
Massachusett's-Bay -- And that which is entitled, "An Act for the better
administration of justice, etc." -- And that "For extending the limits of
Quebec, etc." are repealed. And we recommend it to the provincial conventions,
and to the committees in the respective Colonies, to establish such farther
regulations as they may think proper, for carrying into execution this
Association.

THE foregoing Association being determined upon by the CONGRESS, was ordered
to be subscribed by the several Members thereof; and thereupon we have hereunto
set our respective names accordingly.

In Congress, Philadelphia, October 20, 1774. Signed, PEYTON RANDOLPH,
President. New Hampshire. JOHN SULIVAN, NATHANIEL FOLSOM.
Messachusetts-Bay. THOMAS CUSHING, SAMUEL ADAMS, JOHN ADAMS, ROBERT TREAT
PAIN.
Rhode Island. STEPHEN HOPKINS, SAMUEL WARD.
Connecticut. ELIPHALET DYER, ROGER SHERMAN, SILAS DEANE.
New York ISAAC LOW, JOHN ALSOP, JOHN JAY, JAMES DUANE, WILLIAM FLOYD, HENRY
WESNER, S. BOERUM.
New Jersey. JAMES KINSEY, WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, STEPHEN CRANE, RICHARD SMITH.
Pensylvania. JOSEPH GALLOWAY, JOHN DICKINSON, CHARLES HUMPHREYS, THOMAS
MIFFLIN, EDWARD BIDDLE, JOHN MORTON.
New Castle, etc. CAESAR RODNEY, THOMAS McKEAN, GEORGE READ.
Maryland. MATTHEW TILGHMAN, THOMAS JOHNSON, WILLIAM PACA, SAMUEL CHASE.
Virginia, RICHARD HENRY LEE, GEORGE WASHINGTON, P. HENRY, Jun. RICHARD BLAND,
BENJAMIN HARRISON, EDMUND PENDLETON.
North Carolina. WILLIAM HOOPER, JOSEPH HEWES, R. CASWELL.
South Carolina. HENRY MIDDLETON, THOMAS LYNCH, CHRISTOPHER GADSDEN, JOHN
RUTLEDGE, EDWARD RUTLEDGE.




