CONSIDERATIONS ON THE NATURE AND THE EXTENT OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF
THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT.

PHILADELPHIA:

Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London Coffee House.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following sheets were written during the late Non-Importation Agreement:
But that Agreement being dissolved before they were ready for the Press, it was
then judged unseasonable to publish them. Many will, perhaps, be surprised to
see the Legislative Authority of the British Parliament over the Colonies
denied in every instance. Those the writer informs, that, when he began this
piece, he would probably have been surprised at such an opinion himself; for,
that it was the result, and not the occasion, of his disquisitions. He entered
upon them with a view and expectation of being able to trace some
constitutional Line between those cases, in which we ought, and those in which
we ought not, to acknowledge the power of Parliament over us. In the
prosecution of his enquiries, be became fully convinced, that such a Line does
not exist; and that there can be no medium between acknowledging and denying
that power in all cases. Which of these two alternatives is most consistent
with Law, with the principles of Liberty, and with the happiness of the
Colonies, let the public determine. To them the writer submits his sentiments,
with that respectful deference to their judgment, which, in all questions
affecting them, every individual should pay.

AUGUST 17, 1774.
CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
NO question can be more important to Great Britain, and to the Colonies, than
this -- Does the legislative authority of the British Parliament extend over
them?

ON the resolution of this question, and on the measures which a resolution of
it will direct, will depend, whether the Parent Country, like a happy Mother,
shall behold her Children flourishing around her, and receive the most grateful
returns for her protection and love; or whether, like a stepdame, rendered
miserable by her own unkind conduct, she shall see their affections alienated,
and herself deprived of those advanges, which a milder treatment would have
ensured to her.

THE British nation are generous: They love to enjoy freedom: They love to
behold it: Slavery is their greatest abhorrence: Is it possible then, that they
would wish themselves the authors of it? No. Oppression is not a plant of the
British soil; and the late severe proceedings against the Colonies must have
arisen from the detestable schemes of interested Ministers, who have
misinformed and misled the people. A regard for the nation, from whom we have
sprung, and from whom we boast to have derived the spirit, which prompts us to
oppose their unfriendly measures, must lead us to put this construction on what
we have lately seen and experienced. When therefore, they shall know and
consider the justice of our claim -- that we insist only upon being treated as
Freemen, and as the Descendants of those British ancestors, whose memory we
will not dishonor by our degeneracy, it is reasonable to hope, that they will
approve of our conduct, and bestow their loudest applauses on our congenial
ardour for Liberty.

BUT if these reasonable and joyful hopes should fatally be disappointed, it
will afford us at least some satisfaction to know, that the principles on which
we have founded our opposition to the late Acts of Parliament, are the
principles of justice and freedom, and of the British constitution. If our
righteous struggle shall be attended with misfortunes, we will reflect with
exultation on the noble cause of them; and while suffering unmerited distress,
think ourselves superior to the proudest slaves. On the contrary, if we shall
be re-instated in the enjoyment of those rights, to which we are entitled by
the supreme and controulable laws of nature, and the fundamental principles of
the British constitution, we shall reap the glorious fruit of our labors; and
we shall, at the same time, give to the world, and to posterity, an instructive
example, that the cause of liberty ought not to be despaired of, and that a
generous contention in that cause is not always unattended with success.

THE foregoing Considerations have induced me to publish a few remarks on the
important question, with which I introduced this Essay.

THOSE who allege that the Parliament of Great Britain have power to make Laws
binding the American Colonies, reason in the following manner: That there is
and must be in every state a supreme, irresistible, absolute, uncontrouled
authority, in which the jura summi imperii, or the rights of sovereignty
reside: Blackstone, 48, 49.
That this supreme power, is, by the Constitution of Great Britain, vested in
the Kind, Lords, and Commons: Ibid. 50, 51.
That, therefore, the Acts of the King, Lords, and Commons, or, in other words,
Acts of Parliament, have, by the British Constitution, a binding Force on the
American Colonies, they composing a part of the British Empire.

I ADMIT that the principle, on which this argument is founded, is of great
importance: Its importance, however, is derived from its tendency to promote
the ultimate end of all government. But if the application of it would, in any
instance, destroy, instead of promoting that end, it ought, in that instance to
be rejected: For to admit it, would be to sacrifice the end to the means, which
are valuable only so far as they advance it.

ALL men are, by nature, equal and free: No one has a right to any authority
over another without his consent: All lawful government is founded on the
consent of those, who are subject to it: Such consent was given with a view to
ensure and to increase the happiness of the governed above what they could
enjoy in an independent and unconnected state of nature. The consequence is,
that the happiness of the society is the FIRST law of every government. The
right of sovereignty is that of commanding finally -- but in order to procure
real felicity; for if this end is not obtained, sovereignty ceases to be a
legitimate authority. BURL. 32.


THIS rule is founded on the law of nature: It must control every political
maxim: it must regulate the Legislature itself. The law of nature is superior
in obligation to any other. BLACKSTONE 41.
The people have a right to insist that this rule be served; and are entitled
to demand a moral security that the Legislature will observe it. If they have
not the first, they are slaves; if they have not the second, they are, every
moment, exposed to slavery. For civil liberty is nothing else but natural
liberty, divested of that part which constituted the independance of
individuals by the authority which it confers on sovereigns, attended with a
right of insisting upon their making a good use of their authority, and with a
moral security that this right will have its effect. BURLAMAQUI.


LET me now be permitted to ask -- Will it ensure and increase the happiness of
the American Colonies, that the Parliament of Great Britain should possess a
supreme irresistible uncontroled authority over them? -- Is such an authority
consistent with their liberty? Have they any security that it will be employed
only for their good. Such a security is absolutely necessary. Parliaments are
not infallible: They are not always just. The members, of whom they are
composed, are human; and, therefore, they may err: They are influenced by
interest; and, therefore, they may deviate from their duty. The acts of the
body must depend upon the opinions and dispositions of the members: The acts of
the body may, then, be the result of error, and of vice. It is no breach of
decency to suppose all this: The British Constitution supposes it: It supposes
that Parliaments may betray their trust, and provides, as far as human wisdom
can provide, that they may not be able to do so long, without a sufficient
control. Dissert. on parties. Let. 11. 12.
Without provisions for this purpose, the temple of British liberty, like a
structure of ice, would instantly dissolve before the fire of oppression and
despotic sway.

IT will be very material to consider the several securities, which the
inhabitants of Great Britain have, that their liberty will not be destroyed by
the legislature, in whose hands it is entrusted. If it shall appear, that the
same securities are not enjoyed by the Colonists; the undeniable consequence
will be, that the Colonists are not under the same obligations to entrust their
liberties into the hands of the same legislature: For the Colonists are
entitled to all As the law is the birthright of every subject, so wheresoever
they go, they carry their laws with them. 2. WILLIAM'S reports. 75.
the privileges of Britons. We have committed no crimes to forfeit them: We
have too much spirit to resign them. We will leave our posterity as free as our
ancestors left us.

To give to anything that passes in Parliament the force of a law, the consent
of the King, of the Lords, and of the Commons 4. Institute. 25.
is absolutely necessary The Commons of England have a great and considerable
sight in the Governments; and a share in the Legislature without whom no law
pass. Lord RAYMOND'S reports. 950.
. If, then, the inhabitants of Great Britain possess a sufficient restraint
upon any of these branches of the legislature, their liberty is secure,
provided they be not wanting to themselves. Let us take a view of the
restraints, which they have upon the House of Commons.

THEY elect the members of that House. "Magistrates, says Montisquieu, are
properly theirs, who have the nomination of them." The members of the House of
Commons, therefore, elected by the people, are the magistrates of the people;
and are bound, by the ties of gratitude for the honor and confidence conferred
upon them, to consult the interest of their constituents.

THE power of elections has ever been regarded as a point of the last
consequence to all The Athenians, justly jealous of this important privilege,
punished, with death, every stranger who presumed to interfere in the
Assemblies of the people.
free governments. The independent exercise of that power is justly deemed the
strongest bulwark of the British liberties The English freedom will be at an
end whenever the Court invades the free Election of Parliaments. RA:PN. A right
that a man has to give his vote at the election of a person to represent him in
Parliament, there to concur to the making of laws, which are to bind his
Liberty and Property, is a most transcendant thing and of an high nature (...)
As such, it has always been an object of great attention to the legislature;
and is expressly stipulated with the Prince in the Bill of Rights. All those
are excluded from voting, whose poverty is such, that they cannot live
independent, and must therefore be subject to the undue influence of their
superiors. Such are supposed to have no will of their own; and it is judged
improper that they should vote in representation of a free state. What can
exhibit, in a more striking point of view the peculiar care which has been
taken, in order to render the election of members of parliament entirely free?
It was deemed an insult upon the independent Commons of England, that their
uninfluenced suffrages should be adulterated by those, who were not at liberty
to speak as they thought, though their interests and inclinations were the
same. British liberty, it was thought, could not be effectually secured, unless
those who made the laws were freely, and without influence elected by those,
for whom they were made. Upon this principle is reasonably founded the maxim in
law -- That every one, who is capable of exercising his will, is party, and
presumed to consent to an Act of Parliament.

FOR the same reason that persons, who live dependant upon the will of others,
are not admitted to vote in elections, those who are under age, and therefore
incapable of judging; those who are convicted of perjury or subornation of
perjury, and therefore unworthy of judging; and, those who obtain their
freeholds by fraudulent conveyances, and would therefore vote to serve infamous
purposes, are all likewise excluded from the enjoyment of this great privilege.
Corruption at elections is guarded against by the strictest precautions, and
more severe penalties. Every elector, before he polls, must, if demanded by a
candidate or by two electors, take the oath against bribery, as prescribed by
2. Geo. 2. c. 24 Officers of the excise, of the customs, and of the post
offices -- Officers concerned in the duties upon leather, soap, paper, striped
linens imported, hackney coaches, cards and dice, are restrained from
interfering in elections under the penalty of l 100 and of being incapable of
ever exercising any office of trust under the King.

THUS is the freedom of elections secured from the servility, the ignorance,
and the corruption of the electors; and from the interposition of officers
depending immediately upon the Crown. But this is not all. Provisions, equally
salutary, have been made concerning the qualifications of those, who shall be
elected. All imaginable care has been taken, that the Commons of Great Britain
may be neither awed, nor allured, nor deceived into any nomination inconsident
with their liberties.

IT has been adopted as a general maxim; that the Crown will take advantage of
every opportunity of extending its prerogative in opposition to the privileges
of the people; that it is the interest of those who have pensions, or offices
at will from the Crown, to concur in all its measures; that mankind in general
will prefer their private interest to the good of their country; and that,
consequently, those who enjoy such pensions or offices are unfit to represent a
free nation, and to have the care of their liberties committed to their hands.
There are a few exceptions in the case of officers at will.
All such officers or pensioners are declared incapable of being elected
Members of the House of Commons.

BUT these are not the only checks which the Commons of Great Britain have upon
the conduct of those, whom they elect to represent them in Parliament. The
interest of the Representatives is the same with that of their constituents.
Every measure, that is prejudicial to the nation, must be prejudicial to them,
and their posterity. They cannot betray their electors, without, at the same
time, injuring themselves. They must join in bearing the burden of every
oppressive act; and participate in the happy effects of every wise and good
law. Influenced by these considerations, they will seriously and with attention
examine every measure proposed to them; they will behold it in every light, and
extend their views to its most distant consequences, If, after the most mature
deliberation, they find it will be conducive to the welfare of their country,
they will support it with ardour: If, on the contrary, it appears to be of a
dangerous and destructive nature, they will oppose it with firmness.

EVERY social and generous affection concurs with their interest in animating
the representatives of the Commons of Great Britain to an honest and faithful
discharge of their important trust. In each patr^otic effort, the heart felt
satisfaction of having acted a worthy part vibrates in delightful unison with
the applause of their countrymen, who never fail to express their warmest
acknowledgements to the friends and benefactors of their country. How pleasing
are those rewards! How much to be preferred to that paltry wealth, which is
sometimes procured by meanness and treachery! I say sometimes; for meanness and
treachery do not always obtain ever that pitiful reward. The most useful
ministers to the crown, and therefore the most likely to be employed,
especially in great emergencies, are those who are best beloved by the people;
and those only are beloved by the people, who act steadily and uniformly in
support of their liberties. Patriots, therefore, have frequently, and
especially upon important occasions, the best chance of being advanced to
offices of profit and power. And abject compliance with the will of a imperious
Prince, and a ready disposition to sacrifice every duty to his pleasure, are
sometimes, I confess, the steps, by which only men can expect to rise to wealth
and titles. Let us suppose, that in this manner, they are successful in
attaining them. Is the despicable prize a sufficient recompense for submitting
to the infamous means, by which it was procured; and for the torturing remorse,
with which the possession of it must be accompanied? Will it compensate for the
merited curses of the nation and of posterity?

THESE must be very strong checks upon the conduct of every man, who is not
utterly lost to all sense of praise and blame. Few will expose themselves to
the just abhorrence of those, among whom they live; and to the excruciating
sensations, which such abhorrence must produce.

BUT less all those motives, powerful as they are, should be insufficient to
animate the representatives of the nation to a vigorous and upright discharge
of their duty, and to restrain them from yielding to any temptation, that would
incite them to betray their trust; their constituents have still a farther
security for their liberties in the frequent election of Parliaments. At the
expiration of every Parliament, the people can make a distinction between those
who have served them well, and those who have neglected or betrayed their
interest: They can bestow, unasked, their suffrages upon the former in the new
election; and can mark the latter with disgrace, by a mortifying refusal. The
constitution is thus frequently renewed and drawn back, as it were, to its
first principles; which is the most effectual method of perpetuating the
liberties of a state. The people have numerous opportunities of displaying
their just importance, and of exercising, in person, these natural rights. The
representatives are reminded whose creatures they are; and to whom they are
accountable for the use of that power, which is delegated unto them. The first
maxims of jurisprudence are ever kept in view -- THAT ALL POWER IS DERIVED FROM
THE PEOPLE -- THAT THEIR HAPPINESS IS THE END OF GOVERNMENT.

FREQUENT new Parliaments are a part of the British constitution: By them only
the King can know the immediate sense of the nation. Every supply, which they
grant, is justly to be considered as a testimony of the loyalty and affection,
which the nation bear to their Sovereign; and by this means a mutual confidence
is created between the King and his subjects. How pleasing must such an
intercourse of benefits be! How must a father of his people rejoice in such
dutiful returns for his paternal care! With what ardour must his people embrace
every opportunity of giving such convincing proofs, that they are not
insensible of his wife and indulgent rule!

LONG Parliaments have always been prejudicial to the Prince, who summoned
them, or to the people, who elected them. In that called by King Charles I, in
the year 1640, the Commons proceeded at first, with vigor and a true patriotic
spirit, to rescue the kingdom from the oppression, under which it then groaned
-- to retrieve the liberties of the people, and establish them on the surest
foundations -- and to remove or prevent the pernicious consequences, which had
arisen, or which, they dreaded, might arise from the tyrannical exercise of
p^erogative. They abolished the courts of the star chamber and high commission:
They reduced the forests to their ancient bounds: They repealed the oppressive
statutes concerning knighthood: They declared the tax of ship money to be
illegal: They presented the petition of rights, and obtained a ratification of
it from the crown. But when the King unadvisedly passed an Acts to continue
them till such time as they should please to dissolve themselves how soon --
how fatally did their conduct change! In what misery did they involve their
country! Those very men, who, while they had only a constitutional power,
seemed to have no other aim but to secure and improve the liberty and felicity
of their constituents; and to render their Sovereign the glorious ruler of a
free and happy people -- those very men, after they became independent of the
King and of their electors, sacrificed both to that inordinate power, which had
been given them. A regard for the public was now no longer the spring of their
actions: Their only view was to aggrandize themselves, and to establish their
gradeur on the ruins of their country. Their views unhappily were accomplished.
They over-turned the constitution from its very foundation; and converted into
rods of oppression those instruments of power, which had been put into their
hands for the welfare of the state; but which those, who had formerly given
them, could not now reassume. What an instructive example is this! How alarming
to those, who have no influence over their legislators -- who have no security
but that power, which was originally derived from the people and was delegated
for their preservation, may be abused for their destruction! Kings are not the
only tyrants: The conduct of the long Parliament will justify me in adding,
that Kings are not the severest tyrants.

AT the Restoration, care was taken to reduce the House of Commons to a proper
dependence on the King; but immediately after their election they lost all
dependence upon their constituents, because they continued during the pleasure
of the Crown. The effects soon dreadfully appeared in the long Parliament under
Charles Ild. They seemed disposed ingloriously to surrender those liberties,
for which their ancestors had planned, and fought the bled: And it was owing to
the wisdom and integrity of The Earls of Clarendon and Southampton.
two virtuous Ministers of the Crown, that the Commons of England were not
reduced to a state of slavery and wretchedness by the treachery of their own
representatives, whom they had indeed elected, but whom they could not remove.
Secure of their seats, while they gratified the Crown, the Members bartered the
liberties of the nation for places and pensions; and threw into the scale of
prerogative all that weight, which they derived from the people, in order to
counter-balance it.

IT was not till some years after the Revolution, that the people could rely on
the faithfulness of their Representatives, or punish their perfidy. By the
Statute 6. W. and M. c. 2. it was enacted, that Parliaments should not continue
longer than three years. The insecure situation of the first Prince of the
Hanoverian line, surrounded with rivals and with enemies, induced the
Parliament, soon after his accession to the throne, to prolong this term to
that of seven years. Attempts have since that time been frequently made to
reduce the continuance of Parliaments to the former term: And such attempts
have always been well received by the nation. Undoubtedly they deserve such
reception: For long Parliaments will naturally forget their dependence on the
people: When this dependence is forgotten, they will become corrupt: Whenever
they become corrupt, the Constitution of England will lose its liberty -- it
will perish. MONTESQ. b. II. c. 6. If the legislative body were perpetual; or
might last for the life of the Prince who convened them, as formerly and were
so to be supplied by occasionally filling the vacancies with new
representatives; in these cases, if it were once corrupted, the evil would be
past remedy: But when different bodies succeed each other, if the people see
cause to disapprove of the present they may rectify its faults in the next. A
legislative Assembly also, which is sure to be separated again, will think
themselves bound in interest as well as duty to make only such laws as are (...)


SUCH is the provision made by the Laws of Great Britain, that the Commons
should be faithfully represented: Provision is also made, that faithful
Representatives should not labor for their constituents in vain. The
Constitution is formed in such a manner, that the House of Commons are able as
well as willing to protect and defend the liberties entrusted to their care.

THE Constitution of Great Britain is that of a limited monarchy; and in all
limited monarchies, the power of preserving the limitations must be placed
somewhere. During the reigns of the first Norman Princes, this power seems to
have resided in the Clergy and in the Barons by turns. But it was lodged very
improperly. The Clergy zealous only for the dignity and pre-eminence of the
church, neglected and despised the people, whom, with the soil they tilled,
they would willingly have considered as the patrimony of St. Peter. Attached to
a foreign jurisdiction, and aspiring at an entire independance of the civil
powers, they looked upon the prerogatives of the Crown as so many obstacles in
the way of their favorite scheme of supreme ecclesiastical dominion; and
therefore seized, with eagerness, every occasion of sacrificing the interests
of their sovereign to those of the Pope. Enemies alike to their King and to
their country, their sole and unvaried aim was to reduce both to the most
abject state of submission and slavery. The means employed by them to
accomplish their pernicious purposes were, sometimes, to work upon the
superstition of the people, and direct it against the power of the Prince; and,
at other times, to work upon the superstition of the Prince, and direct it
against the liberties of the people.

THE power of preserving the limitations of monarchy for the purposes of
liberty was not more properly placed in the Barons, Domineering and turbulent,
they oppressed their vassals, and treated them as slaves; they opposed their
Prince, and were impatient of every legal restraint. Capricious and inconstant,
they sometimes abetted the King in his projects of tyranny; and, at other
times, excited the people to insurrections and tumults. For these reasons, the
Constitution was ever fluctuating from one extreme to another; Now despotism --
now anarchy prevailed.

BUT after the representatives of the Commons began to sit in a separate House,
to be considered as a distinct branch of the legislature; and as such, to be
invested with separate and independent powers and privileges; then the
constitution assumed a very different appearance. Having no interest contrary
to that of the people, from among whom they were chosen, and with whom, after
the session, they were again to mix, they had no views inconsistent with the
liberty of their constituents, and therefore could have no motives to betray
it. Sensible that prerogative, or a discretionary power of acting where the
laws are silent, is absolutely necessary, and that this prerogative is most
properly entrusted to the executor of the laws, they did not oppose the
exercise of it, while it was directed toward the accomplishment of its
original end: But sensible likewise, that the good of the state was this
original end, they resisted, with vigor, every arbitrary measure, repugnant to
law, and unsupported by maxims of public freedom or utility.

THE checks, which they possessed over prerogative, were calm and gentle --
operating with a secret, but effectual force -- unlike the impetuous resistance
of factious Barons, or the boisterous fulminations of ambitious Prelates.

ONE of the most ancient maxims of the English law is, That no freeman can be
taxed at pleasure. Bacon's Abridgment of the law, 568.
But taxes on freeman were absolutely necessary to defray the extraordinary
charges of government. The consent of the freemen was, therefore, of necessity
to be obtained. Numerous as they were, they could not assemble to give their
consent in their proper persons; and for this reason, it was directed by the
constitution, that they should give it by their representatives chosen by and
out of themselves. Hence the indisputable and peculiar privilege of the House
of Commons to grant taxes. Note. It is said in diverse records, "per
communitatem Angliae probis concess." Because all grants of subsidies or aids
by Parliament do begin in the House of Com^^^^


THIS is the source of that mild but powerful influence, which the commons of
Great Britain possess over the Crown. In this consists their security, that
prerogative, intended for their benefit, will never be exerted for their ruin.
By calmly and constitutionally refusing supplies, or by granting them only on
certain conditions, they have corrected the extravagancies of some Princes, and
have tempered the headstrong nature of other; they have checked the progress
of arbitrary power, and have supported with honor to themselves, and with
advantage to the nation, the character of grand inquisitors of the realm. The
proudest Ministers of the proudest Monarchs have trembled at their censures;
and have appeared at the bar of the House to give an account of their conduct,
and ask pardon for their faults. Those Princes, who have favored Liberty, and
thrown themselves upon the affections of their people, have ever found that
Liberty, which they favored, and those affections which they cultivated, the
firmest foundations of their throne, and the most solid support of their power.
The purses of their people have been ever open to supply their exigencies:
Their swords have been ever ready to vindicate their honor. On the contrary,
those Princes, who, insensible to the glory and advantage of ruling a free
people, have preferred to a willing obedience the abject submission of slaves,
have ever experienced, that all endeavors to render themselves absolute were
but so many steps to their own downfall.

SUCH is the admirable temperament of the British constitution! Such the
glorious fabric of Britain's liberty -- the pride of her citizens -- the envy
of her neighbors -- planned by her legislators -- erected by her patriots --
maintained entire by numerous generation past! May it be maintained entire by
numerous generations to come!

CAN the Americans, who are descended from British ancestors, and inherit all
their rights, be blamed -- can they be blamed BY THEIR BRETHREN IN BRITAIN --
for claiming still to enjoy those rights? But can they enjoy them, if they are
bound by the Acts of a British parliament? Upon what principle does the British
Parliament found their power? Is it founded upon the prerogative of the King?
His prerogative does not extend to make laws to bind any of his subjects. Does
it reside in the House of Lords? The Peers are a collective, and not a
representative body. If it resides any where, then, it must reside in the House
of Commons.

SHOULD any one object here, that it does not reside in the House of Commons
only, because that House cannot make laws without the consent of the King and
of the Lords; the answer is easy. Though the concurrence of all the branches of
the Legislature is necessary to every law; yet the same laws bind different
persons for different reasons, and on different principles. The King is bound,
because he assented to them. The Lords are bound, because they voted for them.
The Representatives of the Commons, for the same reason, bind themselves, and
those whom they represent.

IF the Americans are bound neither by the assent of the King, nor by the votes
of the Lords to obey Acts of the British Parliament, the sole reason, why they
are bound, is, because the representatives of the Commons of Great Britain have
given their suffrages in favor of those Acts. This is allowed oven by the
advocates for parliamentary power; who account for its extension over the
Colonies upon the very absurd principle of their being virtually represented in
the House of Commons.
But are the Representatives of the Commons of Great Britain the
Representatives of the Americans? Are they elected by the Americans? Are they
such as the Americans, if they had the power of election, would probably elect?
Do they know the interest of the Americans? Does their own interest prompt them
to pursue the interest of the Americans? IS they do not pursue it, have the
Americans power to punish them? Can the Americans remove unfaithful members at
every new election? Can members, whom the Americans do not elect; with whom the
Americans are not connected in interest; whom the Americans cannot remove; over
whom the Americans have no influence. -- Can such Members be styled, with any
propriety, the magistrates of the Americans? Have those, who are bound by the
laws of magistrates not their own, any security for the enjoyment of their
absolute right -- those rights, "which every man is entitled to enjoy, whether
in society or out of it?" Blackstone, 123.
Is it probable that those rights will be maintained? Is it "the primary end of
government to maintain Blackstone, 124.
them?" Shall this primary end be frustrated to a political maxim intended to
promote it?

BUT from what source does this mighty, this uncontrouled authority of the
House of Commons flow? From the collective body of the Commons of
Great Britain. This authority must therefore originally reside in them: For
whatever they convey to their representatives, must ultimately be in
themselves. It is self-evident that the power, with relation to the part we
bear in the legislation, is absolutely, is solely in the electors. We have no
legislative authority but what we derive from them. Debates of the Commons,
vol. 6. P.75.
And have those, whom we have hitherto been accustomed to consider as our
fellow subjects, an absolute and unlimited power over us? Have they a natural
right to make laws, by which we may be deprived of our properties, of our
liberties, of our lives? By what title do they claim to be our masters? What
act of ours has rendered us subject to those, to whom we were formerly equal?
Is British Freedom denominated from the soil, of from the People of Britain? Is
from the latter, do they lose it by quitting the soil? Do those, who embark,
freemen, in Great Britain, disembark, slaves, in America? Are those, who fled
from the oppression of regal and ministerial tyranny, now reduced to a state of
vassalage to those, who, then, equally felt the same oppresssion? Whence
proceeds this fatal change? Is this the return made us for leaving our friends
and our country -- for braving the danger of the deep -- for planting a
wilderness, inhabited only by savage men and savage beasts -- for extending the
dominions of the British Crown -- for increasing the trade of the British
merchants -- for augmenting the rents of the British landlords -- for
heightening the wages to the British artificers? Britons should blush to make
such a claim: Americans would blush to own it.

IT is not, however, the ignominy only, but the danger also, with which we are
threatened, that afflicts us. The many and careful provisions which are made by
the British Constitution, that the electors of members of Parliament may be
prevented from choosing Representatives, who would betray them; and that the
Representatives may be prevented from betraying their constituents with
impunity, sufficiently evince, that such precautions have been deemed
absolutely necessary for securing and maintaining the system of British liberty.

How would the Commons of Great Britain startle at a proposal, to deprive them
of their share in the Legislature, by rendering the House of Commons
independent of them! With what indignation would they hear it! What resentment
would they feel and discover against the authors of it! Yet the Commons of
Great Britain would suffer less inconvenience from the execution of such a
proposal, than the Americans will suffer from the extension of the legislative
authority of Parliament over them.

THE Members of Parliament, their families, their friends, their posterity must
be subject, as well a others, to the laws. Their interest, and that of their
families, friends and posterity cannot be different from the interest of the
rest of the nation. A regard to the former will, therefore, direct to such
measures as must promote the latter. But is this the case with respect to
America? Are the Legislators of Great Britain subject to the laws which are
made for the Colonies? Is their interest the same with that of the Colonies? If
we consider it in a large and comprehensive view, we shall discern it to be
undoubtedly the same; but few will take the trouble to consider it in that
view; and of those who do, few will be influenced by the consideration. Mankind
are usually more affected with a near though inferior interest, than with one,
that is superior, but placed at a greater distance. As the conduct is regulated
by the passions, it is not to be wondered at, if they secure the former by
measures, which will forfeit the latter. Nay the latter will frequently be
regarded in the same manner as if it were prejudicial to them. It is with
regret that I produce some late regulations of Parliament as proofs of what I
have advanced. We have experienced what an easy matter it is for a Minister,
with an ordinary share of art, to persuade the Parliament and the people, that
taxes laid on the Colonies will ease the burdens of the Mother Country; which,
if the matter is considered in a proper light, is, in fact, to persuade them,
that the stream of national riches will be increased by closing up the
fountain, from which they flow.

As the Americans cannot avail themselves of that check, which interest puts
upon the members of Parliament, and which would operate in favor of the
Commons of Great Britain, though they possessed no power over the Legislature;
so the love of reputation, which is a powerful incitement to the Legislators to
promote the welfare, and obtain the approbation, of those among whom they live,
and whose praises of censures will reach and affect them, may have a contrary
operation with regard to the Colonies. It may become popular and reputable at
home to oppress us. A candidate may recommend himself at his election by
recounting the many successful instances, in which he has sacrificed the
interests of America to those of Great Britain. A Member of the House of
Commons may plume himself upon his ingenuity in inventing schemes to serve the
Mother Country at the expense of the Colonies; and may boast of their impotent
resentment against him on that account.

LET us pause here a little. -- Does neither the love of gain, the love of
praise nor the love of honor influence the members of the British Parliament
in favor of the Americans? On what principles, then -- on what motives of
action can we depend for the security of our Liberties, of our Properties, of
every thing dear to us in Life, itself? Shall we depend on their veneration for
the dictates of natural justice? A very little share of experience in the
world; a very little degree of knowledge in the history of men will
sufficiently convince us, that a regard for justice is by no means the ruling
principle in human nature. He would discover himself to be a very sorry
statesman, who would erect a system of jurisprudence upon that slender
foundation. "He would make," as my Lord Bacon says, "imaginary laws for
imaginary commonwealths; and his discourses, like the stars, would give little
light, because they are so high."

BUT this is not the worst that can justly be said concerning the situation of
the Colonies, if they are bound by the Acts of the British legislature. So far
are those powerful springs of action, which we have mentioned, from interesting
the members of that legislature in our favor, that, as has been already
observed, we have the greatest reason to dread their operation against us.
While the happy Commons of Great Britain congratulate themselves upon the
Liberty, which they enjoy, and upon the provisions -- infallible, as far as
they can be rendered so by human wisdom -- which are made for perpetuating it
to their latest posterity; the unhappy Americans have reason to bewail the
dangerous situation, to which they are reduced; and to look forward, with
dismal apprehension, to those future scenes of woe, which, in all probability,
will open upon their descendants.

WHAT has been already advanced, will suffice to show, that it is repugnant to
the essential maxims of jurisprudence, to the ultimate end of all government,
to the genius of the British constitution, and to the liberty and happiness of
Colonies, that they should be bound by the legislative authority of the
Parliament of Great Britain. Such a doctrine is not less repugnant to the voice
of her laws. In order to evince this, I shall appeal to some authorities from
the books of the law, which show expressly, or by necessary implication, that
the Colonies are not bound by the Acts of the British Parliament; because they
have no share in the British legislature.

THE first case I shall mention was adjudged in the 2d year of Richard IId. It
was a solemn determination of all the Judges of England, met in the exchequer
chamber, to consider whether the people in Ireland were bound by an Act of
Parliament made in England. They resolved, "That they were not, as to such
things as were done in Ireland; but that what they did out of Ireland, must be
conformable to the laws of England, because they were the subjects of England.
Ireland, said they, has a Parliament, who make laws; and our statutes do not
bind them; BECAUSE THEY DO NOT SEND KNIGHTS TO PARLIAMENT: But their persons
are the subjects of the King, in the same manner as the inhabitants of Calais,
Gascoigne, and Guienne." 4. Modern Reports, 225.


THIS is the first case, which we find in the books upon this subject; and it
deserves to be examined with the most minute attention.

1. IT appears, that the matter under consideration was deemed, at that time,
to be of the greatest importance: For ordinary causes are never adjourned into
the ExchequerChamber; only such are adjourned there as are of uncommon weight,
or of uncommon difficulty. "Into the Exchequer Chamber, says my Lord Coke, all
cases of difficultty in the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, etc. are, and of
ancient time have been, adjourned, and there debated, argued, and resolved, by
all the Judges of England and Barons of the Exchequer." 7 Coke's Reports, 220.
Calvin's
This Court proceeds with the greatest deliberation, and upon the most mature
reflection. The case is first argued on both sides by learned Counsel; and then
openly on several days, by all the Judges. Resolutions made with so much
caution, and founded on so much legal knowledge, may be relied on as the surest
evidences of what is law.

2. IT is to be observed, that the extent of the legislative authority of
Parliament is the very point of the adjudication. The decision was not
incidental or indigested: It was not a sudden opinion, unsupported by reason
and argument: It was an express and deliberate resolution of that very doubt,
which they assembled to resolve.

3. IT is very observable, that the reason, which those reverend sages of the
law gave, why the people in Ireland we not bound by an Act of Parliament made
in England, was the same with that, on which the Americans have founded their
opposition to the late Statutes made concerning them. The Irish did not send
Members to Parliament; and, therefore, they were not bound by its Acts. From
hence it undeniably appears, that parliamentary authority is derived SOLELY
from representation -- that those, who are bound by Acts of Parliament, are
bound for this ONLY reason, because they are represented in it. If it were not
the ONLY reason, parliamentary authority might subsist independent of it. But
as parliamentary authority fails wherever this reason does not operate,
parliamentary authority can be founded on no other principle. The law never
ceases, but when the reason of it ceases also.

4. IT deserves to be remarked, that no exception is made of any Statutes,
which bind those, who are not represented by the makers of them. The resolution
of the Judges extends to every Statute: They say, without limitation -- "our
Statutes do not bind them." And indeed the resolution ought to extend to every
Statute; because the reason, on which it is founded, extends to every one. If a
person is bound, ONLY because he is represented, it must certainly follow that
wherever he is not represented he is not bound. No sound argument can be
offered, why one Statute should be obligatory in such circumstances, and
another. If we cannot be deprived of our property by those, whom we do not
commission for that purpose; can we, without any such commission, be deprived,
by them, of our lives? Have those a right to imprison and gibbet us, who have
not a right to tax us?

5. FROM this authority it follows, that it is by no means a rule, that the
authority of Parliament extends to all the subjects of the Crown. The
inhabitants of Ireland were the subjects of the King as of his crown of
England; But it is expressly resolved, in the most solemn manner, that the
inhabitants of Ireland are not bound by the Statutes of England. Allegiance to
the King and obedience to the Parliament are founded on very different
principles. The former is founded on protection: The latter, on representation.
An inattention to this difference has produced, I apprehend, much uncertainty
and confusion in our ideas concerning the connection, which ought to subsist
between Great Britain and the American Colonies.

6. THE last observation, which I shall make on this case, is, that, if the
inhabitants of Ireland are not bound by Acts of Parliament made in England; a
fortiori, the inhabitants of the American Colonies are not bound by them. There
are marks of the subordination of Ireland to Great Britain, which cannot be
traced in the Colonies. A writ of error lies from the King's Bench 6. Institute
^56.
in Ireland, to the King's Bench, and consequently to the House of Lords, in
England; by which means the former kingdom is subject to the control of the
Courts of Justice of the latter kingdom. But a writ of error does not lie in
the King's Bench, not before the House of Lords, in England, from the Colonies
of America. The proceedings in their Courts of Justice can be reviewed and
controled only on an appeal to the King in Council. BLACKSTONE 108. 231.


THE foregoing important decision, favorable to the liberty of all the
dominions of the British crown, that are not represented in the British
Parliament, has been corroborated by subsequent adjudications. I shall mention
one that was given in the King's Bench in the fifth year King William and Queen
Mary between Blankard and Galdy.

THE plaintiff was Provost-Marshal of Jamaica, and, by articles, granted a
deputation of that office to the defendant, under an yearly rent. The defendant
gave his bond for the performance of the agreement; and an action of debt was
brought upon that bond. In bar of the action, the defendant pleaded the Statute
of 5. Ed. 6. made against buying and selling of offices that concern the
administration of justice, and averred that this office concerned the
administration of justice in Jamaica, and that, by virtue of that Statue, both
the bond and articles were void. To this plea the plaintiff replied, that
Jamaica was an island inhabited formerly by the Spaniards, that it was
conquered by the subjects of the kingdom of England, commissioned by legal and
sufficient authority for that purpose; and that since that conquest its
inhabitants were regulated and governed by their own proper Laws and Statutes,
and not by Acts of Parliament or the Statutes of the kingdom of England. The
defendant, in his rejoinder, admits that, before the conquest of Jamaica by the
English, the inhabitants were governed by their own laws, but alleges that
since the conquest it was part of the kingdom of England, and governed by the
Laws and Statutes of the kingdom of England, and not by Laws and Statutes
peculiar to the island. To this rejoinder the plaintiff demurred, and the
defendant joined in demurrer.

HERE was a cause to be determined judicially upon this single question in law
-- Were the Acts of Parliament or Statutes of England in force in Jamaica? It
was argued on the opposite sides by Lawyers of the greatest eminence, before
Lord Chief Justice Holt (a name renowned in the law!) and his brethren the
Justice of the King's Bench. They unanimously gave judgment for the plaintiff;
and, by that judgment, expressly determined -- That the Acts of Parliament or
Statutes of England were not in force in Jamaica. This decision is explicit in
favor of America; for whatever was resolved concerning Jamaica is equally
applicable to every American Colony.

SOME years after the adjudication of this case, another was determined in the
King's Bench relating to Virginia; in which, Lord Chief Justice Holt held, that
the laws or England did not extend to Virginia. Salkeld's Reports, 666.


I MUST not be so uncandid as to conceal, that in Calvin's case, where the
abovementioned decision of the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, concerning
Ireland, is quoted, it is added, by way of explanation of that authority, --
"which is to be understood, unless it (Ireland) be especially named." Nor will
I conceal that the same exception This exception does not seem to be taken in
the case of II Richard 2, which was the foundation of all the subsequent cases.
is taken notice of and seems to be allowed, by the Judges in the other cases
relating to America. To any objection that may, hence, be formed against my
doctrine, I answer, in the words of the very accurate Mr. Justice Foster, that
"general rules thrown out in argument, and carried farther than the true state
of the case then in judgment requires, have, I confess, no great weight with
me." Foster's Crown Law, 313.


THE question before the Judges in the cases I have reasoned from, was not how
far the naming of persons in an Act of Parliament would affect them; though
unless named, they would not be bound by it: The question was, whether the
legislative authority of Parliament extended over the inhabitants of Ireland or
Jamaica or Viginia. To the resolution of the latter question the resolution of
the former was by no means necessary, and was, therefore, wholly impertinent to
the point of the adjudication.

BUT farther; the reason assigned for the resolution of the latter question is
solid and convincing: The American Colonies are not bound by the Acts of the
British Parliament, because they are not represented in it. But what reason can
be assigned why they should be bound by those Acts, in which they are specially
named? Does naming them gave those, who do them that honor, a right to rule
over them? Is this the source of the supreme, the absolute, the irresistible,
the uncontrouled authority of Parliament? These positions are too absurd to be
alleged; and a thousand judicial determinations in their favor would never
induce one man of sense to subscribe his assent to them. Where a decision is
manifestly absurd and unjust, such a sentence is not law. Blackstone, 70. The
legality of the opinion; "That the people in Ireland were bound by the statutes
of England, when particularly named by them," seems afterward to have been
doubted of by Lord Coke himself, in another place of his works. After having
mentioned the resolution in the Exchequer Chamber in the time of Richard IId.
and having taken notice that question is made of it in some of the books, and
particularly in Calvin's case, he says, "That the question concerning the
binding force of English statutes over Ireland is now by common experience and
opinion without any scruple resolved; That the Acts of Parliament, made in
England, since the Act of the 10th H. 7, (he makes no exceptions) do not bind
them in Ireland; but all Acts made in England before 10 H. 7, BY THE SAID ACT
MADE IN IRELAND, AN.10, H. 7, c. 22, dc bind them in Ireland." 12 Report, 111.


THE obligatory force of the British statutes upon Colonies, when named in
them, must be accounted for, by the advocates of that power, upon some other
principle. In my Lord Coke's Reports, it is said, "That albeit Ireland be a
distinct dominion, yet, the title thereof being by conquest, the same, by
judgment of law, may be, by express words, bound by the Parliaments of
England." In this instance, the obligatory authority of the Parliament is
plainly referred to a title by conquest, as its foundation and original. In the
instances relating to the Colonies this authority seems to be referred to the
same source: For any one, who compares what is said of Ireland, and other
conquered countries, in Calvin's case, with what is said of America, in the
adjudications concerning it, will find that the Judges, in determining the
latter, have grounded their opinions on the resolutions given in the former. It
is plain that Blackstone understood the opinion of the Judges -- that the
Colonies are bound by Acts of the British Parliament, if named in them -- to be
founded on the principle of conquest. It will not be improper to insert him
commentary upon the resolutions respecting Amercia. "Besides these adjacent
islands (Jersey, etc.) our more distant Plantations in America and elsewhere
are also, in some respects, subject to the English laws. Plantations, or
Colonies in distant countries, are either such where the lands are claimed in
right of occupancy only, by finding them desert and uncultivated, and peopling
them from the MotherCountry; or when already cultivated, they have been either
gained by conquest, or ceded to us by treaties. Our American plantations, are
principally of this latter fort; being obtained in the last century, either by
right of conquest, and driving out the natives (with what natural justice I
shall not at present enquire) or by treaties. Lord Chief Justice HOLT, in a
case above cited, calls Virginia a conquered country.
It is foreign to my purpose to enquire into the reasonableness of founding the
authority of the British Parliament over Ireland upon the title of conquest
though I believe it would be some what difficult to deduce it satisfactorily in
this manner. It will be sufficient for me to show, that it is unreasonable, and
injurious to the Colonies to extend that title to them. How come the Colonists
to be a conquered people? By whom was the conquest over them obtained? By the
House of Commons? By the constituents of that House? If the idea of conquest
must be taken into consideration when we examine into the title by which
America is held, that idea, so far as it can operate, will operate in favor of
the Colonists, and not against them. Permitted and commissioned by the Crown,
they undertook, at their own expense, expeditions to this distant country, took
possession of it, planted it, and cultivated it. Secure under the protection of
their King, they grew and multiplied, and diffused British freedom and British
spirit, wherever they came. Happy in the enjoyment of liberty, and in reaping
the fruits of their toils; but still more happy in the joyful prospect of
transmitting their liberty and their fortunes to the latest posterity, they
inculcated to their children the warmest sentiments of loyalty to their
sovereign, under whose auspices they enjoyed so many blessings, and of
affection and esteem for the inhabitants of the Mother Country, with whom they
gloried in being intimately connected. Lessons of loyalty to Parliament indeed,
they never gave: They never suspected that such unheard of loyalty would be
required. They never suspected that their descendants would be considered and
treated as a conquered people; and therefore they never taught them the
submission and abject behavior suited to that character.

I AM sufficiently aware of an objection, that will be made to what I have said
concerning the legislative authority of the British Parliament, It will be
alleged, that I throw off all dependence on Great Britain. This objection will
be held forth, in its most specious colors, by those, who, from servility of
soul, or from mercenary considerations, would meanly how their necks to every
exertion of arbitrary power: It may likewise alarm some, who entertain the most
favorable opinion of the connection between Great Britain and her Colonies; but
who are not sufficiently acquainted with the nature of that connection, which is
so dear to them. Those of the first class, I hope, are sew; I am sure they are
contemptible, and deserve to have very little regard paid to them: But for the
sake so those of the second class, who may be more numerous, and whose laudable
principles atone for their mistakes, I shall take some pains to obviate the
objection, and to show that a denial of the legislative authority of the
British Parliament over America is by no means inconsistent with that
connection, which ought to subsist between the Mother Country and her Colonies,
and which, at the first settlement of those Colonies, it was intended to
maintain between them: But that, on the contrary, that connection would be
entirely destroyed by the extension of the power of Parliament over the
American plantations.

LET us examine what is meant by a Dependence on GreatBritain: For it is always
of importance clearly to define the terms that we use. Blackstone, who,
speaking of the Colonies, tells us, that they are no part of the Mother
Country, but distinct (though dependant) dominions, (...)
explains dependence in this manner. Dependence is very little else, but an
obligation to conform to the will the inferior depends. The original and true
ground of this superiority in the case of Ireland, is what we usually call,
though somewhat improperly, the right of conquest; a right allowed by the law
of nations, if not by that of nature; but which, in reason and civil policy,
can mean nothing more, than that, in order to put an end to hostilities, a
compact is either expressly or tacitly made between the conqueror and the
conquered, that if they will acknowledge the victor for their master, he will
treat them for the future as subjects, and not as enemies.

THE original and true ground of the superiority of GreatBritain over the
American Colonies is not shown in any book of the law, unless, as I have
already observed, it be derived from the right of conquest. But I have proved,
and I hope satisfactorily, that this right is altogether inapplicable to the
Colonists. The original of the Superiority of Great Britain over the Colonies
is, then, unaccounted for; and when we consider the ingenuity and pains which
have lately been employed at home on this subject, we may justly conclude, that
the only reason why it is not accounted for, is, that it cannot be accounted
for. The superiority of Great Britain over the Colonies ought, therefore, to be
rejected; and the dependence of the Colonies on her, if it is to be construed
into "an obligation to conform to the will or law of the superior state,"
ought, in this sense, to be rejected also.

MY sentiments concerning this matter are not so singular. They coincide with
the declarations and remonstrances of the Colonies against the statutes
imposing taxes on them. It was their unanimous opinion, that the Parliament
have no right to exact obedience to those statutes; and, consequently, that the
Colonies are under no obligation to obey them. The dependence of the Colonies
on Great Britain was denied in those instances; but a denial of it in those
instances is, in effect, a denial of it in all other instances. For, if
dependence is an obligation to conform to the will or law of the superior
state; any exceptions to that obligation must destroy the dependence. If,
therefore, by a dependence of the Colonies on Great Britain, it is meant, that
they are obliged to obey the laws of Great Britain, reason, as well as the
unanimous voice of the Americans, teaches us to disown it. Such a dependence
was never thought of by those who left Britain, in order to settle in America;
nor by their Sovereigns, who gave them commissions for that purpose. Such an
obligation has no correspondent right: For the Commons of Great Britain have no
dominion over their equals and fellow subjects in America: They can confer no
right to their delegates to bind those equals and fellow subjects by laws.

THERE is another, and a much more reasonable meaning, which may be intended by
the dependence of the Colonies on Great Britain. The phrase may be used to
denote the obedience and loyalty, which the Colonists owe to the Kings of
Great Britain. If it should be alleged, that this cannot be the meaning of the
expression, because it is applied to the kingdom, and not to the King, I give
the same answer that my Lord Bacon gave to those, who said that allegiance
related to the kingdom and not to the King; because in the statutes there are
these words: "born within the allegiance of England," and again, "born without
the allegiance of England." "There is no trope of speech more familiar, says
he, than to use the place of addition for the person. So we say commonly, the
line of York, or the line of Lancaster, for the lines of the Duke of York, or
the Duke of Lancaster. So we say the possessions of Somerset or Warwick,
intending the possessions of the Dukes of Somerset, or Earls of Warwick. And in
the very same manner, the statute speaks, allegiance of England, for allegiance
of the King of England."*

DEPENDENCE of the Mother Country seems to have been understood in this sense,
both by the first planters of the Colonies, and also by the most eminent
Lawyers, at that time, in England.

THOSE who launched into the unknown deep, in quest of new countries and
habitations, still considered themselves as subjects of the English Monarchs,
and behaved suitably to that character; but it no where appears, that they
still considered themselves as represented in an English Parliament, or that
they thought the authority of the English Parliament extended over them. They
took possession of the country in the King's name: They treated, or made war
with the Indians by his authority: They held the lands under his grants, and
paid him the rents reserved upon them: They established governments under the
sanction of his prerogative, or by virtue of his charters. No application for
those purposes was made to the Parliament: No ratification of the charters or
letters patent was solicited from that Assembly, as is usual in England with
regard to grants and franchises of much less importance.

MY Lord Bacon's sentiments on this subject ought to have great weight with us.
His immense genius, his universal learning, his deep insight into the laws and
constitution of England are well known and much admired Besies, he lived at
that time when settling and improving the American Plantations began seriously
to be attended to, and successfully to be carried into execution. During the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, America was chiefly valued on account of its mines.
It was not till the reign of James I. that any vigorous attempts were made to
clear and improve the soil.
Plans for the government and regulation of the Colonies were then forming; and
it is only from the first general idea of these plans that we can unfold, with
precision and accuracy, all the more minute and intricate parts, of which they
now consist. "The settlement of Colonies, says he, must proceed from the option
of those, who will settle them, else it founds like an exile: They must be
raised by the leave, and not by the command of the King. At their setting out,
they must have their commission, or letters patents from the King, that so they
may acknowledge their DEPENDENCY UPON THE CROWN of England, and under his
protection." In another place he says, "that they still I must be subjects of
the realm" The Parliament have no subjects. My Lord Bacon gives in this
expression, an instance of the trope of speech beformentioned. (...) when he
means the subjects of (...)
"In order to regulate all the inconveniences, which will insensible grow upon
them," he proposes, "that the King should erect a subordinate council in
England, whose care and charge shall be, to advise, and put in execution, all
things which shall be found fit for the good of those new Plantations; who,
upon all occasions, shall give an account of their proceedings to the King or
to the CouncilBoard, and from THEM receive such directions, as may best agree
with the government of that place." I. Bacon's works, 725, 726.
It is evident from these quotations, that my Lord Bacon had no conception,
that the Parliament would or ought to interpose It was chiefly during the
confusions of the republic, when the King was in exile, and unable to assert
his rights, that the House of Commons began to interfere in Colony matters.
either in the settlement or the government of the Colonies. The only relation,
in which he says, the Colonists must still continue, is that of subjects: The
only dependency, which they ought to acknowledge, is a dependency on the Crown.

THIS is a dependence, which they have acknowledged hitherto; which they
acknowledge now; and which, if it is reasonable to judge of the future by the
past and the present, they will continue to acknowledge hereafter. It is not a
dependence, like that contended for on Parliament, slavish and unaccountable,
or accounted for only by principles, that are false and inapplicable: It is a
dependence founded upon the principles of reason, of liberty, and of law. Let
us investigate its sources.

THE Colonists ought to be dependent on the King, because they have hitherto
enjoyed, and still continue to enjoy his protection. Allegiance is the faith
and obedience, which every subject owes to his Prince. This obedience is
founded on the protection derived from government: For protection and
allegiance are the reciprocal bonds, which connect the Prince and his subjects.
Between the Sovereign and subject there is duplex et reciprocum ligamen; quia
sicut subditus Regi tenetur ad obedientiam; ita Rex subdito tenetur ad
protectionem: Merito igitur ligeantia dicitur a ligando, quia continet in se
Juplex legamen. 7 Report. 5a. CALVIN'S Case.
Every subject, so soon as he is born, is under the royal protection, and is
entitled to all the advantages arising from it. He therefore, owes obedience to
that royal power, from which the protection, which he enjoys, is derived. But
while he continues in infancy and nonage, he cannot perform the duties which
his allegiance requires. The performance of them must be respited till he
arrive at the years of discretion and maturity. When he arrives at those years,
he owes obedience, not only for the protection, which he now enjoys; but also
for that, which, from his birth, he has enjoyed; and to which his tender age
has hitherto prevented him from making a suitable return. Allegiance now
becomes a duty founded upon principles of gratitude, as well as on principles
of interest: It becomes a debt, which nothing but the loyalty of a whole life
will discharge The King is protector of all his subjects: In virtue of this
high trust, he is more particularly to take care of those who are not able to
take care of themselves, consequently of infants, who, by reason of their
nonage, are under incapacities; from hence natural allegiance arises, as a debt
of gratitude, which can never be cancelled, though the subject owing it goes
out of the kingdom, or swears allegiance to another Prince. 2. WILLIAM'S
Reports, 123, 124.
As neither climate, nor soil, nor time entitle a person to the benefits of a
subject; so an alteration of climate of soil or of time cannot release him from
the duties of one. An Englishman, who removes to foreign countries, however
distant from England, owes the same allegiance to his King there which he owed
to him at home; and will owe it twenty years hence as much as he owes it now.
Wherever he is, he is still liable to the punishment annexed by law to crimes
against his allegiance; and still entitled to the advantages promised by law to
the duties of it: It is not cancelled; and it is not forfeited. Hence all
children born in any parts of the world, if they be of English parents
continuing at that time as liege subjects to King, and having done no act to
forfeit the benefit of their allegiance, are ipsa facto naturalized: And if
they have issue and their descendants intermarry among themselves, such
descendants are naturalized to all generations. BACON'S Argument in the case of
postnati of Scotland.


THUS we see, that the subjects of the King, though they reside in foreign
countries, still owe the duties of allegiance, and are still entitled to the
advantages of it They transmit to their posterity the privilege of
naturalization, and all the other privileges which are the consequences of it.
Natural born subjects have a great variety of rights, which they acquire by
being born in the King's legiance, and can never forfeit by any distance of
place or time, but only by their own misbehaviour; the explanation of which
rights is the principal subject of the law. BLACKSTONE 371.


Now we have explained the dependence of the Americans. They are the subjects
of the King of Great Britain. They owe him allegiance. They have a right to the
benefits which arise from preserving that allegiance inviolate. They are liable
to the punishments which await those who break it. This is a dependence, which
they have always boasted of. The principles of loyalty are deeply rooted in
their hearts; and there they will grow and bring forth fruit, while a drop of
vital blood remains to nourish them. Their history is not stained with
rebellions, and treasonable machinations: An inviolable attachment to their
sovereign, and the warmest zeal for his glory shine in every page.

FROM this dependence, abstracted from every other source, arises a strict
connection between the inhabitants of Great Britain and those of America. They
are fellow subjects; they are under allegiance to the same Price; and this
union of allegiance naturally produces an union of hearts. It is also
productive of an union of measures ^^rough the whole British dominion. To the
King is entrusted the direction and management of the great machine of
government. He therefore is fittest to adjust the different wheels, and, to
regulate their motions in such a manner as to cooperate in the same general
designs. He makes war: He concludes peace: He forms alliances: He regulates
domestic trade by his prerogative; and directs foreign commerce by his
treaties, with those nations, with whom it is carried on. He names the officers
of government; so what he can check every jarring movement in the
administration. He has a negative in the different legislatures throughout his
dominions, so that he can prevent any repugnancy in their different laws.

THE connection and harmony between Great Britain and us, which it is her
interest and ours mutually to cultivate; and on which her prosperity, as well
as ours, so materially depends; will be better preserved by the operation of
the legal prerogatives of the Crown, than by the exertion of an unlimited
authority by Parliament. After considering, with all the attention of which I
am capable, the foregoing opinion, -- That all the different Members of the
British Empire are DISTINCT STATES, INDEPEDANT OF EACH OTHER, BUT CONNECTED
TOGETHER UNDER THE SAME SOVEREIGN IN RIGHT OF THE SAME CROWN -- I discover only
one objection that can be offered against it. But this objection will, by many,
be deemed a fatal one. "How, it will be urged, can the Trade of the British
Empire be carried on, without some power, extending over the whole, to regulate
it? The legislative authority of each part, according to your doctrine, is
confined within the local bounds of the part: How, then, can so many
enterfering interests and claims, as must necessarily meet and contend in the
commerce of the whole, be decided and adjusted?" Permit me to answer these
Questions by proposing some others in my turn. How has the Trade of Europe --
How has the Trade of the whole Globe, been carried on? Have those
widely-extended plans been formed by one superintending power? Have they been
carried into execution by one superintending power? Have they been formed --
have they been carried into execution, with less conformity to the rules of
justice and equality, than if they had been under the direction of one
superintending power? It has been the opinion of some Politicians, of no
inferior note, that all regulations of Trade are useless; that the greatest
part of them are hurtful; and that the stream of Commerce never flows with so
much beauty and advantage, as when it is not diverted from its natural
channels. Whether this opinion is well founded or not, let others determine.
Thus much may certainly be said, that Commerce is not so properly the object of
Laws, as of Treaties and Compacts. In this manner, it has been always directed
among the several nations of Europe. But if the Commerce of the British Empire
must be regulated by a general superintending power, capable of exercising its
influence over every part of it, why may not this power be entrusted to the
King, as a part of the Royal prerogative? By making Treaties, which it is his
prerogative to make, he directs the Trade of GreatBritain with the other States
of Europe: And his Treaties with those States have, when considered with regard
to his subjects, all the binding force of Laws upon them. The King may make a
treaty with a foreign State, which shall irre(...) BLACKSTONE. 252.
Where is the absurdity in supposing him vested with the same right to regulate
the Commerce of the distinct parts of his dominions with one another, which he
has to regulate their Commerce with foreign States. If the history of the
British Constitution, relating to this subject, be carefully traced, I
apprehend we shall discover, that a prerogative in the Crown, to regulate
Trade, is perfectly consistent with the principles of law. We find many
authorities that the King cannot lay impositions on Traffic; and that he cannot
restrain in ALTOGETHER, nor confine it to Monopolists: But none of the
authorities, that I have had an opportunity of consulting, go any farther.
Indeed many of them seem to imply a power in the Crown to regulate Trade; where
that power is exerted for the great end of all prerogative -- the public good.
If the power of regulating Trade be, as I am apt to believe it to be, vested,
by the principles of the constitution, in the Crown, this good effect will flow
from the doctrine: A perpetual distinction will be kept up between that power,
and a power of laying impositions on Trade. The prerogative will extend to the
former: It can, under no pretense, extend to the latter: As it is given, so it
is limited, by the Law.


THE END.

