SHORT ADVICE To the COUNTIES of NEW YORK.

O Fortunati nimium sua si bona norunt Eboracenses! BY A COUNTRY GENTLEMAN.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, 1774.

To the PUBLIC.
OUR own happiness, my Countrymen, and the happiness of our posterity, will in
a great measure depend upon our conduct in the present crisis: let that conduct
therefore be such as the importance of the event demands; and let not
prejudice, immediate self-interest, or that proneness to novelty and change,
too often predominent in states as well as individuals, lead us into such
measures as will bring destruction upon ourselves, and induce future ages to
execrate the folly and madness of their infatuated forefathers.

The inhabitants of these colonies, (notwithstanding those acts of the British
Parliament which are complained of, as too grievous and oppressive to be borne,
and against which our patriots raise such a terrible and tremendous cry) are
the freest people upon the globe, and if we were sensible of the blessing, I
might add the happiest also. Survey the different nations of the world, compare
their situation with your own, and you will soon become sensible of the
inestimable advantages you enjoy over them. Do not therefore inadvertantly
sacrifice them to the visionary schemes of mistaken or designing men. By
prudence, firmness and moderation, we shall insure the continuance of these
blessings to ourselves, and be enabled to transmit them pure, and unadulterated
to our children: but if we aim at too much, if we suffer ourselves to be led
away with vain notions of grandeur and independance, we may lose the substance
while we grasp at the shadow, and this our fair structure of liberty and
happiness, which seems calculated to endure through a long succession of ages,
will moulder into nothing, and like the baseless fabric of a vision, leave not
a wreck behind. Great Britain is the basis upon which it stands. In union with
her, we may rise superior to the rest of the world, and set all the kingdoms of
the earth at defiance. But if by our ungrateful treatment of her, she should be
induced to withdraw her protection, and give us over to our own imaginations,
nothing but anarchy and confusion must ensue, the flames of civil discord would
instantly blaze forth, and desolate the land, and amidst the dreadful and
unnatural conflict, some internal tyrant, more fortunate than the rest would
establish his dominion; or some bold invader from abroad seize upon us an easy
and devoted prey, and deprive us of our liberties and boasted independence for
ever.

Such are the scenes that will present themselves to our view, and such the
calamities we must undergo when disjoined from our mother country; and deprived
of that protection which nourished, supported, and established us in this once
inhospitable wilderness, and which has at length raised us to our present
happy and flourishing condition. Believe not therefore such men as tell you
that Great Britain would enslave you; Great Britain wishes to see us free and
happy; she is the land of liberty, and would gladly dispense that blessing to
her children, and to all the world. But her ministers are men, and as such may
err; they may ignorantly or inadvertantly adopt measures that are injurious to
the community, and subversive of its liberties. But the people can surely never
be justified in proceeding to open rebellion, at least, till all peaceful,
legal and constitutional means of redress have proved ineffectual.

We complain of grievances, my countrymen; we say that our liberties are
invaded; but what steps have we hitherto taken for our relief? Have we not
acted in all respects more like fools, to say no worse, than like reasonable
beings, warmed with the pure and steady flame of liberty? Have we not pursued
such measures as must inevitably increase the evil; and if longer adhered to,
make the breach between us, and our mother country IRREPARABLE? while we have
neglected such as common sense and common prudence dictated to us as the most
easy and effectual. Are not our ASSEMBLIES the proper guardians of our rights
and liberties? are they not constituted our Representatives for that very
purpose? can there be more effectual mediators between us and Great Britain
than they are? I am certain there cannot. TO THEM therefore we ought to have
applied, we should then have proceeded legally and constitutionally, and might
have had the fairest prospect of success. But alas! so strangely have we been
infatuated. we have resumed the power into our own hands, and every man is
become a judge and a ruler among us. The whole system of government is
overturned, and all order and subordination lost. In this unruly and disorderly
manner we are making our attack upon Great Britain; like the giants of old
warring against heaven, piling Ossa upon Pelion, and Pelion upon Ossa, fully
determined to force her to submission. Our conduct is too dreadful to be
sported with; yet so ridiculous, that it tempts us to laughter. It Is like the
unaccountable freaks of a madman, we cannot forbear smiling at them, though our
hearts bleed inwardly for the unhappy sufferer.

One measure I must confess has been adopted, which seemed to promise some
success, and which at first view, appeared to be dictated by the spirit of
wisdom, and that was the appointment of delegates to meet in general congress.
Those gentlemen, it was hoped would fall upon some scheme to accommodate the
dispute between Great Britain and America, and mark out a line of government,
that would sufficiently ascertain, and establish the right of jurisdiction in
the one, and secure the liberties of the other. Which plan, when well digested,
the few reasonable and thinking men that were among us, imagined they would
have had the modesty to have submitted to the legislatures of the different
provinces, for their approbation, and sanction. This is what they ought to have
done; this is what all honest and wise men would have done. But mark the
conduct of these distinguished personages, selected from among their fellow
subjects, for the salvation of their country. They met; and while the attention
of all America was fixed upon them, in eager, anxious expectation, a resolve,
unanimously entered into by them, was promulgated to the public, adopting and
approving the infamous and rebellious resolves of the county of Suffolk, in the
Massachusetts government.

I am bound in honor and conscience to do so much justice to those gentlemen
of the Congress who were delegated by this province, as to say, that I have
been assured, and I verily believe it to be the truth, that they did oppose the
violent measures entered into by the General Congress, and more particularly
the adoption of the Suffolk resolves, which I know is abhorrent to their
thoughts, and which I am persuaded (to make use of a smuggling phrase) has been
artfully run upon them.

This was effectually throwing off the mask; and their subsequent conduct has
convinced the world, that from that time forward they acted without disguise.
They have addressed the people of England, they have addressed the people of
Quebec, they have addressed the people of the other Colonies; but for what
purpose, unless it be to excite tumults and seditions, in all parts of the
British Empire, I defy the most sagacious to discover. It Is true they have
addressed the King also; but I am told, and I can easily believe it, in a
dictatorial manner, and in sure and certain hopes of being disregarded. But
amidst all these addresses, the legislature of Great Britain, and the
legislatures of America have been totally neglected and treated with contempt.
This however is not the full measure of their iniquity; a nonimportation, and,
after a lapse, of some months, a non-exportation, and nonconsumption agreement,
must take place, in consequence of their resolves; and to be enforced by their
High Mightinesses the MOB, to the utter subversion of all Law, and the total
destruction of all LIBERTY.

The fatal and dreadful effects of this non-importation scheme, etc. upon all
ranks of people; but more especially upon the insulted and unhappy Farmers (who
it seems must bear the heat and burden of the day) have been sufficiently
delineated by an abler hand. I shall therefore say nothing further upon that
subject, although, they cannot be too often cautioned, and admonished of the
danger, and destruction that is coming fast upon them.

One thing however I will venture to do, and that, because I conceive it to be
my duty, as a good subject. I will give my free and candid opinion upon what
ought to be done in this alarming juncture; upon what I conceive to be the only
measure that can prove effectual, or that can save us from political perdition:
it is what ought to have been done at first, and what, thank God, it is not yet
too late to do.

We must leave the government of this province to the constitutional rulers
thereof; we must submit the conduct of our affairs to our Assembly, our hopes
(under heaven) must rest in them. And notwithstanding the illjudged and unjust
aspersions, thrown upon that honorable body, by weak and wicked men, I am
convinced they will have virtue and spirit enough to vindicate the cause of
their country, and to rescue from the hands of arrogance and presumption, that
authority which has been delegated to them for the most valuable and important
purposes.

Listen, my countrymen, to the voice of reason; be no longer blind to your
happiness. The Assembly are a body of men composed of your own Representatives,
Persons placed in that honorable and important station, by your own choice,
freely and publicly made, and you have the strongest reason to believe, that
they will faithfully and invariably consult your welfare and prosperity, in all
their deliberations. They are all of them Gentlemen resident among you: you
must be personally acquainted with their views, their tempers, and their
general characters; it is almost impossible you can be mistaken: but if at any
time you should chance to be so, you may correct the error by a better choice
at the next election; or if upon any occasion they should mistake your true
interest; or be so abandoned (which is next to impossible) as wilfully to
betray it; you have the same remedy, and a better cannot be devised. You will
likewise have this consolation in our present extremely dangerous condition,
when ruin seems almost inevitable, that these your constitutional
representatives will have due weight with the government at home; their
petitions, their remonstrances you may assure yourselves will be heard, and if
they proceed with prudence, and firmness, of which I cannot entertain a doubt,
your grievances, if there are any, they will be redressed, and you will again
be restored to that peace and good government with which till lately you have
been so singularly blessed. But if you suffer the power to be wrested from
their hands, by men whom you are entirely unacquainted with, and for whose
honor and honesty you can possibly have no security. If you suffer
Republicans, disaffected persons, smugglers, men of no character, and desperate
fortunes, to assume the reins of government, to domineer over you, and to
dictate to you upon all occasions; what can you expect but slavery and
destrustion? Where can you fly for redress? How will you remedy the evil?

Be not deceived, my countrymen, order is in every respect more eligible than
confusion. It Is Heaven's first law, it is the basis of liberty. Let us therefore
restore order and good government among ourselves; for, until we do that, it is
impossible to be FREE.

FINIS.

