Mr. WEBSTER'S FAST-SERMON. JULY 14, 1774.

THE MISERY AND DUTY OF AN OPPRESSED AND ENSLAVED PEOPLE, REPRESENTED IN A
SERMON Delivered at SALISBURY, July 14, 1774. On a Day set apart for FASTING
and PRAYER, On Account of approaching public Calamities. PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
By SAMUEL WEBSTER, A. M. Pastor of a Church in SALISBURY.

BOSTON: Printed by Edes and Gill, in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXXIV.

A FAST-SERMON.
NEHEMIAH IX. 36, -- 38. Behold we are Servants this Day! And for the Land that
thou gave unto our Fathers, to eat the Fruit thereof, and the Good thereof,
behold we are Servants in it!

And it yields much Increase unto the Kings which thou have set over us,
because of our Sins: Also they have Dominion over our Bodies and over our
Cattle, at their Pleasure: And we are in great Distress!

And because of all this, we make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our
Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto it.


NEHEMIAH, the author of this book, was a great officer in the court of
Artaxerxes, king, or rather, as we now speak, Emperor of Persia (being his
Cup Bearer). Which honorable and profitable (...), it seems, tempted him to
tarry behind, when his brethren returned from captivity, about thirteen years
before, under Zerubbabel and Ezra, in order to rebuild the temple and city;
which had now, according to the prophecy, lain waste seventy years.

But when he found, by an account given him by some of his brethren who had
returned from Judea, the yet desolate condition of his ancient city and
country, being a good man and a true patriot, he was greatly affected, and
passed several days in fasting and tears and doleful retirement: And then
addressed himself to God in the most humble prayer and supplication for them.

The substance of which is thus given by a learned paraphrast.

"Lord of heaven and governor of all things! who art infinitely just and
tremendous in thy judgments upon the disobedient; and faithful to all thy
promises to thy dutiful servants: Lend a gracious car to the cries of a
distressed Israelite, humbly confessing his own and his father's iniquities;
and lamenting the calamities of his nation, thine own chosen people.

Let it suffice that they have thus long felt and smarted under the heavy
strokes of thy righteous displeasure, and, with all contrition beg again to be
restored to thy wonted favor and protection.

Remember how thy earliest sure threats of punishing their wickedness with the
loss of their dear country, were still accompanied with a gracious promise,
that their repentance should at last retrieve it again; and cause them still to
be owned by thee for thine inheritance; for whose sakes thou have done such
mavelous things in the sight of all nations.

Have mercy upon the multitude of the guilty, for the sake of those who are
truly penitent, and sincerely desire thy true honor and worship.

Make me the instrument of procuring their safety and taking away their
reproach, by blessing the endeavors I am now going to use with the Persian
Emperor in their favor."

Here was a true patriot indeed! Here was a man who sought the good of his
country! and sought it from principle, and in the right way!

First he mourned for their distress; then he fasted and prayed, and besought
the God of Heaven to direct and prosper him: And then he used the most likely
means he could think of to procure their relief; which was by using his
interest with the Emperor to get a commission to go himself and help them.

And God prosper'd him -- He went and relieved them in a most wonderful manner!

O how happy for us if we had such a friend in the British Court, who had such
influence with the King in this evil day! What great things might he, under
God, do for us! But alas though we have, like the distressed Jews, many enemies,
yet we have no such powerful friend to exert himself in our favor!

This great and good man now dwelt in Shushan, (said to have been the
pleasantest city then in the world,) he dwelt in the king's presence and was
his favorite; and had great riches and honor: yet he felt for the afflictions
of his people, and chose rather to go and suffer with them, that he might
promote their welfare, than to enjoy all the pleasures of that splendid court.

Who can sufficiently admire his excellent spirit, and his excellent conduct
amidst his country's distresses!

He came and encouraged the Jews, and set about repairing the city, and
finished it, though he was derided and counteracted and plotted against
continually; and though they were called rebels by many powerful enemies in the
neighborhood, and even by a number of the NOBLES OF JUDAH, who joined with
their heathen adversaries against him.

After this, though they were in their own land, dwelt again in their city
Jerusalem, and had the worship of the temple restored, yet they were in a poor,
weak and distressed condition to what they were before their late troubles.

And therefore we read, in the beginning of this Chapter -- That, in the
twenty-fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with
fasting and with sackcloths, and with earth upon them. And the seed of Israel
separated themselves from all strangers, and stood and confessed their sins and
the iniquities of their fathers.

Then they recounted the many signal favors to them and to their fathers, and
the ill returns they had made: and then pray that God will put an end to their
grievous troubles.

Howbeit (say they) thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou have
done right, but we have done wickedly.

And the prayer concludes in the words of my text, wherein they recount their
calamities, and promise to renew their covenant with God.

Behold we are servants this day; and for the land which thou gave unto our
fathers, to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof; behold we are servants
in it.

And it yields much increase unto the kings which thou have set over us,
because of our sins. Also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our
cattle, at their pleasure; and we are in great distress! That is, though we
are, through divine goodness, in our own land; yet we are but servants and
tributaries. We are not allowed to call the country our own: The Lord, indeed,
gave the good land to our fathers to improve and enjoy all the blessings of it:
But now those whom the Persian Emperor has placed over us -- (whether by right
or not) are our Lords and Masters: And we hold all our blessings, even our
Estates and Lives, but as tenants at Will and Pleasure.

It yields much increase (for it is a good land) unto the Kings, which for
our Sins. God suffers to lord it over us. But we can call nothing our own: For,
they claim absolute dominion over our Bodies, our Cattle and all that we have,
to call for it and dispose of it at their pleasure: So that in a word, we are
in great distress.

And, because of all this, we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our
Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto it.

That is, (as one expresses the sense) "and though even what we now enjoy be
much more than we deserve; yet do thou still cast an eye of further pity upon
the misery of our condition, accept our present repentance, and that solemn
engagement we now, all of us lay ourselves under, to be obedient for the
future, to thy holy commands."

Upon these words, thus introduced, and opened, I shall make the following
observations, viz.

I. That some people may justly call the land they live in, their own, by a
divine gift to their fathers.

II. That yet, such is the tyranny and oppression of the kings of the earth,
that, where there is the clearest title, the owners are sometimes deprived of
it, or of the blessings of it, which is the same thing.

III. That it is for a people's sins, when God suffers this to come upon them.

IV. That though a people are suffered to live in their own Land, and it be
ever so good in itself, yet if they hold all their blessings only at the
pleasure of others, and can call nothing their own, they are, strictly
speaking, servants, and not freemen: and must be in great distress.

V. That it becomes such a people to fly unto God by solemn fasting and prayer,
for relief, even after they have done all they can for their own preservation.

VI. If they would, on good grounds, hope for success, they should renew their
covenant with God, or lay themselves under the most solemn obligations to be an
obedient and holy people, for the time to come.

I. Then I observe -- That some People may justly call the Land they live in,
their own, by a divine gift to their fathers.

So Israel, in this prayer, called the land of Judea, -- the land which thou
gave unto our fathers: And which therefore they implicitly call their own by
inheritance from them.

And sure there was no room to dispute their title, if God, the great
Proprietor of the world had a right to dispose of it: For he gave it to Israel
for a possession, as the scriptures abundantly testify; so that I need not
stand to quote particular passages.

This land therefore was indubitably their's; so their's, that no body under
Heaven had a right to deprive them of it, nor could do it without wrong and
injustice; for it was their's (as I may say) by deed of gift from the great
Lord of all.

Nor were they the only people in the world who could challenge a just right
and title, yea a divine one, to the country they possessed. For God originally
gave the whole Earth to the sons of men to be divided among them. And wherever
any went and found any part of the Earth unpossessed, or fairly purchased of
the rightful possessors, they also might justly call it their own land, their
proper inheritance, given them by God; though not so expressly given as Canaan
was to Israel. Nor will, or can this be denied by any who pretend to have any
just possessions on Earth: so that I need not enlarge. But may proceed to
observe --

II. That yet, such is the oppression and tyranny of the Kings of the earth,
that, where there is the clearest title, the owners are sometimes deprived of
it, or of the blessings of it; which is the same thing.

So it was in the case before us. The King of Assyria came up against Israel,
only from a lust of power, and to spread his dominions; came up against Israel
and disquieted them in their possessions, the possessions which God had given
them; yea destroyed their city and country, to which he had no pretense of
right (unless it was that Abraham the ancestor of this nation anciently
emigrated from Chaldea a part of his empire, which was too absurd to mention)
yet he came and carried them away captive; and seventy years detained them in
his own land; and grievously afflicted them.

But at length the Lord had compassion on his people, and stirred up Cyrus and
afterward other Kings to give them leave to return to their own land, and
rebuild their city and temple in troublous times.

But yet even then they held them under tribute, and challenged the disposal of
them and of all they had, at their pleasure; because they had power so to do,
though no pretense of right at all.

For, if mere conquest gives right, then right and power must be the same
thing: and so every man as well as a King must have a right to do whatever he
has power to do. And then there could be no such thing as oppression in the
world: which is most absurd and impious to assert!

And yet this has been (I may almost say the manner of the King's of the
earth,) though they dare not avow the principle, yet they have acted as if they
thought they had a right to do whatever they had power to do; without paying
any regard to right or wrong. Where they were able to overcome their
neighbors, and took a fancy to their possessions, they have made it their
practice, time out of mind, to go and seize, by force, them and their land:
sometimes carrying them away captive; and at other times suffering them to live
in their own land, as tenants at will under tribute: and sometimes under such
cruel oppression as to deprive them of all the blessings of a good and fruitful
land. This is too plain and melancholy a truth to dwell upon.

I proceed therefore to observe --

III. That it is for a people's sins when God suffers this evil to come upon
them.

So Israel acknowledged in the text, and through this whole prayer.

It yields (say they) much increase to the Kings which thou has set over us,
BECAUSE OF OUR SINS.

And whoever considers the nature of God, and the righteousness and kindness of
his government, may be sure that this is always the case: For, he does not
afflict willingly, nor needlessly grieve the children of men. He cannot delight
in tyranny and oppression! No, his Soul abhors it; and though he sometimes
suffers it to punish an ungrateful people, who would not be drawn by the cords
of a man and the bands of love; yet we see in the sacred history, that after he
had punished his people by some haughty tyrants, he took his time to punish
them also for their oppression. And never do we find a people forsaken of God
who had not forsaken him first.

And though we are stumbled at the ways of God, when we see the world groaning
for so many ages under the cruelest tyranny and oppression; yet I doubt not,
could we see through the reasons of it, we should be satisfied with the divine
proceedings. We should see that they were first given up to such ignorance or
overgrown wickedness, that it was necessary to curb them in this severe and
rigorous way.

And when they are suitably humbled and brought to repentance, he delights in
granting them deliverance, and never fails of doing it. The Scripture history,
and indeed all history, is abundant witness of this: And thereto I appeal.

And proceed --

IV. To observe, that though a people are suffered to live in their own land,
and it be ever so good in itself, yet, if they hold all their blessings, only
at the pleasure of others, and can call nothing their own, they are strictly
speaking, SERVANTS and not freemen: and must be in great distress.

This was the very case of Israel at the time of this Fast. They were restored
to their own land: But they were not allowed to call it their own. The Persian
Emperor had an absolute power over them, and all that they had; so that they
held all by the most precarious tenure -- his will and pleasure. He claimed
their Cattle, their Silver, their Gold, their Houses and Lands, and even their
Persons, and called for them and disposed of them at his pleasure. And
therefore say they -- Behold, we are Servants this day! And again -- We are
Servants in it! -- that is in our own Land.

And sure it was so. They were not Freemen, but perfect Servants, if a foreign
power had dominion over them and their substance. Such persons really have no
property at all. For how can we call that ours, which others may call for, and
take away, when they please. Every Slave in the world may call himself a
freeman as well as these: And most of them with greater propriety. For most of
them are allowed something which they may call their's.

And they who cannot call any thing their own; let them live in a land like
Canaan, it is almost nothing to them.

It may yield much fruit, but if all besides a bare subsistence, just to keep
them fit for service, must go to their masters, they may be in great distress,
in the midst of the jollity of their taskmasters; and pine away, as many poor
souls do, amidst floods of milk and honey, wine and oil.

And whoever looks over the world, will find, that where such an absolute
dominion is claimed over the people, they are almost universally reduced to
every kind of distress. The world which is now groaning under bondage is a
melancholy witness of this.

Could you but look into the dark places of the earth, and see the habitations
of cruelty, and hear the cries and groans of the oppressed, who have no
comforter, because on the side of the oppressors there is power; it would make
every tender heart ache and ready to burst with grief! But I must forbear. And
shall only add -- That to hold our houses, our lands, our cattle and goods, and
all the comforts of life, and even life it self, by so precarious a tenure as
that of the absolute will and pleasure of unfeeling lawless masters, so that we
may be stripped of them all in a moment when they are out of temper, or even for
every slight fault, is itself a great distress, and must embitter every comfort
of life, and almost make life itself a burden; especially to those who were
born free, and were never in bondage to any man.

And yet this is the best any can hope for, who are once deprived of liberty,
or of the privileges of freemen. I proceed to observe.

V. That it becomes a people in such a distressed condition to fly unto God by
solemn fasting and prayer for relief, even after they have done all they can
for their own preservation.

So did Israel here. Nehemiah like a wise and prudent man, did not sit still
and presume upon providence; but encouraged the Jews to arise and build the
wall of their city, and make it as desensible as possible against the enemy;
and gave orders to use all caution, so as not to give their enemies any
advantage, by shutting and barring the gates in season every night, etc.

But, like a pious man, sensible that all salvation is of the Lord, he
counseled them not to depend upon their own wisdom or strength; but to commit
their cause to God. And therefore called a solemn fast to humble themselves
before God, and to seek his face.

And they assembled for this end, and mourned before him; and made confession
of their sins, and poured out supplications to him to espouse their cause, and
deliver them from their oppressions, and from all their distresses; and restore
them to that happy state of freedom they once enjoyed.

And what could be more reasonable? For, to whom shall people go in their
distress of any kind, but unto God, who can do all things for them? And,
particularly, when they are groaning under the oppression of the great and
powerful, to whom shall they go for relief, but to him that is greater and
higher than they, who sets up kings, and puts them down, and overturns
kingdoms at his pleasure, if it be necessary, to work deliverance for his
people.

The Lord is a sure refuge in such a time of trouble. He is a strong tower, and
whosoever flies to him shall be safe, under the shadow of his wings, against
all the powers on earth.

Even the haughty Human shall fall before him, when he meditates mischief to
the people of God. And proud Senacherib, when he vainly boasts of his numbers
and strength, shall be struck, as by a flash of lightning, and his mighty host,
in which he trusted, become in one night dead corpses.

He can even shut the mouths of hungry lions, or quench the hottest furnace,
when his servants, who trust in him, are to be preserved.

Only then let a people engage God on their side, and they need not fear what
man can do unto them.

And in order to this, God expects to be sought unto, in a public solemn
manner; and, that we humble ourselves before him.

And our Savior has taught us, that prayer, accompanied with fasting, has
peculiar prevalence with heaven; having said (of the evil spirit) -- this kind
goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.

And the people of God have practiced it in all ages, and found the benefit of
it: And so did Nineveh, when threatened with speedy destruction, and were spared.

And so have our fathers in their day, and we in ours.

In this way a people make a solemn appeal to God, as the great governor of the
world, when the powers of earth rise up against them, and cast themselves upon
him. And the Lord expects to be acknowledged, if we need his help: And we have
no reason to look for it without.

Moreover such a day is designed as a day of humiliation for our sins, which
have procured the evils which are upon us. And this, if sincere, cannot but be
acceptable to God. And we know that he has said -- He that humbles himself
shall be exalted. ( Luke xiv. II.) And if such a day is not a day of sincere
humiliation, it is a mockery.

Which leads me to the next observation,

VI. That if a people would on good grounds hope for success, they should renew
their covenant with God; or lay themselves under the most solemn obligations to
be an obedient and holy people, for the time to come.

So did Israel at this time.

And because of all this, we make a sure covenant and write it; and our
Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto it.

The covenant was signed and sealed by the principal persons -- And the rest of
the people took a solemn oath to do as the subscribers had engaged.

What the covenant was, you see in the next chapter.

First, in general they covenanted -- to walk in God's law -- and to observe
and do all the commandments of the Lord their God; and his judgments, and his
statutes: Particularly, that they would not intermarry with the heathen -- that
they would keep the sabbath religiously -- and the sabbatical year --
punctually pay their tribute to the temple -- and give the Priests and Levites
their due -- and no more forsake the house of their God.

And what can it signify to pretend to humble ourselves before God, on such a
day, and to confess our sins, unless we also engage to forsake them, and do
better for the time to come?

And if a solemn covenant was drawn up, in which we should bind ourselves to
God and one another to reform the gross evils which are found among us, and to
be in all things an obedient and holy people, it might be well.

This formal and solemn renewing the covenant has been practiced by some
christian societies, and recommended by others. And I am ready to think it
might have a good effect.

But, the least people can do on such a day is, to resolve and engage, in the
most serious and deliberate manner, to reform all our crying iniquities, which
have provoked God against us, and to obey and serve him for the time to come.
Without this, they do nothing at all to purpose, and can expect no blessing.
Scripture and reason both conspire to assure us of this; and no thinking man
can doubt.

Thus have I gone through with the several observations from the words, and
shall now conclude with some application and improvement.

And now, methinks, almost every thing that has been said, is naturally
applicable to ourselves in this evil day: And we can hardly help seeing the
improvement we ought to make.

However, I shall take a little pains to apply it, and to press the improvement.

Now if any people on earth, since the Jews, have a right to call the land they
live in their own, and to say God gave it to our fathers -- we may say it.

About an hundred and fifty-four years since, our fathers were driven by the
then raging persecution, out of the land of their nativity; and came to seek in
the wilds of America (then called the new world) that liberty which they were
denied at home, (but little thought they should ever be denied here.) They came
with the King's leave, though at their own expense. (and a vast expense it was,
no less, by the fairest and lowest computation, than TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND
POUNDS STERLING, the settling this single province.)

They sound it an howling wilderness, destitute and doleful! And about half the
number of the first adventurers died the first winter under the unparalleled
hardships they suffered.

However, God was with them, and encouraged them; and settled them in this
land; -- an handful of men from whom, with some additions afterward, have
arisen this great multitude, who now occupy the land.

And, as no body on earth had any title to this land but the original
inhabitants -- our fathers got leave of them to settle, and made peace with
them, and fairly purchased their lands of them.

The king had no right to give it, nor the people of England, for it was not
their's to give. But God gave our fathers favor in the eyes of the people of
the land; and they obtained their title to these lands; which was as good as
the people of England have to theirs; or any other people under heaven. All
pretenses to the contrary are vain and frivolous to the last degree.

Surely then the land is ours. The Lord our God gave it unto our fathers: And
we have it by inheritance from them. There is no better title this day on earth.

And yet, if a title could be given by the king, we have that also, in our
charter; which was a solemn covenant between him and our fathers; in which they
engaged to be his subjects, though removed out of his dominions to the ends of
the earth, on condition of their enjoying by his means, all the rights and
privileges of British subjects; (one of which be sure was the safe enjoyment of
our property.)

And this they depended upon enjoying when they ventured their lives and
fortunes to extend the British empire to this end of the world.

And yet sacred as this charter was, and richly as we deserved it, by the
hardships we suffered, and the immense advantage we have been to the land of
our forefathers nativity; yet, in a popish reign, (that of James the second)
our charter was taken away; and, so hard was our fate, after all our expensive
solicitations, only the shadow of it could be recovered; though it was the only
one lost in that general wreck of charters, which was not restored, at the
revolution.

And now, after we have rendered cheerfully all the service in our power to our
nation -- in reducing Cape Breton, Nova Scotia and Canada: Some of which we did
in a manner alone; and in the whole did much more than our proportion: Yet,
because we reap some benefit hereby, as soon as we have struggled through
innumerable difficulties and distresses for a century and an half, and begin
some of us, to live a little comfortably in this wilderness, they envy us our
happiness, and thirst after our inheritance. And because they have squandered
away the nation's money in the most shameful manner, and by this bad husbandry
are got immensely in debt; behold, they threaten to take away all our liberty
and property, and to reduce us to slavery and beggary.

And, which is most aggravating, the king's revenue, it seems, is not helped by
it.

But the money extorted from us is given to placemen and pensioners here, who
are to be our taskmasters to afflict us, and riot on our spoils!

Is it merely then to impoverish us that we are to be thus fleeced to the skin?
No! The plot is deep, and worse is yet behind! These men are by this means to
be attached hereby to their interest, and to be their SPIES and INFORMERS
against us from time to time.

They expect letters from them like those from the enemies of Judah in the days
of Ezra. (See Ezra iv. 14.) Now, FORASMUCH AS WE HAVE MAINTENANCE FROM THE
KING'S PALACE, and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor,
therefore we have sent and certified the king, etc.

In short, their language seems to be that of the Egyptians concerning Israel,
(Exodus 1. 10, etc.) Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply,
etc.

And their policy was much the same. They set Taskmasters over them, to
afflict them. And made their lives bitter with hard bondage -- and rigorous
service.

But behold! how heaven counteracted them: For, the more they afflicted them,
the more they multiplied and grew.

And when they saw that this did not do, being determined, if possible, by
right or by wrong, to carry their point, (for tyranny once begun has no bounds)
they took the most horrid method ever heard of: They sent out a bloody decree,
and ordered the midwives to kill every male child as soon as it was born. Who
could believe human nature capable of this? Who can think of it without horror?
Blessed be God it is not quite come to this with us yet. But who knows how soon
it may? The murder-act since passed, I think, comes but little short of it: and
might justify the very thing.


But did the midwives obey the King's decree? No! They feared God, and
disobeyed the King. And it was so far from displeasing God, that he preserved
them from the wrath of the King, and prosper'd and blessed them for searing God
more than man. And so, I doubt not, if we fear God more than man, shall we also
be preserved and blessed.

But what a deplorable condition are we reduced to, by the tyranny of some that
are over us!

Many ways have been devised to oppress and enslave us: But when we sought the
Lord, he appeared for us, and delivered us from one snare after another. The
cruel decrees against us were repealed: and we hoped again to see good days.
For, though they kept up their exorbitant claim of making laws to bind us IN ALL
CASES WHATEVER, which included a power to dispose of us, and all that we have,
at their will and pleasure; yet we flattered ourselves they would never
exercise this pretended right; but it would forever lay dormant.

But we have found ourselves mistaken. They have framed laws to extort our
money from us without our consent; to raise a revenue, and so to make, at our
expense, a swarm of officers, dependent on them and independent on us; which if
continued, would no doubt alone eventually destroy all our liberties.

And because we would not pay this tax; but destroyed the engine of oppression,
when no other way was left us -- Behold they have now shut up our capital,
surrounded it with ships, and filled it with soldiers, -- stopped all their
trade, and left them to starve without remedy, except from the charity of their
more humane brethren!

And as if this was not enough to satiate their fury -- bills have passed the
two houses -- and doubtless long ere now are signed by the king, The truth of
this was soon confirmed, and the Canada Bill added to them.
to take away every charter-right worth contending for, too many to be
enumerated; and too grievous and oppressive ever to be borne by any free
people, if Heaven puts any lawful means in their power to prevent it.

And what further is meditated by the men of blood, we know not: But many
things are to be feared upon too good grounds. Particularly, many think there
is a design, and will be an attempt, to seize our best friends, and carry them
home for trial! For trial did I say? No! For execution!

But the Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice! He can, and, I trust, will,
prevent this horrid Insult!

May we not now adopt almost every word of my text -- and say -- Behold we are
servants this day. etc.

But, let us now seriously consider, that it is for our sins that God suffers
all these evils to come upon us: He would never have thus forsaken us, if we
had not forsaken him first.

O let us realize this, this day -- and therefore fly to God by fasting and
prayer, by humiliation and repentance.

It Is God only who can help us; without him vain is all human policy and help. O
that we were duly sensible of this, and would religiously cast all our care
upon him!

We must indeed watch as well as pray: and not lie upon our faces and expect
miracles: This was not the way which good Nehemiah took: They did all they
could for their own safety, and then repaired to the throne of grace, and cast
themselves upon divine mercy. Let us go and do likewise.

But there is one thing more in which we must imitate them, or all is in vain
at last: And that is -- We must covenant or solemnly engage this day to reform
our crying sins, and to become an obedient and holy people.

Don't let us trifle in this part of our duty this day! If we do we loose all
the rest. For, if we still regard iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will not
hear us.

Yea, if we will not for all these terrible things be reformed, we have reason
to fear yet seven times worse (if it can be) till we are utterly consumed.

Oh, let us then, with one consent, search and try our ways and turn to the
Lord. Let us exhort one another, and say, with the Prophet -- Come and let us
return to the Lord, for he has smitten, and he will heal us, he has broken,
and he will bind us up; after two days he will revive us, and we shall live in
his sight.

We have done nothing against men, our king or our brethren, to bring all this
evil upon us, but what was judged absolutely necessary to preserve our liberty.

And if there was any thing done amiss, sure it don't deserve all this! From
man therefore I take it to be clearly, unjust, oppressive and cruel, to the
last degree: and find this acknowledged by many of the British parliament
themselves. And who can judge otherwise? For a whole city, nay, a whole
province is destined to destruction, for the supposed fault of a few, without
ever having been charged with that fault; nay, while our great enemy has
publicly declared, that even the town, as such, had no hand in it. And we are
condemned UNTRIED, UNHEARD, contrary to the first principles of justice in all
nations.

But, against God, we may not say -- What have we done? But, rather, -- What
have we not done to provoke his pure eyes to anger?

Men may do us wrong; but God can do none. He has not suffered all this evil to
come upon us for nothing! No! But it is for our multiplied transgressions.

And, if we would stand fast in our liberty, we must secure the divine favor:
for in vain is salvation hoped for from any other quarter.

God has done wonderful things for our land in times past, in subduing the
Enemies before us, and in delivering us again and again from the yokes of
bondage, which were prepared for us. And we rejoiced and shouted abundantly.
But, what suitable returns have we made? Did we become a holier and better
people? No! verily! But we have been, and still are, an evil and unthankful
people. And, I fear we grew worse after all our mercies. Wickedness of almost
every kind, I fear, prevailed more than ordinarily.

What contempt of God and religion -- of his word and worship, and ministers,
and all that belonged to him! -- What horrid profaneness --

What filthiness and uncleanness among our youth, till many are become a
derision! -- What intemperance -- What injustice and oppression! What lying and
backbiting! What unchristian strife and contention in towns and churches! What
thests and burglaries -- Yea, what murders are found among us! It Is endless to
reckon them up -- it cannot be done!

But let every one search and see the plague of his own heart -- Yea let us
search out all our iniquities till we find none. And let us be humbled and lay
in the dust -- And mourn bitterly before God for all the abominations which are
found among us, as well as cry mightily unto God. Yea, let the counsel of the
Lord be acceptable to you this day -- And let us break off from all our
iniquities by righteousness, and from our transgressions, by showing mercy to
those who are poor and oppressed among us, if it may be a lengthning of our
tranquillity. Without this, all our cries and tears are but a mockery, and will
procure us a curse instead of a blessing.

And unless God be better to us than we are to ourselves, all the evils which
hand over us will fall upon us, and perhaps seventimes more (if it can be) till
we are reduced to the most miserable state of mortals, if not utterly destroyed.

And, if you, and this people, will not hear, my soul, and the souls of all the
godly in the land, shall weep in secret places for your pride and sturbborness,
and for all the calamities and distresses which a few days more may bring forth.

O my brethren, -- come and let us return to the God of mercy, who delights
to be gracious! Let us do it without delay! And who knows but the day in which
our enemies hope to triumph in the overthrow of all our liberties, God may (as
he did to his people of old, in the days of Human) make the dry of our
deliverance and of the overthrow of our implacable enemies; and settle our
rights on a firmer foundation than ever.

Our fathers trusted in God, and he did deliver them. And the same Lord yet
reigns, therefore let New England, yea let the earth rejoice! For, I firmly
believe, that if we are not grossly wanting to ourselves, but commit our selves
and our cause to the God of our fathers, in well doing, when we have suffered a
while, he will also deliver us.

But, if not, the Lord prepare us for the most evil days, which may be before
us; and give us grace so to improve them, as to make us thirst more earnestly
for a better world, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest.

AMEN.

