The Grounds of Confidence and Success in War, represented.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A LECTURE, IN LUNENBURG, NEW ENGLAND, ON MONDAY, JANUARY
2d, 1775. TO A Detached Company of Militia there.

By ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in that Place.

Published at the Request of said Company.

Whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your
Lusts that war in your Members.

JAMES iv.1. Let us play the Man for our People, and for the Cities of our God;
and the Lord do that which seems him good.

2d SAML. x.12. BOSTON: Printed by MILLS and HICKS, in School-street M,DCC,LXXV.

THE Grounds of Confidence and Success in War, etc.
PSALMS xxvii.3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not
fear: Though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.


WAR is deservedly accounted a very great judgment; as such it is threatened in
the sacred scriptures, and such esteemed by those who have had sorrowful
experience of its ravages. Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise
and garments rolled in blood Isaiah ix.5.
: Wherever it takes its rout it leaves a crimson tract behind it, occasions the
deepest distress, and spreads destruction round; whilst to complete the doleful
tragedy, famine and pestilence often times follow in its train. Persons of
refined humanity cannot even contemplate it at a distance without the most
painful emotions. With the compassionate prophet they are ready to cry out, my
bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise in me,
I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the
trumpet, the alarm of war Jeremiah iv 19.
. The idea is shocking, the heart revolts at the prospect, and none but the
savage and inhuman can consider its tragical effects without horror: But though
this be true, yet it frequently rages, its rumors are heard in different parts
of the world, and perhaps there is no time when peace is at once enjoyed by all
the inhabitants of the earth. It is melancholy to reflect, that whilst "devils
with devils damned firm concord hold," men, who are under every possible
engagement to cultivate peace and love, should suffer their breasts to be
agitated by passions so malignant as to excite such obstinate disputes as
cannot be decided, but by the sword, and terminate in all the horrors of war.
Still more to be lamented is it, that they, who far from disturbing others,
desire only to sit under their own vine and fig tree, enjoying the sweets of
industry, friendship and liberty, should be molested by the ambitious and
tyrannical, and forced to fly to arms in support of their inherent rights and
privileges: But such is the depraved state of human nature, that instances like
this are not uncommon: Wars and fightings proceed from men's lusts, which war
in their members, and are greatly prevalent since the apostasy. The love of
empire, the principles of ambition, avarice and revenge, being deeply radicated
in the human heart, have converted this earth, which otherwise would have been
the peaceful retreat of innocence, into an horrid scene of offensive wars, and
a field of blood: The united considerations of reason and religion have never
been sufficiently powerful to restrain these lusts of men, and keep them from
invading the persons, liberties and possessions of their neighbors. Hence it
becomes necessary for the humble and quiet, the meek and inoffensive to turn
their attention to the art of war; and while they breathe the pacific spirit of
the gospel, to furnish themselves with the instruments of slaughter: This is
requisite in order to their preserving themselves and property, from the hands
of violence. In this view therefore, war though connected with blood and
carnage, is legitimated. The principles of self-preservation prove it lawful;
the voice of reason proclaims it expedient, and the law of God demands it as a
duty; whilst a most tremendous curse is denounced against such as do this work
of the Lord deceitfully, and keep back their swords from blood Jerem. xlviii.10.
. Were we certain of being always safe from the violent and unreasonable
assaults of others, it would by no means be expedient for us to spend any part
of our time for the acquisition of military skill; for the religion of Jesus,
the laws of God, do not permit us to invade the rights of others, or disturb
them in the quiet enjoyment of their justly acquired possessions. But, inasmuch
as the present corrupt temper of mankind can give us no reasonable prospect of
an entire exemption from their violence, and as the most probable way to
prevent the execution of their wicked designs, is to appeal to the sword, and
be in a capacity to repress their insolence, and repel force by force; hence
knowledge in the arts and policy of war, is a very desirable accomplishment:
And truly happy is the condition of that people, who are so prepared for the
reception of an approaching enemy, as to be free from prevailing fears on the
occasion, and have well grounded confidence of success in battle. This was the
happy condition of David in my text: On what occasion he penned the Psalm is
uncertain: Some think, when he was persecuted by Saul; others, when he was
forced to fly from Absalom; and others again, on the occasion of his being
delivered from the hands of Ishbibenob, one of the sons of a Giant, who came
upon him and thought to have killed him, and probably would have done so, had
not Abishai stepped in to his relief 2d Saml. xxi.16.
: But be the occasion what it would, we find it speaks the language of
confidence, and a full assurance of victory in war, should it ever rise against
him. This was not a groundless presumption, nor the effect of pride and
self-conceit; it was not an enthusiastic impression, nor an evidence of a rash
and foolhardy spirit; but the result of past experience: His knowledge and
dexterity in the use of arms, his own bravery and prowess, the goodness of his
cause and the favor of heaven toward him, filled him with these hopes. The
words then may well furnish out to us the foundation of an enquiry concerning
the things that are requisite to inspire a people with courage, and reasonable
hopes of success in an engagement with an host that either has, or may encamp
against them. You will give your candid attention then, whilst I go on to
enumerate those things that are necessary for this purpose.

1 st. The justice of their cause is, in this view essential: They who are
believers in the righteous, superintending providence of God, must needs have
but very slender hopes of prevailing in battle, if they know themselves to be
engaged in the support of an unrighteous claim: If the increasing their own
power and dominion, the aggrandizement of themselves and families, and the
gratification of the passions of avarice, ambition or revenge, be the only
motives of their commencing hostilities, and the only objects they are pursuing
in opposition to the peace and happiness, the liberty and virtue of those whom
they invade; then, methinks, their own hearts must misgive them; and they can
reasonably expect no favor, no countenance, no support from that upright
Governor of the world who loves righteousness, and is particularly concerned
for the happiness of his great family of mankind: Should they flatter
themselves with hopes of success from their superior numbers, or greater
acquaintance with military discipline, yet they cannot fail to reflect, that
God is able to arm the elements and the whole host of heaven against them, to
impart wisdom to the simple, knowledge to the ignorant, strength to the weak,
and courage to the faint-hearted; and thus to cause victory to declare in
favor of oppressed innocence. This, the most authentic history in the world
teaches us he has done in time past, and this such unrighteous oppressors have
reason to fear he may do again; if in a natural way, deliverance cannot be
procured for those who are standing up in defense of their own righteous cause:
The invaders therefore of the rights of their fellow-men must necessarily have
many fore bodings of ill-success, and just fears of being repulsed, even when
engaged in contest with a people less in number and inferior in skill to
themselves: Whereas on the other hand, the goodness of a people's cause not
only gives hope that God will favor and succeed them in it; that the Captain of
the Lord's host will be for them, and fight their battles, but also inspires
them with great zeal and resolution in the defense of it. What confidence must
that people have of protection and victory, when the interest of religion, the
honor of God, the happiness of themselves, and the welfare of unborn millions,
are the only object of their contention? And what an amazing unbroken courage,
what an invincible heroism, will possess the breasts of those who fight pro
aris et focis, for their religion, their wives and children, their liberty and
happiness, in short, for every thing that is good and great, venerable and
sacred. This will give spirit to the lifeless, courage to the timid, invention
to the dull, and ardour to the phlegmatic. In such a cause as this, persons of
all ages and professions will cheerfully engage. The husbandman will beat his
plough-share into swords, and the vine-dresser his pruning-hook into spears,
and the weak, forgetting his natural embicility, will say I am strong Joel
ii.10.
. In fine, as the poet has finely observed: -- "They have great odds
Against the astonished sons of violence,
Who fight with awful justice on their side."


2 d. A suitable body of troops to stand up in defense of this good cause is
another thing necessary. On the goodness of their cause a wise people will not
alone rely, though God can deliver, and has done so, without any visible means,
yet his usual method is to effect his purposes by the instrumentality of second
causes: Therefore to neglect the natural means of safety, whilst we have them
in our power, is not confiding in, but rashly tempting and boldly presuming on
the power and goodness of God. He expects that we use all lawful methods in our
own power for our security and defense; after which we may leave our righteous
cause with heaven, in humble hope that he will uphold and protect it. Now to
have provided a suitable body of militia to withstand the host that encampeth
against us, is one of those methods which we ought to take for our security:
And that this military body may be such as to give a people reasonable prospect
of victory, it should be circumstanced in the following manner: It should
consist of a respectable number of able-bodied, effective men: Though one
sometimes chases a thousand, and two puts ten thousand to flight, yet this must
be owing to the miraculous interposition of Providence, and what happens
besides the common and ordinary course of things: -- For a large and very
numerous army I would not be understood to plead; because such an one commonly
rather disserves than helps the cause; rather gives occasion to fear a defeat,
than hope for victory: All past experience confirms the truth of this: It is
the unvaried language both of sacred and profane history, that overgrown armies
have commonly been routed, thrown into confusion and cut to pieces, by those of
a more moderate size, who were therefore more easily governed and less
unweildy. Abijah King of Judah with an army of four hundred thousand men
entered the field with Jereboam King of Israel, with twice that number, and yet
the former was victorious, slaying five hundred thousand of the latter in one
btttle 2d Chron. xiii.3, 17.
. Asa King of Judah, having an army of five hundred and eighty thousand men,
entirely routed an army of a million, brought against him by Zerah King of Cush
2d Chron. xiv.9.13.
. So the immense army of Xerxes, consisting of between two and three millions
was entirely defeated by forty thousand Greeks. But though these instances
prove that no advantage is to be expected from an over numerous host; yet at
the present day when it is not usual to carry such supernumerary troops into
the field, it is best to equal, or at least not to fall much short of those
against whom we appear* It is of still greater importance toward insuring
success, that the troops should be valiant and courageous, able of body, and
capable of enduring the fatigues of a campaign. And notwithstanding the
advantage a standing army may, on some account, have over a militia, yet these
latter may, with more security be depended on than the former; because being
composed of men who have had their sinews strung, their limbs invigorated, and
bodies hardened by daily labor, they will commonly exceed the former in
strength and courage; and fighting for their estates, families and religion,
will have every possible inducement to exert the most strenuous efforts in
their defense.

Again, this militia should be well equipt with martial weapons, with proper
arms, and sufficient ammunition. -- Destitute of these, no resistance can be
made, nor achievement performed against the advancing foe. These are as
necessary to the proper soldier to enable him to withstand a well furnished
host, as the panoply of God is to the spiritual soldier, who without it cannot
expect to stand against the wiles of the devil, or quench his fiery darts.
David could not have uttered himself as he does in the text, unless he knew
that he and his subjects were well provided with weapons of war: For what
probability of success can there possibly be in an engagement, if to all the
modern instruments of death, we have nothing to oppose but our naked bodies, or
useless arms, as incapable of annoying as they. Conscious of the disadvantage
arising from the want of military weapons, the Philistines took away all the
smiths, throughout the land of Israel, lest the Hebrews should make themselves
swords or spears, and thus be in a posture of defense; and at another time,
when there was not a sword, or spear to be found among forty thousand in
Israel, they fell an easy prey into the hands of their enemies. Further, they
should be possessed of military skill; -- knowledge in the art of war among
civilized nations has been much cultivated, and by some of them carried to
perfection: To go therefore into the field, in order to face a veteran, well
disciplined soldiery, rude and ignorant of this science, is the direct way to
sacrifice our lives and betray the cause in which we are engaged. More has
often times been done by military skill, than by the advantage of superior
numbers and prowess. In battle with barbarous forces, this is an accomplishment
not so essential. But with those by whom war is studied as a science, and held
as a profession, it is in vain to engage, unless we also are well versed in the
modern maneuvers of the same. They that are but superficially acquainted with
history, know that the most glorious exploits have been achieved by means of
martial discipline. By this, in a great measure, the Greek and Roman soldiers
made their arms triumphant over the barbarous nations of the globe. This,
particularly, extended the Roman Empire to the most diffusive limits, enabled
her to give law to millions, and made her the mistress of the world. This
acquired to Julius Caesar the false glory of having slain more than twelve
hundred thousand men in his wars: For had he been destitute of this skill, he
could not have made such mighty havoc; the strength and courage, the patience
and valor of his troops frequently meeting an equal match from the nations
with whom they contended. To understand the use of the gun, the sword and the
bayonet; to know how to draw up an army in the most advantageous form for
battle, to be expert in the different evolutions, so as to be able to rally a
broken squadron; to place a battallion in an advantageous post, to detach a
party to supply the place of those that may have been outdone, and to reinforce
such as are manifestly too weak to stand the shock that is brought against
them; to know how to perform these several maneuvers readily, without mistake
or blunder, will give to an army a very great advantage in a field engagement,
and without this knowledge our confidence in them can be but small. Lastly,
they should be accustomed to military subordination. To have able Generals,
prudent and experienced commanders, and then implicity to obey them, is the
beauty and perfection, the life and safety of an army. Of this obedience and
subordination the regular troops are an excellent example. It is surprising to
observe to what a pitch they have carried their ideas of order, through the
influence of severe discipline, and long continued custom. The common soldiers
are all obedience to those in command. And amongst the officers themselves
there is a just gradation, each inferior one strictly observing the orders of
those above him. Every one is fixed in his post, and yields submission to those
that are in places of superior command. Hence the supreme officer regulates the
whole. He, like the soul in the natural body, puts in motion every member; and
all the different parts, which otherwise would clash and interfere, depending
ultimately on his influence, are made one harmonious body, all tending in their
respective places to one grand point, without confusion. Whereas, if there were
many masters in an army, all possessed of coordinate power, this would
obstruct each salutary plan, and breed destruction to the whole. From a
consideration hereof, it has ever been esteemed an important point to maintain
this subordination; and for the maintenance of it no discipline has been
thought too severe. Of such moment did the ancient warlike Romans view it, that
we have instances of persons being punished with death for fighting contrary to
order, even though success attended their arms. This indeed was a punishment
disproportionate to the offense: However, all must concede that without the
preservation of government and order in an army no success is to be expected
against those who religiously uphold it. I come now to observe,

3dly. That the righteousness of a people's character is another thing
necessary in order to their being confident of success in war. It is evident
that under the righteous government of Jehovah, those who have appeared in
defense of a just cause, have sometimes been defeated. People have been
deprived both of civil and religious liberty by the prevailing efforts of an
oppressive enemy; and this has been permitted to take place by God as a
punishment for their disobedience, ingratitude and unfruitfulness. As he
sometimes turns a fruitful land into barreness for the wickedness of those that
dwell therein; so at others, he raises up enemies to come and spy out a
nation's liberty and strip them of it, because they have abused it to purposes
of licentiousness, or are otherways wholly unworthy of the same. For the abuse
of the written and preached word of God, people have had their teachers removed
into corners, and a famine of hearing the word has ensued. Thus, because the
Jews neglected and despised the gospel, our Savior threatens, that the kingdom
of God should be taken from them, and given to a nation bringing forth the
fruits thereof. Just so it is with regard to any other important blessing: If
people are not sensible of its worth; if they despise and undervalue, pervert
and abuse it; are ungrateful to the donor of it, and their whole conduct
discovers that they are unworthy the possession thereof; then it pleases heaven
to take it from them that they may see its worth in its absence, and may be
brought to humble themselves before God for their impieties and numerous
provocations. Accordingly, because the Jews had communion with the neighboring
nations with whom they partook in their idolatries, he permitted them from time
to time to be conquered and made tributary to them, and to continue in this
distressed condition, till they were brought to a sense of their sins, and
repenting of them, called upon him for deliverance; whereupon he raised them up
saviors, and restored them to their wonted privileges. Now in consideration of
these things, a people can have no well grounded confidence of success in war,
notwithstanding the justice of their cause, and a respectable body of troops to
defend it, unless their own character be righteous and good; especially if they
have abused great favors, and not lived according to their advantages, nor
answered in any measure, the righteous expectations of heaven concerning them.
This righteous character is necessary, not only for the people in general, but
especially for those on whom they depend to protect them. If they who are
immediately engaged in the war, are persons of vicious behavior, impious,
profane, unjust, intemperate and debauched, we cannot with confidence rely on
their efforts, neither can they face an enemy with calmness and intrepidity.
This character like the accursed thing in the army of Israel, will trouble the
camp, provoke God to withdraw his assistance, and bring wrath upon the whole
people. Nothing great is like to be effected by a dissolute soldiery. Guilt is
always timorous; vice enervates the mind, unstrings the body, and unsits for
dangerous enterprises. True magnanimity dwells not in the breasts of impenitent
sinners; but conscious innocence makes men fearless and undaunted. The wise man
observed long ago, that the wicked flees when no man pursues; but the
righteous are bold as a lion "True conscious virtue is to know no sin,
"He Is armed without, that is innocent within."

.

They who have, through Christ, obtained an interest in the divine favor, and
made God their friend; they who have inlisted under Jesus, the Captain of their
salvation, and have fought the good fight of faith, may be fearless even amidst
the most shocking scenes of blood and carnage. If thousands fall around them,
and ten thousands at their right hands, they may remain unmoved, and meet death
with calmness in its most dreadful forms. Whereas, on the other had, an
absolute certainty of victory is by no means sufficient to make a wicked man
intrepid in fight; for though the battle may be won, yet his life is in danger
of being lost; the consideration of which, must needs excite prevailing fears,
and consequently unsit him, in a degree, for real service.

Lastly, If people entering into war would have well grounded hopes of success,
they must not trust in an arm of flesh, in their numbers, or in their skill or
courage; but in the Lord, committing their cause to him, and depending on his
power and wisdom for prosperity This has been the practice of the pious in all
past ages. In the 44th Psalm we find the church thus expressing herself:
Through thee will we push down our enemies; through thy name will we tread them
under that rise up against us: For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my
sword save me, but thy right hand and thine arm and the light of thy
countenance. When a people have made provision to repel force by force, and are
persuaded of the goodness of their cause and character, then they are properly
prepared to confide in the Lord of hosts and God of armies, and to look to him
for his blessing in so hazardous an undertaking, the event of which depends
wholly on his Providence. A people should acknowledge God in all their ways,
but especially it is their interest and duty thus to do, when their all lays at
stake; when life, liberty and property are depending. They who neglect to do
this, confiding in their own numbers, prudence and valor, are guilty of a
grand omission that may prove fatal to their cause. The language of such
conduct is, either that God's Providence is not concerned in the events of war,
or that they stand in no need of his interposition and assistance; whereas
common observation teaches us that he is particularly concerned in deciding the
fate of battles. Things do not always, nay, not frequently turn out according
to natural probabilites. How often have armies been defeated in a very
wonderful manner, contrary to all human appearances or expectations. The race
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but time and chance happens
to them all. Should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight,
this would be most manifestly owing to the special interposition of the Divine
Being on the weaker, or against the stronger side. And indeed, in victories
obtained in a more natural way, the agency of heaven is concerned, and his
superintendency to be acknowledged; for he is the author of all the warlike
accomplishments that soldiers possess: They have nothing but what they received
from him, and to him are they indebted for their valor and military skill.
Hence David acknowledges that God taught his hands to war and his fingers to
fight. Now the way to secure the divine assistance and protection in battle, is
to trust in him. They that trust in the Lord, shall be like mount Zion, which
cannot be moved. There is no King saved by the multitude of an host; a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength. An horse is a vain thing for safety,
neither shall he deliver any by his great strength. But whosoever trusts in the
Lord shall be safe. It was this favor and protection of God, which he had
secured by trusting in him, that made David so confident of success in war: The
Lord, says he, is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear, the strength of
my life, of whom shall I be afraid? In this way did King Asa and King
Jehosaphat obtain signal victories over hosts much superior in number to
theirs: In their distress they cried unto the Lord, and he did deliver them.
The words of Asa are these, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with
many, or with them that have no power; help us, O Lord, for we rest on thee,
and in thy name go against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not
man prevail against thee. And Jehosaphat addresses himself to heaven in the
following manner: Behold how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou have given us to inherit. O our God, will thou not judge
them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against us;
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are up unto thee. In consequence of
their thus looking to God, and humbly depending on him for assistance, they
both came off victorious; for none that trust in the Lord shall be ashamed, but
cursed is man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm.

IMPROVEMENT.
1 st. What has been said, may serve as a caution to all people not to engage
in a war that is manifestly unjust. Every one is so that is entered upon with a
view to deprive a nation or society of men of their just rights and privileges;
to dispossess them of their property and possessions; and to bring them into a
state unfriendly to virtue, religion and happiness. It is highly dangerous and
criminal to take up arms in such a cause as this. Dangerous, as such persons
put themselves out of the protection of heaven, and can hope for no assistance
from the God of armies; but on the contrary, have reason to think that he will
be against them, frown upon all their enterprises, disconcert their measures,
and cause the mischiefs they have framed for others, to fall upon their own
heads. Besides, they have reason to expect the most vigorous opposition from
those whom they attempt to oppress: Criminal, because should they prove
successful, they are chargeable with the guilt of murder, in the sight of
heaven, for every person that is slain by them in the defense of their just
rights and liberties. If the cause of the war be just, every person that is
destroyed when standing up in opposition to it, is righteously slain, and his
blood will be required at his own hands; but if it be otherwise, they that are
slain, will hereafter rise in judgment against their destroyers, and will
condemn them: Whereas, if on the contrary, they themselves should fall in
battle, being killed in the support of an unrighteous claim, they will be in
danger of going down to hell with their weapons of war Ezekiel. xxxii.27.
. It is sincerely to be wished, that at the present day, when ambition and
avarice are so frequently the only motives for fighting, this matter were
properly considered by all. Then, methinks, we should not have our ears so
often saluted by the unwelcome sounds occasioned by the clashing of swords, the
report of cannon, and other instruments of death. Under the prevailing
influence of this persuasion swords would be beat into plough-shares, and
spears into pruning hooks, nation would no more rise against nation, neither
would they learn war any more. Every one would sit under his own vine and
fig tree, having none to make him afraid. But, as there is no prospect of this
at present; as wars will not cease to the ends of the earth, till the lusts and
corruptions of men are to a greater degree subdued; and as, impelled by these
sordid passions, one state will be perpetually seeking to subjugate and enslave
another, therefore,

2 ly. It becomes every people to put and keep themselves in a posture to
defend their liberties from the depredations of their fellow-men. They cannot
expect long to enjoy the inherent rights of humanity, unless in a capacity to
resist the forceable attempts of others against them. To stand fast in their
liberties is the duty of every body of men, and the way to do this is to be
united among themselves, to preserve a virtuous character, to keep up a just
sense of the importance of their privileges, and to acquire the arts and
instruments of war. So much depends on the military character of a people, that
they cannot rationally depend on the preservation of their rights and
possessions without it. When they sit careless and secure, neglecting the
necessary means of defense; when no provision is made by them to resist the
encroachments of their ambitious and aspiring neighbors; when a martial spirit
flags, and the knowledge of arms remains uncultivated, then, like Laish of old,
they may be easily plundered and subdued, and indeed it is highly probable they
will be so. In observations like these the people of this country are
particularly concerned. Though we now enjoy peace, we cannot reasonably flatter
ourselves that this important blessing will always be continued. Our
privileges, possessions and conveniences of life are too considerable to escape
the eye of envy. European nations notice our circumstances, and doubtless covet
them. In years past the power of Great Britain has protected us from the
invasions of foreign states. -- But, alas! the time is already come, when it is
not safe wholly to depend on her: For she who was the nurse of our infancy, the
guardian of our youth, and he boast of our riper years, has now become the
invador of our liberties. An attack from that power to which we have been used
heretofore to look up for protection, seems now most immediately to threaten
us. So that, it should seem, the period had already commenced, when of our
privileges we must be deprived, or stand ready to defend them with our own
swords. Unhappy is the dispute, which under the government of God has commenced
between Great Britain and these colonies, and increasing from year to year, has
at length arrived to a most alarming crisis. Had we submitted to the
unreasonable claims of parliament, and consented to have been slaves, we might
then have been delivered from the present gloomy prospects of war. But though
we all profess allegiance to Britan's King, and have ever discovered ourselves
as loyal subjects as any in his dominions; yet so just an idea have we of the
importance of our rights, that we seem resolved to defend them at the risque of
every thing dear, and never, by a tame submission, entail misery on ourselves
and posterity. This opposition, on our part, has fired the resentment of the
ministry at home, who seem equally determined to support their own measures, if
possible; and hence, at present, al^ things threaten the horrors of a civil
w^^. We know, and are fully persuaded that our cause is good, that justice is
o^ our side, that liberty, religion and happiness are at stake; and therefore
that we should be wanting to ourselves, our children and our country, not to
endeavor to defend it. And, from this persuasion, are now vigorously making
hostile preparations to withstand the designs of those who may attempt to
enforce the late unconstitutional acts of the British parliament. But, should
we be called to battle, what prospect have we of success? Are the conditions to
be found with us, that were mentioned in the foregoing discourse, as necessary
to give confidence of victory? It is to be feared they are not. What shall then
be said unto you? Shall you be exhorted to submit to the late pretentions of
parliament, acknowledge its authority to legislate for you, and be tamely
obedient to its oppressive edicts? God forbid! You are rather to be exhorted,
by repentance and reformation, to make your character as good as your cause,
and piously trusting the event with God, recur to the ultima ratio, the sword.
Though not prepared, perhaps, at present to meet the enemy in the gate, yet we
shall be highly culpable if this be long the case with us. If in contest we
fail of success, it will be either through the viciousness of our character, or
our deficiency in military skill.

These impediments may be removed, and that I may be instrumental thereof, I
would now most earnestly recommend it to this whole people, seriously to
consider, that the difficulties under which we labor, and of which we loudly
complain, were suffered to fall upon us for our sins. Our own wickedness has
corrected us, and backslidings reproved us that we might know and see that it
is an evil thing and bitter, that we have forsaken the Lord our God. In vain do
we send the most powerful and skilful troops against our enemies, whilst we
remain impenitent and disobedient; whilst intemperance and debauchery, pride
and oppression, luxury and extravagance, impiety and profaneness abound among
us; for these will inevitably turn the edge of their swords, and procure them a
defeat, because we cannot rationally hope the continuance of our liberties,
unless we are worthy, and prepared to make a good improvement of them. Suffer
me therefore by every thing that is excellent and desirable on the one hand; by
the sweets of peace and security, by the blessings of liberty, good government
and order, and by the joy of future salvation; also, on the other, by every
thing that is dreadful; by the horrors of war; by the flowing blood of your
fellow-countrymen; by the miseries of slavery and oppression, and by the still
greater infelicities of future damnation: By these hopes and fears, suffer me,
with all the plainness of a friend, to conjure you, to break off your sins by
righteousness, and your iniquities by turning to the Lord. Mourn your abuse of
privileges, neglect of opportunities and breach of covenant; lament all those
impieties and rebellions which have been so provoking to the Lord, and have
caused him to bring us into our present truly distressed circumstances. Reform
also all your extravagancies, and mortify your pride; renounce foreign
superfluities, and live contentedly, in compliance with the recommendation of
the Continental Congress, on the produce of your own bleating flocks and
fertile fields. Such conduct as this, both in a religious and political view,
will greatly subserve the interest of our cause, and tend to deliver us from
one of the most terrible of all worldly evils, a civil war. But should it fail
of this desired end, yet being thus reformed, we may then with greater
confidence make the last appeal. Well disciplined troops fighting for such a
penitent people, and in so good a cause as ours, may be almost certain of
victory. But have we a prospect of such? Is it likely, from present
appearances, that this and the neighboring colonies will be able to furnish
out an army sufficiently qualified to look regular troops in the face? I
answer; in our numbers, we shall be in no degree deficient, and the courage of
American forces was never justly disputed; they have given as exemplary proofs
of it as any people under the sun. The air we breathe, and the climate we live
in, tend to make us hardy and bold, persevering and patient. No difficulties
can discourage, no dangers terrify the valorous sons of New England, tempered
in these northern climes, and braced by these frigid north-westerly blasts. But
what shall we think of their skill? It is readily confessed, that this in years
past, has not, in general, been great. But at present, a spirit of emulation,
and an ardent desire to excel herein, is excited in the midst of us. Our
present prospects of danger have put us upon this important study, which in
times of supposed safety we unwisely neglected. In our different towns and
colonies, what time is spent, what cost bestowed, and pains taken in the
acquisition of this necessary science? Military companies formed, officers
chosen, and preparations hastily making for an approaching enemy! From
specimens already given, we have the most animating assurances, that in the
revolution of a few months, if we persevere, we shall have a most respectable
militia; qualified to do eminent service for their distressed and insulted
country. Rejoiced are we to find that the same love of freedom, and thirst of
martial skill, which so generally prevail through the provinces, have
manifested themselves in this place, and been exhibited in a manner that does
us honor; for while, on the one hand, we have run into no excesses, been
concerned in no disorders, nor offered any abuse to those, who in some things
think differently from us; on the other, being prompted by this noble spirit,
we have been quietly pursuing those steps that have been calculated to procure
a redress of grievances, and in particular made considerable advances in the
knowledge of the art military.

This naturally leads me to address myself to you, gentlemen of the militia, by
whom the science of arms has been cultivated, and at whose desire we are now in
the house of God. You are not the first instance of soldiers asking wisdom from
heaven, and enquiring their duty from the ministers of religion. To John the
Baptist, men of this character applied, saying, what shall we do? He replies,
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. This is the duty of all soldiers, at all times, and under all
circumstances; but not the whole of it. Yours under the present circumstances
and prospects, I have generally hinted at already. You will suffer me now to be
more particular, and say, that as you have voluntarily inlisted with the
professed design of standing up in defense of the liberties of your country,
you are bound diligently to pursue those measures, and painfully endeavor to
acquire that skill which may most effectually qualify you for this purpose. To
this end you will labor to make greater proficiency in military knowledge.
Your present improvements are observed with pleasure, and are an earnest of
something still more considerable. Go on then, in pursuit of higher measures;
rest not contented with any seize to which you have already arrived; but
leaving the things that are behind, go on unto perfection. Much, you have been
told, depends upon this, and without considerable understanding herein, defeat,
if not destruction, will be your portion; should you be called to encounter
regular troops. If you are not provided with proper instruments of war, it may
be the fault of others; but if deficient in skill, it must be your own,
especially as you have peculiar advantages for the obtainment of it Every
member of this Company, to the number of ^7, being furnished with a military
book, the generous present of Dr. JOHN TAILOR, a gentleman truly distinguished
for his patriotism, and hearty zeal in the cause of ilberty.
. Be also persuaded to accustom yourselves to order in your preparatory
exercises. Learn to be obedient to command now, or you will probably be
regardless of it in the field of battle, where its want would prove
destructive. This cannot be too heartily pressed upon you, as it is so
essential a point, and a quality also for which our militias have never been
distinguished. And as it is at present somewhat probable that you will be ere
long called from the field of exercise to that of battle, be exhorted to be
ready for so hazardous a service, by diligently preparing for death: Set not
too high a value upon life; count it not dear to you; think frequently of a
better country, repent of your sins, inlist under Jesus the Captain of your
salvation; get your consciences purged from guilt, through the blood of Christ;
acquaint yourselves with him, and secure the friendship of heaven: This will
give you necessary courage, make you more indifferent about life, and be the
means of covering your heads in the day of battle; for precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of his saints; he guards them from danger, and so long as
life is a blessing he will preserve it. Commit your cause to God, trust also in
him, and he will bring your reasonable wishes to pass. We sincerely wish you
the greatest acquaintance with the arts of war, and all the graces and virtues
of the Divine Spirit, to beautify and adorn your souls; but we fervently pray,
that you may never be called, in providence, to fight with, or shed the blood
of British soldiers, who are bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. It is
the ardent wish of every good man, that the present unhappy controversy may be
honorably terminated without the effusion of human blood; and that the dark
cloud and gloomy prospects with which this year is ushered in, may be scattered
long before the end of it: But if it must continue, and our invaluable
liberties cannot be preserved, but by the sword you will then not shrink from
danger, nor desert the cause, but be of good courage and play the men valiantly
for your people, and the cities of your God.

Should you die in battle, you will die in the bed of your honor, and names be
had in everlasting remembrance? Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.

To conclude, let us all of every character remember that we are here in a
state of spiritual warfare, surrounded by numerous, subtle and potent foes, who
are constantly seeking to seduce our minds to vice, and procure the destruction
of our souls. Let us then inlist under Jesus, who is the Captain that has
undertaken to lead on his troops against this formidable host to victory and to
triumph. May we endure hardness as good soldiers. May we take to ourselves the
whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the wilds of the
devil, and quench all his fiery darts. May none of us be dastardly in this
spiritual conflict, but being animated by that glorious crown that awaits the
victors in heaven, may we fight valiantly, and be faithful unto death. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give you a crown of life.

AMEN.

