To the respectable Public.
Have a good End in view, and pursue it.
EVERY Friend of American Freedom, rejoices to find a true and honest Spirit of
Liberty Prevailing in all Ranks and Degrees in this City: It must eventually
prove our Safety; and a united Effort ought to be made for the Relief of a
Sister Colony, now suffering in the general Cause. Deputies must be sent on our
Part, and for God's Sake let us not dispute about the Mode of Election, but who
shall most accelerate an Accommodation between the Parties. The Resolves are
not material; whether we approve of the one Set or the other, is of no
Consequence. Measures ought immediately to be adopted to procure Delegates to
represent us at the Congress; they ought to be such as the Majority of the
Citizens confide in; and, in order to ascertain this beyond any Doubt, I
propose two Methods, either of which in my Opinion is unexceptionable.

First. That two or more Persons of repute (who are of different Sentiments as
to the Candidates that have been proposed) be appointed in each Ward of this
City, to take the Sense of the Inhabitants; that the Names of the seven
Candidates be mentioned to them, and that they be desired to nominate any five
of the seven they approve of, for Delegates: But in Case any Citizen does not
choose to be confined to the seven nominated, he is to be at Liberty to name
any five as Delegates, out of the City and County at large.

Second. On a Supposition that the above may be objected to, I propose that a
Poll be opened in each Ward of this City, under the joint Direction and
Inspection of the Committees of Correspondence and Mechanics, to take the Votes
of the Citizens for five Delegates: The Poll to be conducted in the same Manner
as for Election of Magistrates.

The Resolves adopted by the Committee of Correspondence, as now amended, will
be approved of by many; so will the Resolves of the other Committee: In
disputing which are best, and which ought to be adopted, we may lose Sight of
our grand Object, -- the Resolves agreed on at the Congress, must be binding,
to render them effectual, therefore let us wait patiently for the Result of a
joint Deliberation; but should a Number of Citizens be tenacious to have the
Sense of the City taken which of the Resolves they choose to adopt, it may be
done in the same Manner, and at the same Time that Delegates are appointed,
viz. by Subscription or Polling.

My good Citizens, I advise you not to be led a stray by any designed
Publications; consider your All is at Stake. Be assured I have nothing so much
in View as a Reconciliation of Parties, which is really essential, in order to
procure a proper Delegation, and convince the Enemies of America we are not to
be cajoled either by their fair Promises or Threats, but will ever resist all
internal Taxes that they may attempt to load us with.

New York, July 25, 1774. An honest American.


