THOUGHTS UPON SLAVERY.

By JOHN WESLEY, A. M.

GENESIS, Chap. iv. And the Lord said -- What have thou done? the voice of thy
brother's blood cries unto me from the ground.

LONDON, PRINTED: Reprinted in PHILADELPHIA, with notes, and sold by JOSEPH
CRUKSHANK. MD,CC,LXXIV.

THOUGHTS UPON SLAVERY.
1. BY slavery I mean domestic slavery, or that of a servant to a master. A
late ingenious writer well observes, "The variety of forms in which slavery
appears, makes it almost impossible to convey a just notion of it, by way of
definition. There are however certain properties which have accompanied slavery
in most places, whereby it is easily distinguished from that mild domestic
service which obtains in our own country See Mr. Hargrave's plea for Somerset
the negro.
."

2. Slavery imports an obligation of perpetual service, an obligation which
only the consent of the master can dissolve. Neither in some countries can the
master himself dissolve it, without the consent of judges appointed by law. It
generally gives the master an arbitrary power of any correction not affecting
life or limb. -- Sometimes even these are exposed to his will: or protected
only by a fine, or some slight punishment, too insiconderable to restrain a
master of an harsh temper. It creates an incapacity of acquiring any thing,
except for the master's benefit. It allows the master to alienate the slave, in
the same manner as his cows and horses. Lastly, it descends in its full extent
from parent to child, even to the latest generation.

3. The beginning of this may be dated from the remotest period, of which we
have an account in history. It commenced in the barbarous state of society, and
in process of time spread into all nations. It prevailed particularly among the
Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, and the ancient Germans: And was transmitted by
them to the various kingdoms and states, which arose out of the ruins of the
Roman empire. But after christianity prevailed, it gradually fell into decline
in almost all parts of Europe. This great change began in Spain, about the end
of the eighth century: And was become general in most other kingdoms of Europe,
before the middle of the fourteenth.

4. From this time slavery was nearly extinct, till the commencement of the
sixteenth century, when the discovery of America, and of the western and
eastern coasts of Africa, gave occasion to the revival of it. It took its rise
from the Portuguese, who to supply the Spaniards with men, to cultivate their
new possessions in America, procured negroes from Africa, whom they sold for
slaves to the American Spaniards. This began in the year 1508, when they
imported the first negroes into Hispaniola. In 1540 Charles the fifth, then
king of Spain, determined to put an end to negro-slavery: Giving positive
orders. That all the negro slaves in the Spanish dominions should be set free.
And this was accordingly done by Lagasca, whom he sent and empowered to free
them all, on condition of continuing to labor for their masters. But soon
after Lagasca returned to Spain, slavery returned and flourished as before.
Afterward other nations, as they acquired possessions in America, followed the
examples of the Spaniards; and slavery has now taken deep root in most of our
American colonies.

II. Such is the nature of slavery: Such the beginning of negro-slavery in
America. But some may desire to know, what kind of country it is, from which
the negroes are brought? What sort of men, of what temper and behavior are
they in their own country? And in what manner they are generally procured,
carried to, and treated in America?

1. And first, What kind of country is that from whence they are brought? Is it
so remarkably horrid, dreary and barren, that it is a kindness to deliver them
out of it? I believe many have apprehended so: But it is an entire mistake, if
we may give credit to those who have lived many years therein, and could have
no motive to misrepresent it.

2. That part of Africa whence the negroes are brought, commonly known by the
name of Guinea, extends along the coast, in the whole, between three and four
thousand miles. From the river Senegal, (seventeen degrees north of the line)
to Cape Sierra Leona, it contains seven hundred miles. Thence it runs eastward
about fifteen hundred miles, including the Grain-Coast, the Ivory-Coast, the
Cold-Coast, and the Slave Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From thence
it runs southward, about twelve hundred miles, and contains the kingdoms of
Congo and Angola.

3. Concerning the first, the Senegal-Coast, Mons. Brue, who lived there
sixteen years, after describing its fruitfulness near the sea, says, "The
farther you go from the sea, the more fruitful and well improved is the
country, abounding in pulse, Indian corn, and various fruits. Here are vast
meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle. And the villages
which lie thick, show the country is well peopled." And again: "I was
surprised, to see the land so well cultivated; scarce a spot day un-improved:
The low lands divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice: The higher
grounds were planted with Indian corn, and peace of different sorts. Their beef
is excellent; poultry plenty and very cheap, as are all the necessaries of
life."

4. As to the Grain and Ivory Coast, we learn from eye witnesses, that the soil
is in general fertile, producing abundance of rice and roots. Indigo and cotton
thrive without cultivation. -- Fish is in great plenty; the flocks and herds
are numerous, and the trees loaded with fruit.

5. The Gold-Coast and Slave-Coast, all who have seen it agree, is exceeding
fruitful and pleasant, producing vast quantities of rice and other grain,
plenty of fruit and roots, palm-wine, and oil, and fish in great abundance,
with much tame and wild cattle. The very same account is given us of the soil
and produce of the kingdoms of Benin, Congo and Angola. -- From all which it
appears, That Guinea in general, far from being an horrid, dreary, barren
country, is one of the most fruitful, as well as the most pleasant countries in
the known world. It is said indeed to be unhealthy. And so it is to strangers,
but perfectly healthy to the native inhabitants.

6. Such is the country from which the negroes are brought. We come next to
enquire, What sort of men they are, of what temper and behavior, not in our
plantations, but in their native country. And here likewise the surest way is
to take our account from eye and ear witnesses. Now those who have lived in the
Senegal country observe, it is inhabited by three nations, the Jalofs, Fulis,
and Mandingos. The king of the Jalofs has under him several ministers, who
assist in the exercise of justice. The chief justice goes in circuit through
all his dominions, to hear complaints and determine controversies. And the
viceroy goes with him, to inspect the behavior of the Alkadi, or Governor of
each village. The Fulis are a numerous people; the soil of their country
represented as rich, affording large harvests, and the people laborious and
good farmers: Of some of these Fuli blacks who dwelt on the river Gambia,
William Moor the English factor gives a very favorable account. -- He says,
they are governed by their chief men, who rule with much moderation. Few of
them will drink any thing stronger than water, being strict Mahometans. The
government is easy, because the people are of a good and quiet disposition; and
so well instructed in what is right, that a man who wrongs another is the
abomination of all. -- They desire no more land than they use, which they
cultivate with great care and industry: If any of them are known to be made
slaves by the white men they all join to redeem them. They not only support all
that are old, or blind, or lame among themselves; but have frequently supplied
the necessities of the Mandingas, when they were distressed by famine.

7. The Mandingos, says Mons. Brue, are rigid Mahometans, drinking neither wine
nor brandy. They are industrious and laborious, keeping their ground well
cultivated, and breeding a good stock of cattle. Every town has a governor, and
he appoints the labor of the people. The men work the ground designed for
corn; the women and girls, the rice-ground. -- He afterward divides the corn
and rice among them: And decides all quarrels if any arise. All the Mohammedan
negroes constantly go to public prayers thrice a day: there being a priest in
every village, who regularly calls them together: Some authors say, it is
surprising to see the attention and reverence which they observe during their
worship. -- These three nations practice several trades; they have smiths,
sadlers, potters and weavers. And they are very ingenious at their several
occupations. -- Their smiths not only make all the instruments of iron, which
they have occasion to use, but likewise work many things neatly in gold and
silver. It is chiefly the women and children who weave sine cotton cloth, which
they dye blue and black.

8. It was of these parts of Guinea, that Mons. Adanson, correspondent of the
royal academy of sciences at Paris from 1749 to 1753, gives the following
account, both as to the country and people. "Which way soever I turned my eyes,
I beheld a perfect image of pure nature: An agreeable solitude, bounded on
every side by a charming landscape; the rural situation of cottages, in the
midst of trees; the ease and quietness of the negroes, reclined under the shade
of the spreading foliage, with the simplicity of their dress and manners: The
whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and I seemed to
contemplate the world in its primitive state. They are generally-speaking, very
good natured, sociable and obliging. I was not a little pleased with my very
first reception, and it fully convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made, in the accounts we have of the savage character of
the Africans." He adds, "It is amazing that an illiterate people should reason
so pertinently concerning the heavenly bodies. There is no doubt, but that with
proper instruments, they would become excellent astronomers."

9. The inhabitants of the Grain and Ivory-Coast are represented by those that
deal with them, as sensible, courteous, and the fairest traders on the coasts
of Guinea. They rarely drink to excess: If any do, they are severely punished
by the king's order. They are seldom troubled with war: If a difference happen
between two nations, they commony end the dispute amicably.

The inhabitants of the Gold and Silver-Coast likewise, when they are not
artfully incensed against each other, live in great union and friendship, being
generally well-tempered, civil, tractable, and ready to help any that need it.
In particular, the natives of the kingdom of Whidah are civil, kind, and
obliging to strangers. -- And they are the most gentleman-like of all the
negroes, abounding in good manners toward each other. The inferiors pay great
respect to their superiors: -- So wives to their husbands, children to their
parents. And they are remarkably industrious: All are constantly employed; the
men in agriculture, the women in spinning and weaving cotton.

10. The Gold and Slave Coasts are divided into several districts, some
governed by kings, others by the principal men, who take care each of their own
town or village, and prevent or appease tumults. -- They punish murder and
adultery severely; very frequently with death. -- Theft and robbery are
punished by a fine proportionable to the goods that were taken. -- All the
natives of this coast, though heathens, believe there is one GOD, the author of
them and all things. They appear likewise to have a confused apprehension of a
future state. And accordingly every town and village has a place of public
worship. -- It is remarkable that they have no beggars among them: Such is the
care of the chief men, in every city and village, to provide some easy labor,
even for the old and weak. Some are employed in blowing the smiths bellows;
others in pressing palm-oil; others in grinding of colors. If they are too
weak even for this, they sell provisions in the market.

11. The accounts we have of the natives of the kingdom of Benin is, that they
are a reasonable and good-natured people, sincere and inoffensive, and do no
injustice either to one another or to strangers. -- They are civil and
courteous: If you make them a present, they endeavor to repay it double. And
if they are trusted, till the ship returns next year, they are sure honestly to
pay the whole debt. -- Theft is punished among them, although not with the same
severity as murder. If a man and woman of any quality, are taken in adultery,
they are certain to be put to death, and their bodies thrown on a dunghill, and
left a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just and honest in their
dealings; and are also very charitable: The king and the great lords taking
care to employ all that are capable of any work. And those that are utterly
helpless they keep for GOD's sake; so that here also are no beggars. The
inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people. They discover a
good understanding, and behave in a friendly manner to strangers, being of a
mild temper and an affable carriage. -- Upon the whole therefore the negroes
who inhabit the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the southern bounds
of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless, brutish, lazy
barbarians, the fierce, cruel, perfidious savages they have been described,
that on the contrary, they are represented by them who had no motive to flatter
them, as remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have for
improving their understanding: -- As very industrious, perhaps more so than any
other natives of so warm a climate. -- As fair, just and honest in their
dealings, unless where whitemen have taught them to be otherwise: -- And as far
more mild, friendly and kind to strangers, than any of our forefathers were.
Our forefathers! Where shall we find at this day, among the fair-faced natives
of Europe, a nation generally practicing the justice mercy, and truth, which
are related of these poor black Africans? Suppose the preceding accounts are
true, (which I see no reason or pretense (...) doubt of) and we may leave
England and France, to seek genuine honesty in Benin, Congo, or Angola.

III. We have now seen, what kind of country it is, from which the negroes are
brought: And what sort of men (even whitemen being the judges) they were in
their own country. Enquire we, Thirdly, In what manner are they generally
procured, carried to, and treated in America.

1. First. In what manner are they procured? Part of them by fraud. Captains of
ships from time to time, have invited negroes to come on board, and then
carried them away. But far more have been procured by force. The ^^^^stians
landing upon their coasts, seized as many as they found, men, women and
children, and transported them to America. It was about 1551, that the English
began trading to Guinea: At first, for gold and elephants teeth, but soon
after, for men. In 1566, Sir John Hawkins sailed with two ships to Cape Verd,
where he sent eighty men on shore to catch negroes. But the natives flying,
they fell farther down, and there set the men on shore, "to burn their towns
and take the inhabitants." But they met with such resistance, that they had
seven men killed, and took but ten negroes. So they went still farther down,
till having taken enough, they proceeded to the West Indies, and sold them Here
it may be well to give a particular account of that transaction in the very
words in which it is transmitted to us by early historians, as it is a clear
proof, that it was solely from a desire of gain that the English first
undertook to seize and bring the unhappy Africans from their native country;
and is a clear and positive refutation of those false arguments frequently
advanced in vindication of the slave trade, viz. That the first purchase of
negro slaves by the English, was from motives of compass^^^, with views of
saving the lives of some of tho^^ ^^acks who being taken prisoners in battle,
would, if not thus purchased, have been sacrificed to the revenge of their
conquerors: but this plea is manifestly false; from all the accounts we have of
the disposition of the negroes in those early times, they appear to have been
an innocent people, gentle and easy in their nature; rather averse to war, as
is the general disposition of the natives of these warm climates; till being
corrupted by an intercourse with the Europeans, and stimulated by the excessive
use of spirituous liquors, they were induced to join them in their cruel
depradations against their unhappy countrymen. The account given of that
transaction by Thomas Lediard in his naval history, at page 141, is in the
following words: That Sir John Hawkins in his several voyages to the Canary
islands, understanding that negroes were a very good commodity in Hispaniola,
(then settling by the Spaniards) and that they were easy to be had in great
numbers on the coast of Guinea. Having (...) his mind to his friends, he soon
found adventurers for his undertaking; amongst whom were Sir Lionel Docket, Sir
Thomas Lodge, and others: and having fitted out three small vessels, manned
only with 100 men, he departed from the coast of England in October 1562, and
sailed first to Teneriffe, where he took in several refreshments; from thence
to the coast of Guinea, where he got in possession, partly by the sword, and by
other means, upwards of three hundred of the natives, besides several
commodities which that country afforded: with this booty he set sail for the
island of Hispaniola in the West Indies, where he disposed of his negroes. Two
years after, he went another voyage on the coast of Guinea; there he staid
several days at the island Sabula, where every day they took some of the
inhabitants; burning and ravaging their towns: when having completed their
number of negroes, they set sail for the West Indies.
.

2. It was some time before the Europeans found a more compendious way of
procuring African slaves, by prevailing upon them to make war upon each other,
and to sell their prisoners. -- Till then they seldom had any wars: But were in
general quiet and peaceable. But the white men first taught them drunkenness
and avarice, and then hired them to sell one another. Nay, by this means, even
their kings are induced to sell their own subjects. So Mr. Moore (factor of the
African company in 1730) informs us, "When the king of Barsalli wants goods or
brandy, he sends to the English governor at James' fort, who immediately sends
a sloop. -- Against the time it arrives, he plunders some of his neighbors
towns, selling the people for the goods he wants. At other times he falls upon
one of his own towns, and makes bold to sell his own subjects." So Mons. Brue
says, "I wrote to the king (not the same) "if he had a sufficient number of
slaves I would treat with him. He (...) three hundred of his own people, (...)
sent word, he was ready to deliver them for the goods." He adds, "Some of the
natives are always ready" (when well paid) "to surprise and carry off their own
countrymen. They come at night without noise, and if they find any lone
cottage, surround it and carry off all the people." -- Barbot, (another French
factor) says, "Many of the slaves sold by the negroes are prisoners of war, or
taken in the incursions they make into their enemy's territories. -- Others are
stolen. Abundance of little blacks of both sexes, are stolen away by their
neighbors, when found abroad on the road, or in the woods, or else in the
cornfieldsd, at the time of year when their parents keep them there all day to
scare away the devouring birds." That their own parents sell them, is utterly
false:

3. To set the manner wherein Negroes are procured in a yet stronger light, it
will suffice to give an extract of two voyages to Guinea on this account. The
first is taken verbatim from the original manuscript of the Surgeon's Journal.

"SESTRO, Dec. 29, 1724. No trade to day, though many traders came on board.
They informed us, that the people are gone to war within land, and will bring
prisoners enough (...) or three days; in hopes of which (...) stay.

"The 30th. No trade yet: but our traders came on board today, and informed us
the people had burnt four towns: So that tomorrow we expect slaves off.

"The 31st. Fair weather: but no trading yet. We see each night towns burning.
But we hear, many of the Sestro men are killed by the inland Negroes: So that
we fear this war will be unsuccessful.

"The 2d. of January. Last night we saw a prodigious fire break out about
eleven o'clock, and this morning see the town of Sestro burnt down to the
ground." (It contained some hundred houses.) "So that we find their enemies are
too hard for them at present, and consequently our trade spoiled here.
Therefore about seven o'clock we weighed anchor, to proceed lower down."

4. The second extract taken from the journal of a Surgeon, who went from
New York on the same trade, is as follows. "The Commander of the vessel sent to
acquaint the king, that he wanted a cargo of slaves. The king, promised to
furnish him, and in order to it, set out, designing to surprise some town, and
make all the people prisoners. Some time after, (...) king sent him word, he
had not yet (...) with the desired success: Having attempted to break up two
towns, but having been twice repulsed: But that he still hoped to procure the
number of slaves. In this design he persisted, till he met his enemies in the
field. A battle was fought, which lasted three days. And the engagement was so
bloody, that four thousand five hundred men were slain upon the spot." Such is
the manner wherein the Negroes are procured! Thus the christians preach the
gospel to the heathens!

5. Thus they are procured. But in what numbers and in what manner are they
carried to America? -- Mr. Anderson in his History of trade and commerce,
observes, " England supplies her American colonies with Negro-slaves, amounting
in number to about an hundred thousand every year." That is, so many are taken
on board our ships; but at least ten thousand of them die in the voyage: About
a fourth part more die at the different Islands, in what is call the Seasoning.
So that at an average, in the passage and seasoning together, thirty thousand
die: That is, properly are murdered. O earth, O Sea, cover not thou their blood!

6. When they are brought down to the shore in order to be (...) our surgeons
thoroughly examine them, and that quite naked, women and men, without any
distinction: Those that are approved are set on one side. In the mean time a
burning iron, with the arms or name of the Company, lies in the fire, with
which they are marked on the breast. Before they are put into the ships, their
masters strip them of all they have on their backs: So that they come on board
stark naked, women as well as men. It is common for several hundreds of them to
be put on board one vessel; where they are stowed together in as little room,
as it is possible for them to be crowded. It is easy to suppose what a
condition they must soon be in, between heat, thirst, and stench of various
kinds. So that it is no wonder, so many should die in the passage; but rather,
that any survive it. Thomas Philips in his account of a voyage he made to
Guinea, and from thence to Barbados, with a cargo of slaves relates, "That
they took seven hundred slaves on board. When they were brought in the vessel,
the men were all put in irons, two and two shackled together, to prevent their
mutinying or swimming ashore. The negroes, he says, are so (...) leave their
own country, that they have often (...) out of the canoe, boat and ship, into
the seas, and kept under water till they were drowned, to avoid being taken up,
and saved by the boats which pursue them." -- They had about twelve negroes who
willingly drowned themselves; others starved themselves to death -- Philips was
advised to cut off the legs and arms of some to terrify the rest; (as other
captains had done) but this he refused to do: From the time of his taking the
negroes on board, to his arrival at Barbados, no less than three hundred and
twenty died of various diseases: Which the author says, "was to their great
regret, after enduring much misery and stench, so long, among a parcel of
creatures nastier than swine: No gold-finder, says Philips, can suffer such
noisome drudgery as they do who carry negroes, having no respite from their
afflictions so long as any of their slaves are alive." How unreasonable was it
in Philips, thus to reflect on negroes; could such a number be crowded together
in so warm a climate, even if they had all been healthy, without being
extremely offensive: How much more when so many lay sick, dead and dying. He
speaks of the English people's great sufferings by nastiness, stench, etc. but
he forgets the sufferings of the poor blacks, which must have been incomparably
greater than their's; not to mention the painful sorrow, and anxiety of mind
these distressed creatures must have labored under.


7. When the vessels arrive at their destined port, the Negroes are again
exposed naked, to the eyes of all that flock together, and the examination of
their purchasers: Then they are separated to the plantations of their several
masters, to see each other no more. Here you may see mothers hanging over their
daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears, and daughters clinging to
their parents, till the whipper soon obliges them to part. And what can be more
wretched than the condition they then enter upon? Banished from their country,
from their friends (...) ^^^^^ations for ever, from every comfort of life, they
are reduced to a state scarce any way preferable to that of beasts of burden.
In general a few roots, not of the nicest kind, usually yams or potatoes, are
their food, and two rags, that neither screen them from the heat of the day,
nor the cold of the night their covering. Their sleep is very short, their
labor continual, and frequently above their strength; so that death sets many
of them at liberty, before they have lived out half their days. The time they
work in the West Indies, is from day break to noon, and from two o'clock till
dark: During which time they are attended by overseers, who, if they think them
dilatory, or think any thing not so well done as it should be, (...) them most
unmercifully, so that you (...) see their bodies long after whealed and scarred
usually from the shoulders to the waist. And before they are suffered to go to
their quarters, they have commonly something to do, as collecting herbage for
the horses, or gathering fuel for the boilers. So that it is often past
twelve, before they can get home. Hence if their food was not prepared, they
are sometimes called to labor again, before they can satisfy their hunger. And
no excuse will avail. If they are not in the field immediately, they must
expect to feel the lash. Did the Creator intend, that the noblest creatures in
the visible world, should live such a life as this!

"Are these thy glorious works, Parent of Good?"

8. As to the punishments inflicted on them, says Sir Hans Sloan, "they
frequently geld them, or chop off half a foot: After they are whipped till they
are raw all over, some put pepper and salt upon them: Some drop melted wax upon
their skin. Others cut off their ears, and constrain them to broil and eat
them. "For Rebellion," (that is, asserting their native Liberty, which they
have as much right to as to the air they breathe) "they fasten them down to the
ground with crooked (...) on every limb, and then applying fire by degrees, to
the feet and hands, they burn them gradually upward to the head." Sir Hans
Sloan after describing the severe tortures practiced on the negroes, sums up
the pains they are made to suffer under the terms of exquisite and extravagant
Now must not the reasonable and humane nature of those who order these dreadful
tortures as well as those who execute them, be changed into develish who can
thus put their fellow creatures to such extravagant, such exquisite torment?
And for what? Often, even for that which their tormentors themselves would have
done if in (...) situation. If through the exertion of barbarous and unjust laws,
the natural attendant on slavery, these our hapless fellow men are doomed to
die, yet in their deaths, let it at least be remembered that they are men. We
hear with horror and detestation of some such execution in the inquisitions and
under some tyrannic governments; but these inhumanities are certainly contrary
to the genius and disposition of the British nation, and quite abhorent of its
laws, which do not allow of tortures either in punishment, or to extort
confessions. Sir I Dalrymple in his memoirs says that the Parliament in the
declaration of right asserted, that pitying and ^^^^^ing humane nature, no
cruel and unusual punishment should be inflicted.

How Britons can so readily admit of a change in their disposition and
sentiments, as to practice in America what they abhor and detested in Britain,
can be accounted for on no other principle, but as being the natural effect of
slave-keeping, which as the celebrated Montesquieu observes, "insensibly
accustoms those who are in the practice of it, to want all moral virtues, to
become haughty, hasty hard hearted, passionate, voluptuous and cruel. The evil
attendant on the condition of the poor slaves will end with their lives, and
the merciful father of the family of mankind will doubtless look on their deep
affliction, and where their hearts are thereby humbled, requite them good in
another state of existence for their sufferings in this: but with respect to
their lordly oppressors, this horrible abuse of their fellow men, will
doubtless extend its baneful influence even into the regions of eternity. It is
surprising that the thoughtful people, where slavery prevails should so little
advert to its dreadful consequent effects to themselves and families,
particularly on the necessity they are in of sending away their offspring from
under their own paternal care, in very early life, lest their tender minds
should be corrupted, and every noble and generous sentiments eradicated by the
oppression and cruelty they are daily witnesses of. -- That parents should be
thus incapacitated and deprived of the opportunity and satisfaction of forming
the minds of their offspring to virtue and happiness, but that this most sacred
and delightful trust must be lest to the care of the hireling and the stranger,
must to every tender thinking parent, appear an evil of so afflictive a nature,
and so contrary to the divine order, that no human advantage can compensate for.

The author of the history of Jamaica, wrote about the year 1740, in his
account of the sufferings of the negroes, says, The people of that island have
indeed the severest ways of punishing; no country exceeds them in a barbarous
treatment of their slaves, or in the cruel methods by which they are put to
death. After confirming what is before said he adds, "They starve them to
death, with a loaf hanging over their mouths. I have seen these unfortunate
wretches gnaw the flesh off their shoulders, and expire in all the frightful
agonies of one under the most horrible tortures. He adds, (...) incline to
touch the hardship which these poor creatures suffer in the tenderest manner,
from a particular regard which I have to many of their masters; but I cannot
conceal their sad circumstances entirely: the (...) trivial error is punished
with terrible whipping. I have seen some of them treated in that cruel manner,
for no other reason but to satisfy the brutish pleasure of an overseer, who has
their punishment mostly at his discretion. I have seen their bodies all in a
gore of blood, the skin torn off their back, with the cruel whip, beaten pepper
and salt rubbed in the wounds, and a large stick of sealing-wax cropped
leisurely upon them. It is no wonder, (adds this (...)) if the horrid pain of
such inhuman tortures incline them to rebel." The same author gives us extracts
of some of the laws of Jamaica relating to the punishment of slaves, taken as
he says, from a general collection of the plantation laws, the printed
statutes, or the secretary's-office, viz.

"If any slave by punishment from his owner for running away, or other offense,
suffer in life or limb, none shall be liable to the law for the same; but
whosoever shall kill a slave out of wilfulness, wantonness, or bloody
mindedness, shall suffer three months imprisonment, and pay fifty pounds to the
owner of the slave. If the party so offending be a servant, he or she shall
have on the bare back thirty-nine lashes, and also (after the expiration of the
term with his or her master or mistress) shall serve the owner of the deceased
slave the full term of four years. If any person kill a slave stealing or
running away, or found by night out of his owner's ground, road, or common
path, such person shall not be subject to any damage or action for the same.

"Those that go out in parties to reduce the negroes, shall receive from the
treasurer for every rebellious negro that shall be killed, bringing in his head
to any justice, forty pounds; for every negro taken and brought in alive, and
not maimed, ten pounds, to be paid by the owner, who is hereby obliged under
the penalty of fifty pounds, to transport such slave so taken; and in case the
owner cannot be found, then the treasurer shall pay the ten pounds, receive the
slave, sell and transport him, and retain the produce to be employed in the
said service."

The following advertisement was taken from one of the North Carolina news
papers. "Runaway last November, from the subscriber, a negro fellow named Zeb,
about 36 years of age, about 5 feet 8 inches high, a very good cooper by trade
etc. -- As he is outlawed, I will pay twenty pounds proclamation money out of
what the act of assembly allows in such cases, to any person who shall produce
his head severed from his body, and five pounds proclamation money if brought
home alive."

JOHN MOSLEY.

An advertisement of the same kind was printed in London, in the general
evening post, Jan 1, 1774, said to be taken from the Williamsburgh gazette,
where after describing the negro, the master adds, "The said fellow is
outlawed, and I will give ten pounds reward for his head severed from his body,
or forty shillings if brought alive." As strange as such publications may
appear to such whose hearts as are not hardened by the practice of slavery, yet
I am informed advertisements of this kind are frequent in the southern colonies.

It is alleged by the planters in excuse for these unnatural, these monstrous
cruelties, that the greatest severity, the most cruel punishments, are
absolutely necessary for the management of slaves, on account of those train of
vices which slavery necessarily introduces. A late author remarks how shocking
it is to think that those unhappy victims must from the nature of the thing
become dangerous and refactory, in proportion to the greatness and generosity
of their minds.

Can there be a more dangerous maxim, than that necessity is a plea for
injustice? For who shall fix the degree of this necessity? What villain so
atrocious who may not urge this excuse? or as Milton expresses it --

-- And with necessity
The tyrant's plea, excuse his devilish deed.
How many thousands and tens of thousands has this devilish plea of necessity
brought to a cruel and untimely end? What account will in future states of
existence, be given to the father of the family of mankind, for the lives of so
many of our fellow men so inhumanly murdered. A particular instance of the
destruction of human beings, under the pretense of necessity, is related by
captain Cook, in his voyage round the world, in company with messieurs Banks
and Solander, in the year 1768, being at Rio Janiero, one, if not the principal
town of Brazil; he relates, page 29, "That the inhabitants, who are very
numerous, consists of Portuguese, Negroes and Indians. The township of Rio
Janiero, which he was told was but a small part of the province, is said to
contain thirty-seven thousand white people, and six hundred and twenty-nine
thousand blacks, many of whom are free, in the proportion of seventeen to one."

Page 34. (he tellsus "The riches of the place consists chiefly in the mines;
that much gold is brought from these mines, but at an expense of life that must
strike every man, to whom custom has not made it familiar, with horror. No less
than forty thousand Negroes are annually imported on the king's account to dig
in the mines; and (he adds) we are credibly informed, that the last year but
one before we arrived here this number fell so short, probably from some
epidemic disease, that twenty thousand more were draughted from the town of Rio
Janiero."




9 But will not the laws made in the Plantations, prevent or redress all
cruelty and Oppression? We will take but a few of those Laws for a specimen,
and then let any man judge.

In order to rivet the chain of slavery, the law of Virginia ordains, "That no
slave shall be set free, upon any pretense whatever, except for some
meritorious services, to be adjudged and allowed by the governor and council:
And that where any slave shall be set free by his owner, otherwise than is
herein directed, the churchwardens of the parish wherein such negro shall
reside for the space of one month are hereby authorized and required, to take
up and sell the said negro, by public outcry."

Will not these Lawgivers take effectual care, to prevent cruelty and
oppression?

The law of Jamaica ordains, "Every slave that shall run away, and continue
absent from his master twelve months, shall be deemed rebellious:" And by
another law, fifty pounds are allowed, to those who kill or bring in alive a
rebellious slave." So their law treats these poor men with as little ceremony
and consideration, as if they were merely brute beasts! But the innocent blood
which is shed in consequence of such a detestable law, must call for vengeance
on the murderous abettors and actors of such deliberate wickedness.

11. But the law of Barbados exceeds even this. "If any negro under
punishment, by his master, or his order, for running away, or any other crime
or misdemeanor, shall suffer in life or member, no person whatever shall be
liable to any fine therefore. But if any man of WANTONNESS, or only of
BLOODY-MINDEDNESS or CRUEL INTENTION, wilfully kill a negro of his own" (Now
observe the severe punishment!) "He shall pay into the public treasury fifteen
pounds sterling! And not be liable to any other punishment or forfeiture for
the same!"

Nearly allied to this is that law of Virginia: "After proclamation is issued
against slaves that run away, it is lawful for any person whatsoever to KILL
AND DESTROY such slaves, by SUCH WAYS AND MEANS AS HE SHALL THINK FIT.

We have seen already some of the ways and means which have been thought fit on
such occasions. And many more might be mentioned. One gentleman, when I was
abroad thought fit to roast his slave alive! But if the most natural act of
"running away" from intolerable tyranny, deserves such relentness severity,
what punishment have these lawmakers to expect hereafter, on account of their
own enormous offenses?

IV. 1. This is the plain, un-aggravated matter of fact. Such is the manner
wherein our African slaves are procured: Such the manner wherein they are
removed from their native land, and wherein they are treaed in our Plantations.
I would now enquire, whether these things can be defended, on the principles of
even heathen honesty? Whether they can be reconciled (setting the Bible out of
the question) with any degree of either justice or mercy.

2. The grand plea is, "They are authorized by law." But can law, human law,
change the nature of things? Can it turn darkness into light, or evil into
good? By no means. Notwithstanding ten thousand laws, right is right, and wrong
is wrong still. There must still remain an essential difference between justice
and injustice, cruelty and mercy. So that still I ask, Who can reconcile this
treatment of the negroes, first and last, with either mercy or justice.

Where is the justice of inflicting the severest evils, on those that have done
us no wrong? Of depriving those that never injured us in word or deed, of every
comfort of life? Of tearing them from their native country, and depriving them
of liberty itself? To which an Angolan, has the same natural right as an
Englishman, and on which he sets as high a value? Yea where is the justice of
taking away the lives of innocent, inoffensive men? Murdering thousands of them
in their own land, by the hands of their own countrymen: Many thousands, year
after year, on shipboard, and then casting them like dung into the sea! And
tens of thousands in that cruel slavery, to which they are so unjustly reduced?

3. But waving, for the present, all other considerations, I strike at the root
of this complicated villainy. I absolutely deny all slave-holding to be
consistent with any degreee of even natural justice.

I cannot place this in a clearer light, than that great ornament of his
profession, judge Blackstone has already done. Part of his words are as follows:

"The three origins of the right of slavery assigned by Justinian, are all
built upon false foundations. 1. Slavery is said to arise from captivity in
war. The conqueror having a right to the life of his captive, if he spares
that, has then a right to deal with him as he pleases. But this is untrue, it
taken generally, That by the law of nations, a man has a right to kill his
enemy. He has only a right to kill him in particular cases in cases of absolute
necessity for self-defence. And it is plain, this absolute necessity did not
subsist, since he did not kill him, but made him prisoner. War itself is
justifiable only on principles of self-preservation. Therefore it gives us no
right over prisoners, but to hinder their hurting us by confining them. Much
less can it give a right to torture, or kill, or even to enslave an enemy when
the war is over. Since therefore the right of making our prisoners slaves,
depends on a supposed right of slaughter, that founddation failing, the
consequence which is drawn from it must fail likewise."

"It is said, Secondly, slavery may begin, by one man's selling himself to
another. And it is true, a man may sell himself to work for another: But he
cannot sell himself to be a slave, as above defined. Every sale implies an
equivalent given to the seller, in lieu of what he transfers to the buyer. But
what equivalent can be given for life or liberty? His property likewise, with
the very price which he seems to receive, devolves ipso facto to his master,
the instant he becomes his slave: In this case therefore the buyer gives
nothing, and the seller receives nothing. Of what validity then can a sale be,
which destroys the very principles upon which all sales are founded?"

"We are told, Thirdly, that men may be born slaves, by being the children of
slaves. But this being built on the two former rights, must fall together with
them. If neither captivity, nor contract can by the plain law of nature and
reason, reduce the parent to a state of slavery, much less can they reduce the
offspring." It clearly follows, that all slavery is as irreconcilable to
justice as to mercy.

4. That slave-holding is utterly inconsistent with mercy, is almost too plain
to need a proof. Indeed it is said, "That these negroes being prisoners of war,
our captains and factors buy them merely to save them from being put to death.
And is not this mercy?" I answer, 1. Did Sir John Hawkins, and many others,
seize upon men, women and children, who were at peace in their own fields or
houses, merely to save them from death? 2. Was it to save them from death, that
they knocked out the brains of those they could not bring away? 3. Who
occasioned and fomented those wars, wherein these poor creatures were taken
prisoners? Who excited them by money, by drink, by every possible means, to
fall upon one another? Was it not themselves? They know in their own conscience
it was, if they have any conscience left. But 4. To bring the matter to a short
issue. Can they say before GOD, That they ever took a single voyage, or bought
a single negro from this motive? They cannot. They well know, to get money, not
to save lives, was the whole and sole spring of their motions.

5. But if this manner of procuring and treating negroes is not consistent
either with mercy or justice, yet there is a plea for it which every man of
business will acknowledge to be quite sufficient. Fifty years ago, one meeting
an eminent statesman in the lobby of the house of commons, said, "You have been
long talking about justice and equity. Pray which is this bill? Equity or
justice?" He answered, very short, and plain, "D -- n justice: It is
necessity." Here also the slave-holder fixes his foot: Here he rests the
strength of his cause. "If it is not quite right, yet it must be so: There is
an absolute necessity for it. It is necessary we should procure slaves: And
when we have procured them, it is necessary to use them with severity,
considering their stupidity, stubbornness and wickedness."

I answer, You stumble at the threshold: I deny that villainy is ever necessary.
It is impossible that it should ever be necessary, for any reasonable creature
to violate all the laws of justice, mercy, and truth. No circumstances can make
it necessary for a man to burst in sunder all the ties of humanity. It can
never be necessary for a rational being to sink himself below a brute. A man
can be under no necessity, of degrading himself into a wolf. The absurdity of
the supposition is so glaring, that one would wonder any one can help seeing it.

6. This in general. But to be more particular, I ask, 1. What is necessary?
And, secondly, To what end? It may be be answered, "The whole method now used
by the original purchasers of negroes, is necessary to the furnishing our
colonies yearly with an hundred thousand slaves." I grant, this is necessary to
that end. But how is that end necessary? How will you prove it necessary, that
one hundred, that one of those slaves should be procured? "Why, it is necessary
to my gaining an hundred thousand pounds." Perhaps so: But how is this
necessary? It is very possible you might be both a better and an happier man,
if you had not a quarter of it. I deny that your gaining one thousand is
necessary, either to your present or eternal happiness. "But however you must
allow, these slaves are necessary for the cultivation of our islands; inasmuch
as white men are not able to labor in hot climates It is not proposed to
remove the negroes from laboring in the several provinces and islands where
they are now employed; in order to employ white men in their stead, what is
proposed, is only to prevent any farther import of negroes, except those who
may come voluntarily and in a free condition; and to fall upon such just
regulations and proper encouragement with respect to those already amongst us,
that from dangerous grudging slaves, they may become willing hearted laborers,
who having an interest in the peace and welfare of the country, will be parties
in its strength and support. But whilst deficiencies by the death of the
laboring slaves can be so easily made up by the continual fresh imports from
Guinea, and the planters find it cheaper to make new purchases than to raise
the children, or spare and cherish the parents of those already in their
service, little amendment can be expected in the hardship they are put to, and
the cruelties exercised upon them. Surely the number already in our colonies
and islands, which on a calculation made four or five years past, was between
eight and nine hundred thousand, besides that there has' been a vast number,
said to be about an hundred thousand since yearly imported: all these, with
their increase, if well used, would certainly be sufficient to perform all
necessary labor. If an end was put to the import of negroes, and the odious
and cruel distinction of master and slaves, with all its attendant horrors
should cease, many laboring people from Europe, who are now discouraged from
an apprension of being put on a level with slaves, would probably be willing to
come ever and engage in the service.

John Miller, professor of law at Glasgow, in his late observations concerning
distinction of ranks in society, observes, "That the slavery established in our
colonies is an object of great importance, and is attended with difficulties
which cannot be easily removed. It has been thought that the management of our
plantations requires a labor in which free men would not be willing to engage,
and which the white people are from their constitution incapable of performing.
How far this opinion is well founded according to the present maimer of
laboring in that part of the world, seems difficult to determine, as it has
never been properly examined by those who are in a condition to ascertain the
facts in question. But there is ground to believe, that the institution of
slavery is the chief circumstance that has prevented those contrivances to
shorten and facilitate the more laborious employments of the people, which
takes place in other countries, where freedom has been introduced. With regard
to the planting of sugar, experiments have been made in some of the islands,
from which it appears, that in some species of cultivation, cattle might be
employed with advantage, and that the number of slaves might be greatly
diminished. But these experiments have been little regarded, in opposition to
the former usage, and in opposition to a lucrative branch of trade which these
innovasions would in a great measure destroy. At any rate, the interest of our
colonies seems to demand, that the negroes should be better treated, and even
that they should be raised to a better condition -- The author of a late
elegant account of our American settlements, has proposed, that small wages
should be given them, as an encouragement to industry. If this measure were
once begun, it is probable that the master would soon find the utility of
pushing it to a greater extent. Nothing can appear more astonishing than the
little attention that has hitherto been paid to any improvement of this nature,
after the good effects of them have been so fully illustrated in the case of
the villains in Eurose. At the same time, it affords a curious spectacle to
observe, that the same people who talk in so high a strain of political
liberty, and who consider the privilege of imposing their own taxes, as one of
the unalienable rights of mankind, should make no scruple of reducing a great
proportion of the inhabitants into circumstances by which they are not only
deprived of property, but almost of every right whatsoever. Fortune, perhaps
never produced a situation more calculated to ridicule a grave and even a
liberal hypothesis, or to show how little the conduct of (...) is at bottom
directed by any philosophical principles."

We have accounts from England of some regulations that have taken place in the
Spanish colonies, which do the Spaniards much honor, and are certainly worthy
our imitation; they are to the following effect: -- "As soon as a slave is
landed, his name, price, etc. are registered in a public register, and the
master is obliged by law, to allow him one working day in every week to
himself, besides sundays: so that if the slave chooses to work for his master on
that day, he receives the wages of a freeman for it; and whatever he gains by
his labor on that day, is so secured to him by law, that the master cannot
deprive him of it. As soon as the slave is able to purchase another working
day, the master is obliged to sell it to him at a proportionable price, viz.
one fifth part of his original cost, and so likewise the remaining four days at
the same rate, as soon as the slave is able to redeem them; after which he is
absolutely free." This is such encouragement to industry, that even the most
indolent would be tempted to exert themselves. Men who have thus worked out
their freedom, are inured to the labor of the country and are certainly the
most useful subjects that a colony can acquire.


." I answer, 1. It were better that all those islands should remain
uncultivated for ever, yea, it were more desirable that they were all together
sunk in the depth of the sea, than that they should be cultivated at so high a
price, as the violation of justice, mercy, and truth. But, Secondly, the
supposition on which you ground your argument is false. For white men, even
Englishmen, are well able to labor in hot climates: provided they are
temperate both in meat and drink, and that they inure themselves to it by
degrees. I speak no more than I know by experience. It appears from the
thermometer, that the summer heat in Georgia, is frequently equal to that in
Barbados, yea to that under the line. And yet I and my family, (eight in
number) did employ all our spare time there, in felling of trees and clearing
of ground, as hard labor as any negro need be employed in. The German family
likewise, forty in number, were employed in all manner of labor. And this was
so far from impairing our health, that we all continued perfectly well, while
the idle ones all round about us, were swept away as with a pestilence. It is
not true therefore that white men are not able to labor, even in hot climates,
full as well as black. But if they were not, it would be better that none
should labor there, that the work should be left undone, than that myriads of
innocent men should be murdered, and myriads more dragged into the basest
slavery.

7. "But the furnishing us with slaves is necessary, for the trade, and wealth,
and glory of our nation:" Here are several mistakes. For 1. Wealth is not
necessary to the glory of any nation; but wisdom, virtue, justice, mercy,
generosity, public spirit, love of our country. These are necessary to the real
glory of a nation; but abundance of wealth is not. Men of understanding allow,
that the glory of England was full as high in Queen Elizabeth's time as it is
now: Although our riches and trade were then as much smaller, as our virtue was
greater We are told in Hill's naval history, page 239, That when captain
Hawkins returned from his first voyage to Africa, he was sent for by Queen
Elizabeth, who expressed her concern to him, lest any of the African negroes
should be carried off without their free consent, declaring it would be
detestable, and call down the vengeance of heaven upon the undertakers. --
Captain Hawkins promised to comply with the Queen's injunction, but acted quite
contrary to his promise, which occasioned that author to remark, "That here
began the horrid practice of forcing the Africans into slavery, an injustice
and barbarity which so sure as there is vengeance in heaven for the worst of
crimes, will sometime be the destruction of all who act, or who encourage it."
Geraldus Cambrensis, a noted author who lived about six hundred years past, in
his observations concerning the causes of the prosperity of the English
undertakings in Ireland, when they conquered that island, tells us, "That a
synod or council of the clergy being then assembled at Armagh, and that point
fully debated, it was unanimously agreed, that the sins of the people were the
occasion of that heavy judgment then fallen upon their nation; and that
especially their buying of Englishmen from merchants and pirates, and detaining
them under most miserable hard bondage, had caused the Lord by way of just
retaliation, to leave them to be reduced by the English to the same slate of
slavery; whereupon they made a public act in that council, that all the English
held in captivity throughout the whole land should be presently restored to
their former liberty."


. But, Secondly, it is not clear, that we should have either less money or
trade, (only less of that detestable trade of man-stealing) if there was not a
negro in all our islands, or in all English America. It is demonstrable, white
men, inured to it by degrees can work as well as them: And they would do it,
were negroes out of the way, and proper encouragement given them. However,
Thirdly, I come back to the same point; better no trade, than trade procured
by villainy. It is far better to have no wealth, than to gain wealth, at the
expense of virtue. Better is honest poverty, than all the riches bought by the
tears, and sweat, and blood of our fellow creatures.

8. "However this be, it is necessary when we have slaves, to use them with
severity." What, to whip them for every petty offense, till they are all in
gore blood? To take that opportunity, of rubbing pepper and salt into their raw
slesh? To drop burning sealing wax upon their skin? To castrate them? To cut
off half their foot with an axe? To hang them on gibbets, that they may die by
inches, with heat, and hunger, and thirst? To pin them down to the ground, and
then burn them by degrees, from the feet, to the head? To roast them alive?
When did a Turk or a Heathen find it necessary to use a fellow creature thus?

I pray, to what end is this usage necessary? "Why, to prevent their running
away: And to keep them constantly to their labor, that they may not idle away
their time. So miserably stupid is this race of men, yea, so stubborn, and so
wicked." Allowing them to be as stupid as you say, to whom is that stupidity
owing? Without question it lies altogether at the door of their inhuman
masters: Who give them no means, no opportunity of improving their
understanding: And indeed leave them no motive, either from hope or fear, to
attempt any such thing. They were no way remarkable for stupidity, while they
remained in their own country: The inhabitants of Africa where they have equal
motives and equal means of improvement, are not inferior to the inhabitants of
Europe: To some of them they are greatly superior. Impartially survey in their
own country, the natives of Benin and the natives of Lapland. Compare, (setting
prejudice aside) the Samoeids and the Angolans. And on which side does the
advantage lie, in point of understanding? Certainly the African is in no
respect inferior to the European. -- Their stupidity therefore in our
plantations is not natural; otherwise than it is the natural effect of their
condition. -- Consequently it is not their fault, but yours: You must answer
for it, before GOD and man.

9. "But their stupidity is not the only reason of our treating them with
severity. For it is hard to say, which is the greatest, This, or their
stubbornness and wickedness." -- It may be so: -- But do not these, as well as
the other, lie at your door? Are not stubbornness, cunning, pilfering, and
diverse others vices, the natural, necessary fruits of slavery? Is not this an
observation which has been made, in every age and nation. -- And what means
have you used to remove this stubbornness? Have you tried what mildness and
gentleness would do? I knew one that did: That had prudence and patience to
make the experiment: Mr. Hugh Bryan, who then lived on the borders of
South Carolina. -- And what was the effect? Why, that all his negroes (And he
had no small number of them) loved and reverenced him as a father, and
cheerfully obeyed him out of love. Yea, they were more afraid of a frown from
him, than of many blows from an overseer. And what pains have you taken, what
method have you used, to reclaim them from their wickedness? Have you carefully
taught them, "That there is a GOD, a wise, powerful, merciful Being, the
Creator and Governor of Heaven and Earth? That he has appointed a day wherein
he will judge the world, will take an account of all our thoughts, words and
actions? That in that day he will reward every child of man according to his
works: That "then the righteous shall inherit the kingdom prepared for them
from the foundation of the world: And the wicked shall be cast into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." If you have not done this, if you
have taken no pains or thought about the matter, can you wonder at their
wickedness? What wonder, if they should out your throat? And if they did, whom
could you thank for it but yourself? You first acted the villain in making them
slaves, (whether you stole them or bought them.) You kept them stupid and
wicked, by cutting them off from all apportunities of improving either in
knowledge or virtue: And now you assign their want of wisdom and goodness as
the reason for using them worse than brute beasts!

V. 1. It remains only, to make a little application, of the preceding
observations. -- But to whom should that application be made? That may bear a
question. Should we address ourselves to the public at large? What effect can
this have? It may inflame the world against the guilty, but is not likely to
remove that guilt. Should we appeal to the English nation in general? This also
is striking wide: And is never likely to procure any redress, for the fore evil
we complain of. -- As little would it in all probability avail, to apply to the
parliament. So many things, which seem of greater importance lie before them
that they are not likely to attend to this. I therefore add a few words to
those who are more immediately concerned, whether captains, merchants or
planters.

2. And, first, to the captains employed in this trade. Most of you know, the
country of Guinea: Several parts of it at least, between the river Sonegal and
the kingdom of Angola. Perhaps now, by your means, part of it is become a
dreary uncultivated wilderness, the inhabitants being all murdered or carried
away, so that there are none left to till the ground. But you well know, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, fierce, cruel,
treacherous, or unkind to strangers. On the contrary, they were in most parts a
sensible and ingenious people. They were kind and friendly, courteous and
obliging, and remarkably fair and just in their dealings. Such are the men whom
you hire their own countrymen, to tear away from this lovely country; part by
stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars, which you raise or
foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from their parents,
parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives from their
beloved husbands, brethren and sisters from each other. You have dragged them
who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their native shore.
You have forced them into your ships like an herd of swine, them who had souls
immortal as your own: (Only some of them have leaped into the sea, and
resolutely stayed under water, till they could suffer no more from you.) You
have stowed them together as close as ever they could lie, without any regard
either to decency or convenience. -- And when many of them had been poisoned by
foul air, or had sunk under various hardships, you have seen their remains
delivered to the deep, till the sea should give up his dead. You have carried
the survivors into the vilest slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery
as is not found among the Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in
America.

3. May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as
well as to those you are concerned with.

Is there a GOD? You know there is. Is He a just GOD? Then there must be a
state of retribution: A state wherein the just GOD will reward every man
according to his works. Then what reward will he render to you? O think
betimes! Before you drop into eternity! Think now, He shall have judgment
without mercy, that showed no mercy.

Are you a man? Then you should have an human heart. But have you indeed? What
is your heart made of? Is there no such principle as compassion there? Do you
never feel another's pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity
for the miserable? When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breasts, or the
bleeding sides and tortured limbs of your fellow creatures, was you a stone, or
a brute? Did you look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the
agonizing creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled
remains into the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear drop from your
eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do
not, you must go on, till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the
great GOD deal with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their
blood at your hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Comorrah than for you! But if your heart does relent, though in a small degree,
know it is a call from the GOD of love. And to day, if you hear his voice,
harden not your heart. -- To day resolve, GOD being your helper, to escape for
your life. -- Regard not money! All that a man has will he give for his life?
Whatever you lose, lose not your soul: nothing can countervail that loss.
Immediately quit the horrid trade: At all events, be an honest man.

4. This equally concerns every merchant, who is engaged in the slave trade. It
is you that induce the African villain, to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: By
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers
him to go on: So that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes, and stupisied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. "Master, (said a slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) "what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy, and master Billy, and carry them into
our country, and make them slaves, how would you like it?" His answer was
worthy of a man: "I will never buy a slave more while I live." O let his
resolution be yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business.
Instantly leave it to those unfeeling wretches, "Who laugh at human nature and
compassion!" Be you a man! Not a wolf, a devourer of the human species! Be
merciful, that you may obtain mercy!

5. And this equally concerns every gentleman that has an estate in our
American plantations: Yea all slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
men-buyers are exactly on a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, "I pay
honestly for (...) goods: and I am not concerned to know how they are come by."
Nay, but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know they are honestly come by.
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know, they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by
means, nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house-breaking, or
robbery upon the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of
more complicated villainy, of fraud, robbery and murder) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans: in particular by murders, of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain, and the African butchers.
You therefore are guilty, yea, principally guilty, of all these frauds,
robberies and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion:
they would not stir a step without you: -- Therefore the blood of all these
wretches, who die before their time, whether in their country, or elsewhere
lies upon your head. The blood of thy brother, (for, whether thou will believe
it or no, such he is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee
from the earth, from the ship, and from the waters. O, whatever it costs, put a
stop to its cry before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the
half of your goods, deliver thyself from blood-guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed,
thy surniture, thy house, thy lands are at present stained with blood. Surely
it is enough; accumulate no more guilt: spill no more the blood of the
innocent! Do not hire another to shed blood: Do not pay him for doing it!
Whether you are a christian or no, show yourself a man; be not more savage than
a lion or a bear!

6. Perhaps you will say, "I do not buy any negroes: I only use those left me
by my father." -- So far is well: but is it enough to satisfy your own
conscience? Had your father, have you, has any man living, a right to use
another as a slave? It cannot be, even setting revelation aside. It cannot be,
that either war, or contract, can give any man such a property in another as he
has in his sheep and oxen. Much less is it possible, that any child of man,
should ever be born a slave. Liberty is the right of every human creature, as
soon as he breathes the vital air. And no human law can deprive him of that
right, which he derives from the law of nature.

If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of mercy, nor of
the revealed law of GOD) render unto all their due. Give liberty to whom
liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of human
nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary
choice. -- Away with all whips, all chains, all compulsion! Be gentie toward
all men. And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he should
do unto you.

7. O thou GOD of love, thou who art loving to every man, and whose mercy is
over all thy works: Thou who art the father of the spirits of all flesh, and
who art rich in mercy unto all: Thou who have mingled of one blood, all the
nations upon earth: Have compassion upon these outcasts of men, who are trodden
down as dung upon the earth! Arise and help these that have no helper, whose
blood is spilt upon the ground like water! Are not these also the work of thine
own hands, the purchase of thy Son's blood? Stir them up to cry unto thee in
the land of their captivity; and let their complaint come up before thee; let
it enter into thy ears! Make even those that lead them away captive to pity
them, and turn their captivity as the rivers in the south. O burst thou all
their chains in sunder; more especially the chains of their sins: Thou, Savior
of all, make them free, that they may be free indeed!

The servile progeny of Ham
Seize as the purchase of thy blood!
Let all the heathen know thy name:
From idols to the living GOD
The dark Americans convert,
And shine in every pagan heart!
FINIS.
SIMILAR causes will produce similar effects; the dreadful consequence of
slavery is the same amongst every people and in every nation where it prevails:
this truth is verisied in the following accounts of the inhuman treatment the
negroes met with both from the Hollanders and the French.

The first is taken from the late writings of Edward Bancroft, an English
physician, who resided some years in that part of America, called Dutch Guiana,
which includes the several settlements of Surinam, Barbices, Demarara, etc. The
insensibility with which this author relates and vindicates the cruelties and
indignities exercised, by the Dutch, on the miserable Africans, show that the
advantage accruing to him from the labor of the slaves, as well as his
connection with their oppressors, had its usual and natural effects, in
obscuring his understanding, and hardening his heart against the dictates of
reason and humanity.

The French author appears to have been in a very different situation; he was
an officer belonging to the troops quartered in the island Mauritus, now called
The Isle of France, who not reaping any advantage from the labor of the
slaves, nor having any dependence on the planters, his mind remained so
unprejudiced, that the dictates of reason and tender feelings of humanity, had
free liberty to exert themselves.

Doctor Bancroft, whilst he is giving his readers a genuine relation of the
prodigious oppression and cruelty exercised on the negroes, advances such
arguments in defense of the practice of slavery, as are, indeed, a dishonor to
reason, and shocking to humanity. He tells us, That the labor of the country
is almost wholly performed by negroes -- that they are kept at a submissive and
humble distance, by severity of discipline, which he is so hardened as to say,
not only contributes to the safety of the white inhabitants, but even the
happiness of the slaves, because, adds he, the impossibility of attaining is
ever found to destroy the desire of enjoyment, and rigid treatment, by
annihilating every hope of liberty, renders the slaves content with the
enjoyment of slavery. -- He acknowledges, That the negroes are indeed spurred
to industry by the whip of correction, which is ever at their heels, and not
sparingly exercised; but, that there is no medium: either the minds of the
slaves must be depressed by abject slavery, or the lives of the masters are in
imminent danger: For this reason (he says) they have been oppressed by many
humiliating penalties and distinctions. The evidence of slaves relating to
white persons are of no validity. An attempt to strike a white inhabitant is
punished with death. Their masters or overseers have not only the power of
inflicting corporal punishment, but are in some measure allowed to exercise a
right over their lives, since the putting a negro to death is attended only
with a pecuniary punishment. In which situation, he confesses, they are subject
to many complicated species of misery, exposed to the tyranny of the imperious,
and lust of the libidinous; and to an incessant toil which will have no period
but with their lives. Thus this author through the whole of his reasoning,
manifestly shows the depraving effect which the sight and practice of those
bard and cruel measures which are attendant on slavery, has upon the heart and
reason of men, otherwise of good judgment. -- Hence he adds, That though this
treatment has the appearance of cruelty, and cannot be reconciled to the
principles of justice and equity, yet many things which are repugnant to
humanity, may be excused on account of their necessity and for
self-preservation. -- Speaking of the provision made for the negroes in food
and clothing, he says, The expense of maintaining them in this climate is very
trifling -- they are assigned a piece of ground, from this the slave is
supplied with a sufficient stock for his sustenance; on which however he is not
allowed to labor but only on sundays; receiving from his master a weekly
allowance of dried fish to the amount of a pound and an half; which is all that
his master contributes toward his food. The females receive the same
treatment, and the drink of both is nothing but water: yet from this water and
vegetables, with a morsel of dried fish, these people derive sufficient
nutriment to sustain the hardest labor in the most enervating climate. The
clothing of the negroes (who work in the fields) is scarce sufficient to
answer the demands of modesty. If any of them have either shirts, breeches, or
petticoats, they are the produce of their private industry, as their masters
furnish only a piece of coarse blue or brown linen, which is applied to the
middle, in both sexes, and a blanket with which the slave covers himself at
night; sleeping on boards only.

The account given by the French officer of the disposition of the blacks, and
the treatment they received from his countrymen on the island Mauritius, is as
affecting as the former, though apparently wrote from a different motive and in a
quite different spirit. He informs us, that the slaves who are employed in the
cultivation of that island, are brought chiefly from the island Madagascar,
situate about two hundred leagues distance.

"That these black men, whose features bear a nearer similitude to the
Europeans than the negroes of Guinea, are handy, intelligent, and sensible of
honor: In their own country they apply themselves to many little handicrafts
with great industry; they are passionately fond of dancing and music; their
instrument is a kind of bow, to which a calibash is fixed; from which they draw
a soft kind of harmony, accompanied with songs of their own composition. Love
is always the subject. The girls dance to the song of their lovers; the
spectators beat time. -- These poor people in their own country are extremely
hospitable: when a black in Madagascar is on his journey, he goes into the
first house that suits his exigency, and though unknown, the family share their
provisions with him. He is neither asked whence he comes nor whither he goes:
it is the custom of the country. With such arts and such manners these black
people are brought to the island Mauritius to labor for the whites. They are
set on shore quite naked, except a rag that covers their loins; the men are
ranged on one side and the women on the other, with their little children, who
cling about the mother through fear. The planter examines the whole, and
purchases such as suits him. Brothers, sisters, friends, lovers, are separated;
they take leave of each other with tears, and depart for the plantation. These
blacks are naturally of a joyous temper; but after some years of slavery they
grow melancholy. -- The treatment they receive from their masters is rigorous:
at day break, three cracks of the whip are the signal that calls them to work:
each slave appears in the plantation with their mattock; here they work almost
naked in the heat of the sun. For the least neglect they are bound hand and
feet on a ladder; their commander armed with a postillions whip stands over
them, and gives them on their naked posteriors fifty, an hundred, or two
hundred lashes. Every lash brings off the skin. The poor wretch covered with
blood, is let loose, and dragged back to his work. Some of these miserable
creatures on being thus chastised, are not able to sit down for a month after.
The women are punished in the same manner. There is a law made by the French
king in their favor, called the black code: this law ordains that at each
punishment they shall receive no more than thirty lashes; that they shall not
be obliged to work on sundays; that they shall have their provision weekly, and
their shirts yearly: but this law is not observed. Sometimes when they grow
old, they are turned adrift to get their living as they can. One day I saw one
of them who was nothing but skin and bone cutting flesh from a dead horse to
eat. It appeared to be one skeleton devouring another. -- They have
occasionally the consolation of religion proposed to them, and are from time to
time baptized. They are told that they are made brethren of the whites, and
shall go to heaven; but they hardly know how to believe the Europeans should
conduct them to heaven, whilst they are, they say, the cause of all their
sufferings on earth. -- They frequently refuse us, say they, necessary meat and
clothes, and beat us cruelly without reason: of this I have seen many
instances. A slave, almost white, threw herself one day at my feet; her
mistress made her rise early and watch late: if she chanced to sleep, she
rubbed her mouth with ordure: and if she did not lick her lips, she commanded
her to be whipped; she begged of me to solicit her pardon, which she obtained.
Sometimes the masters of these wretches grant such request, and within two days
double their punishment, reckoning in tale of lashes what they had professedly
forgiven. A counselor of whom some blacks had complained to the governor,
assured me, that though they were exempted from punishment that day, the next he
would have them slead from head to foot. -- In short, when those wretched
creatures can no longer support their condition, they sink into despair. Some
of them put a period to their lives by poison or the halter: others throw
themselves into some petty boat, without sails, without compass, without
provision: in this manner they hazard a passage of two hundred leagues to
return to the Island of Madagascar, from whence they were brought. I have known
them land there, be retaken and returned to their masters. In general they take
refuge in the woods where they are hunted by detachments of soldiers, negroes,
and dogs. Planters there are who make on such occasions a party of pleasure.
They are attacked with the spear, like wild beasts. When they cannot be reached
this way they are shot. Their heads are cut off and carried in triumph to town
on the end of a pole. This is what I have seen almost weekly -- I have seen
them hanged and broke alive, they went to their punishment with pleasure and
supported it without complaint. I have seen a woman throw herself voluntarily
from the ladder. They cry that in another world they shall find a happier life,
and that the father of mankind is not so unjust as man -- I have daily beheld
men and women whipped in the manner before described for having broken a pot, or
forgot to shut a gate, their bloody limbs afterward rubbed with vinegar and
salt to heal them. -- I have seen them in the excess of their anguish unable to
cry any longer. -- I have seen them bite the cannon on which they were bound.
-- I sicken at the recital of these horrors. -- My eyes ach with seeing them.
-- My ears with hearing them. Here I see poor negro women bending over their
spades, their naked children bound upon their backs: Miserable creatures that
tremble as they pass before me. -- Sometimes I hear the sound of their drum,
but more frequently the sound of whips cracking in the air like the report of a
pistol; and the heart rending cries of mercy, master mercy. -- If the
unfortunate creatures would complain that the laws in their favor are not
observed to whom can they complain; their judges are often their greatest
tyrants (witness the counselor before mentioned) It is alleged that without
this severity, it is impossible to manage the slaves, you must have punishments
and pains, iron collars with braces, whips, blocks to bind them by the foot,
and chains to go round their necks. They must in short be treated like beasts,
that the whites may live like men. Can we wonder at reasoning like this? Where
there is injustice in the principle, there must be inhumanity in the
consequence.

I am mortified when I think that those philosophers, who have shown so much
fortitude in their attacks of moral and religious abuses, have not mentioned
the poor negroes -- They turn from the view of their misfortunes, they talk of
the massacre of the Mexicans by the Spaniards, as if that crime were not the
guilt of their own days; a guilt in which half Europe is concerned. Is it a
greater crime at once to assassinate a people who differ from us in opinion,
than to hold in living torments, a race of men who labor for the gratification
of our palates and appetites, our internal and external luxuries?"

If it is alleged in answer to these narratives, that such cruelties may
indeed be practiced by the Hollanders and French, but that they are seldom used
amongst the English, to this it may, with truth, be replied, that though
different circumstances may occasion a variation of conduct in different
places, yet there is in effect but little difference; wherever slavery is
practiced, and an unlawful desire of gain prevails, it will have its natural
effect, it will harden the heart, and induce to the use of hard and cruel
measures, to obtain the end proposed. Its generally thought that the Hollanders
exercise a greater degree of rigor and cruelty toward their slaves, than the
English. Nevertheless our nation is in some cases said to exceed the former. An
Instance of this is related by Captain Cook before mentioned, who on his return
in his voyage round the world, at page 797. when at the Island St. Helena's,
belonging to the English, tells us, that the negro-slaves are very numerous in
that island. -- That they appear to be a miserable race, worn out by excessive
labor, and partly by ill usage, of which they frequently complain, he adds, I
am very sorry to say, that instances of wanton cruelty are much more frequent
among my countrymen here, than among the Dutch, who are, and perhaps not
without reason, generally reproached with want of humanity, at Batavia and the
Cape.

The foregoing accounts of the cruel usage the miserable Africans find, with
little variation in all places and amongst every people where slavery prevails
will doubtless be grevious to such who feel for the cause of humanity and
justice. Nor is it to be expected that there will be any amendment, whilst the
dessiciencies which happen by deaths, can so easily be made up by fresh
imports, and the lives of the miserable negroes are left to the caprice and
passion of their owners, or their overseers, more especially as these last
generally expect favor from their masters, in proportion to the sugar, etc.
they cause to be made, without any check from the laws, which rather
countenance the murder of the slaves, if done, or said to be "done by way of
chastisement." And even when it is publicly known that the death of a slave
has been occasioned through bloody mindedness or wanton cruelty; yet agreeable to
the prevailing opinion, that the spirits of the slaves must be kept down by the
most humiliating distinctions, and severity of discipline; the prosecution of
such murders is discouraged, indeed great difficulties would attend those who
would attempt it, as it is seldom that any white person is present when such
murder is committed, except the overseer or his dependants; and that the
evidence of the negroes is of no validity against the whites. Hence the lives
of the poor slaves are in every respect, in a very precarious situation,
subject to the passion and rage of those who have the rule over them, and the
spilling of their blood unnoticed by those who ought to protect them;
nevertheless, it is not hid from the all-feeing eye of God, and will doubtless
remain, though a covered, yet accumulated store of divine displeasure against the
perpetrators of it.

And here it may not be improper to lay before the reader a few instances from
the many, very many, which might be given of the shocking cruelties exercised
on the miserable negroes, being a striking instance of the dreadful
insensibility which the habit of hard and cruel measures will gradually
introduce in the human heart.

The first instance was related by a person who furnished the compiler with the
advertisement from North Carolina, viz. That whilst he was there a negro woman
flying into the woods, probably from ill usage, was pursued by the overseer,
who having met with her, after cruelly beating her, fastened her to his horse,
so to drag rather than lead her; that before he reached the (...) she was a
dead corpse. Such usage of a fellow creature appeared most unnatural and cruel
to the relater; but what most surprised him was, to find that this poor
creature's life being taken away in so brutal a manner, made no impression on
the minds of the people; it raised no indignation against the murderer, or
commiseration for the unhappy victim; they seemed quite hardened to such scenes.
He heard but one person take any manner of notice of the matter.

Another instance fell under the immediate notice of a person of credit, when
in the island of Jamaica, now residing in this city. Hearing a grievous cry, he
went to the place from whence it came, where he saw a young negro woman of
about eighteen years of age, swung by her hands, with heavy weights at her
feet, and a man lashing her naked body with a hard whip; making pauses from
time to time, and flinging pickle or salt and water on the wounds, the whip had
made. The sight was so horrible, that he turned from it and came home. Sometime
after, looking out, he saw this same young woman carried dead on a board: She
had been cruelly whipped to death; neither did he observe that this pitious
spectacle drew the concern or hardly attention of the people.

A third instance happened in Charlestown, in the presence of a person now
residing there. A vessel had taken in a number of slaves, on the coast of
Guinea, amongst these was a man, who probably from the dignity of his situation
in his own country, or from some other cause, did not show such submission as
the ship's people expected and require of slaves. They attempted to tie him
with ropes, but that not answering their purpose, they confined him in irons,
and otherwise so tormented him during their passage from Guinea, in order to
bring down his spirit, that when they arrived at Charlestown, he was in so
weak a condition as to be scarce able to walk to the place of sale, but as he
was urged on with the whip. When the slaves returned in the evening, this man
remaining unsold, was forced along with the rest toward the vessel, he walked
on for a while, till he came to the marketplace, where he fell; but the whip
being exercised upon him, he rose, and going on a little farther dropped down
dead. The relater, a person of credit, saw the transaction, and exclaimed
against the barbarity; but no (...), either judicially or (...) was dragged
along and flung (...) sea, to be devoured by the sharks.

The last instance I shall mention, happened in Carolina, on board a vessel
with slaves from Guinea, related by a person lately in this city from thence.
It seems the poor negroes had let in a persuasion, from a fire appearing on the
shore, that the white people proposed to put them to death; this made them
unwilling to leave the ship: However they were all made to comply except one
man, who had taken so strong hold of some part of the ship, that the sailors
were not able to loose him. This raised the anger of the captain to so great a
degree, that he struck the poor fellow so hard a blow, with something like an
handspike, as broke both his arms, whereby the captain looking upon the fellow
as disabled and unfit for sale, gave him another blow on the head, which caused
his brains to fly about the vessel.

"We know, says a late respectable author, that the negroes (employed in our
plantations) are purchased from their (...) Guinea, who pretend to have (...)
dispose of them, and that (...) like other commodities, transported by the
merchants, who have bought them into America, in order to be exposed to sale.
If this trade admits of a moral or a rational justification, every crime, even
the most atrocious, may be justified. Government was instituted for the good of
mankind; kings, princes, governors, are not proprietors of those who are
subject to their authority; they have not a right to make them miserable. On
the contrary, their authority is vested in them, that they may, by the just
exercise of it, promote the happiness of their people. Of course they have not
a right to dispose of their liberty, and to sell them for slaves. Besides, no
man has a right to acquire or to purchase them: Men and their liberty are not
either saleable or purchaseable. -- No one, therefore, has any but himself to
blame, in case he shall find himself deprived of a man, whom he thought he had,
by buying for a price, made his own; for he dealt in a trade which was illicit,
and was prohibited by the most obvious dictates of humanity. For these reasons,
every one of those unfortunate men, who are pretended to be slaves, has a right
to be declared to be free, for he (...) lost his liberty; he could not lose it
^^is prince had no power to dispose of him. Of course the sale was ipso jure
void. This right he carries about with him, and is entitled every where to get
declared. As soon, therefore, as he comes into a country in which the judges
are not forgetful of their own humanity, it is their duty to remember that he
is a man, and to declare him to be free. I know it has been said, that
questions concerning the state of persons ought to be determined by the law of
the country to which they belong; and that, therefore, one who would be
declared to be a slave in America, ought, in case he should happen to be
imported into Britain, to be adjudged according to the law of America to be a
slave; a doctrine, than which nothing can be more barbarous. Ought the judges
of any country, out of respect to the law of another, to show no respect to
their kind and to humanity. Out of respect to a law, which is in no sort
obligatory upon them, ought they to disregard the law of nature, which is
obligatory on all men at all times, and in all places: Are any laws so binding
as the eternal laws of justice? It is doubtful, whether a judge ought to pay
greater regard (...) them, than to those arbitrary and (...) usages which
prevail in a distant land? Aye, but our colonies would be ruined, if slavery
was abolished. Be it so; would it not from thence follow, that the bulk of
mankind ought to be abused, that our pockets may be filled with money, or our
mouths with delicacies? The purses of highwaymen would be empty in case
robberies were totally abolished; but have men a right to acquire money by
going out to the highway? Have men a right to acquire it by rendering their
fellow creatures miserable? Is it lawful to abuse mankind, that the avarice,
the vanity, or the passion of a few may be gratified? No! There is such a thing
as justice, to which the most sacred regard is due. It ought to be inviolably
observed. Have not these unhappy men a better right to their liberty and to
their happiness, than our American merchants have to the prosits which they
make by torturing their kind? Let therefore our colonies be ruined, but let us
not render so many men miserables. Would not any of us, who should -- be
snatched by pirates from his native land, think himself cruelly abused, and at
all times entitled to be free. Have not these unfortunate Africans, who meet
with the same cruel fate, the same right? Are not they men as well as we, and
have they not the same sensibility?"

"But it is false, that either we, or our colonies would be ruined by the
abolition of slavery. It might occasion a stagnation of business for a short
time. Every great alteration produces that effect: Because mankind cannot on a
sudden, find ways of disposing of themselves and of their affairs: But it would
produce many happy effects. It is the slavery which is permitted in America
that has hindered it from becoming so populous, as it would otherwise have
done. Let the negroes free, and in a few generations, this vast and fertile
continent, would be crowded with inhabitants; learning, arts, and every thing
would flourish amongst them: Instead of being inhabited by wild beasts, and by
savages, it would be peopled by philosophers, and by men." Prins. law of Scotl.

"He who detains another by force in slavery, is always bound to prove his
title. The slave sold or carried into a distant country, must not be obliged to
prove a negative, that he never forfeited his liberty. The violent possessor
must in all cases show his title, especially where the old proprietor is well
known. In this case, each man is the original proprietor of his own liberty.
The proof of his losing it must be incumbent on those who deprive him of it by
force." Syst. mor. phil.

"Long and serious reflections upon the nature and consequences of slavery have
convinced me, that it is a violation both of justice and religion; that it is
dangerous to the safety of the community in which it prevails; that is it
destructive to the growth of arts and sciences; and lastly, that it produces a
numerous and very fatal train of vices, both in the slave, and in his master.
-- Freedom is unquestionably the birth right of all mankind; Africans as well
as Europeans: to keep the former in a state of slavery, is a constant violation
of that right, and therefore also of justice. -- The British merchants obtains
the negroes form Africa, by violence, artifice, and treachery, with a few
trinkets to prompt those unfortunate people, to enslave one another, by force
or stratagem. Purchase them, indeed they may, under the authority of an act of
the British parliament. An act entailing upon the Africans (with whom we were
not at war, and over whom a British parliament could not of right assume even a
shadow of authority) the dreadful curse of perpetual slavery, upon them and
their children forever. There cannot be in nature, there is not in all history,
an instance in which every right of men is more flagrantly violated." Lee's Add.

EXTRACT of a Sermon preached by the Bishop of Gloucester, before the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel at their anniversary meeting, on the 21st of
February, 1766.

FROM the free-savages I now come (the last point I propose to consider) to the
savages in bonds. By these I mean the vast multitudes yearly stolen from the
opposite continent, and sacrificed by the colonists to their great idol, the
GOD OF GAIN. But what then, say these sincere worshippers of Mamman, they are
our own property, which we offer up. Gracious God! to talk (as in herds of
cattle) of property in rational creatures! creatures endowed with all our
faculties, possessing all our qualities but that of color; our brethren both
by nature and grace, shocks all the feelings of humanity, and the dictates of
common sense. But, alas! what is there in the infinite abuses of society which
does not shock them? Yet nothing is more certain in itself, and apparent to
all, than that the infamous traffic for slaves directly infringes both divine
and human law. Nature created man free,; and grace invites him to assert his
freedom. In excuse of this violation, it has been pretended, that though
indeed these miserable outcasts of humanity be torn from their homes and native
country by fraud and violence, yet they thereby become the happier, and their
condition the more eligible. But who are You, who pretend to judge of another
man's happiness? That state, which each man, under the guidance of his maker,
forms for himself; and not one man for another. To know what constitutes mine
or your happiness, is the sole prerogative of him who created us, and cast us
in so various and different moulds. Did your slaves ever complain to you of
their unhappiness amidst their native woods and deserts? Or, rather, let me
ask, did they ever cease complaining of their condition under you their lordly
masters? Where they see, indeed, the accommodations of civil life, but see them
all pass to others, themselves, unbenefited by them. Be so gracious then, ye
petty tyrants over human freedom, to let your slaves judge for themselves, what
it is which makes their own happiness. And then see whether they do not place
it in the return to their own country, rather than in the contemplation of your
grandeur, of which their misery makes so large a part. A return so passionately
longed for, that despairing of happiness here, that is, of escaping the chains
of their cruel task masters, they console themselves with feigning it to be the
gracious reward of heaven in their future state; which I do not find their
haughty masters have as yet concerned themselves to invade. The less hardy
indeed wait for this felicity till overwearied nature sets them free; but the
more resolved have recourse even to self-violence, to force a speedier passage.

But it will be still urged, that though what is called human happiness be of
so fantastic a nature, that each man's imagination creates it for himself, yet
human misery is more substantial and uniform throughout all the tribes of
mankind. Now, from the worst of human miseries, the savage Africans by these
forced emigrations, are entirely secured, such as the being perpetually hunted
down like beasts of prey or prosit, by their more savage and powerful
neighbors -- In truth, a blessed change! -- from being hunted to being caught.
But who are they that have set on foot this general HUNTING? Are they not these
very civilized violators of humanity themselves? Who tempt the weak appetites,
and provoke the wild passions of the fiercer savages to pray upon the rest."

THE END.

