The (...) America Swallowing the Bitter Draught.


THE WATCHMAN's ALARM TO LORD N -- H; OR, THE British Parliamentary Boston
Port-Bill unwraped BEING AN ORATION ON THE MERIDIAN OF LIBERTY; Not to inflame
but to cheer the Mind: Or as an APPLE of GOLD in the PICTURES of SILVER for the
mourning CAPTIVES in AMERICA. With some OBSERVATIONS on the LIBERTIES of the
AFRICANS.

By the BRITISH BOSTONIAN.

And he said unto me, Watchman what see thou? And I said, I see a flying
Roll, and the Length is Twenty Cubits, and the Breadth is Ten Cubits, and in it
was written, MOURNING, LAMENTATION, and WOE.

EZEKIEL. And he said unto me, this is the curse that goes forth upon the Face
of the Earth.

ZECHARIAH. And it came to pass when Jehudi had read Three or Four Leaves, he
cut it with a Penknife and burnt it in the Fire that was on the Hearth until it
was all consumed.

JEREMIAH. O Liberty! O Virtue! O my Country!
It is a noble Act to stem Taxation's Rage.
CATO. As it is required of Watchmen to be open, free, and faithful to every
Enquiry made, it is therefore hoped that no one will be angry at the free
Answers returned by the Watchman in Israel, to the Enquiries made. Watchman
what of the Night, etc. The whole being intended as a merry, serious, suitable,
and cheerful Satyr.

SALEM: N. E. Printed by E. RUSSELL, in Rucks-street, (over Mr. J. BADGER's
Auction and Broker's-Store) near the State-house, leading to Marblehead.
M,DCC,LXXIV.

AN EXPLANATION Of the Plate in the First Page.
I. AMERICA, as a woman covered with a mourning Mantle.

II. Lord N -- H with the Boston Port-Bill seen from his pocket, forcing the
taxed tea down the throat of America, which she furiously pukes up again in his
face.

III. Britannia in a disconsolate Posture, with prayers and tears, mourning for
the distresses of her daughter America.

IV. S -- r. G -- l W -- n, that false, ficle, defaming, treacherous court
sycophant, binding America with the iron hand of tyranny.

V. A late America Representative holding the feet of America that she might
not kick against the iron power of the present A -- n.

VI. Lord B -- in an Highland dress, with fury in his eyes, and a broad sword
in his hand, on which is wrote his heart, and what he would wish to enforce --
military law.

VII. and VIII. The French and Spanish Ambassadors, pointing to Lord N -- H
with his Port-Bill, and smiling at the mad conduct of the B.....h
A............n in forcing Taxes from the Americans without their consent.

IX. Boston cannonaded.

X. Boston petition under feet.

THE WATCHMAN's ALARM, etc.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers, and ye that fear GOD, give audience.
THE peculiar solemnities of this day are more immediately adapted, by the
public consent of the churches, to paint forth the life and MEREDIAN of
LIBERTY. The distress you are in, and the danger there is of your losing your
rights, call aloud to supplicate the throne of GOD for deliverance; to pray for
a restoration of your just rights, and a final settlement of the sure enjoyment
of them.

By liberty, is meant political liberty; and, according to the true etimology
of the word, in (...)'s dictionary, it is a power of acting agreeable (...) the
laws which are made and enacted by (...) consent of the PEOPLE, and no ways
inconsistent with the natural rights of a single person, or the good of
society. This is the liberty which is opposed to slavery.

Liberty of the mind is the free thought that expands, ruminates from sea to
sea, and from rivers to the end of the earth, and none can control it. The
chariot of a thought, of a wish, of a desire, is like the wings of the morning,
which flies to the uttemost parts of the earth; and is like the sun which
rejoices to run its race; it is like the fountains which rise spontaneously
free; it is like the emitting life of the vine to all its branches; like the
flowing rivers, the fertile fields in their pleasant growth, or like the gentle
zephyrs which diffuses its fragrant life through the globe. This is freedom
which is above the control of man, or beyond the suppression of any parliament
or ministerial tyrant. This is that kingdom of liberty which no man can
destroy, and therefore not the liberty we are this day to treat of and
solemnize. That which calls upon every heart and commands every soul, is that
of a civil and sacred nature, which is so much in danger.

Civil liberty is the people's inherent right to enjoy; namely, all the
privileges of their laws according to their compact with their King; this right
is ever inherent in the people, and cannot be given to kings, nor taken away by
any parliament whatsoever; the enjoyment may, but the right cannot; its
creation is natural and rises with every generation. This is the power of the
people which binds kings in fetters and nobles in irons.

Sacred liberty is a satisfaction of soul in the choice of worship and
adoration of GOD: This is JEHOVAH's law for the souls of men, and (...) but
devils and priestly tyrants have ever (...) to invade this right.

But as your civil rights are destroyed, your capitol town besieged, your
harbor blockaded, your port shut, trade, which is the sinews of life and
liberty is stopped by power and force of arms, what have we not to fear
respecting our divine liberty? This makes it a night of distress and sorrow, of
great darkness and many fears: This makes me mourn for the affliction of
Joseph; to mourn with them that mourn, to hang my harp with the rest of the
captives and weep; yet not as those who are without hope, for he that has
delivered does deliver, in whom we trust he will yet deliver.

But this night of sorrow naturally leads me to the words of the Prophet, for
the present contemplation;

Watchman what of the night? Watchman what of the night?

What indeed! a very proper, a very important question at this time. The most
remarkable transactions of the GOD of heaven for the deliverance of his people
are made manifest as a key to unlock, or as a door to open the divine designs
by interrogations. Thus when man had sinned and marred the beauty of his
creation; when that light, life, love, adoration, and contemplation of his GOD
had forsaken his soul, the GOD of heaven said unto him, Adam, Where art thou?
Thus when a cloud of sorrows covered the camp of Israel, and GOD seemed to
forsake his people, Joshua, whose name denotes the LORD's salvation, said, If
Israel turn their backs upon their enemies, what will thou do unto thy great
name? Thus Elihu, when he taught Job the corruption of his heart and nature,
and how unbecoming it was in him in calling himself righteous, and justifying
himself under his affliction before GOD, seeing his heart was corrupt, that it
was not his thoughts, words, or actions that could acquit him before GOD, and
therefore he says, How shall a man be just with GOD? How indeed! But this
question I leave for the Priests to answer, who are very busy about it, but in
general know nothing of the matter.

Another solemn question we have, which is, Who shall go to heaven? I hope you
would be glad to know this, my hearers; you will find it, Ps. xxix.3. Who shall
ascend unto the hill of the LORD? and who shall stand in his holy place? He
that has clean hand and a pure heart. Is it him? Then it is plain, my friends,
that it is not you nor me, for our hearts are impure. Who can it be? A very
proper question. Were they the Prophets and Patriarchs? No! no! for they were
like you and me, they had often unclean hands, and always a corrupt heart. Who
can it be? That is the point. Are they our Ministers, then? O no, my friends,
no, no, that is a settled point; certain, both in heaven and in earth, for the
scripture says, We have all sinned, and are verily men, subject to like
passions, and therefore not pure in heart. Who can they be? I think I will
leave it for the Priests to tell you, whom I believe, if Paul was alive, would
soon tell them they know but very little of this matter; this I know they will
not let me go, because, they say, I have eat with unwashen hands: What then?
Have not they or have not I washed them since? Will not that do? If it will I
think I have as good a right to go to heaven as they have. May not one crowd in
with them? No, no, they will not give you elbow room. Well, they need not be
afraid, for I will not go with them, nor trust my soul among them. You may, if
you please, brethren, for I have no dominion over your faith, but would fain be
a helper of your joy.

Again, when sin and satan, when death and hell had invaded the rights of the
whole creation and made it groan; when sinners were to be redeemed, GOD
glorified, salvation finished, righteousness revealed, life, liberty, and glory
to be made manifest to the sons of men; an inquiry, according to scripture
ideas, seems to arise from the sacred throne, Who is this that engages his
heart to approach unto me, says the LORD? Who, indeed? The answer you have
from CHRIST's own own lips, Isa. lxiii.5. And I looked and there was none to
help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm
brought salvation.

Once more, when the church saw, prophetically saw, the great work finished,
namely, righteousness shining like the light of the morning, salvation sealed
as the finished work of the GOD of heaven, sin suffered for, the law fulfilled,
GOD glorified, death, hell, and the grave triumphed over. She says, Who is
this? Who is this indeed that has done all this? Few know among the Priests,
and fewer desire to know among the people: But it is I, says the Redeemer,
that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. This shows what divine designs and
grand displays of mercy are made manifest by scripture interrogations.

Which leads me to the contemplation words, or first inquiry,

Watchman what of the night? Watchman what of the night?

I will tell you as well as I can, but be patient, for I am not eloquent, and
my talent is small, and I am but a poor man and little esteemed in Israel. I
have read of a poor wise man who by his wisdom delivered the city, yet no man
remembered the same poor man: But never you mind that, for there is nothing new
under the sun.

What of the night? you ask. I will tell you, it is a very good night; I mean
for honest men to be out in, the stars are clear, the sky is serene, the wind
is calm: It is to be sure a bad night for thieves and robbers, who intend to
catch our persons, steal our properties, and rob us of our rights, it is a very
bad night for them. The scripture says, If a thief comes, he comes in the
night; but he loves a dark night. But be not afraid, for the morning comes;
remember from a night arose all the blessings of creation, the beauties of
paradise, and all the happiness of the life that now is, and the hope of that
which is to come. As it is written, And darkness covered the face of the deep,
and he said let there be light, and there was light; therefore fear not the
night, though weeping may endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning.

Yet sometimes by night I own we are to understand deep troubles, national
distress, and personal sorrows, as was the case of Jacob, of Job, of the
prophets, and the nations of Israel and of Judah; and it is worthy our
attention for a moment; did I say, nay but for eternity, to observe the
ponderous sorrows of CHRIST's soul, when he poured out his soul to death, when
he made his soul an offering for sin, when his soul was troubled, when being in
an agony, and his sweat was as the drops of blood, when his soul was sore
amazed, when dying the just for the unjust, to bring us nigh unto GOD. All
these sorrows in their ponderous weight and pressing feelings are set forth by
the figure of a dark night; this, says CHRIST, is your hour and power of
darkness: And there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
Hence he says, My head is wet with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night.

Thus it appears that the word night denotes sorrows personally and nationally,
and this is your case, as well as that of the united colonies, so far as they
feel for and sympathize with you.

Not long since your Forefathers, who were the Patriarchs and Apostles of
America, though distressed by the savage tribes, yet they enjoyed their
political charter liberties settled by compact with their king.

Not long since the capital of America, the meridian harbor of the continent
was open, your castle commanded, your colors flying, your commerce spreading,
your importance growing, your laws ruling, peace and plenty flowing, your
warlike spirit shining, your standards renowned: But alas! be astonished, O
heavens at this, how has your loyalty almost proved your ruin; seeing your
power, beholding your importance; jealous, jealous of a growing empire, the
British Ministry take the rein of government, break the compact of their King,
assume the right of making your laws, and usurp the authority of taxing your
property, tyrannically and oppressively to the whole globe, continue to block
up your harbor, cruelly cutting through the silver veins of trade, stained your
streets with the bloody dews of death; they have seized your castle, besieged
your town with all the majestic horrors of war! But lo! they look to a
peaceful, serene people in the light of a few powerless, harmless doves,
trembling upon the ground they tread; and only to unnecessary fearful minds
terrible as an army with banners; this is their hour and power of darkness, but
fear not, the morning comes.

But Watchman what do you hear of the night?

I will tell you, as I stand continually upon my watch tower in the day time,
and sit whole nights in my watchward. I saw a brother watchman coming near my
watch-ward, he is an old faithful watchman, his name is Micah, to whom I said,
having had a familiar acquaintance with him, Watchman what of the night? He did
not say, as New England people generally do, I do not know, Sir, and
immediately begin to tell you; but he says, like an honest whig, I will tell
you, if your heart be as my heart; you will find it in my journal,Sir, Micah
vii.3. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince asks and
the Judge asks for a reward; and the great Man utters his mischievous
desire: SO THEY WRAP IT UP. Have they not done wrapping up yet? What will they
wrap up next? The seas, the morning light, the sun, these they have wrapped up
long ago in England; nay the beasts of the forest and the fowls of the air,
and the felicity of the fields and the blessings of the earth, Alluding to the
land tax, window tax, beer tax, tithes, etc.
the rain from heaven; nay, the earth, air, and sea is wrapped up by them; so
that there is nothing, O happy! but heaven left for us to make our escape from
them. In short they are like death and the grave, which cries, GIVE, GIVE, but
we have nothing to give them. Have they not wrapped up our harbor, our common,
our castle, our trade, our wharves, our ships that we cannot launch them? What
would they have? Have they not wrapped up a great part of the lands of America,
called the King's lands and tall pines? Have they not wrapped up our charter
rights, liberties, and constitutional privileges? Have they not wrapped seven
millions annually from America? What more would they have? Brother Watchman I I
will tell you: They want to wrap up America into the British kingdom; they want
to make three bishoprics in America, a Bishop for Boston, etc. a Bishop for
New York, etc. a Bishop for the Carolinas, etc. all officers and offices to be
held in the power of the Crown, and at the dispose of the King, and sixty more
lordships by degrees, then peradventure (for they do such things in England)
the next will be to wrap up our wives and our daughters. Stop, we will not have
them wrapped up by them however; but I believe it is best to unwrap it all and
see what is in this political bill of parcels.

Pray brother Watchman can you tell me who sent for this parliamentary bill of
parcels? O yes: Mr. T -- H -- n, Mr. P -- n, Mr. O -- r, and others, by private
and confidential letters. Well then, let them pay the bill and defrey the
expenses of it; What have we to do with it? It is hard they should send to
parliament for a bill of parcels and then charge it upon innocent people, and
leave it to children yet unborn to suffer for it. And is it not unjust for
those who wrapped this bill to send it to, and charge upon those people who
never ordered it? I think it can never stand in equity.

But Watchman, as you are free and open, remember your commission, Isaiah
xxi.6. For thus has the LORD said unto me, go and set a Watchman, let him
declare what he sees.

I will; what saw you? Being upon my watch tower some time ago, I saw in a
grand assembly a large parliamentary bill of parcels put together. Another
brother Watchman (his name is Zechariah) coming by, I said to him, well brother
Watchman, what of the night? What see thou? And he answered, I see a flying
roll, and the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth is ten cubits:
And he said to me, this is the curse that goes forth upon the face of the
earth. Upon which another Watchman came up who is used to be among captives, to
whom I said, Watchman what have you to say of the night? I will tell you; I
looked, said he, and behold a hand was sent unto me, and lo! a roll of a book
was therein, and he spread it before me, and in it was written within and
without, LAMENTATION, MOURNING, and WOE, with this motto or inscription upon
it, And so they wrap it up. Colonel Bar coming in, and looking at it and
seeing the inscription, says, So they wrap it up; let us unwrap it and see what
they have wrapped up before it goes, and upon unwrapping the first parcel out
tumbled the d -- l, upon which he says, Why, my Lord, did you wrap the d -- l
to send him away: Do not you know you cannot do without him? nor the M -- y or
P -- t at present. I suppose he had a hand in the matter, as he came out upon
opening the first paper. Indeed Colonel I would have no hand in the matter, I
did always despise it; it was brought to me to get signers, but I could not get
one of all my peers in the lower regions to consent: For my part I leave other
kings to make acts to shake their kingdoms, but I know better than to do it
myself, for if I take away the rights of my people, I shall not get a new
subject these thousand years; therefore I think you might have let me alone, as
I was wrapped up in a sleep to go to America, passage free, under a royal
commission, to command fleets and troops in America to kill musquetoes, for as
to the people they do not deserve it: Take care of him, my Lord, says the
Colonel, poor d -- l he must not be lost; upon which his Lordship said, Come
Tom, come, A free speech to an old friend.
and he took him under his cloak, upon which the Colonel missing him, he says,
what is become of the poor d -- l? To which Mr. P -- said, his Lordship has
taken him under his cloak, and put him in his closet. I fear, says the Colonel,
in his bosom where he used to dwell, or otherwise he never could have framed
such an act as this: Let not the Reader think the Author is any way given to a
spirit of levity, it is what he always despised from his youth; but only
introduced some lively turns of thought to cheer the captives who weep and hang
their harps upon the willows because of the night. There is a time to rejoice,
says Solomon. Neither think it strange, that the Author speaks so familiar
about the d -- l, when he speaks no harm of him, though he has been at
parliament, in the closet chamber, and privy council, when he has read of the d
-- l's being in a much better place, and among better company than most of
these, even among the sons of GOD, Job i.6. And satan came also. And as to his
entering the heart of his Lordship, it is nothing strange when we read of his
entering the heart of a much better man, even of a disciple of JESUS. And satan
entered into the heart of Judas Iscariot.
To block up Boston harbor, cut off all trade, secure their wharves, appoint
such as they please, under what direction they please, the Governor to choose
the Council, the Sheriff to choose the juries, until the people of Boston shall
make such satisfaction, such concessions, and enter into such obligation of
better obedience, as the B -- sh M -- y shall think proper. This will never do;
it must be all unwrapped and thrown away for waste paper. Why could not your
Lordship have wrapped up the olive branch and not the unsheathed sword. Is this
the way to gain their treasure, to win their affection, or procure their
happiness; such an act supposing the British Parliament to have a right to make
laws for the Americans; such an act as this can never do, because it does at
once destroy that near union between America and the Mother Country, alienate
their affections from their Sovereign, stop the blessings of commerce, and
spread death, want and poverty through the British nation, and likely will
occasion a revolution of the state; besides, the grand question is, who are the
rebellious and disobedient? If there are any, it must be the Americans or the
British Parliament. If the British Parliament have a right to tax the
Americans, then the Americans are disobedient to their laws. But if they have
no right to tax them, (which it is clear they have not, nor do they barely
attempt to prove it) then it is plain who are the first aggressors, and cause
of all the distresses at Home, and confusion in America, for where there is no
power or liberty of representation, there are not according to the English
laws, any right of taxation.

Some say that the tea was not subject to any taxation, but an impost duty.
What is the difference, if it must be paid by an advance price by the people,
without their consent to a duty or taxation? They say it was the destruction of
private property. What difference does this make between its being private
property or parliamentary property? The grand question is, whether any people
under heaven have not, by the law of self preservation, a right to destroy any
persons power or property who destroy their settled rights as a people?
Besides, is it just or usual for one nation to tax the private properties of
another nation and province, and oblige them under penalties of death to pay
the tax? Is not this a breach upon the law of nations? And do not such
law-breakers deserve to be punished by the loss of their property? Can mankind
think it strange that the justly angry populace should destroy what their
Governor would not stoop to save? Let the East India Company ask pardon of the
Public whom they have offended.

Colonel Bar, General Conway, Governor Pownall, Messieurs Burkes, Dowdeswell,
and many, very many more who are the most honorable Members of the House of
Commons, unwrapped it much in the same manner, and laid it aside as waste
paper. Nay, the Peers of the land, the House of Lords, many of them united
therein: Lord Chatham has much contemned it; Lord Cambden has boldly declared
against it: Likewise the following Peers, in a paper, entitled, the Lord's
Protest, distinguished themselves in the cause of American freedom, namely,
Richmond, Portland, Abingdon, King, Essingham, Rockingham, Abergavenny, Lester,
Craven, Fitzwilliam, etc. who all unwrapped and disapproved of the bill, the
charge, and the demands. [May those illustrious Peers and Commoners, who have
so nobly distinguished themselves in the cause of America, in opposition to
those who were for taxing them, be gratefully remembered, and handed down to
posterity. May their names be held in eternal honor, so long as one spark of
the noble sensation of gratitude shall remain in the breast of an American!]
But his Lordship said, We will let the Americans know that we will sit quiet no
longer under their insults, whatever may be the consequence; we must risque
something or ALL is OVER. Upon which taking the opportunity of a thin house in
great haste they in a hurry wrapped it up again, got a royal signet upon it,
and sent it all over.

A remark. Now my Lord all is over; all the bill is over, the ships are over,
and the army is over, we hope, my Lord, it is all over: For we do not want no
more, and your Lordship may take these back as soon as you please, for we have
nothing for them to do. It puts me in mind of a soldier who served in the last
war, who being ordered by his General, namely, S -- x, to feed his horses with
peace, rice, and corn, when the soldiers and many others had not bread to eat;
the soldier therefore went to the Surgeon and desired him to draw all his
teeth; why, said the Surgeon, do they ache? He said no, but his General had
robbed him of his bread, and given it to his horses, and thereby he had nothing
for his teeth to do, therefore he would not keep them. Thus it is, my Lord, we
have nothing for his Majesty's ships and armed force to do, unless it be to
kill Musketoes, and therefore we do not choose to keep them.

It puts me in mind of what my brother Watchman said, (his name is Jeremiah)
when I asked him what they did with the roll? And he said, It came to pass when
Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with a penknife, and burnt it
in the fire that was upon the hearth until it all was consumed. And it came to
pass; that is enough, it is not needful to know how it came to pass, that the
Watchman does not tell us, but if it comes to pass that is all we wish for
peace sake.

But to be more close and serious; to hear the widows mourn for fear, labor
fail, children crying, trade ceasing, children begging daily bread, the streets
unoccupied, the sea uncloathed, the harbors undressed; to hear the noisy
cannons roar, to see the blazing spear displayed, the bloody banner spread, and
all this by brethren, by our own mother's sons, by flesh of our flesh and bone
of our bone; for what they know not on the other side of the atlantic, nor do
we on this continental shore: Something is surmised, we are wickedly
represented to his Majesty, and therefore we must, says his Lordship, risque
something, or all is over. What must they set Israel to fight against Judah.
There is the same mad mistaken paralleled case at large in Joshua xxii. However
my Lord, you have risqued something indeed, namely, the crown and peace of the
state; his Majesty's ships, army, and ammunition, and we judge all is over,
they are come safe; we mean to use them well as brethren; and I wish the tea
was paid for, if that may answer all the end they came for, and make way for
union and peace, which has been whispered.

But it is yet a night season; methinks I hear you say, Watchman what of the
night? What shall we do to night? I will tell you; first, praise GOD for the
mercies of the day, humbly trust his promise for safety through the night, then
do as regular people do, eat your supper, go to bed and sleep quietly until
morning, then arise and pay your morning sacrifice of praise to GOD and go to
your daily labor, and whatsoever thine hands finds to do, do it with all thy
might. Fear not the night, for the morning comes, for the LORD our GOD is with
us; fear them not, for there be more for us than they that be with them; fear
them not.

Secondly, love your King, feelingly, firmly, and affectionately: But remember
that allegiance and obedience is only due to a King, as his fidelity and
coronation oath is fulfilled to you; it is the law not the man that ought to
rule. The King is by consent of the people made their royal Trustee, or grand
Trust for the preservation of their rights; if he fails here he is no longer
King according to the laws of England; therefore pray that the Almighty may
give him judgment as a royal diadem to his crown, for the peace of Britain and
her union happiness with America; honor your Governor with reverence and duty
to every branch of legal authority; be kind to the soldiery; be genteel to the
officers; pray for Lord N. that the GOD of heaven may bless and we hope forgive
him, as he did Abitophel, and send him to his own place as he did Judas. I have
heard that his Lordship is a man of fine sensation, quick understanding, a
great senator, and a faithful servant to the Crown. But how a person can be a
man of honor, honesty, fine sensations, a faithful senator, who can propose,
aim, and proceed to distress thousands of thousands of innocent people, by
destroying their essential liberties and natural rights, by the arbitrary arm
of iron power, and thereby bid defiance to the law of nature and nations, which
binds kings in fetters and nobles in irons. The man who dares this is the
greatest tyrant beneath the sun. Was his Lordship a man of fine sensations, of
quick understanding, possessed of the feelings of humanity for the happiness of
mankind, he would surely have felt the piercing pleas, the nervous reasonings,
the cutting arguments, not only of Lord Chatham, Lord Cambden, and others, but
of those (if I may express it) angelic arguments of Colonel Bar to his
Lordship, for the peace of Britain and the happiness of America; but lo!
nothing will do but the iron rod, and not the olive branch, and therefore I
think if the Almighty will forgive him, mankind can very well spare him. But if
there should a single son of Issachar upon the earth, who is born like a strong
ass to couch between two burdens, who can approve of this act, an act that
deprives GOD of the grand designs of creation, man of his inherent rights, and
the blessings of Providence; an act that takes away his labor, his bread, his
all, his estate, his existence; an act that makes the widow mourn, the
fatherless to cry for bread; an act that forbids the merchant to trade; his
stores to be open, his wharves to be used; an act that sets land and water,
winds and waves, blood and banners all in array against a loyal people, to make
them love their King, whom they always adored. If there should be such a being
upon the earth who can plead for this act, he must be happy; for surely the
Almighty has made him without a soul, and consequently he can have no sins to
answer for. What shall I say to such a one? He lives indeed, but he must die;
Dust thou art, (that is all) and unto dust thou must return. Shall I say in the
Prophet's language, Hell from beneath moves to meet thee at thy coming. No;
heaven forbid! indeed there is no danger, for it is so full already of more
sensible beings, that there is no room, in charity we hope for such there. Thus
you see that we are more mild and charitable for those Persons who vainly call
themselves Friends to Government: They say that we, yea and those honest
British Members of Parliament who plead for the rights of injured America are a
set of damned -- etc. and ought to be damned. Now we are not for having these
friends to government, as they falsely style themselves, damned: No; but for
their being saved even from the power of damning others. But I would say as
Samuel did unto Israel; GOD forbid that I should sin in ceasing to pray for
you, for I bare you record that you have zeal for your King and Country, but
not according to the knowledge of the essential and charter rights of the
Americans; therefore it it is that such multiply words without knowledge, etc.

Watchman you have told us what of the night: But Watchman what of the morning?

I will tell you; the morning comes, the morning of hope, the morning of help,
the morning of mercies. The morning comes; that is happy, it comes. How?
without the aid of man, of its own accord, by infinite power. Thus our
deliverance comes from the GOD of Heaven. Who among you would dare in a dark
night to attempt to help omnipotence to spread the wings of the morning? Would
not the attempt in thought be blasphemous; wait with patience, the morning
comes freely as the gift of heaven, and thus comes your deliverance, not only
temporal but spiritual and eternal, as the fruit of omnipotent love and power.
Hence CHRIST is said to be as the light of the morning, as the light of the
morning without clouds. And this doctrine is believed by all mankind, but the
Priests and the people. The Priest says, GOD will give salvation as the light
of the morning; he offers it to you, but you must assist the Almighty, and help
him on your part, or you cannot have it, by fulfilling the conditions of the
covenant; by coming up to the terms of the gospel, by getting faith, by laying
down your arms of hostility, etc. O! if they will but do these good things, in
plain English help the Almighty a little, win him over by a few dead promises
and prayers, and then he will give them the light of the morning, I mean his
favor: Hence it is they tell the dead they must live or they will be damned,
that is all; the deaf they must hear or they will perish; the blind they must
see or they will be lost. But says the dead in sin, I cannot give myself life,
and the deaf, I cannot hear, and the blind I cannot see: But says the Preacher
you will be damned if you do not; putting all the first, living, and moving
power upon those who have neither life nor power, yet according to them they
must be damned because they have it not: And this they call the light of the
gospel; poor Ignoramus's: I do not mean as Gentlemen or as Scholars, but
respecting the gospel of CHRIST, my soul often melts for them with holy
compassion, at other times, like Elijah, in order to awaken them, I cannot but
mock them with a holy indignation, Why halt they between two opinions? I do not
mean all; there are some whom I delight to hear. But O when will the Priest
proclaim, When shall the people know the joyful sound? namely, that salvation
from the GOD of Heaven is as free, as unconditionally free and powerful to the
souls of men as the light of the morning is unto mankind.

Further, let it be remembered what naturalists say, that it is darkest just
before the morning light; this scripture experience and ten thousand delivering
mercies have made manifest to the sons of men; then why should we fear;
remember what the Prophet says, In the evening it shall be light, add as David
says, Though weeping may endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning. You
never knew a night but the morning followed it, nor a dark affliction either of
soul or body, but what a sure mercy followed it, just as the morning follows
the night; as it is written, The evening and the morning were the first day.

As the night is the womb of the morning, so is the night of affliction the
womb of ten thousand times ten thousand mercies to mankind; by this very idea,
the glory of heaven, the joy of saints, and the salvation of sinners is
declared. Psalm cx.3. speaking to the MESSIAH, JEHOVAH says, From the womb of
the morning thou have the dew of thy youth.

Moreover by the light of the morning we behold the beauties and blessings of
the day. -- Thus it is by the light of the morning of mercies, to speak in
scripture language When JEHOVAH scatters the princes in Salmon, rebukes kings,
and binds princes in fetters, and nobles in irons, to make known deliverance to
Jacob, and salvation to Israel. This makes the mountains to rejoice, and the
trees of the field to clap their hands, and the people to say amen. This is the
LORD's and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Once more: The morning comes, the light of the morning is sure to scatter the
darkness of the night, it is omnipotent, and uncontrollable. Who can stop the
expanding wings of the morning? It is a beam of omnipotence; the morning rays
are the rays of the Deity. Wait on the LORD then and be of good courage for the
morning comes. Nor is it in the power of kings, princes, potentates,
parliaments, or any arbitrary arm to stop these morning mercies; for as the
morning surely chases away the darkness of the night, so the LORD JESUS, who is
the light of the morning, shall surely chase away every night of sorrow from
them that fear him: Unto you that fear my name, says GOD, shall the sun of
righteousness arise with healings in his wings.

One more inquiry: Watchman what of the night? Do you think we deserve it? I
know we deserve it from GOD, but not from man; and I acknowledge that you
deserve it from GOD? I am glad you are so humbly sensible: But what if I say
you deserve it from GOD, and will tell you for what; it is for your iniquitous
and disgraceful practice of keeping African slaves, a custom so evidently
contradictory to the laws of GOD, and in direct violation of the charter The
liberty of the Africans is as much their right, nay their charter right,
according to the charter of this province, settled by the English Parliament,
as it is the right of the Governor, the greatest Gentleman, or Englishman in
America to be free, as the charter declares. Our will and pleasure is, and we
do hereby for us, our heirs, and successors, grant, establish, and ordain, that
all and every of the subjects of us, our heirs, and successors, which shall go
to and inhabit within our said province and territory, and every of their
children which shall happen to be born there, or on the seas in going thither,
or returning form thence, shall have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of
free and natural subjects within any of the dominions of us, our heirs, and
successors, to all intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever, as if they
and every of them were born within this our realm of England.
of this province, and the natural and unalienable rights of mankind; however
any among you, professing christianity, although at the same time are guilty of
so glaring a trespass on the laws of society and humanity, may inconsistently
gloss over their detestable usage with the idle pretense of christianizing
them, when it is well known more than one half those who are owners of these
black people do not care what becomes of the souls of them, if they can reap
the profits arising from the labor of their bodies, at least until they arrive
at the age of fifty, a period which is far beyond the meridian of man's natural
life. I only judge from their conduct toward these miserable creatures, more
especially with regard to their education, and this assertion is notoriously
verified in respect of those who hold slaves in the West Indies, as well as in
most parts of America, even where the christian religion is professed, they are
not learned to read one word of the holy scripture, or say their catechize:
Nay, some venture to say, were they to have learning, and to be instructed in
the principles of religion, they would be of no service to any one: However,
admitting their motives of importing these Africans to make christians of them,
if they can, to be sincere, is it likely any man will be willing to bind
himself for life, in order to obtain your chance salvation, by means of your
prayers, feelings, movings of the spirit, etc. which perhaps most of you may
account works of righteousness?

This truly benevolent and public-spirited way of freeing black men when they
are old, reminds me of a story I heard of one who was held in bondage until he
was near sixty years of age, when his master very generously offered him his
freedom, after telling him he had been a faithful, honest slave, and thanked
him for his past good services. But hear the honest reply of the aged,
decripid, and untutored African, arrived at such a period of life as to
occasion gray hairs, by age and hard labor; I tank you, Maser, I tink you hab
all de marrow, hes way you take care de bone.

Blush ye pretended votaries for freedom! ye trifling patriots! who are making
a vain parade of being the advocates for the liberties of mankind, who are thus
making a mockery of your profession, by trampling on the sacred natural rights
and privileges of the Africans; for while you are fasting, praying,
non-importing, non-exporting, remonstrating, resolving, and pleading for a
restoration of your charter rights, you at the same time are continuing this
lawless, cruel, inhuman, and abominable practice of enslaving your
fellow creatures, which is so disgraceful to human nature; a practice which
must redound to the eternal dishonor of any people much more to those who wear
the christian name, and must surely make the heart of every feeling person
shudder at the thought of being held in perpetual slavery, but shocking to
relate, it is realized by millions of unhappy mortals in the world, a greater
part of which I am sorry to say are dwellers in this American land of freedom!

But if ye fail of abolishing this vile custom of slave-making, either by a law
of the province, common law, (which I am told has happily succeeded in many
instances of late) or by a voluntary releasement, the oppressed sons of Africa
may very justly retort this stubborn passage of sacred writ upon you, Isaiah
lviii.6. Loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let the
oppressed go free, that ye break every yoke: And may truly say with the same
Prophet, Isaiah i.13, 19. Bring no more vain oblation: The calling of
assemblies I cannot away with; it is iniquity even the solemn-meeting. If ye be
willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land.

But let me ask you, I mean those who are guilty in this respect, with what
face can you look up to the ALMIGHTY, that just and righteous Being, and beg of
him his aid and assistance in our political affairs, while we are oppressing
our African brethren ten thousand times as much by keeping them in slavery for
life? And what is a trifling three penny duty on tea in comparison to the
inestimable blessing of liberty to one captive? But O shocking the very
imagination! yet more amazing the reality! to know we have millions among us
who are slaves to all generations, at least we design them as such, unless some
kind arm should interpose in the behalf of these miserable people to put an end
to their bondage. O how it makes me rejoice, yea it makes me leap for joy, when
I mention the much honored names The word of GOD commands us to give honor to
whom honor is due, and surely it is not due to any more than to those who
relieve the oppressed, and give liberty to them who are in bondage: We desire
therefore to mention five honorable Gentlemen, who have, from christian
principles and from a sincere love of liberty, given freedom to their slaves,
namely, JOSEPH BOWDITCH, Esquire Capt. SAMUEL BARTON, and Mr. JONATHAN PHELPS, ser.
of Salem. Major FULLER, of Newtown, Mr. ROBERT PIERPONT, of Boston, and the
REFERREES, on a case brought on at the inferior court of common pleas for the
county of Essex for July term, between Mr. CALEB DODGE, of Beverly and his
negro servant, who gave a verdict in favor of the negro, by which he obtained
his freedom, there being no law of the province to hold a man to serve for life.
of those worthy patriots for liberty, those sincere friends to the rights and
liberties of mankind, who, emulated with a spirit of liberty, have so nobly let
public virtue triumph over sordid self-interest, and have released a number of
valuable black servants who were held in bondage. May they and their children
be blessed for this truly god-like act; and may their public-spirited example
be followed by many, very many Gentlemen who are owners of slaves. Let it never
be told in the streets of America, that nursery of freedom, that there is one
bond-slave dwells therein.

To conclude this solemn and much discussed subject, however little regard may
have been paid to it by those whose interest it may justly be supposed to be to
slight every thing that shall be advanced in favor of the Africans. However the
time is coming, I hope, when instead of these sorely distressed and much
oppressed Africans retorting passages of scripture on you slave-makers, our
Savior's words may come with full power and have their desired effect, namely,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. Though
little account may be made of them in the religious as well as political world,
they ought to be the eternal rule of righteousness to mankind.

Some of you may remember what your late Governor Pownall said to his servant
Frank, on his confining a number of birds in a cage: Says his Excellency, Whose
birds are those in that cage? Mine, Sir, replied his servant. What did they
cost? Two dollars, Sir. Says his Excellency, there are your two dollars for
them, let them be free, for I will have no being that GOD has made, in bondage
in my house. Soon after the Governor purchased a number of flying-squirrels to
send to England, which he confined in a cage: His man Frank seeing them,
enquired of his fellow servants whose squirrels they were? They informed him
they belonged to his Excellency; on which Frank immediately let them all free:
And on his carrying the tidings to his Excellency, enquired of him, what the
squirrels cost? The Governor was a little angry at first for his freedom in
asking what they cost? but on telling him he had set them at liberty, and
offering to pay for them, his Excellency was much pleased with the familiar,
soft admonition in favor of liberty.

Sir, One word if you please as Watchman.

Watchman what of the night? I mean of the night of ministerial darkness of the
gospel; what of the night, Watchman?

Who is he that makes this inquiry? Thou art sure a sensible soul, for I have
not had such an enquiry ever since I have been upon my watch tower in America.

This enquiry, my hearers, will naturally lead me for a few minutes to speak of
religious liberty, and you that do not love religion or sacred liberty may go
out, there will no body take any notice of it but GOD, and you know and others
will know that you do not mind him much; but I choose to speak a word in season
to the enquirer, because among sensible people it is known that the Standing
Ministers, in general, by their arbitrary authority in the churches and
despotic power by councils have as much destroyed the charter rights of the
church of CHRIST, as the British Ministry have the rights of the American
subjects.

However I will tell the enquirer it is a dark night indeed, insomuch that the
people in a sacred sense seem to me to dwell in the land of darkness and of the
shades of death, but it is a very good night for blind folk, for blind Priests
and blind people, for the blind lead the blind, the night and the day are both
alike to them; they group at noonday and stumble upon the dark mountains; for
if the light that is in them be darkness, how great is that darkness; nor will
they come to the light lest their ministerial deeds should be reproved, and if
any dawn of light appears to any, the Priests with the insensibly fine thread
of prejudice sews their eyes, as mankind sew up the eyes of flutterers to blind
them, that by them they may catch more pigeons, and thereby make them seven
fold more the children of condemnation. The Priest goes his old, cold, deathly
and pharisaical round (like a horse in a mill) of long prayers, tears,
conditions, terms; do your part, lay down your arms, submit and GOD will change
his anger, will love you and have mercy upon you. Such pharisaical rubbish we
have continually from the pulpit: If you ask bread they give you a stone; if
you talk to them in the language of Canaan, they answer you in the language of
Ashdod; this makes it a dark night, a dark night to the church indeed. When do
we ever see the ministration of glory made manifest by the Priest, by preaching
CHRIST as the light of the morning, or ever proclaim the light of a DIVINE
RIGHTEOUSNESS, of a finished salvation, of pardon alone by CHRIST's death,
atonement by his blood, of victory by his resurrection, of peace only by the
belief of the finished righteousness and atonement. When do we hear of the
power of the HOLY GHOST in regeneration, giving freely like the light of the
morning, life, light, peace, joy, and consolation by the ministration of the
gospel, and thereby engaging their souls by the bonds of almighty grace, to new
obedience day by day. Sometimes we have a little of these things mentioned, but
depend upon it, in general, there is death in the pot, when ever the sons of
the Prophet sees it: They are always setting forth GOD and the creature at a
distance from each other, like two angry parties, and then they persuade the
creature not to be angry any longer, and then GOD will not be angry with him,
so the people the best of them in general so esteemed, they think right to get
a robe of self-righteousness, being ignorant of GOD's righteousness, and then
judge all is well with them, and are pleased, like children, with themselves,
vainly thinking that GOD is pleased with them, because the Priest tells them
so: And so they wrap it up: And if any one attempts to unwrap it and says as
CHRIST did, How can ye escape the damnation of hell? they are like the scribes
and pharisees, exceeding angry to be sure, and say why he is a troubler in
Israel, he is beside himself, he has not the approbation of the Standing
Ministry. However I am of Mr. C -- s -- ll's mind who, was desired to procure
the approbation of the Standing Ministry, that he might be more extensively
useful in the world. He replied, by no means, for he had had their reprobation
for twenty years, which he thought far more preferrable.

But though your sorrows may yet continue, your harps hang upon the willows,
and things may yet grow darker and darker, and your sorrows be like the
swellings of Jordan, yet fear not, the morning comes. Though the fig tree
should not blossom, nor there should be no fruit on the vine; the labor of the
olive fail, and the field yield no meat, and the flocks be cut from the field,
and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet wait on the LORD and be of good
courage, the morning comes. Support your congress, maintain your union,
strengthen your affection, relieve the poor, persevere in piety, patience, and
prudence as a band of brethren united in one COMMON CAUSE, be fearless, be
harmless, and may GOD ALMIGHTY bless you.

AMEN.

