Mr. Whitney's DISCOURSES ON THE PUBLIC FAST, JULY 14, 1774.

The Transgression of a Land punished by a multitude of Rulers.

CONSIDERED IN TWO DISCOURSES, Delivered JULY 14, 1774, Being voluntarily
observed in most of the religious Assemblies throughout the Province of
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, AS A DAY OF FASTING and PRAYER, On Account of the DARK
ASPECT of our PUBLIC AFFAIRS: And now published at the Desire of the HEARERS,
to whom they are INSCRIBED.

BY PETER WHITNEY, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Northborough.

BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlborough-Street. MDCCLXXIV.

SERMON I.
PROVERBS XXVIII.2. For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof: But by a Man of Understanding and Knowledge the State thereof shall be
prolonged.


GOOD civil government is one of the greatest temporal blessings which any
people are favored with. Without this we cannot be safe and secure in the
possession of any worldly good. Our virtue and happiness, our lives and
property would be exposed to innumerable continued dangers from the
unrestrained lusts and passions of mankind. One would lie at the mercy of
another: and he who found himself possessed of the greatest strength and power,
would sacrifice all that is dear to others, to his own will and pleasure. Where
there is no law or government, every one will "do that which is right in his
own eyes," as they did when there was no king in Israel. Government is as an
"hedge about our persons, and about all that we have on every side," against
the ravages and depredations of lawless men, men who have nothing to govern
them, but their own wills, passions and appetites. Says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.8,
9, 10.
"We know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully; knowing this, that
the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient,
for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of
fathers and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers, for whoremongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured
persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine."

THE sin and fall of man gave occasion for civil government in societies, as a
necessary curb and restraint to the corrupt lusts and vile affections of human
kind. Had man never sinned he would not have been under the influence of unruly
disorderly lusts and passions: he would not have been so disposed to transgress
the eternal and unalterable rules of equity and truth; but would have "lived
soberly, righteously, and godly in the world."

IT was evidently in compassion to a fallen degenerate world that God
instituted and ordained civil government, and that he was himself, in a special
and peculiar sense, the supreme magistrate in Israel, appointing subordinate
officers and judges, more immediately to manage the affairs of their state,
under his direction and guidance.

THE divine Being has, all along, abundantly manifested his approbation of
civil government. He was indeed angry with his people of old, for rejecting
him, who was King of kings, and Lord of lords, from being their king, and
asking him to give them a king like unto the heathen nations round about. This
was a sin in them: and the very thing they desired, became a snare and a
scourge unto them. It had been well for them, and all succeeding nations, had
their original form of government been strictly adhered to, gratefully
accepted, and well improved. They sought a change, and God granted their
request. Since when, he has been pleased, in his holy word, very particularly,
to point out the qualifications of "princes" and rulers, and the duty of the
people, to submit to their authority and laws, withal intimating that good
rulers are a blessing, great benefactors to mankind. "He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of God; and he shall be as the light of the
morning, when the sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender
grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain," 2 Samuel 23.3.4.
says God.

NO particular form of government has unerring wisdom pointed out, prescribed
and directed unto. But mankind, in their various dispersions through the earth,
and different nations, are left wholly to their liberty to agree upon their own
plan and constitution, their particular model of government, and to depute
whom, and as few, or as many, as they shall think fit, to rule and govern them,
being to obey and submit to them, whom they have thus clothed with authority,
"not only for wrath, but for conscience sake." The supposition of a divine
hereditary right in some, to govern the rest, is glaringly absurd and
groundless. God's setting aside Saul and his family, and bringing David, the
son of Jesse, to be the king of Israel, together with the parable of Jotham,
recorded in the book of God, Judge. 9.7 -- 15.
being well weighed and attentively considered, prove that such right cannot be
founded on the Bible. And where can we go to find and prove this doctrine of
the divine hereditary right of particular persons and families to rule and
govern others, if not to the revelation from heaven. A people may, if they
please, make the kingdom hereditary, in a particular family, under certain
limitations and restrictions; (as is the case in England); and whoever claims a
right to the British throne, contrary to such established rules, is a daring
usurper, and impudent pretender; and this has been the character of some of the
inglorious and tyrannical Stewart family, ever since the reign of James the
second. The people of England after various struggles and contests, and having
tried many very different forms of government, at length happily united those
three leading kinds, monarchy, aristocracy and democracy, which composed that
excellent civil constitution, which has been the glory of Britons, and the envy
of foreigners. Says one, "All power has its foundation in compact and mutual
consent, or else it proceeds from fraud or violence. Where the latter takes
place, the dominion which men claim is no better than usurpation; and they who
by these methods raise themselves above their brethren, are so far from having
a right to govern, that they ought to be punished as public disturbers and the
enemies of mankind. -- When government is founded in mutual consent, it is the
undoubted right of the community to say who shall govern them; and to make what
limitations or conditions they think proper. -- But whatever form of civil
government men have chose, there are certain constitutions which are the basis
and foundation of the state, and which are obligatory on those who govern, as
well as on those who are governed. These constitutions are a sort of
fundamental laws, which cannot be violated without the greatest danger to a
community. When either part attempts to invade the right of the other, it
usually produces convulsions, which sooner or later overturn the state." The
king of England, at his coronation, is sworn to defend the rights of the
people, and to govern according to the established constitution, the
fundamental laws and statutes of the realm. The British constitution, in its
primitive purity, is the most perfect form of civil government, because it
derives and secures the greatest good to the whole nation, which is the end of
all civil government. Finite beings can conceive of no other end, the divine
Being could have in view, in the ordination and appointment of civil
government, and setting some over their brethren, but the good of the people.
Reason suggests no other, nor does revelation speak of any but this. The
scripture assures us that magistrates are appointed of God to be his ministers
for good to the public. He did not appoint such an order of men, for the
purposes of enslaving the rest, and involving the world in misery and
wretchedness, nor surely to enrich and aggrandize themselves and families, at
the unnecessary expense, and great damage of the public, as if God had a
partiality for them. He did indeed intend, that princes and rulers, continually
attending on this very thing, the public good, and seeking the welfare of the
state, and the happiness of the people, should be honorably maintained, and
distinguishingly supported, as but the just recompense of their faithful and
important services for them. It is an apostolic injunction upon the people to
support their rulers. "For, for this cause pay you tribute also; for they are
God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore
to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom,
fear, to whom fear, honor, to whom honor." Where government subsists, it must
of necessity be supported and maintained. This will create burdens for the
people, but burdens which they will cheerfully bear, and go through, while they
feel the benefit of their rulers mild, reasonable, righteous, just and
impartial administration. The people are bound in justice and equity to support
them, who employ their time and talents in the public service. While serving
the people, they ought to be maintained in ease and honor, according to their
rank and station, and the degrees of service, by them, done to the community.
They should have their minds freed from all anxiety and distressing concern, as
to their own and their families subsistence in the world. That rulers should
sacrifice their own estates and fortunes in the service of the people, is not
just or reasonable. Men who serve others ought to be rewarded in proportion to
the time they spend, and the benefit thence resulting to them for whom they
labor. "The laborer is worthy of his hire." And I see not why rulers, and
others, who are wholly devoted to public business, and spend all their time,
(if need be) and talents therein, ought not to be more than barely supported,
and maintained in character; why they ought not to be enabled, in that way, to
lay up for their families and children, in some proportion, as it might be
supposed they probably would, by prudence, honesty and diligence in any other
lawful calling. Parsimony in a people toward "princes," and rulers, or the
ministers of Christ, is a great sin, and has a natural tendency to defeat the
designs of heaven, in their appointment to office. But with regard to the
support due to civil government from the governed, there is a measure, beyond
which, taxes imposed on them, are but extortion and oppression. "There is
nothing that affects men more, than when you touch their interest; people in
general find it hard to procure the conveniences of life; nothing will sooner
alienate their minds from government, than when rulers needlessly deprive them
of that which they have dearly earned, and wantonly dissipate the public
treasures. Rulers ought ever to proceed in this part of their duty with caution
and prudence, that people may see the taxes they impose are not to gratify
their pride, their avarice, or any other passion; not to carry on any private
design, "but that they are necessary for the support of government and the
exigencies of the state." Rulers should be men hating covetousness, as well as
fearing God, otherwise they will sacrifice the rights and property of their
subjects, and sometimes their lives, to gratify their pride, ambition and
avarice. Naboth lost his life, through the covetousness of Ahab, who sought his
vineyard. When magistrates neither fear God, nor regard man, instead of aiming
at the public good (which is their main business) they will study to advance
their own private interest, and that of their household, and do any thing to
keep in office. Sinister views govern and predominate; such men are not to be
trusted. Power in their hands is dangerous; for they will sacrifice conscience
and sell their country to gratify and pleasure themselves; or they will do this
to please those above them, on whom they depend. Such men are easily bought.
How far this has been verified of late, in this land, I leave all to determine
for themselves. Rulers seem to be mistaken, when they act with a view only to
support and preserve their own greatness and grandeur. "That the civil ruler
and christian minister should engross the wealth of the world to themselves, as
they have done in many ages and countries, and live in pride and luxury, on
spoils violently extorted or slily drained from the people, is altogether
foreign to the design of God in setting them up." That they ought to be
supported in ease and honor, we may collect from the sacred oracles.

AS good rulers, God's ministers for good to the people, are entitled to
sufficient and honorable maintenance, so are they, to every mark of honor,
esteem and respect from their subjects. "Honor the king," says St. Peter. And
as there are no lawful powers, but who are ordained of God; so St. Paul directs
us to render to such their dues; "fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor," is
due. Rulers and princes are entitled to the most respectful treatment from the
people over whom they are placed. We may not "speak evil of dignities," nor "of
the rulers of the people." To treat "princes" and rulers with contempt,
indignity, and disrespect, is slighting and contemning an ordinance of God.

BUT not only are good "princes," and rulers to be supported and honored in
their stations, but submitted to and obeyed. Reason will direct, and interest
lead, all cheerfully to submit to the laws and government of such magistrates;
and religion most strongly enforces the same duty* St. Paul, says, "Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: The
powers that be, are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: And they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake." And St. Peter exhorts. "Submit yourselves to
every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: Whether it be to the king as
supreme; or unto governors, as unto them, that are sent by him." The civil
ruler is the minister of God for good to the people. While rulers pursue the
end of their appointment to office, seeking the public good, they are to be
obeyed and submitted unto. Rulers are men of like passions with ourselves; as
liable to an undue bias and influence, and so to errors and mistakes in their
conduct, as their subjects. It becomes subjects to point out the mistakes which
rulers run into, at any time, in their administration; and when these are made
to appear, they will, if they have the good of society at heart, immediately
rectify them. We may not refuse submission to higher powers, because of lesser
errors in government. Allowance ought to be made for rulers as well as others.
It is the property of the divine Being only to be incapable of doing wrong.
Every wrong step in rulers, may not proceed from a settled disposition to abuse
their power and injure their subjects. But when they make use of their power
and authority in a manner subversive of the end of their designation to office;
when they encroach on the natural and constitutional rights of the people; when
they trample on those laws, which were made, at once to limit their power, and
defend their subjects; in such cases the people are bound not to obey them, but
resist them as public robbers and the destroyers of mankind and of human
happiness. Says the great Mr. Lock in his treatise upon government.
"Wheresoever law ends, tyranny begins, if the law be transgressed to another's
harm. And whoever in authority, exceeds the power given him by law, and makes
use of the force he has under his command, to compass that upon the subject
which the law allows not, ceases in that to be a magistrate; and acting without
authority, may be opposed as any other man, who invades the right of another."
And in these cases the people must be judge of the good or ill conduct of their
rulers; to the people they are accountable. It is the highest popery to affirm
otherwise. "The argument whereby the Aposte Paul enforces his exhortation of
submission to rulers, and disswades from resistance, is, that these civil
powers are ordained of God, and ordained by him, ministerially to convey
blessings from him to the people. So long therefore, and so far as these civil
powers act agreably to the design of their ordination, and do good in their
stations, the people are obliged to subjection, and resistance will be
blameable; but if these powers forsake their proper sphere, thwart God's design
in ordaining them, disserve the people, and take measures which tend to ruin
them, the Apostle's ground of the people's subjection ceases; and, indeed,
submission becomes a fault, and resistance a virtue. If the people ought to
oobey well conducting rulers out of regard to the public good, it must be as
much their duty, still governed by a regard to the public good, to oppose them,
when pursuing destructive methods. To suppose it belongs to the Apostle's
meaning, that it is a damnable sin to resist civil powers, because ordained of
God, though they act entirely out of character, and thwart every kind purpose
God had in ordaining them, is in the class of most palpable grating
absurdities. A pretense to ground such ideas, as those of indefeasible right,
passive obedience, and non-resistance, on the Bible, is criminal -- an high
abusive scandal to the Christian religion, and its divinely inspired
Promulgator. If God had given up mankind to the will of oppressors, not
permitting the people, on pain of damnation, to attempt their own relief, it
would not, indeed, have exceeded the demerit of a sinful world; but would have
been disagreable to the general analogy of kind Providence." As rulers, however
omnipotent they may pretend to be, are not raised above a possibility of erring
and mistaking in the exercise of their power and authority, so it is not absurd
to suppose they may, in some cases enjoin and require things of their subjects
contrary to the laws of nature, which are the laws of God, and contrary also to
the Christian religion; in which case our duty is plain, "We must obey God
rather than men." And, "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage." If any come in
privily to spy out our liberty, which we derive from the Author of nature and
the Author of our most holy faith, we may not give place to them, by
subjection, no not for an hour; that the rights of nature and of conscience,
and the truth of the gospel, may continue with us. But not to enlarge in this
way.

HIS present majesty, king George the third, has in my opinion, an undoubted
right to the British throne; but his right thereto is founded, if not wholly,
yet principally, on the people's right to resist, and set aside evil and wicked
rulers, rulers who trample on the fundamental laws of the state, and invade
their subjects rights and liberties. Had not the people resisted and removed
that unhappy and misguided king, Charles the first, the nation would probably,
have been ruined. King James the second, brother of Charles the second, and son
of Charles the first, so enraged the people, by his infatuated measures, as
that he was forced to abdicate the throne, and flee his kingdom. Then William
Henry and Mary, prince and princess of Orange, were proclaimed king and queen
of England. This event, called the revolution, took place in 1688. William and
Mary dying without issue, the princess Anna of Denmark, second daughter of king
James the second, was proclaimed queen. She died leaving no children, whereupon
George Lewiss, elector of Hanover, succeeded to the crown of Great-Britian. He
was grandson of the princess Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of James the first,
king of England. He was succeeded, in the throne of these kingdoms, by his son
George the second, of illustrious memory, who was grandfather to George the
third, the present rightful sovereign on the British throne. History shows us
that the greater part of the kings of England, have come to the throne, not so
much by right of inheritance, as by the election of the people, and the
resistance they have made to them who were heirs apparent to the crown, or
actually on the throne. "Archigallo, Emerian, Vertigern, Sigibert, kings of the
west saxons: Beornred and Alured, kings of Northumberland, were all deprived of
their thrones for their evil government, and such who were though it more worthy
preferred in their stead. King Edwin being deprived for his unjust government,
the crown was given to his brother Edgar, who was one of the rarest princes,
that the world had in his time both for peace and war, justice, piety and valor.

Of all our kings from the Norman invasion, the better half came to the crown
contrary to the doctrine of the divine unalienable right. William the second
put by his brother Robert, so did Henry the first. Stephen set aside, Maud the
empress. King John did the same, by his nephew. Edward the third, outed his
father, Edward the second. Henry the fourth, obliged Richard the second, to
abdicate. Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, kept possession of the throne
from the house of Mortimer, whose right it was by inheritance. Edward the
fourth, removed Henry the sixth. Richard the third, served his nephew, Edward
the fifth after the same rate. Henry the seventh, would never own his wise's
title, and so on." See a treatise, entitled, Vox populi, vox Dei, being true
maxims of government.


If the people have a right to keep out the next heir to the crown, because he
is a papist, they have equal right to do so for any other as weighty cause, and
to fix on the throne such a prince as they shall think fit.

WHAT has been said above respecting government and the great blessing it is to
society, may serve to introduce what shall follow, agreeable to the purport of
the text.

POWER is too intoxicating, and liable to abuse. As great a blessing as
government is, like all other blessings, it may become a scourge, a curse, and
severe punishment to a people. "For the transgression of a land, many are the
princes thereof," says Solomon. Intimating that to have many princes in a
kingdom is a just judgment of God upon a sinful nation. These words may be
variously interpreted. "For the transgression of a land, and a general
defection from God, and religion, to idolatry, profaneness and immorality,
many are the princes thereof; many at the same time pretending to the
sovereignty, and contending for it, by which the people are crumbled into
parties and factions, biting and devouring one another. Or many princes
successively in a little time, one cutting off another, or soon cut off by the
hand of God, or of a foreign enemy." But this word "prince," need not be
understood in so limited a sense, as intending the king, or first magistrate.
It may most properly be understood here, as meaning the nobles, counselors,
and officers in a kingdom and land; any ruler and officer among people; any who
are set over them to rule, order and govern them. And our text speaks of it, as
a punishment upon a people and land to have a multitude of princes, or rulers
and officers. For the entertaining just conceptions of this point, let it be
observed: That as government was ordained of God for the " good" of the people,
and not for their destruction; so to effect this most valuable intended end, it
is necessary, that in every state there be as many "princes," and rulers, of
one sort and of another, higher and lower as shall be sufficient to all the
purposes of good government; both for the making and executing laws, conducive
to the general felicity, and that the benefits and advantages thence resulting,
may be seen and felt, in the remotest parts of the empire. In proportion to the
extent of a kingdom, must be its number of "princes," its legislative and
executive officers. It is not possible for one, or a few, to carry on the great
end of government, in a large and widely extended empire. Governors and
officers must be sent forth into all parts to make and execute good and
wholesome laws for the punishment of evil doers, and for the encouragement and
security of them who do well. This will create proportionable burdens for the
people: Because all serving the public, ought by them to be well supported. But
multiplying of lucrative offices in a kingdom or state, beyond what is really
necessary to promote, the only and great end of government, the general good of
the community, as it must produce great and warm struggles for higher and more
profitable posts among them, and unavoidably increase the burdens of the
people, so it may truly be reckoned a severe punishment, and heavy judgment
upon a land. Innumerable, almost, are the evil consequences which take place in
the state, from a needless addition of "princes," rulers and officers in it,
which prove the thing to be a sore scourge and curse to the land. Bribery and
corruption will prevail, and an increase of taxes and duties on the necessaries
of life, on lands, food and clothing, whereby the people are reduced to
straits and poverty, while these Supernumeraries live in idleness, affluence
and luxury, on the labors of the honest and industrious. How noxious to society
is this! Whether Great-Britian and these colonies, being a part of the empire,
are in that situation of having many more "princes," rulers and officers
therein, than are absolutely necessary to manage the affairs of government,
some will doubtless venture to deny. But, so great is the number of "princes,"
that is, placemen and pensioners in our nation and land, as that the stipends
they receive must, and will keep the nation in debt. An immense sum is annually
paid in pensions, to persons who are out of public business, and some to
persons in office, over and above their fixed income. This, together with the
necessary expenses and charges of the state, have created such a debt in
England, as that after all the means and methods used to increase the national
revenue, it can do little more than pay the interest of the debt, and the
annual exigencies of government. The interest of our national debt amounts to
near upon five millions a year. Ten millions of pounds sterling is our present
annual national income, and likewise our present annual national expense;
including what may at times be paid toward the discharge of the debt and the
cost of collecting.
That persons in high office, and ministers of God for good to the public,
should be rewarded for their services, is but just; and that they be maintained
in honor and dignity, proportioned to their rank, and the importance and
usefulness of their offices to the people, is very reasonable. But why one who
was well rewarded while in office and business, must retire therefrom, with a
pension of several thousands of pounds, only to make room for another person,
we, in this remote corner of the world, see not. All this burden comes upon the
laboring poor, and by this means they are so straightened, as scarce to be able to
procure for themselves and families, the necessaries of life. The generality of
the common people in England and Ireland, fare much poorer, than the meanest
servant, and most abject slave in this land. That men who have performed some
signal exploit, and done something whereby special benefit accrues to the state
should be distinguishingly rewarded, is but reasonable and just. All the wit
and craft of men has been exercised, and their invention wracked to find out
offices, posts and employments for them who have been seeking places, that
there might be, at least, a plausible pretense for their receiving large
salaries from the people. It is almost impossible, to reckon up the different
"princes," rulers and officers, in the nation, or to compute their stipends;
the sum thereof is, almost, beyond account. New and unheard of officers and
rulers have been made of late years, that so all may be provided with places
and incomes.

FURTHER, a large standing army, consisting, perhaps of near an hundred
thousand men in all parts of the British dominions, is kept up, at an amazing
expense to the state. Some under half pay, others under full pay; the higher
officers have very great wages, while the soldiers have scanty allowance. This
army is kept up to aid the civil power, it is pretended; but were the
requirements of civil rulers just and reasonable, there would be no occasion of
having recourse to the powers of the military, to enforce obedience. When
measures are to be carried, and can be carried, only by force of the soldiery,
and the terror of arms, it is proof abundant that they are unlawful and
unconstitutional. For however there may be persons of a factious, licentious
turn, yet the body of a people are disposed to obedience and submission from a
principle of self-interest, if nothing else. They are disposed to "lead quiet
and peaceable lives." When there arises general uneasiness and complaint among
a people, it is a certain sign things do not go well in the state, and that the
measures pursuing are not just, right and equal. A standing army kept up, as
they always are, in idleness, in time of peace, are the bane of religion,
virtue and social felicity, and the nursery of the most exuberant growth of all
kinds of wickedness and debauchery. This is a plan to fright people into a
compliance with favorite measures, which the abettors are sensible mankind will
not readily consent unto. And may it not be, because they are not just? This is
a measure unnecessarily burdensome. For "a constitution which cannot support
its own weight must fall; -- it must be supposed essentially defective in its
form or administration Military aid has ever been deemed dangerous to a free
civil state; and often has been used as an effectual engine to subvert it." A
people ought not to be forced or frighted out of their rights, liberties and
property. When standing armies are improved, it may well awaken the jealousy of
the people, and rouse their attention to their dearest worldly interests. When
rulers and princes act in character as ministers of God for good to the people,
and pursue the things which tend to the welfare and interest of the state,
instead of their own, the people will easily perceive it. "People are generally
capable of knowing when they are well used. Public happiness is easily felt.
Men cannot but perceive when they enjoy their rights, and privileges; when they
set at quiet under their own vines and fig trees, and there is none to make
them afraid; when the laws of the land have their course, and justice is
impartially administered; when no unreasonable burdens are laid upon them; when
their rulers are ready to hear their complaints, and to redress their wrongs;
when they treat them with condescension, tenderness and affection; when they
sympathize with them under their difficulties, and, like their great Master,
are afflicted in all their afflictions. Such a temper and conduct in rulers are
easily perceived, without any extraordinary penetration." Dr. Eliot's election
sermon.


BUT to proceed, We, in this land, have seen and felt and still see and feel,
the evils of a standing army posted among us in time of peace; sent hither to
force or fright this people to comply with acts of the British Parliament,
which are generally looked upon as unconstitutional and grievous; and they will
probably be improved to force this people, if possible, to relinquish their
chartered rights and liberties, which we hold by the plighted faith of former
princes, and the crown.

BESIDES, new courts of admiralty have been, within these few years, erected,
judges appointed with extensive jurisdiction and "great power," with large
salaries annexed to their offices, without being obliged to reside in their
respective districts, or perform any part of the service; but do all by their
deputies, who also have good stipends. Persons are liable to be carried, a
great distance, for trial in these courts, and there the party complaining is
in a sense both judge and jury. These, together with a new Board of
Commissioners, and other officers, unknown to our fathers, compose that band of
"princes," by whom this land is punished for its transgression. Nothing need be
said here more than to mention these things, unless it be to add, that the
Board of Commissioners, and other officers are maintained in pride, idleness
and luxury, at a vast and needless expense of public treasure. For, admitting
it to be reasonable that a revenue be raised in America, it might be collected
without maintaining such a multitude of officers, in the collection, as are
employed, and which eats up most, if not the whole, of the profit. But enough
has been said to show when government, instead of being a blessing, becomes a
scourge, and a punishment to a people. It is so when its rulers or princes are
many, and numerous, whereby unnecessary burdens are brought upon the people.

I GO on to say very briefly, That "by a man of understanding and knowledge the
state thereof shall be prolonged." Religion and knowledge will prevent or
redress the grievances, to which a land may be subjected, by a mulititude of
"princes" and rulers. A privy counselor, or minister of state, or the
principal rulers in a kingdom, if they are men of real religion and enlarged
knowledge will use their influence and power to restrain and suppress, "the
transgression of a land," and pursue the best methods for healing the wounds
thereof, that so the good estate thereof may be prolonged. It is scarce
possible to conceive, what eminent service one wise man may do for a nation in
a difficult, critical and troublesome juncture. The wise man tells us in this
chapter, where we find the text, that, "the prince who wants understanding is
also a great oppressor: But he that hates covetousness shall prolong his
days." The love of money, and the want of due consideration, are the causes of
the mal-administration of "princes" and rulers. A ruler who it covetous will
neither do justly, nor love mercy, but the people under him shall be bought and
sold. But rulers who are ture fearers of God, and haters of covetousness, shall
prolong their government and peace; they shall be happy in the affections of
their people, and the blessings of their God. Rulers who are wise and good,
will never oppress and enslave their subjects, if they would consult their own
interest, ease and safety. Tyrants and oppressors who sacrifice every thing to
their covetousness, and ambition of an absolute, arbitrary power, generally
suffer for their madness and folly, when an oppressed and enslaved people are
rouzed. Such rulers often fall a sacrifice to the rage of mankind. When they
who rule over men, are persons of understanding and knowledge, not only men
discerning in the times and seasons, knowing what Israel ought to do, but men
of real goodness and religion, are "just, ruling in the fear of God," the state
of that people will be prosperous, flourishing, and happy: Such rulers will be
a God-like blessing. Says God by the mouth of his servant king David, "they
shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even as a morning
without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain." The character and extensive beneficence of the faithful ruler, are
here represented, who with a God-like ardor employs his authority and influence
to advance the common interest; The righteous Lord, whose countenance beholds
the upright, will support and succeed rulers of this character: And it is an
evidence of his favor to a people, when such are apponited to rule over them.
The natural effect of this, is quietness and peace, as showers upon the tender
grass and clear shining after rain. In this case a loyal people must be happy,
and fully sensible that they are so -- while they find their persons in safety
-- their liberties preserved -- their property defended -- and their confidence
in their rulers entire. The necessary expenses of government will be borne with
pleasure; while justice holds the balance, and righteousness flows down their
streets. Such civil state, according to the natural course of things, must
flourish in peace at home, and be respectable abroad -- private virtues will be
encouraged, and vice driven into darkness -- industry in the most effectual
manner promoted -- arts and sciences patronized -- the true fear of God
cultivated, and his worship maintained. Happy must the people be that is in
such a case -- ye happy is the people whose God is the Lord." Rev Mr. Cock's
election sermon.
"By a man of understanding and knowledge, the state thereof shall be
prolonged." But I need not enlarge here, since so much was said in the
beginning of this discourse, of the great blessing of good civil government.
Government, as great a blessing as it is, sometimes may become a scourge and
punishment to a people. Is not this the case, at this day, with our nation and
land?

OUR part, my hearers, is to consider what are the moral causes of our public
calamities and troubles, humble ourselves before God, and, while his judgments
are abroad in the earth, learn righteousness. "For the transgression of a land
many are the princes thereof." The consideration of this matter, together with
some observations upon the present state of this country, and directions and
advice to the people respecting the same, will be the business of the next
discourse. In the mean time, let what has been said, be well weighed and duly
considered by us, "And the Lord give us understanding in all things."

End of the First SERMON.
SERMON II.
PROVERBS XXVIII.2. For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof: But by a Man of Understanding and Knowledge the State thereof shall be
prolonged.


IN the morning I expatiated upon the great blessing of good civil government,
and considered the grand end and design of the institution -- Then observed
that, as great a blessing as civil government was, it might be so conducted as
to become a curse, a judgment and punishment to a land: And it is so, when the
"princes," or rulers "thereof are many," many more than are necessary to
promote and effect the great end of government, the good of the community, and
when by being multiplied in a land, the burdens of the people must be greatly,
needlessly and very unprofitably increased, and they impoverished and enslaved:
While men, or rulers of understanding and knowledge, rulers of religion and
piety as well as great discernment, by their wise, prudent and righteous
administration, will prolong the state, the tranquillity, and happiness of the
land.

BUT as the present state of the British empire indicates that civil government
is made a scourge and punishment unto the people, so our part, my hearers, and
the proper business of this day, is to enquire and consider what are the moral
causes of this punishment, to humble ourselves before God, and while his
judgments are abroad in the earth, learn righteousness.

THE present multitude of "princes," or rulers in the land, and their enormous,
gigantic strides after dispotic government and arbitrary power, our text
teaches us to consider as a just judgment of heaven, and a righteous punishment
upon "the land" (as inflicted by God) for the many provoking sins, and daring
"transgressions" of the people. "Our adversity is to be considered, as the
effect of providential agency or permission -- as a righteous parental
chastisement of heaven, for our many provacations; and a loud call for
universal repentance and reformation, according to the gospel or Christ." While
therefore, the language of this day's solemnities seems to be this, that with
all humility we confess our sins to God, and "come boldly to the throne of
grace that we may find mercy to pardon," and with fullest confidence are
committing our cause to the God of infinite wisdom, putting up fervent prayers
to that Being, who is able to save; we should, at the same time, consider our
indispensable obligations, and the necessity of "adding to" our prayers and
supplications, true and unfeigned repentance, as ever we would hope to obtain
audience of Him, "who loves righteousness, and hates iniquity." The psalmist
tells us, that, "if we regard iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will not hear
us." The voice of Providence, at such a time of trouble, and day of darkness,
speaks on this wise, to every messenger of the Lord of Hosts "cry aloud, and
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgression, and their sins." Isaiah 58.1.
This people should be taught what is amiss among them, be "showed their evil
works, and their transgressions which they have exceeded." Job 36.9.
And be earnestly pressed and urged to repentance and reformation, as the only
way to obtain deliverance from our present distress, and to cause the divine
Being to avert those impending evils and punishments, which will, otherwise,
fall on us, until God "shall make an utter end of us."

OUR ancestors, who first came into this country, and their immediate
posterity, were a pious, a holy and a praying people, and God had a favor for
them. But we, who have thus remotely descended from them have risen up in their
stead, "a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, we have forsaken
the Lord, we have provoked the holy One of Israel unto anger, we are gone away
backward." "Iniquity greatly abounds, and the love of many waxes cold."
Multitudes are "enemies to God and religion, in their minds by wicked works."
Have we not forfeited all our blessings into the hands of God? And are not
rulers made the instruments, in his hands of depriving us of some of them, and
thus punishing us? And are not most of the evils we now suffer, the natural and
necessary, as well as moral, effects of our vices? And is there any reason to
hope that we shall be a happy people, while pride and extravagance, luxury and
intemperance are so prevalent among us? But further, to use the words of
another, which are peculiarly emphatical, and expressive. "Though greatly
distant, we are sorrowfully infected with the irreligion and vices, which are
predominant in England; and which reign there to such a degree as that we can
scarcely forbear applying such language as that in the Revelation, "come out of
her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues: For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities." A worldly spirit, is discovering itself, in numerous immoral
effects of avarice, in many instances of perferring private temporal interests
before the good of the country, and as to some in an easy declension from the
dissenting cause, and coincidence with a certain more worldly, and less
reformed ecclesiastical establishment; the immoral practice of gameing with
lucrative purposes, chiefly among persons in that which they call high life; a
great neglect of public religious ordinances, in almost all parts of the land;
amazing profanity, especially in maritime places; widely prevailing and highly
excessive use of spirituous liquors, together with a variety of high-strained
modes of extravagance and luxury, more especially in our larger and more
wealthy trading towns. -- Things which appear at such a day as this "exceeding
sinful," absurd and aggravated, are in the number of those sins wherewith our
times are marked; while some persons run off into the wildest excesses of
sentiment, some "concerning faith have made shipwreck," and others are
tinctured with the spirit of skepticism. And such irreligion and vice, whereby
we offend our God, and "the God of our fathers," and merit our misery at his
hands, are, in a great measure, borrowed (with unaccountable fond embraces) of
the very people from whom our sufferings proceed. -- The reflection is
sufficiently painful and confounding, without proceeding to observe that,
persons may possibly be found, degenerate enough, to spread vice and wickedness
among us, from a principle of Balaamitish policy, or to render as an easier
prey, by means of the venality, carelessness and timidity which are the natural
effects of luxury."

"BUT whatever may be justly said of their origination, certain it is, that by
numerous offenses against God, we merit a much deeper plunge of adversity, than
we are now involved in; and we are called upon, by the monitory language of
divine Providence, to "consider our ways, and turn our feet unto his
testimonies, and so to give glory to the Lord our God, before our feet stumble
upon the dark mountains; and while we look for light, he turn it into the
shadow of death, and make it CROSS darkness." Mr. Turner's election sermon.


BUT not to enlarge in this way. I will proceed to show, agreeable to what has
already been hinted -- That many of the evils and troubles we now suffer, are
the moral, and also the natural and necessary effects of our transgressions and
sins; so that we may read our sins, in the way and manner of our punishment.

WITH regard to the duty laid upon India teas, I cannot help thinking, (though
some possibly may call this superstition) that it is a just judgment, and
righteous punishment upon this people, for their vile abuse, and prostitution
of that article of foreign trade, and I may add, needless luxury. To me it
appears, that by means of this article of tea, the people of this land, have
run into excesses of wickedness, great beyond all account. Many have foolishly
laid out their money for this, who could scarce procure the necessaries of
life, and for no other reason, but because it was fashionable. And all orders,
ranks and ages of people have been so devoted to it, as that they, many of them
at least, "have worshipped and served this creature, more than the Creator, who
is blessed forever." Is it possible to tell how much time has been foolishly
spent, principally, but not altogether, among them, who are above the common
level of mankind? Much time has been lost, which might have been more
profitably spent at home in their own proper business. Is it possible to say
how much actual wickedness has been committed by people, (when visiting one
another for the sake of tea, chiefly) in idle, vain and sinful conversation, in
freely handling the characters of others, slandering and defaming of them;
together with a pretense among many at such times, to a power of revealing
secrets, or foretelling future events, which, in whatever light we view it,
must be evil. For a knowledge of any future events comes not from God in that
way. If any persons have this power it must be derived from some evil spirit.
If none have this power of foretelling future events; pretending to it, may at
least be reckoned among that "foolish talking and jesting which" the apostle
says, "are not convenient," and which by no means "become women, professing
godliness*" Besides, there are many other evils attending this fashion and
custom of visiting, for the sake of drinking tea. It is no sin for persons, who
are able, to use the produce of other countries either for food or clothing:
It is the excess in the use hereof, with other evils accompanying the same
which is faulty; and whether this article has not pretty universally been used
to a great degree of faulty and sinful excess, is a question, I readily submit,
for decision, to the sober and thinking part of mankind. While I shall scarce
mention the damage done to this country, by the unexampled use and consumption
of India-teas, in the vast sums of money annually sent hence to purchase it.
Were the people in this land to use it as freely as heretofore they have done,
the revenue arising from the duty laid on that single article, small as it is,
no doubt, would annually amount to several hundred thousand pounds. It is to be
hoped, that for the good of their country, the people will totally lay aside
the use of that needless, not to say hurtful commodity; for the duty hence
arising, is chiefly, if not wholly spent, to support in idleness, or something
worse, a set of men, many of whom, are not only needless, but noxious to
society.

BUT to proceed, May not the late act of the British court for blocking up the
harbor of Boston, be viewed in the light of a just frown of heaven upon the
town and country, for their excess in trade, and amazing extravagance in the
consumption of foreign commodities. Though a free trade to foreign countries,
well managed, may be a great benefit, yet it may be abused, and prove a real
damage to the land. Many things absolutely surperflous are imported; things
which tend only to feed our pride and vanity. Many things are imported, which
might be manufactured among ourselves, vastly to our own advantage. It is
greatly to the interest of any country to encourage all kinds of manufactures.
But we have too generally contracted a distaste to what is home-made, and think
we must go abroad for food and clothing. This country has been overstocked
with foreign goods, whereby the land is drained of it is money. Besides,
multitudes in all parts are running into trade, which is a real damage to the
community: were they employed in handling the plow, (a work many of them are
much fitter for) and turning the wilderness into a fruitful field, they would
do more eminent service to their country, and, no doubt, to themselves.
However, I am far from thinking that this act of parliament, is a righteous and
just act, as some do. It is an amazing stretch of power, replete with cruelty
and oppression; not to be paralleled in the records of any court, even the
Ottoman, and stands unexampled in all history. "All who have seen or heard of
it, say, there was no such deed done nor seen, from the day that the children
of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt, unto this day: Consider of it, take
advice, and speak your minds." Judges 19.^0.
Says God, "Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed: To turn aside the needy from judgment,
and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their
prey, and that they may rob the fatherless." Isaiah 10.1.2.
But what may we not expect from a parliament, which has resolved, it has
full power, authority and right to make laws and statutes to bind the colonies,
in ALL cases whatsoever? In that case, what end do the legislative courts of
these provinces answer?

AGREEABLE to the above resolution, two acts have already passed the house of
commons, and the house of lords, fundamentally subversive of our chartered
rights, and civil constitution, whereby many of our municipal institutions and
laws, which many years ago received the royal sanction, and which we have long
been in the enjoyment of, are repealed, and the government here rendered
despotic and arbitrary. Whether these bills have received the king's consent or
not, is not yet certain. We have reason to hope in the mildness, tenderness and
affection of our sovereign; but in assenting or not assenting to acts of the
British court he, no doubt, consults his privy council. If these bills pass
into laws, whether this people will submit thereto, or not, is a question which
cannot be determined: But if they submit, liberty here will be at an end, we
hold our rights, property and lives by the most precarious tenure. "The
governor and council, hereby instituted with powers, with which the British
constitution has not trusted his majesty, and his privy council, have the means
of returning such a jury in each particular cause, as may best suit with the
gratification of their passions and interests. The lives, liberties and
properties of the subject are put into their hands without control; and the
invaluable right of trial by jury, is turned into a snare for the people, who
have hitherto looked upon it, as their main security against the licentiousness
of power. We see in this bill the same scheme of strengthening the authority of
the officers and ministers of state, at the expense of the rights and liberties
of the subject, which was indicated by the inauspicious act for shutting up the
harbor of Boston. See the Lord's protest against this bill. There were twenty
in the house of Lords against this bill, their names will be handed down to all
future generations, as the Patrons of liberty and America, and friends to
mankind. Eleven of these noble Lords, namely, Richmond, Portland, Abingdon,
King, Effingham, Ponsonby, Rockingham, Abergavenny, Leinster, Craven,
Fitzwilliam, have in a protest, signed by them, said every thing which need be
said against such a bill, showed the impolicy and injustice of it.
It seems cruel and unjust to be deprived of our chartered rights and
privileges; and so it seemed to our forefathers, when the first charter was
inhumanly murdered. Says Dr. Eliot, See his election sermon.
"Our fathers dearly bought the privileges we enjoy. It is evident, when they
left their native land, they thought their rights as Englishmen would follow
them wherever they sat down, and be transmitted to their posterity; and we hope
their posterity have done nothing to forfeit them. It was kindly and justly
said by bishop Burnet to a New England agent, as I find it delivered before his
excellent son, and the general assembly of this province, "that he would openly
stand up for us, and notwithstanding all the obloquy that would be cast upon
him for it, he would plead our cause; and when our charter should come to be
considered in the house of lords, he would there publicly declare, that there
was a greater sacredness in the charter of New England, than in those of the
corporations in England; for those were only acts of grace, whereas the charter
of New England was a contract between the king and the first patentees; wherein
they had promised to enlarge the king's dominions on their own charges,
provided that they and their posterity might enjoy such and such privileges:
And now they had performed their part, for the king to deprive their posterity
of the privileges granted to them, would carry a face of injustice in it." Thus
that great and good man." In 1688 the house of commons voted the taking away
the charters of the plantations to be a grievance. Gov. Hutchinson's hist. vol.
I. p. 38.
Says another, "The New England charter, was not considered as an act of grace,
but a compact between the sovereign, and the first patentees."

Our fathers plead their right to the privilege of it, in their address to king
Charles the second; wherein they say, "It was granted to them, their heirs,
assigns and associates forever; not only the absolute use, and propriety of the
tract of land therein mentioned; but also full and absolute power of governing
all the people of this place, by men chosen from among themselves, and
according to such laws as they shall from time to time see meet to make and
establish, not being repugnant to the laws of England, they paying only the
fifth part of the ore of gold and silver, that shall be found here, for and in
respect of all duties, demands, exactions and services whatsoever." And from an
apprehension, that the powers given by the crown to the four Commissioners For
a full account of these Commissioners, and the reception they met with in the
province, see governor Hutchinson's hist. vol. I. from p. 229 to 256.
sent here, were, in effect, subversive of their rights and government -- they
add -- "We are carefully studious of all due subjection to your majesty, and
that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake." "But it is a great
unhappiness to be reduced to so hard a case, as to have no other testimony of
our subjecton and loyalty offered us but this, viz. to destroy our own being,
which nature teaches us to preserve; or to yield up our liberties, which are
far dearer to us than our lives -- and which, had we any fear of being deprived
of, we had never wandered from our fathers houses into these ends of the earth
-- nor laid out our labors and estates therein." See Rev. Mr. Cook's election
sermon.


BUT though they could thus plead, they pleaded in vain; that charter was
vacated. As strong if not stronger pleas have been made by our friends in both
houses of parliament, and by the people in this country in favor of the second
charter, and against those bills, which have passed the two houses; but all to
no purpose: -- if his majesty has given, or does speedily give his assent to
those bills, we shall be deprived of the greatest liberties and privileges
granted to us, in our charter, and this province will by means of such an
alteration and change in their form of government, naturally be thrown into a
state of anarchy and confusion, for some time.

THIS province has always had its enemies, men who have looked upon its
privileges, as a prey richly worth their seizing. Our enemies have generally
been men born and bro't up among ourselves, who have been under every tie to
guard, support and defend the rights of their native country. With respect to
the measures which have been lately adopted by the British court, in regard to
America and this province in particular, they have been contrived, promoted,
and greatly urged, chiefly by natives of this land, Some of them are gone to
the bar of God, in whose hands we are willing to leave them. All who have
abetted these measures we shall mark, and "the abhorrence and execrations of
mankind will consign them to an infamous immortality." That some men, men of
particular occupations and employments should formally return thanks to any one
for his good services, who has labored to deprive us of our charter-rights, and
to subvert our civil constitutution, may be accounted for. Such may hope for
some trifling promotion, and to build themselves up upon the ruins of their
country. That the ministers of the church of England should do so, is not so
easily accounted for, unless it proceeds from the favorable notice such may
have taken of that church, and a hope that, if our civil government is changed,
their ecclesiastical constitution may be established here. But that ministers
of the congregational establishment should do thus, is altogether:
unaccountable at present.
Is it not almost unaccountable that any children of this land should prove
such monsters and prodigies of wickedness, such unnatural parricides and
assassins as to stab the vitals of their own country? But what will not lust
after power and dominion, or love of money, do? It "is the root of all evil,
which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows."

BUT in times of public calamity and distress, we may be too apt to overlook
the first, the moral cause of the evils we suffer. We indeed cannot help taking
some notice of the instruments of our griefs and sorrows. It is granted there
is the permission, and, perhaps, agency of heaven in these evils, for "shall
there be evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it?" Yet they who have
been the voluntary instruments, in bringing these troubles upon the province,
are not the less guilty; "thou could have no power against me, except it were
given thee from above," said our Savior to Pilate; yet this did not prove him
innocent, "in condemning that just One." Divine Providence in such events is
not to be impeached. The moral evils which take place in the world, are not to
be charged on God. Nothing can justify, or excuse the contrivers and promoters
of present measures: "Their guilt is of a scarlet color, and a crimson die."
But be their crime what it will, it becomes us to enquire what we have done to
provoke God thus to visit us in his anger, and to chasten us thus in his hot
displeasure. It becomes us to reflect with deepest contrition and penitence of
heart, on our past conduct, whereby we have offended the majesty of heaven, and
merited severest punishment. "For the transgression of the land" these things
are ordered, or permitted as a righteous chastisement, designed "for our
profit," to bring us to true repentance and reformation. When I consider the
way and manner of our punishment, I am ready to think, how much soever I may
differ from some people, that we have greatly abused those very liberties and
privileges, which, if these acts take place, we shall be deprived of; that we
have abused good government. May we not read our sins, in the face of our
punishment? I would here ask, have not some people, under the notion of zeal
for liberty, run into the most excessive licentiousness, and been guilty, in
one place and another, of the most lawless, unjust, and tyrannical proceedings,
such as pulling down and destroying houses, abusing persons, endangering men's
lives, destroying their property, breaking windows, delivering prisoners out of
the hands of justice, If there be any law of this province, allowing creditors
to keep debtors in jail, as long as they please, even after it appears that
they have nothing wherewith to pay, it is with all deference and modesty
submitted to our legislature, whether such a law does not contradict the laws
of nature and of Christianity, and if it does, whether it ought not to be
repealed!
and putting many into great fears; all contrary to the good and wholesome laws
of this province? These things, many of them at least, are indeed but the
natural consequences of a stretch of power in rulers and "princes," they are
the common fruit of grievous, oppressive and unconstitutional acts of
government. There was nothing of this kind among us, until the ever memorable
stamp act took place. Solomon has long since, observed, that "oppression makes
a wise man mad." But such lawless measures are not to be justified; they ought
not to be countenanced, or tolerated by any, nor have they been, by many. They
do not always answer a valuable purpose, but evil generally comes thereof; they
excite a spirit of revenge in the sufferers, and revenge has been pursued unto
the utmost, the bitter and severe fruits whereof we are now reaping. In these
times, when the general cry has been for liberty, have not some persons in the
land, of a querulous, factious and licentious turn, slid into the dangerous
extreme of despising all government, and endeavored to put down all rule,
order, government and authority, both in church and state? Has not reasonable,
just and mild government, in some parts of the land, been trampled on and
spurned at, and good rulers reviled, slighted and set at naught? Liberty, my
brethren, is a precious and inestimable jewel, and ought to be used with utmost
caution and delicacy. It may be as much abused as government and power, leading
into measures equally tyrannical and oppressive. The people who resist and
counteract well conducted civil administration, and trample upon the good and
wholesome laws of the land, should consider that they "resist an ordinance of
God, and they who resist shall receive to themselves damnation." It is not
improbable, that some persons in the land appear rather favorers of the present
oppressive measure of government, because they have seen too much of a
factious, licentious and tumultuous spirit among some people.

BUT to proceed: In the act for regulating the civil government of this
province, it is proposed that towns should be deprived of the liberty, which
the laws of this province have given them, of meeting when they please, and
acting upon whatever to them, may seem meet and good. And here it may be asked,
Have not some towns in the land sinned greatly, and highly provoked God, by an
abuse of the liberty and power by law given to them? Has no town done things
monstrously injurious and oppressive? And have not the "cries of the injured,
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath?" It is possible that, under color
of law, and that plea that all must be bound in all cases by the vote of the
majority, even things most unjust and unrighteous, may be transacted. It is
very difficult, if not impossible, to frame laws in such a manner, as to
prevent every species of injustice and iniquity. Are not towns therefore, which
have been guilty of a perversion of their liberty, in judgment, and as a proper
punishment, to be abridged thereof. Though, I grant, it looks most unreasonable
and unjust, that innocent places should suffer with the guilty.

FURTHER: The manner of returning jurymen is by the above act to be altered,
and the privilege granted, by our laws, to towns to return them, is to be
wrested from them. And have not some towns sinned greatly in the sight of God,
by trifling, in the most daring manner with this invaluable privilege, which
has been looked upon as our main security against the licentiousness of power.
Have not some places returned such persons, to serve as grand jurymen, and
jurymen on trials, in most interesting and important causes, as neither fear
God, nor regard man? Persons, who not only have no religion, but are enemies to
all religion and goodness; men who can deistically reproach the excellent, well
attested religion of Jesus Christ, and blaspheme its divine Author? Men "who
fear not an oath? Persons who have no regard to religion, to divine revelation,
will never think themselves bound to regard an oath; they can, and often do,
trifle with it. Have there been no instances wherein persons of this cast, have
been really picked, to serve a turn? Are our lives, our interest, our property
more safe in the hands of such persons, than they would be in the hands of a
jury returned by the sheriff? The remedy provided against this evil by the act
of the British court, is as bad as the disease; for although it may prevent
some evils, it will create more. Some other, better and more effectual remedy,
might be provided by our own legislature, and really ought to be; for this is a
"crying iniquity in our high places."

FURTHER, By the above mentioned act, the liberty of our choosing our own
counselors is to be taken from us, and put into the hands of the crown: This,
if it takes place, must ere long, have a vast influence on our liberty, laws
and religion. And we may expect that some alteration will soon be made in the
form of choosing our own representatives. When these dearest liberties are
threatened, does it not become this people, seriously to ask whether they have
not, by an abuse hereof, offended the most high God? We have all along had
great and good men in the two houses of assembly; men of great abilities,
fearing God and hating covetousness. But have they all been of this character?
Have none been elected to a seat in either house, who have been enemies to
religion, peace, order and good government? We are in a most pitiful situation,
if there are not men sufficient for all the places of government, who are well
qualified therefore; men not only friendly to the rights and liberties of this
people, but men discerning in the times and seasons, and knowing what they
ought to do; men of religion and piety, as well as sound judgment and enlarged
knowledge. Electors ought to have a regard to the religious and moral
characters of the men, whom they appoint to rule over the people, as well as to
other necessary qualifications. The direction of heaven in this case is plain;
"Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of
truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them." Exodus 18.21.
Men of another character, men who will trifle with, and sacrifice, their own
most important interests, will also sacrifice the interests of others, to serve
their own sinister views and purposes. Has that due regard been paid to the
moral and religious character of men, who have been appointed to places of
civil power and trust, men whose business it is, to see that the laws of the
land are well executed, which ought to be in all cases? But not to enlarge,
have we not too much reason, from the punishment which is threatened, to think
that we have wantonly trifled with, and shamefully abused these our inestimable
liberties and privileges, that our sins, in these respects have been very
great, and most provoking to God? But our sins, as a people, for which we now
suffer severe judgments, (and severer we are threatened with) cannot be reckoned
up in order. Suffice it to say, that so many and so great are our iniquities
and transgressions, that we have reason to fear, destruction from the Almighty
will come upon us to the uttermost. Nothing without timely repentance and
amendment, so striving to recommend ourselves to the divine Being, can save us.
Says God, "At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil
that I thought to do unto them." Jeremiah 18.7, 8.


HOWEVER faulty and guilty the instruments and agents in our calamities are,
yet considering our impieties and sins, they are but a just and righteous
punishment as coming from the hands of God, which may be averted by deep
humiliation and hearty contrition for our offenses; offering, at the same time,
as we profess to do this day, ardent prayers to Him, who is able to save,
committing our righteous cause to him, who so marvellously appeared for our
forefathers in their day, and even for us in our day. "His arm is not
shortened that it cannot save; his ear is not heavy that it cannot hear." "They
who make mention of the Lord, should not keep silence, and give him no rest,
till he establish, and make this land a praise in the earth." "For Zion, or the
churches sake they should not hold their peace, and for Jerusalem's sake should
they not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns." Isaiah 62.1, 6, 7.
Is it not altogether unaccountable that any persons who acknowledge a
Providence superintending, governing and ordering in all events, should be
found backward to the duties of such a day of fasting and prayer? For however
we may differ in sentiments as to what are our calamities, this is certain,
there is abundant occasion for deep humiliation on account of our sins, and the
divine judgments brought on the land therefore, whatever we may think our sins
and those judgments be.

THIS country seems to be in a most alarming and critical situation. So dark a
day perhaps North America never saw. There is scarce one gleam of light breaks
through the darkness, to comfort our hearts withal. Indeed we might hope that,
that God who so wonderfully owned and smiled upon the cause for which our
forefathers came into this, then howling wilderness would still own and smile
upon it; but our iniquities testify against us, and we must be sensible that
for our abuse of the blessings of religious liberty, and the gospel, we have
forfeited them into the hands of God. Our religious liberties are always
endangered when the civil are invaded; and from present appearances we have all
reason to fear they will fall together, and that it will not be long before
that ecclesiastical hierarchy will be established here (and possibly that
spiritual tyranny be exercised) from which our forefathers fled. It seems
strange, that a deep concern of mind respecting this matter, should not be
awakened in every friend to the dissenting interest.

WHAT are the leading springs and motives of the present measures of
administration it is hard to say. We have reason to fear, at least, that a
design is forming to dethrone his present majesty, king George the third, our
rightful sovereign, and to introduce the Pretender, and with him the popish
religion. Popery is, no doubt, gaining ground in England. A high dignitary of
the church of England, as we suppose, has declared, but a few years since, that
"popish bishops reside here," (that is in London, or in England somewhere) "and
go about to exercise every part of their function, without offense, and without
observation." See the answer to Dr. Mayhew's observations, printed in London.
"The papists, only in London, were by computation an hundred thousand, in the
year 1745, since which their numbers are vastly increased there, and in other
parts of the kingdom; the people being, as it is said, perverted by popish
bishops, priests, jesuits, etc. by hundreds and thousands, if not ten
thousands, yearly." See Dr. Mayhew's second defense of his observations, p. 71.
The good laws of England, it appears from hence, are dormant and unexecuted,
against papists; nor would it be any reflection to say, that, possibly, some of
this persuasion may be advanced to places of high power and trust in our
nation. Certain it is, that his majesty's council in Grenada, an American
island, is composed partly, if not wholly of Roman catholics. There is a
popish bishop at Canada. This, it is said, was stipulated, in the last treaty
of peace between England and France. There is a popish priest at Nova Scotia,
who is supported by England, as I have been informed. These things, so
tolerated and countenanced, may well lead us to fear that some secret designs
are planning against the crown, and protestant religion in England, the
abettors whereof may, not improbably, ere long boldly show their faces, and
openly own their cause. However that be, these things forebode no good to the
civil constitution, or ecclesiastical, of Great Britain. The principles and
tenets of papists are such, as that it is not safe for any protestant
government to tolerate them. The dissenting interest in America will doubtless
suffer, if popery should ever overspread England. We in this land have abundant
reason to fear and be alarmed; and especially when we consider how barren and
unfruitful we have been while planted in the Lord's vineyard, and favored with
divine manurings and cultivations; and have, like Capernaum, been exalted, unto
heaven, in point of spiritual privileges and advantages; -- we have reason to
fear lest the gospel kingdom should be taken from us, and given unto a people,
that will bring forth the fruits thereof. But God is merciful and gracious, and
long suffering to us ward, not willing that we should perish, but desirous that
we come unto repentance, and be saved. The monitory language of divine
Providence at the present day, seems to be like that admonition, long ago sent
to the church of Ephesus. "Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent." Revelation 2.5.
O that, when such are the judgments of heaven we feel and fear, this people
would learn righteousness. "Righteousness exalts a nation." Says one, whose
words may very fitly be used here. -- "Could we see people in general, humbling
themselves under the mighty hand of God, in the evils that are come upon us --
could we see a general disposition in them, to break off from their sins by
righteousness, and from their iniquities by turning to the Lord -- could we see
practical piety and religion prevailing among all ranks of men -- how much
would the prospect brighten up? God would appear for us, "who is the hope of
his people and the Savior thereof in the day of trouble." And "if God be for
us, who can be against us?" He can work deliverance for us in a thousand ways
to us unknown. Then our peace shall be as a river, when our righteousness is as
the waves of the sea. Mutual harmony and affection shall be restored between
Great Britain and her colonies, and between all orders of men in them. The
burdens under which we groan shall be removed. We shall no longer be so
unhappy, as to be suspected of wanting loyalty to our king, or of having the
least disposition to refuse a constitutional subjection to our parent country.
The great evils which we now suffer, in consequence of such groundless
suspicions, shall be removed. We shall sit quietly under our vines and
fig trees, enjoying the fruit of our fathers unremitting labors, and of our
own, and have none to make us afraid. We shall behold our settlements extending
themselves into the yet uncultivated lands. "The wilderness shall become a
fruitful field, and the desert shall blossom as the rose." Our navigation shall
be freed from its present embarrassments; and trade recover a flourishing
state. Our rights and privileges shall be established on a firmer basis than
ever. Every revolving year shall add something to the glory and happiness of
America. And those that behold it shall see occasion to say, "Happy art thou O
people! Who is like unto thee, saved of the Lord! The shield of thy help, and
who is the sword of thine excellency."

"WHOSE breast does not burn with desires to see his dear native land in such a
state, the happy reverse of its present one! Who would not be ambitious of
contributing something toward it! This we have all power (...) Let us up, and
be doing, and the (...) be with us." Rev. Mr. Haven's election sermon.


THE present alarming situation of this whole land engages our attention, and
demands the united exertions of this people, in the methods justifiable in the
sight of God, for our deliverance. It would be unpardonable in us tamely to
submit to slavery and chains. Freedom is the gift of God; he has given us right
and means to assert it. We may reasonably ask and expect his gracious
assistance, in the reasonable and righteous employment of those means. It would
be most stupid and highly cirminal in us to look for deliverance, while we sat
still only asking divine help. This would be to expect miracles. Unanimity in
all orders and ranks of people, is necessary at the present alarming crisis, to
give weight, force and strength to all attempts to save this sinking land. They
who endeavor artfully to divide, are attempting to destroy us, and must answer
for all the ill consequences. "That the people should be divided, and some of
them disengaged from such a cause as that of their country's freedom, by small
private piques and prejudicing contentions; or influenced by little hopes and
fears about worldly promotions and interests, should treat it in a nugatory
manner, is entirely astonishing! But our surprise abates, when we consider, how
capable human nature is of trifling in the most immediate concerns of religion
-- in reference to eternal life, and everlasting misery." Those inhuman and
barbarous miscreants who have been plotting their country's ruin; those sordid
wretches, who, perferring their own private interest, to the salvation of their
country, can "rejoice at" her "calamites, will not go unpunished" by heaven,
and justly merit the abhorrence, detestation and total neglect of this
suffering people.

LAWFUL and justifiable means of redress are within our power. "Other nations
have contended in blood for their liberty, and have judged the jewel worth the
price that was paid for it. These colonies are not reduced to the dreadful
necessity. So dependant is Great Britain on us for supplies, that heaven seems
to have placed in our hands means of an effectual, yet peaceable, resistance,
if we have sense and integrity to make a proper use of them. A general
agreement between these colonies, of non-importation and non-exportation, an
engagement among this people, not to consume India-teas, or British
manufactures, faithfully observed, would certainly, under Providence, be
attended with success." But in all attempts of this kind, we should carefully
endeavor, not to distress any fellow creatures, unless our own self-defence and
the preservation of our country, make it necessary. This is a measure toward
obtaining relief which violates no law of God or man. No law obliges us to go
to another country for food or clothing, or any thing besides, if we can do
without. If the present acts of parliament take place here (and subsequent ones
we may continually look for) we must be driven, of necessity, to live more
within ourselves; we shall not have the means of procuring British goods, and
in that case England must sink; ruin and bankrupcy to all the trading part of
the nation, will be the consequence. The greatest source of national wealth to
Great Britain, is her trade to these colonies. We maintain a far greater number
of people, in England, than we do here. These colonies, are to England, as the
pillars were to the house which Sampson brake, whereby the house fell on the
Lords and all the people. If we fall the whole British empire will fall with
us; and possibly that may fall while we stand. Nothing will save the nation
from ruin, if America does not. Ireland, groaning under Egyptian-like bondage,
is stretching forth her hands, and calling to us for help and relief. What will
be the issue of the present commotions throughout the whole British empire, it
is not easy to foretell. It was long ago prophesied, by the great Montesquieu,
that "As all human things have an end, the state we are speaking of (England)
will lose its liberty, will perish. Have not Rome, Sparta, and Carthage
perished? It will perish, when the legislative power shall be more corrupt than
the executive." We may fear that this prophecy is near its accomplishment.

BE that as it may. While we are suffering the loss of many valuable blessings,
we should not forget that, of the unmerited mercy of God, we still are in the
possession of a rich variety of inestimable favors. Let us endeavor to make all
suitable returns of love, gratitude and obedience, to that Being, "from whom
comes down every good and perfect gift," herefor; while, at the same time, we
are constantly looking to God, by prayer, for the removal of his judgments,
under which the land groaneth, for the averting those evils which may be
impending, and for the bestowment of every blessing, "that he would remember
us, with the favor he bears unto his people, and visit us with his salvation,
that we may see the good of his chosen, that we may rejoice in the gladness of
his nation, and that we may glory with his inheritance." Psalm 106.4, 5.
Let us carefully follow the direction of the Psalmist. "Fret not thyself
because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity:
For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
Trust in the Lord and do good; so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou
shall be fed. Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the
desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord: Trust also in Him, and he
shall bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the
light, and thy judgment as the noonday. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently
for Him: Fret not thyself because of him who prospers in his way, because of
the man who brings wicked devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake
wrath: Fret not thyself in any wise to do evil. For evil doers shall be cut
off: But those that wait upon the Lord they shall inherit the earth. For yet a
little while, and the wicked shall not be: Yea, thou shall diligently consider
his place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace." Psalm 37.1 -- 11.


TO conclude. While struggling for deliverance from arbitrary human power, and
for civil liberty, let us remember that we are in voluntary slavery under the
usurped dominion of lust over reason, and let us exert ourselves for
deliverance from the bondage of corruption, and that we may be vindicated "into
the glorious liberty of the children of God." We must not expect refined
happiness in this present evil world. Infinite wisdom sees meet to exercise us
with various trials in this state, that we may be disengaged from a too fond
pursuit of worldly felicity, and be excited to seek those things which are
above. There is a better country before us, even an heavenly; be this the main
object of our desires, pursuit and endeavors. Let us manifest, by all our life
and conversation, that we are seeking a city which is to come, which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. In a little time death will
translate us to another world, and "seeing we look for this, let us be diligent
that we may be found of our Judge in peace, without spot, and blameless;" and
then we shall be forever happy in that state where "the wicked cease from
troubling, and we shall no more hear the voice of the oppressor." There an
eternal circle of uninterrupted happiness, large as our wishes, awaits us, to
which we shall, at length, be admitted, of the mercy of God, in Christ Jesus,
our Lord. AMEN!


