A FEW Political Reflections SUBMITTED TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE BRITISH
COLONIES, BY A CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by JOHN DUNLAP.

M,DCC,LXXIV.

Advertisement.
THE following Reflections were periodically published in the PENNSYLVANIA
PACKET; and the Printer of that News Paper having had a Call for all the
surplus Numbers remaining on Hand after supplying his Subscribers, he has
ventured to republish them, and turn them abroad without Comment or
Recommendation.

The Editor.

A FEW POLITICAL REFLECTIONS SUBMITTED TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE BRITISH
COLONIES.
SO loud and important is the present cry for liberty, that it cannot but rouse
every man who has the welfare of his country at heart; and it becomes every
man's duty to exert himself on the occasion. We have, my Brethren, a dangerous
slippery path to tread: Let us then carefully pick our way, and attentively
inspect every road that is pointed to our view. -- Let us patiently hear and
consider every opinion that is offered with candor. Let us not reject, with
contempt, whatever disagrees with our own private sentiments. In the multitude
of counsel there is wisdom.

THE dispute between Great Britain and her colonies is now reduced to a single
point. -- Whether the Parliament shall give laws to America; a point so unjust,
so unnatural and absurd, that not only every American, but many of the
inhabitants of Britain, must unite in opposing it. In what manner this
opposition is to be made, becomes a question of the most serious nature. -- The
ultima ratio -- to oppose force to force, is what the heart of every American
must revolt at; for with whom should we engage? -- Our friends -- our
countrymen -- our kindred -- No! let not the base profligacy of a Ministry,
abandoned to every principle of virtue, and raging for despotism, tempt such
near and dear connexions to sheath the sword in each others bowels. -- There
are surer, safer means to end the controversy. -- It is with great deference I
hazard my opinion with my countrymen; I know I must stand or fall with you, and
am, in the highest degree, earnest to have us act with spirit and prudence.

THE first emotions of anger cannot be supposed always to dictate the best
adapted schemes; for at that time a degree of revenge will ever attend the
remedy. Let us be calm, my Brethren; let us confer freely and closely together,
and let us determine, like men of sense, to bear difference in sentiments with
becoming coolness. We all mean the same thing, we all desire to be extricated
from the common danger; and is it to be wondered at, if we view the matter in
different points of light.

THE first resolves from our afflicted Brethren in Boston intimate a design of
suspending all trade with the West Indies: Far be it from me to condemn them
for such a step, at a time when under the agonizing influence of arbitrary
subjection, with their properties and liberties wrested from them; but cooler
thoughts must convince men, who have so clear a view of the rights of mankind
as they have, that punishments should only be inflicted where Justice directs.
Our Brethren in the Islands are so unfortunately surrounded with natural
domestic enemies, that self-preservation, the strongest principle nature,
prompts them to a kind of acquiescence with acts of Parliament; and their want
of internal means of independent support must ever render it prudent for them
to oppose their Mother Country with caution. Their dependence on us for
provision is so great, that should it be suddenly withheld, a general famine in
the Islands must inevitably ensue; for it would be a considerable time before
the English Merchants would throw their trade into that channel: The high price
of provisions in England would deter them from venturing; as also probably some
doubts might arise in their minds of our strictly adhering to our resolutions.
Thus should we inflict the severest of punishments upon an innocent people,
that, by their sufferings, we might find relief. -- No, my Brethren, we are not
yet reduced to the sad necessity of acting unbecoming that spirit of liberty we
profess. -- Some may argue that the Islands have upwards of seventy members in
Parliament; but let us remember they are not chosen by the West Indians; they
only happen to be gentlemen that have sugar estates; and any American
gentleman, that chooses to settle in England, and will not begrudge the knavery
and the price, may obtain a seat.

SOME of our neighbors, in Maryland, have extended their views a step further,
and propose withholding the moneys due to their Merchants in England: But this,
on reconsidering the subject, they will certainly give up. All liberty is
founded in justice, and I hope every American will spurn at the thought of
acting beneath the character of men and Christians: Let us first do strict
justice to others, and then we can with confidence assert our own rights. The
Merchants of England have entrusted us with their fortunes; they have placed in
us the most unlimited confidence; nay, they are our warmest advocates and
friends; shall we then unjustly take a step that would infallibly ruin them?
Far be it from us, and I hope the gentlemen of Maryland, who have hastily
adopted this sentiment, will readily retract, when they consider it in all its
consequences; amongst which the breach of public mercantile faith ought not to
be esteemed the least.

OUR commerce with England being founded on mutual convenience, and voluntary
compact, it certainly rests with us to determine how far it shall be extended,
and when it shall cease; this is a right which even Lord North, with all his
arbitrary views, dare not deny. No man can be obliged to purchase goods of
another; the seller can do no more than expose his wares to public sale, the
buyer is to determine what, when, and how much he will buy; this being the
case, it becomes now a question, whether this is not the time to make a general
exercise of that power: As an individual, after having maturely weighed the
subject, I give my voice for exerting it, in its fullest extent. I would
recommend a general non-importation, as the most effectual means of convincing
the people of England of how much importance we are. Their manufacturers will
quickly feel the stagnation of trade, and remonstrate in our behalf to the
Legislature; here is our ground, here let us fight them; it is a ground we can
maintain with an honest conscience, and let us not quit it, till they have
disavowed the right of taxing by whatever name; and let us not forget to insist
on a repeal of the Wool bill, the Hat bill, and the Iron bill, which are in
their nature more obnoxious to liberty than the Revenue acts. Perhaps it may be
said we cannot do without English goods long enough to effect our purposes; I
do assure you, Brethren, it is most certainly a mistaken opinion; if we can but
determine to throw by our luxuries, nor cast off our clothes till they are
ready to fall from our backs, we have stock sufficient to last for years to
come. Let every patch on our garments stand as a proof of our patriotism, and
let no man be ashamed of an old coat. But as in the effecting so desirable a
purpose, the burden will fall particularly heavy on the Importers and
Retailers, many of whom have no other way of supporting their families, I would
recommend an earnest attention to their situation; for it would be the highest
injustice to require them to fall a sacrifice to the general cause: -- It Is
through them we are to conquer -- then let us not doom them the unhappy
victims, to spring the mine, that we may enter the citadel. The present tax
demanded of us is so trifling, that, for the mere quantum, it might not be an
object of our attention; but all the horrid train of Parliamentary impositions,
which would certainly follow, must rouse every man to acknowledge the necessity
of our bleeding freely in this important contest.

TO apply the properest remedy on this occasion, may not fall within the small
sphere of my discernment: What occurs I humbly offer to consideration. If the
former annual profit of every Importer and Retailer was to be heartily and
fairly stated, and the deficiency, that might arise during the non-importation,
made up to them by the public, I should with the utmost cheerfulness pay my
proportion of the tax; -- but as it is not probable, that any Governor would be
hardy enough to give his assent to a bill for that service, it is a scheme that
must be rejected. Therefore I would propose, that a large judicious Committee
be chosen, who should fix the rates, at which Merchants and Retailers might
sell their stocks on hand; and that those Rates be fixed so high, as to be a
probably sufficient compensation for their suffering in the public cause: And
that they should become bound to each other, not to sell under price. Thus
every consumer would contribute his proportion, and pay the joyful price of his
liberty. But before a step of this kind is taken, let it be by the joint voice
of the country as well as town: Let their sentiments be taken, their liberties
are concerned as well as ours; perhaps they may project some scheme more likely
to answer the end. Let us be open to every man's counsel, we have but one point
to aim at, and it matters not who hits the mark.

THE Honorable House of Burgesses in Virginia, whose noble sentiments of
liberty, and independancy of spirit, justly entitle them to a foremost rank
amongst the American Legislatures, have taken up the matter with a becoming
mixture of firmness and moderation; and if I am led to controvert some of their
opinions, it is with the utmost respect and deference. Had their Governor
permitted them to continue the session a few days longer, they would probably
have made the necessary strictures on their own resolves. -- A tenderness for
the Manufacturers of Great Britain, so far as it is consistent with the welfare
of America, is what every humane mind amongst us must applaud; and I honor
them for the sentiment: But should it appear on closer investigation, that a
partial attachment to their interest would essentially injure our own, no man
can hesitate to determine on the part we ought to take. Impelled by resentment
against the East- India Company, for their ungenerous and officicus attempt to
rivet on us the cruel shackles forged by the iron hand of Parliament, it is not
to be wondered at, if every American should unite in a resolution to let them
feel the just punishment of their folly. Should we determine on a partial
non-importation, by confining it solely to East India goods, it would
undoubtedly be a very heavy blow to the Company, and might interest them in a
repeal of the acts we complain of: But on the other hand, it must be observed,
we should unite the manufacturing interest of England against the repeal, and
thereby cast an unlooked for weight into the ministerial scale; for as many of
the manufactures of India are imitated in England, and for others they make
good substitutes, we could not more effectually gratify the English artisan,
than by withdrawing our custom from the India warehouse; and in this the landed
interest would concur. Whatever increases the demand for the manufactures of a
country, eventually extends to the Landholder; for the Tradesman having money
to spend, can afford to pay a good price to the Farmer, and he of course a good
rent to the Landlord. Thus instead of facilitating our measures, we should
furnish the Minister with fresh strength to prosecute his determined plan of
subjugating the Americans. However far the Premier may have bent his force to
support the India Company, I cannot think he will abandon the principle of
taxing America, purely to serve them. Should the scheme of a partial
non-importation take place, and be attended with the consequence, here
surmised, chagrined at the disappointment, and mortified with the want of
foresight, we must still have recourse to other measures. If a partial
non-importation was thought absolutely neccessary, strange as the proposition
may seem, I should think it more advisable to confine ourselves to the use of
East India goods solely; whereby a jealousy would be excited between the
English and India interest; and a repeal might thereby be brought about; but
this is by no means consistent with my apprehension of the matter. It is A
GENERAL NON- IMPORTATION HONESTLY ADHERED TO, that must work our deliverance;
it is the only natural peaceable remedy in our power. It may be said, that
thereby the poor manufacturers of Great- Britain will be reduced to great want
and distress, and that as they by no means promoted the acts, they claim the
same reasoning in their favor, as our Brethren in the islands: but their cases
are by no means similar. The Islanders might actually starve without our
supplies; but the poor of England cannot, will not, perish with famine, whilst
there is bread in the land. The laws of England secure a support to the
necessitous; the rich, who made those laws, know they must support them; and
should it be dealt out with a scanty hand, the fullfed spirit of Englishmen
would quickly trample down the distinctions of meum and tuum, and administer to
their own wants. Instances of this sort are not to seek; the annals of George
the second and third produce them in abundance; and no subject has more
seriously engrossed the attention of thinking men in the nation than the
clamor about provisions. Here we may sensibly wound them, but let it not be a
mortal blow: far be it from the heart of a child essentially to injure a
parent; let our incisions be no deeper than are just necessary to discharge the
corrupted mass that collects about her vitals, and to couch the cataract in her
eyes; and if her auditory nerves are too much clogged, let us inject a little
of the spiritus Americani, and restore to her that necessary sense: -- But to
quit the metaphor. Let us endeavor to convince them, that the Island of Great
Britain is properly a land of manufacturers, surrounded by harbors for
exportation; and that the continent of America is a most valuable granary at
her service. Let them but repeal all restrictive laws, and freely open to us
their ports, and then I trust they will never see their Manufacturers forsaken,
nor their seed begging bread.

THE genius of America is agriculture, and for ages to come must continue so.
An extensive wilderness to the westward will long receive the gradual
overflowings of population; and the Manufacturer of Great Britain will never
meet with a formidable rival in the shape of an American Farmer, so long as he
can purchase the clothing of his family with the produce of his fields. It Is
numbers closely pent up together, that point out the necessity of applying art
to nature, and new modeling her materials.

I crave your patience, Brethren, to attend me a little further. We have now
had time to take a retrospective view of our conduct toward the different
cargoes of Tea sent to this continent; some of which have been destroyed, some
landed, and some sent back. Moderate men begin to think, that the destruction
of the Tea at Boston was rather a rash procedure, and that recompense ought to
be made. If I understand the Philadelphian Committee right, they meant to
advise such a measure to our afflicted Brethren; and I heartily concur with
them therein. Some amongst us congratulate the Pennsylvanians on getting so
happily through their affair; but, Brethren, I cannot think we should leave it
here; if the Tea destroyed at Boston requires payment, on a principle of equity
and justice, because it was the property of others, with equal propriety may it
be expected from us to pay for the freight and damages of the Tea sent back
from hence. The property of the East India Company was alike injured in both
cases; and, from a parity of reasoning, it becomes a charge upon us. Let it not
be said the Company has made no such demand, therefore we will make no such
proposal. I apprehend the laws of right and wrong are eternally and invariably
the same; and, from a sense of justice, we ought to be beforehand with the
payment. He that is no honester than the laws of government require, will never
stand foremost in the lists of honor. -- Yes, my Brethren, I am bold to
recommend the voluntary offer of a compensation, and shall heartily subscribe
my quota.

BRETHREN -- I beg leave to extend my views still a little further. After every
assembly on the continent has atttempted to take legal and constitutional
measures for redress, and either their attempts are defeated, or their measures
fail, then arrives a most interesting, a most alarming period. When a nation
can derive no benefit from its government, the very end of government is
frustrated; and the wretched inhabitants are reduced near to a state of nature,
and have all to begin anew. -- I cannot help expressing my astonishment, as I
proceed in this subject, at the rashness and unparalleled folly of Great
Britain, a nation so highly valued for its jealous preservation of civil
liberty, that her conduct toward her colonies on the present occasion, must
greatly tarnish the glory of her annals. Has she trained up her children, like
calves in the stall, to fall bloody victims by her own unnatural cruel hands?
-- What could she wish from us more than we freely gave? For whom have we
toiled in this once uncultivated wilderness? For whose benefit do we rise up
early, and lie down late, is it not for Great Britain? -- Are not our sails
spread to every wind that blows under heaven, to bear away the dear earnings of
the sweat of our brow, that they may at last center in Britain? Are we not her
faithful generous customers for all the various commodities of her industrious
workmen? Do we clamor at the prices they exact! Do we not cheerfully pay
whatever they are pleased to charge us for their goods? Whenever, in the course
of trade, we collect the specie of other nations, we lavishly pour it into
Britannia's lap; whilst, with an honest confidence in each other's honor, we
content ourselves with a medium Paper Money.
of commerce of no intrinsic value, that our once fond Mother may revel in our
real wealth. What more, in a commercial way, has she a right to wish?

BUT to return from this digression, -- If Great Britain, by an arbitrary
exertion of power, reduces us to a state of anarchy: so much must every man be
enamoured with the blessings of civil government, that he will wish to raise
from the ruins a new fabric somewhat resembling the old. -- If we cannot have
the benefit of advice from our constitutional Assemblies, we must have recourse
to the Vox Populi: -- A new Phoenix must arise out of the ashes. -- Therefore I
would respectfully propose, that every county in every province should elect as
many members for a popular Assembly, as they now return to their legal
Assembly. That the qualifications for the electors, and elected, be the same in
both elections. That when this is done throughout the continent, a place of
congress should be appointed; and each popular Assembly should instruct and
send at least six members, and that this GRAND ASSEMBLY should unite in a firm
and respectful remonstrance to the whole Legislature of Great Britain;
asserting our natural and acquired rights, and tendering offers of
accommodation. For, Brethren, we are united to Great Britain by the strongest
and closest ties of interest, as well as affection; she has a right to expect
something from us at some future day; -- with submission I speak it -- I say
she has a right to expect something from us, and the time is perhaps not very
distant, when we should determine what that something shall be.

IT has been formerly urged that the Americans, buying the manufactures of
Britain, do actually and bona fide pay all the taxes levied on the
Manufacturers; because a sufficient living profit must remain to the
Manufacturer, after paying those taxes. This argument, though at first view
specious, I apprehend is not so extensive in its conclusion, as the writers on
the subject imagine. If we contend that we pay a proportionable part of the
taxes of Great Britain, by purchasing her manufactures, it must be observed,
that we do not pay higher for those goods than her own inhabitants, who consume
of their own manufactures a much larger quantity than we do. -- Therefore on
the subject of taxes arising out of their manufactures, we with them, and they
with us, are just upon a level; and of course every actual tax paid by them
toward the support of government, exclusive of what they pay in the prices of
the manufactures they use, is just so much more than we pay.

IT may perhaps be said that England, being greatly enriched by having such
valuable customers, is bound, in point of interest, to secure and protect us;
and should we determine never to contribute a single farthing toward her
coffers, but in the way of trade, and even had she no means in her power of
extorting it from us, still would she continue to shield us with her arm, and
cover us from danger. For what man throws up a farm as useless for so weak a
reason, as it is not always yielding him an hundred fold; he will estimate the
whole charge of cultivation, and then, if the produce exceeds the cost, he is
encouraged to proceed. Why have the English spent so much in defense of
Portugal? -- Is it for affection? -- Is it for preserving the balance of power?
-- Or is it for some annual subsidy? -- No -- it is for the protection of such
valuable customers in the possession of their gold, that they may live to
export it for the Manufactures of Great Britain; being fully sensible of the
benefit of riches flowing from industry. But waving the policy of England, let
us, my Brethren, with the true spirit of honest men, do the thing which is
just. Let America be characterized by an eye of discernment, a heart of
integrity, and an open hand.

IT is true we have internal taxes, for the support of government amongst
ourselves; but those taxes, only respecting our internal convenience and
security, include no competent idea of defense against a foreign power. If
America should establish an independance, which I pray Heaven avert, we should
soon fall a prey to some of the maritime Princes, unless we could maintain a
fleet sufficient to guard our coast; how far this would be practicable, I leave
every American to judge for himself. As the case stands at present, we turn our
eyes to Britain on every impending danger; we look to her fleets for protection
and defense. Ought we not then, my Brethren, to think of contributing some
portion of the national expense? Though in the all powerful hands of
Providence, the fleets of nations, and the armies of Kings, are but as chaff
before the wind, and his fiat is sufficient to screen us from every machination
of evil; yet as he is pleased to permit his creatures to breath forth that
spirit of rancour and ill will toward each other, for purposes in his wisdom
far beyond my conception, the concerns of human civil government point out
carnal means of preservation; and, till a much wished universal restoration of
purity succeeds, the policy of nations must partake of the spirit of war.
Therefore, Brethren, suppose we should tender them some annual sum for the
support of government, and raise it in certain quotas amongst ourselves. Let us
stipulate for the same free trade they have; and let America be considered as
joined to Great Britain. If the inhabitants of London, Liverpool, and Bristol,
enjoy an equal privilege in trade, why should not we be considered in the same
point of light? What narrow soul'd policy is it that draws a line of
distinction between a Briton and an American? Let the wealth of the British
empire equally diffuse itself, and like water find its level. If a flood of
wealth pours into a country through the channels of trade, it quickly ebbs out
again in pursuit of luxuries and dainties; and thus, by successive undulations,
gives motion to the springs of the whole empire. Our distant situation renders
it impracticable to unite us with each other in legislation. Let each govern
its own internal affairs, and all unite in the grand bulwark of the nation.
What shall be the portion for America to contribute, will become a question of
deep decision, nor should it be hastily determined. I would wish England to
make the demand, and leave us to deliberate on it. -- I know America would be
generous, -- I hope England would be just.

BEFORE the point is finally settled, let it be well ascertained what is to be
understood by acts for regulating of trade. Amongst our political writers on
the American side of the question, there are some of such high characters for
judgment and discernment, as to make me less positive in asserting my opinion
on the subject. But I must confess I could never be convinced, by their
arguments, of the practicability of drawing a line so near the borders of
taxation, as not to encroach upon that ground; a ground that is worth
contending for -- a ground we must contend for with all our might. Let it be
remembered that the King has a negative upon all our bills, which ought to be
deemed a sufficient check upon our conduct. We acknowledge the King of Great
Britain for our Sovereign -- we love him -- we revere him -- we are attached to
him both by policy and principle; but cannot -- must not allow any kind of
authority in his Parliament; and if that Parliament would but attend to the
true constitutional interest of the empire, they would cease to claim it.

AND now, Brethren, let me recommend unanimity and prudence amongst ourselves.
Let no distinctions of sects or countries prevail amongst us. Let little party
views subside and sink in the general cause; and let the calamities that at
present threaten us, tend to unite us in one firm band of amity and love. Hence
we may hope to transmit to our posterity a glorious prospect of lasting
freedom, embellished with a back ground of fertile fields, and thickly settled
villages. Then shall our children, and childrens children, bless the virtue and
resolution of their forefathers, whilst nobly pursuing our virtuous plan, they
cultivate and extend an amazing American empire, and rank in splendour,
independance, and riches, with all the united powers of the Eastern World.

" Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town."
Sic transit gloria mundi.
Philadelphia, June 11 th, 1774.
NUMBER II.
THE more I consider the importance of the present controversy, the more am I
convinced of the necessity of wisdom in our councils, by which we may more
certainly expect, under Providence, a happy issue to our virtuous struggle: and
virtuous I have no doubt it will be hereafter termed, by even those with whom
we now contend: -- but we must keep the strictest guard over our passions. --
Reason must command our forces, and justice lead the way to conquest: thus
shall we ride triumphant over our enemies, and compel them both to fear and
admire us. -- Pardon me, Brethren, if in pursuing this subject, I seem
sometimes to assume the style of dictation; I mean but to give my honest
guileless sentiments -- sentiments that are but the pure effusions of a heart
devoted to my country, -- I cannot sit an idle unconcerned spectator, Codrus
like, "amidst a bursting world." And O! that I could unite the bewitching
powers of eloquence and wisdom, that, through the medium of your passions, I
might gain the plaudit of your judgment. -- I know there needs but your calm
attention, and all will be well. -- Justice and truth will ever prevail, and
their fiercest enemies fall at last prostrate at their feet. The conflict may
be tedious, but a virtuous perseverance will gain the day.

THE sparkling ideas of a warm imagination are too apt to soar into the regions
of danger, and, without providing a proper retreat, involve the bold adventurer
in unthought of perplexities. But let us, my Brethren, like skilful Generals,
send our scouts abroad -- view the designs and strength of our enemy, and
secure the most advantageous posts the ground will admit. -- Calmness in
council, and previous maneuvers, mark as strongly the genius of a General, as
presence of mind, and courage in the field. The nation whose wise policy in the
cabinet baffles the invidious attempts of hostile neighbors, without calling
forth the horrors ot military carnage, shines brighter in the annals of a
christain age than if poutrayed with all the splendid clangor of arms died in
blood, and surrounded with the victorious trophies of fallen thousands.

THOSE who stand on higher ground than I do, may probably have their circle of
vision enlarged, and with stronger optic organs look further into distant
events. -- Mine I confess have been too much confined to a narrower sphere; and
nothing but my country's weal could tempt me to clamber up the rugged mountains
of politics.

I have already, with much submission, declared my sentiments, that a general
non-importation was the only weapon we should wield in this unnatural
ministerial war; and wish I may be happy enough to convince my countrymen that
we need not go further.

SHOULD the proposal made by some of our southern Brethren, and countenanced by
some in this province, be adopted -- the proposal of a non-exportation to
Britain -- I conceive it would be but giving ourselves a more deadly wound --
Whatever our country, by its industry and frugality, can spare for exportation,
is just so much added to its riches; whether we deposit it in the hands of an
English merchant till called for, or order it immediately back in mercantile
investment.

THAT a heavy dept is incurred by us in England, for the several articles of
her commerce, is undoubtedly true; and that it is a debt which we mean honestly
to pay, I believe is also as true; and that after the contracted limitation of
credit is expired, the English factors will expect, and the American merchants
will allow, that an interest of five per cent. ought to commence; and though
the intercourse between the two countries should have a temporary cessation,
the terms of the first contract would still be binding, and an accumulating
load of debt press with aggravating weight upon our shoulders.

IF we suppose this continent to take from Great- Britain the value of three
millions per annum, we may reasonably presume that the importers in America are
at all times that sum in debt. For though some may trade on such extensive
capitals as will enable them to keep within the limited time of payment, yet
there are so many who fall short of their contracts, that the supposition may
readily be granted. Admit then, we stop all intercourse with England. -- From
that instant will begin an interest of five per cent. on the enormous sum of
three millions, which amounts to no less than one hundred and fifty thousand
pounds sterling per annum; a sum that must actually be remitted to them,
whenever we renew our intercourse. During this important interval, if the money
due to our English merchants could be employed to such advantage, as to pay us
for our trouble, and reserve one hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling per
annum for their use, politically speaking, the continent might be said to be no
great sufferers, but, viewing it in that moral point of light which I hope
every American will advert to, we should do them the highest injury. Every
gentleman in business will readily assent to the proposition, that receiving
interest is by no means an equivalent to the man in trade. If money is said to
be the "sinews of a nation," it is the very nervous fluid in the commercial
system, which, pervading the muscular powers, gives force to contract or extend
those sinews; it is the very life, soul, and essence of trade. How then can we
reconcile ourselves to the commission of so flagrant an act of injustice; but
if our feelings of virtue fail us, let us apply to those tender strings of
interest, which are ever at unisons in the great commercial harp; there let us
strike, and the sound will vibrate in every ear.

IT has been said that whatever a country, by its industry and frugality, can
spare for exportation is just so much added to its riches. Now if we dam up
this surplus amongst ourselves, like closing the pores, or checking
perspiration, we produce a putrid collection -- a confined fermentation
succeeds -- and nature struggling with the disorder, throws the body into a
fever; which though frequently effecting a cure, sometimes proves fatal. Should
all intercourse with Britain cease, our invention need not be long racked, to
conceive the effect it would produce; nor can I be charged with officiously
pointing out to our enemies a road of conduct, which their own eyes must
discover, and which their present system of policy would defend. He that plays
a cautious game, will never risque a blot to the chance of an oversight: and he
would certainly ill deserve the affection and confidence of his countrymen, who
perceiving an impending danger, forbore to give warning. If with such a heavy
debt against us we break off our connection, is it not natural for our
creditors to take the alarm; possessed of their fortunes, and out of their
reach, must they not wish to keep a watchful eye over us? Is it probable they
can consent to our trade with other nations in Europe, with wealth properly
theirs: If government interfered in favor of the East India Company, for the
paultry sum of fifteen or eighteen thousand pounds destroyed by persons
unknown; how much more likely is it, that she will exert herself on behalf of
the whole trading interest of Great Britain, to bring to justice the private
"defaulters of unaccounted millions?" Let us suppose, to take a clearer view of
the argument, for conjectures should ever be encouraged, where probability
points the prudence of the search; I say let us suppose, that the Parliament of
England, with their high notions of sovereignty and omnipotence (though I with
reverence explode the application of the expression) should shut up our
harbors to every port of Europe; though we might fire with rage, and swell
with indignation, our efforts would be futile, and our clamours unheard. -- The
patriot might mourn, and the peasant might feel, whilst increasing murmurs
spread through the land, and tear us with civil discord. Liberty revered of all
-- that darling of the British soul, that heavenly spark, lodged in the human
heart for purposes great and important, is yet so nearly, so closely connected
in every mind, with the pleasing gratifying ideas of property, that whenever
that is endangered, the first alarm is loud and serious.

OUR fields, through the wanted providence of the great Lord of the soil,
produce their usual crops -- our barns expand with the pressing load of
unnumbered sheaves; and a joy "like unto the joy of harvest" spreads a serenity
of countenance through thousands, ten thousand families -- in pleasing
confidence, and with unwearied diligence, they beat the golden ears, and
prepare the joyful produce of a twelve month's labor -- Whistling as they go,
and forming a general concussion of earth, from every distant frontier, they
roll along in heavy loads the grateful tribute of their toils -- let us follow
them to the capitols -- to the several ports of embarkation -- but hold --
grief swells my heart -- a tremor seizes on my limbs -- my whole nervous system
becomes disordered -- every inflexion of the bowels of compassion strains with
involuntary convulsions -- I am scarce able to proceed -- they approach -- they
enter the once busy streets -- they startle at the general void -- for a moment
they pause -- surprise and amazement almost forbid them to enquire the cause --
but soon, too soon they find the general distress -- THE PORT IS SHUT -- the
demand is over, they return to their once joyful homes, solemn and
disconsolate; pondering as they pass along, and watering the ground with their
tears.

WHEN our honest endeavors have been faithfully exerted, and fail of their
expected success; when it has pleased the great disposer of events to order his
providence contrary to our wishes, and blast our best and well meant designs;
with humble resignation and submission, we can sit down in mournful peace; and
having no imprudencies to add to our misfortunes, we can look up, with
confidence, for some favorable change: -- But when justice, and a good
conscience, deny that heartfelt solacing resource, when the dictates of
passion have run counter to every idea of right, from whence is our peace to
flow? Where shall we look for comfort? Will not our farmers, the strength and
support of our land, reason back from the consequence up to the cause? Will
they not see that our inattention to the eternal rule of right has plunged them
into this abyss of confusion; and that in pursuit of our own liberties we have
infringed upon the rights of others? Will they not recommend, will they not
urge a change of measures; perhaps at a time when our enemies may not be
disposed to suffer our landing on the ground from whence we embarked? Will they
not -- but I fear to proceed -- Hence, my Brethren, let us be warned, and rush
not into such probable danger. Let us continue to export to them as usual, let
us if possible double our exports, let us bring them in our debt. The merchants
of England are men of honor and principle, and with them we shall be safe, in
them we shall find friends. What though the revenues, arising from tobacco
cultivated in the southern provinces, may amount to above 400,000 l. sterling
per annum, and a general non-exportation of that article should be determined
on; the wheels of government might probably thereby be retarded in their
motion, but fresh springs would quickly be applied, and the machine go on, at
least for a time; and the present struggle between America and Britain, will
most assuredly turn in favor of that country which can longest hold out -- let
all our force be bent against their manufacturers; they are the ramparts
against which our batteries must be levelled; let us but make an impression
there, and the contest will certainly be decided. The actual laborers in the
various manufacturing branches are men of honest principles and lovers of
liberty, but possessed of such scanty means, that the week's earnings but just
bring round the week's support. Their employers in the different towns, who
supply them with raw materials, and pay them for their work, are most of them
men of middling fortunes; and can only advance to the workmen, in proportion as
they receive remittance from the exporting merchant; Therefore if the orders
from America cease the stagnation goes down step by step, till the loom and the
anvil become at rest. I the more earnestly dwell on this point, because I know
of no other resource under Heaven for our preservation: I want to enforce it in
every man's mind, and when conviction once gains ground, the work is half
finished. Though I have already pressed on this subject, I doubt it is not
sufficiently adverted to. It Is urged by all, that the step would answer every
purpose our most sanguine wishes could expect, were it but practicable, but it
is said the importers will not consent to it: I insist they must consent to it,
we must make it their interest to consent to it; and then they will not refuse
-- I, applaud their resolution in objecting to being the only sufferers, when
our purses enable us to share the burden. It Is ungenerous, it is unjust to
expect it of them. There never was a time so big with the necessity of opening
our eyes, and our purses, as the present. Let it but pass over, and long may we
range through an extensive circle of events, before the same conjunction
appears. Liberty, the brightest constellation that shines in the political
himisphere, is now rising toward its zenith in America: If we suffer it to
set, without effecting the work, which its light displays to our view, the dark
shades of slavery will extend across our land, and too late we may lament the
delay.

I contend -- and I contend with a zeal which convinces me I am right, that we
must not pass by the present temper of the times. Our passions cannot always
remain upon the stretch; we shall gently relax from the severity of strict
right, and heedlesly and gradually slide down the hill of opposition; our
rulers will become our tyrants; and, from a country of happy freemen, we shall
degenerate into a land of abject slaves. I summons you, Brethren, I conjure
you, Brethren, if you love your country, if your wives, if your children are
dear to you, if your dignity as men has any influence over you, bestir
yourselves on the occasion. O that my voice could reach to the innermost
regions of your hearts, and I could there imprint what I feel! Though I revere
the land from whence my ancestors sprang, though the sound of Briton was ever
grateful in my ear, the indignities now offered us, rouse a Roman spirit in my
heart, and forbid me to feel the calls of nature. Have ye, Brethren, no virtue
left, shall temporary interest prevail over your country's future weal, or will
you unlock the treasures you have gained, and pour them into the common stock?
Trust me, friends; believe me, my countrymen; whatever you advance at this
interesting period, is fixing chains and fetters on the sums that remain, but
if niggardly you clinch the miser fist, and grasp your all, as with seeming
security, the day is not far off when you must surrender the whole to a
tyrant's will. Therefore unite with one voice, and say, we will support the men
who must stand foremost in the charge. To draw your attention, from the
importance of the scene before you, to a private object, were to trifle with
the cause, I shall only declare that I am, in no shape, connected with
importing or importers; my earnestness arises purely from a love of liberty
supported by justice.

SINCE my first address I have seen some of the late debates in Parliament, and
find the thought of an accommodation there suggested -- but, it is said, we
have tendered no such proposal -- I rejoice to find the sentiment originate in
that House, and I wish, Brethren, we may not suffer it to die away -- we have
many friends there, and we ought to strengthen their hands. We hear in that
House, from Mr. Cornwall's Speech.
one who is no professed friend to America. Has any one offered any thing on
the head of assisting England -- has any person been authorized to treat, or
any ambassador sent on the occasion, I should meet them half way -- and let us
be equally prompt to meet them there. I hope our congress will be empowered to
choose such ambassadors.

THEY seem uncertain of our meaning about taxation -- whether we object to the
"mode of taxation, or to the right" -- I am sorry to find it a question at this
day -- They must be told, every American will tell them, their own reasons will
inform them, that it is the right and the right solely which we deny. -- We
object not to assist them, whenever they stand in need, and convince us of the
propriety of the demand. -- Nay, we would even lend them our aid, in pointing
out such modes as will coincide with their plan of extracting from our pockets
our honestly earned wealth. -- What if we should remind them, of witholding
their drawbacks, of withdrawing their bounties, and treating us on a level with
the inhabitants of the realm; would they think we should clamor at this
regulation of trade, that we should absurdly and wantonly contend for the
privilege of buying their goods upon terms lower than the natives of Britain.
-- No -- They will find us men so firmly attached to the strict principles of
justice, that though we search with a jealous eye into our own rights, we will
scrupulously divest ourselves of the most distant wish to invade the just
claims of others.

WE are told that if they give up the present duty on tea, which was only
reserved as a kind of declaratory right of taxation, that we shall quickly make
other claims; that we shall demand a repeal of the duty on wine, etc. Mr.
Cornwall's Speech.
-- Their fears are certainly well grounded -- we ought to demand it. -- Shall
it be called a regulation of trade, for an American to be obliged to carry the
wines of Portugal to an English outport, and there deposit a duty -- shall the
wines of Madeira pay 7 l. sterling per ton in America for the purposes of
regulating trade -- the very conception is big with absurdity. -- Was England a
country of vineyards, and their grand staple the juice of the grape, with some
color of justice, might she wish to restrain us from buying of foreign
nations. -- The grand Protestant interest, independent of England's pretended
supremacy, would be an argument on both sides the water sufficient to unite us;
but as the English never did, nor ever can attempt to cultivate the vine, any
demands on that score must proceed more from the rapacity of their cravings
than the justice of the tribute.

WE transport from this continent large quantities of provision to Portugal,
and in return take from them their wines, fruit, etc. -- In the name of sound
policy, where is the pretense for hampering us more carefully in the purchase
of our wine than in the vending our flour -- if the internal interest of
Great Britain was to be guarded at the expense of the colonies, why was not the
duty laid upon our grain? There we are rivals; but in wines they have no kind
of reasonable control over us; unless by our importing them, immediately and
unadulterated from the press, before they enter an English vault we become the
objects of their envy -- If I apprehend right the true spirit of regulating
trade, IT IS TO PREVENT ANY ONE BRANCH OF THE EMPIRE FROM IMPOVERISHING THE
OTHER BY AN UNCONSTITUTIONAL TRADE WITH NATIONS, WHO ARE NATURAL ENEMIES OF THE
CROWN -- it is our interest to support each other against a common foe; and
therefore, to prevent the treacherous attempts of such individuals, as would
prefer their own private emolument to the good of the whole, it becomes
necessary to form such laws as may restrict them from committing such public
injuries; but when laws are made to give a preference of any one part of the
empire to the other, they clash with the grand design of an united interest --
We contend for the uncontrouled right of trading to every port in Europe, which
the policy of England opens to her natives, and the absolute privilege of
importing from thence every article which they import; and if the conveniences
or necessities of Government, amongst ourselves, should call for duties and
restrictions similar to theirs, we should readily adopt them.

LET no man think I am enlarging the circle of American claims beyond the
bounds of reason. -- It Is by reason alone I am guided in my pursuit. -- Let
every narrow sentiment fly excentric from my soul, and may the pure
unadulterated spirit of liberty give vigor to my understanding, whilst I
pursue, with unremitted searches, my rights as a man. It is needless here, to
enter into the origin and design of government; that it is intended, and
constructed for the united good of every individual, is so universally allowed,
that it would be insulting the understandings of Englishmen to expatiate on it.

THAT we may not be too much exasperated against our Brethren in England,
suppose we calmly draw a veil over our present resentments, and penetrate into
the reasoning of their hearts. -- To be born a Briton is not to become a
monster with a tyrant mind -- To breath the air of Albion is not to imbibe the
spirit of unrighteousness and love of cruel sway. -- A true English soul, when
well informed, has nobility for its basis. Two centuries ago the powers of
English royalty centered in the British isles; their constitution was
established, their subjects were their own, and submitted to the control of
the supreme legislature -- Then might they talk with confidence of the
supremacy of Parliament -- the people's supreme good was properly their rulers
supreme care. When the adventurous sons of Neptune launched forth into the
boundless main, and pushed out their trembling barks into the vast Atlantic --
when the shores of this mighty wilderness were first descried -- still were
they Britons; like children discovering some distant pleasing seat, they
scarcely venture out of sight for a moment, but with joy mixed with fear in
their countenances, they hasten back to tell the adventrous tale: -- still were
they Britons -- many were the dangers, and repeated the trials, before any kind
of establishment was made -- before a durable landing was effected -- still
they kept hold of Britannia's hand -- they grew -- still she supported them --
their eyes were ever toward her for defense -- if differences arose amongst
themselves, they appealed to Britain for justice, and plead her decisions as
right. -- Year after year the natives of the realm embarked for this promised
land; but still were they Englishmen -- Their dependence on England, and
submission to English legislation had so intimately connected itself with every
idea of government, that their very constitutions were interwoven. -- The
father taught the son to love and revere the old man's native land; and with
attentions solely engrossed by the improvement of their farms, the plants of
government were raised by seeds from England. British Parliaments early
extended their care over the new world, and its inhabitants were not alarmed --
the supremacy of Parliament they had never been taught to doubt because never
exerted to their injury; thus confidence on one hand, and an opinion of right
on the other, growing up together, a kind of tacit submission took place. --
When the act for restricting our manufactures first came abroad, the right was
but gently attacked by the Americans, who, slumbering under the old prejudices
in favor of Parliamentary power, supinely bowed their heads. -- At length when
our enemies of the House of Bourbon began to envy us "our pleasant places," and
make encroachments on our land, England took up the quarrel; and, by the help
of the colony forces, under Providence, drove them from the continent; but this
was not done without large drains from the coffers of Britain; yet so much did
they esteem it their cause, that taking into consideration the great sums
expended by this infant country, they ordered us a handsome reimbursement --
still they looked on us as their children. --

DURING the war, we had great intercourse with England -- officers of the army
were continually passing and repassing; many of them sons of the best families.
Gentlemen on their travels extended their routs to America; and even Peers of
the realm landed on our shores. Flushed with the joy of victory, and pleased
with the men by whom we conquered, we lavished the fruits of our industry in
social banquets. -- We displayed a parade of wealth beyond the bounds of
moderation and prudence; and suffered our guests to depart with high ideas of
our riches -- these were communicated to their friends at home, and the tale
went round. The nation was oppressed with a heavy load of debt, great part
incurred by the defense of America, and the sons of England began to clamor
for bread; how natural then was it for Parliament to hunt out fresh resources?
and when their children abroad paraded in all the pride of plenty, how
plausible the scheme of acquiring their aid. -- The power of Parliament had
scarce ever been denied, or but feebly opposed. The suggestion of right was
never permitted to have full scope in their minds. -- The ideas of a nullum
tempus act, in favor of liberty, they had never conceived. -- Time immemorial,
and long usage, had placed them so secure, that the records of reason were
thought scarce worth the search. -- They began like men, with warranted titles,
to break up the ground. A rich vein of oar was promised by the miners; and a
Greenville undertook to sink the shaft -- but quick as lightening, in piercing
the soil, it communicated the touch to every American breast. -- Like men
suddenly brought from the shade we startled at the glaring light of day -- our
pupils contracted, our eyebrows lowered; and we stood pensively aghast -- a
solemn pause ensued; at length the rays began gradually to enter; our sight
became dilated, and we viewed with astonishment the film that had so long
overspread our eyes -- in short, we united -- we reasoned -- and in some sort
gained the victory; but still England, long used to government on their part,
and submission on ours, could not conceive the propriety of our independance.
Their active minds, darting across the great Atlantic, considered America as
contiguous to Britain. History had not furnished them with a similar connection,
and their rule of conduct was only to be determined by their own opinion of
right; and they, undertaking to become sole judges in the case, have fallen
into the unhappy error which produces our present confusion. -- I can make
great allowance for the former conduct of Great Britain; every American can
feel for her mistake. -- They took us as babes at the breast; they nourished
us, and leading us gently along, supported and instructed us -- with pleasure
they viewed our ripening years, and gloried in the goodly figure to which we
were attaining. -- With swift and rapid growth we approached to riper age; and,
trust me, Britons, we feel within our bosoms a spirit that bespeaks us your
genuine off spring. -- We look to manhood -- our muscles swell out with
youthful vigor; our sinews spring with elastic force; and we feel the marrow
of Englishmen in our bones. The day of independent manhood is at hand -- we
feel our strength; and, with a filial grateful sense of proper obedience, would
wish to be esteemed the friend as well as child of Britain, In domestic life,
we all allow there is a time when youth shall no longer be subject to the
control of age; when reason forbids, and when nature denies. -- May Britain
think seriously on this important subject; let her weigh the connection in the
strict balance of justice; nay, let her try it on the graduated scale of causes
and events, and her judgment will join hand in hand with her equity, and
declare we are men.

LONG, may she live in blooming health, and ruddy vigor; long may she continue
respected abroad, and beloved at home; and when the final period approaches
(the fate of empires as well as men) may her grateful children take her gently
by the hand, and lead her softly down the "steep of age," protecting her from
insults, and feeding her with bread. -- To her ashes may they raise a filial
monument of glory, and inscribe with sorrowing hearts on her tomb --

Here lies BRITAIN.
Once
The glory and envy of the world.
Her armies awed the nations,
Her fleets with swelling fails
Aided
By her thunders,
Spread commerce through the globe.
Blessed in the good will of all good men,
She lived a life of virtue,
And died in an honorable and advanced old age,
Bequeathing to her posterity, in America,
The most valuable benefaction,
A NOBLE EXAMPLE.
This STONE
Is erected, with tears to her memory,
By
Her Faithful Sons.
June 22, 1774.
NUMBER III.
THOUGH in my last paper, with the impetuous rapidity of a heated fancy, I
darted through aeras yet unborn, and plunged into the distant regions of
futurity, I beg leave, my brethren, to conduct you back in safety, to the
important and interesting reign of George the Third. -- A Prince, whose
goodness of soul, and unsuspecting heart, unfortunately for his people, have
unwarily betrayed him into the ensnaring measures of designing men; men whose
lust for power, and rapacious pursuit after riches, would tempt them to swallow
up both King and and kingdom, were they not sensible of the necessity of
exhibiting to public view so oftensible a power as royalty, under whose
patronage and protection they are artfully undermining the constitution, and
preparing to commit the most horrid parricide on their country. Lulled into
security, and wallowing in luxuries, the nation is silently gliding down the
stream. -- The bark seems at rest -- the surface of the deceitful current is
calm and serene -- the banks are in verdure, and the shrubs and the flowers
beguile with their fragrance, whilst the foaming roar of the distant cataract
is scarce seintly heard. -- Alas, Britannia! -- without some friendly eye
perceives thy floating danger, and rushing into the flood drags thy galley to
shore -- thou art gone -- irretrievably gone; and may America prove that friend.

I DO not pretend, my brethren, to any systematical order in the course of
these reflections; I cast them as mites into the treasury, as they arise in my
mind, and if any sentiments are found amongst them of weight and importance, my
labors will not be lost. Much has been said on the subject by various writers,
and possibly some ingenious digester may hereafter collect and form them into a
found American system of policy. I much wish to see the execution of such a
design.

IT is now generally allowed that a congress of the colonies is absolutely
necessary; and as I have no doubt that part of their result will be the
appointment of ambassadors to attend, in person, with our complaints at the
Court of Great Britain; every aid, however feeble, cannot be deemed impertnent;
and every argument that can be held forth, to support the common cause, will at
least be listened to; and certain it is, the grand desideratum on this occasion
is to embark with the strongest and clearest proofs we can procure, to convince
the rulers, and the people of Great Britain, that it is their interest to
attend to our grievances, and grant us redress.

PERHAPS in pursuing this object, it may not be amiss to make a few political
calculations; that we may exhibit, at one view, the vast importance of the
Colonies, I am well aware that the observations I am now about to make, will at
the first glance, have so much the air of visionary speculation, that many of
my readers will turn from me with indignant contempt; but they will please to
observe, I am endeavoring to unfold to view, the mighty chart of a cultivated
Continent; for cultivated it undoubtedly will be, before our children have
slept many ages in the peaceful grave; -- and as every whole is made up of
parts, we ought now to consider ourselves as members in embryo of this
stupenduous body, and much are the people of England interested in studying the
subject; for swiftly the time passes away, and much it behooves them to watch
our increase, and accommodate themselves to our growth.

THOUGH it may be a considerable time before the full accomplishment of the
following calculations shall happen, yet whoever attentively peruses the great
volume of nature, will find sufficient scope for the exercise of foresight and
reasonable conjectures.

PETER the Great, Czar of Muscovy, with a genius penetrative and persevering,
pierced far into the dark abodes of futurity; and, from a wild barbarous and
contemptible state, formed a plan of empire, of which his predecessors had
never conceived the most distant idea; and which at this day has risen to such
a formidable height of grandeur, that her connections are sought with respect
by the first powers in Europe. If a century before the accession of Peter to
the Czarship, a diviner had foretold her approaching glory, his countrymen
would have treated him with scorn and derision; and well they might, for
nothing but a genius like Peter's could have surmounted the prejudices and
customs of barbarians. But with us, where every liberal art has its votaries,
where science enlarges the mind, and where manly freedom is valued and enjoyed,
nothing but a retrogration into the savage obscurity often centuries ago can
obstruct or retard the rapidity of our progress.

AFTER craving the kind indulgence of my reader, in gratifying me with a
latitude to pursue an investigating fancy, I will venture to entrust to his
candor the harmless reveries of a leisure hour.

IF we suppose the British subjects on the continent to be at this day three
millions, we shall naturally look forward for a proportionate increase. If from
the first inhabiting this country in 1578 by a few settlers, under many
difficulties (with annual imports from Europe, considerably less than at the
present day) we have increased to the amazing number of three millions, for
truly amazing it is -- how much more rapid must be our progress for the next
two centuries?

WHERE the means of subsistence are easily attainable by industry, and a scope
of country offers equal to the increase -- the conjectures of population,
formed by a very ingenious writer Doctor Franklin.
amongst ourselves, will certainly hold good. Then if, according to that
gentleman's calculation, a country doubles its inhabitants in 20 years; -- a
single century will advance us to a multitude almost beyond conception.

In 20 years the number will be 6 millions, 40 years 12 millions, 60 years 24
millions, 80 years 48 millions, 100 years 96 millions,
nor will the progressive advance cease till the land is full. --

TO take a more extensive view of this grand subject, it may not be amiss to
consider the immensity of the tract we have to cover. If we reckon from the
Polar Circle passing through the south part of Greenland to the Tropic of
Cancer passing through the Gulf of Mexico, we shall find an extent of country
of 2967 miles, and admitting the lands westward, to extend on an average 55
degrees in longitude, there will be at least 2475 statute miles; which number
squared by the latitude, viz. 2967 statute miles, gives 7 millions 3 hundred
and 43 thousand 3 hundred and 25 square statute miles, and as each square mile
contains 640 acres, we may compute within the habitable part of America 4699
millions 7 hundred and 28 thousand acres of land. If we divide this into farms
of 100 acres each there will be 46 millions 9 hundred and 97 thousand 2 hundred
and 80 farms; and allowing each farm to maintain five persons, the lands of
North America will support 234 millions nine hundred and 86 thousand and four
hundred inhabitants. Perhaps it will be said that the great spaces covered by
lakes, bays and rivers, and the large portion of land unfit for cultivation in
every part of the continent, particularly in Greenland, will render a large
discount necessary; but if we consider what vast numbers collect in cities,
towns, and villages, without a single acre of ground to ten families, it may be
reasonably conjectured that thereby a more than sufficient allowance will be
made. But to take a more accurate sight, let us look into the state of
countries already full settled with inhabitants. England is reckoned by some
writers, to contain 25 millions of acres and 4 millions 6 hundred thousand
souls, and by others 39 millions of acres, and 6 million souls. -- Suppose we
take the medium -- the number of acres will then be 32 millions, and the
inhabitants 5 millions 300 thousand, which is but about six acres to each
individual; whereas in our preceding calculation of the numbers in America, we
have allowed only 5 souls to each 100 acres, being 20 acres each; which is
above 3 times as much as is found necessary in England; but suppose we str^^^
off for water, bad land, etc. so large a proportion as one fourth, still there
will remain 15 acres to each soul, though they should amount to the number
before specified, viz. 234,986,400, for a crooked round number say 235
millions; which is nearly equal to the number of inhabitants in Europe, Asia
and Africa; supposed by some writers to be about 300 millions.

AS I proceed in this subject I am struck with wonder at the immensity of the
view before me; but when I contract my sight to the minutia of the political
movements of England, I am astonished at their debates. Could they dwarf the
Americans like the tree of an espalier, well might they expect to reach and eat
of the fruits; but when it tours from the ground, and spreads its lofty
branches in the air -- they are only to be acquired by the aid of its limbs. --
America must grow -- England must perceive it, and yet she neglects to reason
properly on the event. All the desiderata of their government center in power,
and yet they are employing every possible agent to defeat their own purposes.
-- Wise and prudent measures would so conciliate the affections of the
Americans, that they would readily fall in with the supremacy of the proper
legislative branch, and submit to a negative control for ages to come, if
violence and oppression did not rend them asunder.

THE seat of government rests in England; all profitable prices are vested in
the crown. The right of making war or peace are royal prerogatives. Connexions,
alliances and treaties, by which every American, will esteem himself bound, are
determined in England. All conquests and new ceded countries, though even
obtained by the assistance of the colonies, vest in the King, without murmur or
complaint. Shall England say then that America is independent, because acts of
Parliament are not permitted to tax her inhabitants. -- Let them but be
satisfied for the present, with the immediate advantages resulting from mutual
intercourse, and in cases of necessity from our voluntary aids, and then it may
not be difficult to point out to them a fund, that may prove of the utmost
importance.

IT has already been shown that America contains about 4,700 millions of acres,
now if we suppose a quit rent to the crown of only one farthing sterling per
acre, it amounts to the annual sum of 4 millions and 95 thousand 8 hundred and
33 pounds. It will be said that a great portion of the inhabited part of
America is granted in charters, without such quit rents being reserved, and
therefore it can never amount to the sum here surmised. Let us then strike off
one fourth part, which will be a sufficient allowance for the present
settlements, as well as for waters and waste lands as already mentioned. -- But
if the crown was to instruct its Governors to grant the lands as fast as they
are purchased of the natives to actual settlers, without the exorbitant claims
of a string of officers, the quit rents might be raised to even All lands
hereafter granted in New York are to bear a halfpenny sterling quit-rent, and
be sold at public sale for the benefit of the Crown.
a halfpenny sterling per acre, and the settlers would be gainers by the
advance. Then striking off one fourth of 4,700 millions of acres, and affixing
a halpenny sterling on the remainder, viz. 3,525 millions, the annual revenue
from the quit rents would be 7 millions 3 hundred and 43 thousand 7 hundred and
50 pounds. Here would be a tax so equal and easy, that the wheels of government
might move without friction, and perform their annual revolutions without noise
or jar. No man would complain of the burden, when it became part of the terms
of his original contract. The scale on which I have set out I know is large,
but not more so than the chart admits of; nor should it be despised by those at
the helm. Government will most assuredly derive great assistance from this
source, small as it may seem at present, if properly attended to. But they will
do well to remember the force of their own arguments in their present debates,
and prudently guard against the danger of our one day retorting them.

WE hear a ministerial member Mr. Welbore Ellis.
in the House of Commons declaring in that House, in reply to a Gentleman Sir
George Saville.
, who is one of the greatest ornaments of his country, and whose nice
discriminations on justice would grace the Chancellorship of Britain; I say, we
hear in that House, " I think, Sir, that Chartered Rights are by no means those
sacred things, which never can be altered; they are vested in the Crown, as a
prerogative for the good of the people at large; if the Supreme Legislature
find that those Charters, so gramea, are both unfit and inconvenient for the
public utility, they have a right to make them fit and convenient. Whenever
private property is concerned, the Legislature will not take it away without
making a full recompense; but whenever the regulation of public matter is the
object, they have a right to correct, control, or take it away as may best
suit the public welfare." -- From the same side of the House Mr. Jenkinson.
we also hear, " Much has been sad about hearing the parties (meaning the
people of Boston, in defense of their charters) and taking away their chartered
rights; I am of opinion when the right is a high political regulation, you are
not in that instance bound to hear them." -- Another Gentleman Mr. Rigly.
in Ministerial league, with the most insulting and audacious sneer, entertains
the House with " A greet deal has been said concerning requisition, pray in
what manner is it to be obtained? -- Is the King to demand it, or are we, the
Legislative Power of this country, to send a very civil polite Gentleman over,
to treat with their assemblies? -- How and in what manner is he to address that
assembly? Is he to tell the Speaker that we have been extremely ill used by our
neighbors the French; that they have attacked us in several quarters -- that
the finances of this country are in a bad state, and therefore desire you will
be kind enough to assist us, and give us some money? -- Is this to be the
language of this country to that? And are we thus to go cap in hand?" -- I
hope, my Brethren, you will pardon my making such large extracts from debates
which you have already seen, but I thought it might not be amiss, to take a
collective view of the spirit of Parliament: I call it the spirit of
Parliament, because countenanced by so large a majority; but does not the heart
of every American boil with indignation in perusing it? Can he bear with
moderation the united insult on his liberty and understanding? Who or what are
those insignificant creatures, an Ellis, a Jeakinson, or a Rigby? Or what the
combined numbers of an English Parliament, when weighed against the growing
majesty of this mighty continent? -- Centered in council, and surrounded by
unopposing numbers, they boldly utter sentiments like Lords of the Earth. --
But the pompous display of imaginary power, and the empty shadow of declaratory
right, however stupenduous they may appear in a British Senate, will gradually
lessen and shade away as they extend across an ocean of three thousand miles.
-- I am lost as I pursue the confused intricacy of their notions of right, and
after the most diligent scrutiny into the rudiments of their principles, I can
only resolve them into the wicked policy of arbitrary Monarchs; the extension
of power. But let us revert to the growing connection between America and
Britain. We have taken a distant view of the immense revenue arising to the
Crown from the Continent; a revenue that is already begun, and, if fully
collected, amounts to no despicable sum.

IF "chartered rights are by no means sacred things," and we are to admit the
doctrine of breaking contracts, when unfit and inconvenient for public utility,
how long time will those hardy politicians allow to elapse before America shall
sit in judgment on the question. Will they call it fifty or 100 years; or will
they vainly hope that heedless centuries will glide silently away, in tame and
stupid submission to unnatural subjection. If the immense supplies from America
are squandered away in profusion and corruption; if the common enemies of the
empire are gaining ground on our power, by the debaucheries and profligacy of
an enfeebled and enervated system of British policy, will not our successors
revive the arguments of the present day, and produce them as cases in point.
Let not a British Parliament rave with indignation at sentiments like these,
and rush impetuous into vindictive resentment; let them rather sit calmly down,
like master builders, and wisely count the cost. Let them look back into their
own history, and mark the progress of the State; -- there they will find, that
the power of England has ever been in an exact ratio to her commerce. How much
then is her interest concerned in preserving a good understanding with her
Colonies.

SOME, who affect to treat her trade to America with contempt, when compared
with her other connexions, would do well to make an accurate view of the great
commercial scale. The Princes of Europe, sensible of the vast importance of
trade and manufactures, are every were exerting the utmost of their influence
amongst their subjects, to train and cultivate the commercial arts; how much
England has already felt the effect of their designs, the languishing state of
some branches of their manufactures may feelingly and forcibly inform them. In
Europe her system of trade is contracting, but in America a most noble and
extensive field expands to her sight. Here is her mart, here is the grand vent
of her industrious artisans. Let the Brtish Senate cultivate harmony and
friendship, whilst we till our fields? And, distant as our situations are, a
waving band of British canvass shall unite us together, and a floating isthmus
of Royal English Oak shall extend through the main. Ship in sight of ship shall
unfold one of the wonders of Augur the son of Jakeh, and mark a way in the
midst of the sea.

POSSIBLY some may be alarmed with the motion of granting to the Crown of
England a halfpenny sterling on our land. I acknowledge, on a cursory
inspection, the expediency of it may prove doubtful; but, brethren, if you will
please to indulge me a little further, in giving scope to a political
imagination, we will examine the subject in a pretty extensive point of view.

THE levying of taxes on a nation, in such just directions, as to fall equally
on all, however desirable, has been hitherto deemed one of the political
impossibilities of Government; but every statesman, who prosecutes the
happiness and strength of a country, will make it his indefatigable study to
approach as near to that desired equality, as the nature and constitution of
the state will admit.

THERE are few governments in the world, but have arisen to their present
height of grandeur, or fallen to their present state of decay, by insensible
and unpremeditated gradations. -- Barbarism has leisurely fled before
civilization, without leaving any certain fixed plan behind. From century to
century the forms of government have been varied, but have ever been calculated
to the meridian of the present day. -- Perhaps it is left for us in America,
boldly to chalk out a new plan, and show to reviving Eastern realms, if
reviving should ever be their fate, that the true art of government is yet to
unfold. -- But I fear to proceed -- methinks I grow presumptuous in my views,
and, brethren, your patience begins to be exhausted -- shall I proceed? -- or
shall I drop the pen? -- You're silent -- I Will venture on. --

WHEN a country is so entensive in itself, as to produce the means of
subsistence to its inhabitants, its land may be justly said, to be the origin
and fountain of all its wealth; and the value of every article of its
production, will in some measure be regulated by the value of the land. If the
landlords of a country rent out their grounds at twenty shillings per acre, and
the ground yields but ten bushels of wheat per acre, and the wheat sells but
for two shillings per bushel, the farmer will be inevitably ruined. Then either
the landlord most lower his rent, or the wheat bring a higher price, otherwise
the ground will remain untilled. If the estate is so circumstanced, that the
rent cannot be lowered, the wheat will undoubtedly rise; for the farmer will
not pursue his labor without a living pay. Thus the value of the produce of a
country will ever bear a proportion to the value of the land, if that value
cannot be abated; and, of consequence, every inhabitant will be affected in
proportion as he possesses more or less property. Now lands subject to
Quitrents are so circumstanced, that the value in that respect cannot be abated.

IF we suppose all future lands granted in America to be charged with the
annual payment of an halfpenny sterling per acre, the consumers of the produce
of the soil, must pay a certain proportion of the rent or tax; and thus there
will be a pretty equal contribution through the land. But to make some greater
provision for a future greater day, these lands might be granted at an
halfpenny for the first 100 years, conditioned to advance a halfpenny every
century, for ten centuries to come; by which time, if not long before, the
whole continent would probably be full settled. The neat revenue would then be
seventy- three millions four hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred
pounds; nor would this tax ever be thought high. Extensively wild as these
bounds may seem, they are still within the limits which time shall encircle.
When Egbert, the first monarch of England, first swayed his scepter, it wanted
but 27 years of being as distant from the reign of George the third as from the
present important day to this mighty era of American grandeur: -- and six such
periods even then had rolled away since creation began. But to return -- If it
be said, that the great difference in the qualities of the soil would render
the tax unequal, it must be observed, that the worst lands will always be the
last taken up, and that every subsequent purchaser of good land will pay
proportionably more for it, as it excels in quality. In countries where they
are circumscribed within narrow limits, and the sea almosts surrounds them, the
inhabitants are obliged for subsistence to borrow support from the main;
therefore when the trade of such a nation greatly exceeds the value of its
lands, it is reasonable to look to her commerce for assistance in defraying the
necessary expense of government; as in England, where the whole rents of the
land some years ago were estimated at only nine millions, when probably the
pubic charges amounted to six. -- But in this mighty continent the inland
tracts are so immense, and so distant from the sea, that a proper land tax,
judiciously laid on all new granted lands, will in all probability, in a series
of years, answer every necessary expense.

I HOPE I shall not hereby too much alarm the landed man, by proposing to lay
the whole burden of the tax on the landed interest; for it ought to be
considered that, with respect to future purchasers, every man now resident on
the continent stands exactly on an equal footing; and every purchase made after
such a regulation, will be a fair and open contract made between the purchaser
and the public: nay, it will prove an immediate advantage to the present
land-holder, whose lands not being subject to such an impost, like those in
England clear of tithes, will always command a higher price.

TO provide an easy and equitable fund for public services is the second grand
object of a Legislature -- the first being to secure the impartial
administration of justice.

NOW if we penetrate seriously into the important study of probable events, we
shall certainly be induced to believe, that when the numbers, power, and
revenues of America exceed those of Britain -- a revolution of the seat of
empire will surely take place.

GEORGE the First, when called to the throne of England, never harbored so
absurd a thought as to wield the English scepter in the Electorate of Hanover;
the center of his dominions was the place of his choice; nor would the nation
have been satisfied without it. How long it may be before a similar translation
shall happen in favor of America, I will not undertake to determine -- but
should the Georges in regular succession wear the British diadem to a number
ranking with the Louis's of France, many a goodly Prince of that royal line
will have mingled his ashes with American dust; and not many generations may
pass away, before one of the first Monarchs of the World, on ascending his
throne, shall declare with exulting joy, " Born and educated amongst you, I
glory in the name of AMERICAN."

WHEN this important day arrives, as arrive it most surely will, if kind
Providence is pleased to bless us with harmony and peace amongst ourselves, can
there be a more pleasing, more joyful prospect for our successors, than to
receive their Monarch with a revenue ready prepared, a revenue sufficient to
answer every exigency of the State.

ENGLAND may smile, with contemptuous sneer, at these vain chimeras of an
American brain; but so certainly as events follow their causes, and the planets
pursue their wonted revolutions, the empire of Britain will devolve on America.
These are truths which I want to imprint on every mind, which I wish every
American to feel; and then with manly dignity they will assert their rights,
nor basely cringe to the lawless usurpation of unreasonable power.

IF it were not diverging too far from the idea of Political Reflections, I
would conclude them with hazarding a conjecture which has in some sort arisen
out of the vastness of the subject.

A NEW world is now opening before us, and Christianity is extending her wings
over these Western regions of ignorance. Asia, Africa, and Europe have had the
glad tidings of salvation sounded amongst them, and by the blessed influence of
a heavenly mediator are every where spreading amongst unbelievers -- perhaps
when Barbarism and Infidelity are expelled from the face of the globe, and
Christianity has universally extirpated the seed of sin -- Earth may have done
her work -- the surrounding impulsions on matter may be withdrawn, and all
Nature be dispersed, in the twinkling of an eye, into the boundless immensity
of space, when every unembodied soul shall instantly flow back in rapture to
that immensurable ocean of love and mercy, from whence it originally derived.

July 13, 1774.
NUMBER IV.
BRETHREN,
WHEN our dearest rights are at stake, and the happiness of future thousands is
involved in the debates of the present day, to be supinely silent were justly
to merit the virtuous indignation of each son of liberty. Though the writer of
these Reflections, for reasons which he then thought sufficient, brought them
to a close in his last paper, yet fired with the grateful idea of serving his
country, and holding up his hand against the engines of oppression, he ventures
with submissive deference to resume his pen: Nor shall the envenomed shafts of
malicious insinuations These papers were attacked in some of the public prints
with great virulence, as breathing too much of the spirit of moderation -- *
DIT. --
deter him from declaring, to his countrymen, the sentiments of his heart. In
the honesty of his intentions he rests his defense, and shielded by the armor
of a virtuous cause, he braves the deep barbed darts of insidious attacks.

WHEN impending ruin awaits an ill judged step, and to retreat is worse than to
advance, is it to be esteemed culpable or strange, that the man of caution and
prudence should move with deliberation, and pronounce with distrust? -- With
many such I have met, but yet have never dared to declare them disaffected to
the cause, or traitors to their country. They know it is a dreadful game --
their all is at stake, and one false move may bring on lasting confusion --
These men of cautious foresight will tell you, that we ought carefully to avoid
attempting more than we can perfect; and the observation is undoubtedly just:
But then it remains to be determined, what are those things in which the danger
lies; some of them will say, that the Colonies cannot subsist without their
annual imports from Great- Britain; therefore, if we should agree to a general
non-importation, and the Parliament should resolutely hold out, we must sink in
the conflict as soon as our stock in hand is exhausted, and be reduced to sue
for peace on their own terms. Humiliating thought indeed! -- But I trust, my
brethren, these fears are groundless. -- Grant me but one point, and that by no
means an impracticable one to a resolute and virtuous people, and I think a
mode may be struck out, which would enable us to stand the parliamentary siege,
though seven times longer than the siege of Troy -- The point I beg you to
grant me is, that you will content yourselves with the absolute necessaries for
the mere support of the body; and I cannot persuade myself to doubt the manly
resolution of the Americans, in spurning at the idea of foreign luxuries when
set in competition with " essential liberty." -- Shall slavery, with all her
direful train, be suffered to surround our dwellings, and imprison us with
chains and bolts of our own forging? -- Shall the independent spirit of a free
American, that would brave the fiercest enemy, sink prostrate at the unworthy
feet of luxury, and surrender up our dearest rights for the paultry pomp and
pageantry of unmanly tinsel. -- How think ye were your brave forefathers
dressed, when with truly British souls they withstood the storms of invading
neighbors, and bared their brawny muscles to advance on the daring foe? -- Did
they wanton, think you, in the flowery silks of Persia, and tarnish their
growing glory with embellished vests? Did the sparkling gems of India, or the
shining glare of Peruvian ore, employ the emboldened minds of your martial
ancestors? -- No. -- But we will not search deep into the records of antiquity
for instances of stern manly virtue. I trust the true seeds of British honor
are implanted in the breast of every British son, and when called forth, by the
enlivening rays of the glorious sun of liberty, they will blossom with
fragrance, and bear in abundance. -- I call you then, my brethren, I entreat
you with ardor, to remove every obstruction that impedes your road, and your
childrens road, to the temple of happiness.

LET us, my brethren, consider what are the real and absolute necessaries of
life. We shall find them presently reduced to the two simple points of
provisions for the support of our natures, and coverings from the inclemencies
of the weather. The former an all gracious Providence has amply and generously
provided us; a provision for which my heart, with reverential gratitude, bows
at his Almighty throne, and thankfully accepts for me and mine my humble share;
and may every depending soul unite with me in humiliating wonder and amazement
at the merciful continuation of his blessing to a people too much estranged
from his ways. What do we stand in need of, which the various climes of this
extensive continent will not indulge? If the spices of India are withheld from
our tables, perhaps we may experience, in their stead, the fragrance of health.
But to provide for the heats, and the colds, and the decency of dress, may
require a more earnest attention. Every necessary for shelter from the weather
we have amongst ourselves, and the means of procuring every necessary implement
of labor and husbandry. Stone, clay, lime, timber, iron, oil and paints,
abound in our land: We have also lead; and if we will content ourselves with
the simple idea of shelter from the weather, the workmen we have amongst us
will effectually supply our wants. Glass for windows can be made amongst us;
and, if encouraged, will grow in quantity; and though we cannot immediately be
supplied with all we want, yet when our necessity calls on our virtue for
support, we shall find that small rooms and few of them will not be absolute
sudden dissolution to the soft framed Lady, or fine formed Beau. -- Let us but
take a view through the country, and we shall find many a healthy happy pair,
surrounded by a numerous offspring, beneath the scanty roof of one single room.
-- Let us look round the walls of their homely cot, and then when we return to
our plenteous cities, we may cry with the Athenian Philosopher, How many things
are here, which I do not want. -- But to return to the principal and most
important object, our clothes. Many parts of the continent are so well adapted
to the raising of flax, that it might become a staple article; and in others, a
little further to the southward, hemp might be improved to good advantage, on
ground not naturally very rich; and cotton we know will come to good perfection
in the Carolinas and Georgia; these, when wrought up, will provide us very
amply with summer wear; for I assure you, brethren, it is very possible for the
fairest Lady and finest Gentleman to exist, at least four months of the twelve,
with these American productions, though rough and coarse. But the greatest
difficulty is to provide for the winter blasts, in our northern colonies. The
wool raised on the continent is yearly consumed amongst us: Therefore for the
amount of woollens, formerly imported from England, we must now think of a
substitute in America, if Parliament should hold out the siege, till our stores
are exhausted, and our clothes are in rags; which some think they will
certainly attempt. -- In part to remedy this evil, it might be well immediately
to revive the resolution, formerly taken, to increase the breed of our sheep,
by preserving the lambs, to as great a number as the farms can possibly
support; though this, I am sensible, will not furnish us a sufficient supply
for many years to come. The Neutrals formerly settled on our Commons, being
reduced to great want, picked their old clothes to pieces, and new spun them
up: An example not unworthy of imitation.

A FULL suit of clothes, for a common sized man, will take about seven pounds
of wool, and perhaps more for a woman; which I believe will require, on an
average, at least three sheep: Therefore if every farm consist of five persons,
as some wills be women, and some children, we may suppose it to require fifteen
sheep to supply the family in clothes; a number not very considerable, and yet
perhaps more by one fourth than our farms, one with another, support; and then,
as a considerable part of the inhabitants in each province dwell in towns and
villages, the number of sheep must still be further increased, before they can
be supplied: and after all, we have made no allowance for stockings, or
coverings to our beds, which articles alone will at present consume all the
wool on the continent. Thus we might be reduced at last, by an obstinate
persevering Minister, to an absolute submission, if we had no other resourse. A
fear of this, I am persuaded, discourages many from joining heartily in a
non-importation agreement. But happily for us, we have that resource. A
resource which cannot fail us, if our pride does not stand in the way. -- What
think you, my brethren, of LEATHERN DOUBLETS -- do you start at the thought
with indignation, or will you sacrifice your fancy for gentility to the saving
of your country. -- The deer skins annually shipped from America, if
immediately stopped exporting, will amount to a quantity sufficient to clothe
the whole of our inhabitants, by the time our stock of woollens is exhausted. I
knew a laboring man who had a buckskin vest, which lasted him seventeen
winters, and is still in wear. -- The Beau may keep up the sprightly buff, the
farmer may tinge them russet gray, and the bench, the bar, and the pulpit may
still put on the sable dye; nor would a Lady's skirts be disgraced by the skin
of a do -- what nation think ye, would dare attempt enslaving these men in
leathern jerkins? -- Firm, stout, and independent, they might defy the malice
of their enemies, whilst their fields found them bread, and their woods wrought
their clothes. -- It Is not a visionary scheme, it is both practicable and
prudent; and if any ten gentlemen in this city will order a full suit of
buckskin against the fall, the Political Reflector will heartily join the
number. -- I know they will be warm, and I am sure they will be strong; nor
would I except stockings, I have had them made of do skin dyed black, and much
resembled silk. Should this scheme generally take place, our sheep might have
time to increase, and our stocks of English woollen might last the longer. The
gain hereby to the continent would be immense; for if we suppose only one
million of men, who wear a complete suit of clothes each, there will be at
least three millions seven hundred and fifty thousand yards of broadcloth
consumed, which, on an average at eight shillings sterling per yard, amounts to
one million five hundred thousand pounds sterling; and suppose our patriot suit
to last us only seven years, before we cast it off for our servants, there
would be a saving in the exportation to Great Britain of ten millions five
hundred thousand sterling; from which perhaps we ought to deduct three millions
five hundred thousand for the actual cost of the skins to the Indians, which
would be a large allowance. Thus we should save a million sterling a year for
the seven years, besides the clothing of our servants a year or two more; for
I will not suppose them all to be such good economists as the labourer
abovementioned. I beg, brethren, you will consider this point well. The
summer's sun now shines with all its force, and the scorching heats of a
southern climate almost annihilate the remembrance of the shivering blasts of a
northern wind, but soon they will be with you, and trust me, brethren, you will
find a buckskin suit a faithful friend in a winter's day. Then instantly let us
agree to stop the exportation of deer skins; and encourage our skinners to fall
to work.

ANOTHER subject I would beg leave to remark on. We are now on every hand
preparing for a Congress from the several colonies; and much will depend on the
wisdom and unanimity of our councils; it is a sentiment that cannot be too much
insisted on. Various are the conjectures of the mode which should be adopted by
them when met; all agree in the necessity of an earnest and spirited address,
but many contend that till the effect of the address is known, no other step
should be taken. I must acknowledge though I esteem an address absolutely
necessary, as a piece of decent and respectful decorum, and as a proof of our
hearty disposition to renew our former union and good understanding, yet I dare
not flatter myself with the expectation of much redress from that only. If we
deny their power, they may refuse us a hearing; nor indeed can they
consistently listen to our claims whilst the act remains in full force, by
which they declare their " right to bind us in all cases whatever." That act
must be repealed before they will consent to treat with us; and year after year
may slide away in the nogociation; therefore I conceive that our resolutions of
withholding from them the benefit of our custom, should take place at some
certain time to be fixed at the congress. It will probably be then too late to
stop the importation of this Falls goods, but before the next Spring orders
could be complied with, we might be certain of their receiving or rejecting our
address. They may possibly at first treat our advances with contempt, but they
will find it a serious business; and that we are customers not to be trifled
with. They must at last be reduced to treat with us, and to treat with us on
the footing of friends; friends who would wish to renew in their bosoms the
pleasing connexions which formerly subsisted; connexions which have contributed
to make both them and us a great and happy people. Matters are now reduced to
such a crisis, that it becomes absolutely necessary to form a charter of
connexions. The repeated exertions of parliamentary power, over one of our
sister colonies, must justly alarm every province on the continent. If no
bounds are to be prescribed to their wills, if penal laws are to be made from
time to time, by a British Senate, for the punishment of past supposed
offenses, without even calling on the delinquents to make their defense, I
contend that the vassals of an eastern monarch are as free and as happy as the
subjects in America. But perhaps the eyes of England may be opened, and they
will discover the necessity of giving us a Bill of Rights -- if so -- with whom
shall they treat? Is it probable they will enter into so important a
negotiation, with the Members of the ensuing congress? It is with submission, I
declare my belief, that they will object to that body, as not being the legal
representatives of the people. -- For if Great Britain were inclined to fix the
terms of our future connection, and should demand from the Members of the
congress their credentials, and whether they thought themselves fully empowered
by the voice of the people, to settle the solemn boundaries of power, think
you, my brethren, they would venture on the arduous and mighty task.

IT is sinning to be silent, where so much is depending; and the man who holds
his peace when the fate of nations is at stake, deserves neither the protection
of civil government, nor the blessings of liberty. -- I cannot be silent -- I
must declare that though the present congress is a necessary step, and the mode
of appointing it the only way left in our power, yet when we and our posterity
are to be bound by the line of the present day, if government at home should
now call on us to run that line -- I must contend that the men to whom this
solemn charge is committed, should receive the full and united voice of the
continent. When once the boundaries are established, and the lasting way marks
of future ages engrossed on the important parchment, it may not be easy to get
them removed or erazed: Much then does it behove us to set out constitutionally
and regularly on this grand design.

WHEN an individual shall dare to step forth with his private opinion, and
offer it to public notice, on affairs of the utmost moment to his country, much
does he risque in the attempt. Whilst some will impute it to the busy
promptness of impertinent zeal, others, with suspicious anger, will charge on
his guilty head, the barbarous designs of a mischievous incendiary. -- Hard is
the middle path to find. To preserve the due equilibrium of an upright
conscience, and the desirable reputation of an honest citizen, requires both
dexterity and virtue in a greater degree than generally falls to our share. But
let not the way faring man hereby be dismayed; let him boldly discharge his
conscious duty, and leave to the grand disposer of events the reward of his
labors.

IF we sift into the motions of empires, and the wary results of deep held
councils, we shall find the whole proceeds from single sentiment of man by man;
shall then a fear of being singular in opinion suppress the rising thought and
stifle a conception at its birth? Or shall we not rather proclaim with social
toleration, "He that has a dream, let him tell his dream." Then with
respectful deference to my countrymen, I would beg leave to propose, that in
the address to be presented to his Majesty by the congress -- they should pray,
that he would be pleased to give instructions to all his Governors on the
continent, to give their assent to a law, to be presented them by the several
Assemblies, for the appointing two or more persons from each province to join
in a great continental council, for the purpose of determining the grand
subject of an American Bill of Rights; which grand council should, by the
several bills, have full power given them to proceed to London, and to enter
upon the negotiation with the legislature of Great Britain; and when finally
adjusted, be reciprocally binding on Great Britain and the colonies. This would
be a legal and firm contract; and as it would be determined on and agreed to,
by men appointed by assemblies chosen by the people, no possible objection
could arise on the part of the Americans.

THE necessity of such a legal congress cannot be too much insisted on; and
were every letter wrote home to our friends in England, to convey the
sentiment, I know nothing more likely to affect it. The disturbances that have
already arisen, and which must be expected still to arise, from time to time,
must enforce the necessity of determining the point of power where it is to
lie, and how far it is to extend.

EVERY difference between the Colonies and England will be grateful news to our
natural enemies, and nothing can be more desirable by them than an open
quarrel. How far French gold may contribute to widen the breach, and spur up a
reigning minister to enlarge in his claims, may be difficult to unveil; but the
history of courts gives us too many fatal proofs of the baseness of corruption
to leave us without fear. If the present Ministry are from under the influence,
we have no time to lose.

BUT to return -- Some may probably conceive, that the members of the present
congress are vested with full powers, if the people of England were disposed to
enter on the business; but we have already supposed they would not undertake
it. The modes of appointing them have been so various, and in some cases
through necessity so quickly determined on, that it is much to be doubted,
whether a line run by them would be esteemed by their constituents sufficiently
authentic.

IN the several interior concerns of our private policy, we carefully attend to
the legal choice of men who are to transact our affairs: -- How much more
essential then is it, to establish on its proper basis so important a
superstructure as is now to be reared. There never was a treaty since creation
began, so extensive in its consequence, and so nice to discuss. It Is offensive,
defensive, connected, independent, a mixture of rivalship and friendship, the
greater subordinate to the lesser, and yet all bound together by one common
interest and affection. The men with whom we repose this awful power, should
unite the wisdom of sages and the virtue of saints; and such I trust we have
amongst us: Men who will hand down their names in American story, as the
glorious directors of a vast and virtuous compact; men on whom succeeding
generations shall look back with wonder, and with grateful ardor for ages to
come, hold their exalted characters in joyful remembrance.

July 20, 1774.
NUMBER V.
AS it is the happy and undoubted right of every freeman to speak his candid
sentiments without reserve or control, I cannot, in justice to the cause of
liberty, suppress a few remarks on some of the resolves entered into by the
Pennsylvania Committee; whilst, at the same time, I join the general applause
of their well tempered spirit, and general moderation.

THE first resolve I would beg leave to remark on is the 13th, in which they
declare, That the venders of merchandise of every kind within this province
ought not to take advantage of the resolves relating to non-importation in this
province and elsewhere; but that they ought to sell their merchandise, which
they now have, or may hereafter import, at the same rates they have been
accustomed to do within three months last past. -- This is a subject I have
very attentively considered, and I cannot conceive upon what policy, prudence,
or justice, the resolve is founded.

A VERY considerable number of worthy honest citizens and countrymen, for their
own comfortable subsistence, and the public convenience of the country, have
thrown their fortunes into the dry good business, upon the reasonable
confidence of a probable sale, and living profit; and their expectations have
been pleasingly gratified; they have acquired reputation in their several
neighbourhoods, a plentiful support for their families, and are ranked amongst
the useful members of society. At length the unhappy dissentions of the times
point out these men as the only probable means by which we are to obtain
relief. We are obliged to tell them, Gentlemen, the distresses of our country
oblige us with reluctance to call on you for a sacrifice, which we are fully
sensible must be highly injurious to your interests. -- You only are the men by
whom redress can come; and on your virtue, and disinterested love of your
country, we are solely to rely; therefore we request you for the cause of
liberty, for the sake of transmitting freedom to your children, and our
children, to lend us your aid to save our country. By every generous manly
breast such a requisition would be received with resolute, but sorrowful assent.

MEN who have engaged their fortunes, and connexions in a particular channel of
trade, cannot easily divert them into others; nor indeed is there room for the
change, Those men, who have many of them supported handsome figures in society
now find themselves called on to serve their country, at the risk of their
fortunes; for should the dispute continue any length of time, and the
non-importation remain unbroken, the sources of their living must fail them,
and the merchant and retailer must break in upon their principal; and we well
know there are many amongst us, who support a good and fair credit upon so
small a capital, that a short cessation would reduce them to great distress;
yet the nature of the case is such, that on these men we are obliged to call
for a sacrifice, that may perhaps prove their ruin. A love for the liberties of
their country silences their complaints, and trusting to the virtuous
generosity of their countrymen they submit to their fate; but how great must be
their surprise, think you, when they are told, that they are not only to be
deprived of the extensive benefit of trade, which they once enjoyed in common
with the rest of their fellow citizens and countrymen, but that they must also
be stripped of the poor little resource that was left them, of raising the
prices of their goods, whereby every consumer, by paying a small matter more
than he had been used to pay, would contribute his proportion of the burden in
a manner which would be least likely to wound the delicacy of the sufferer.
Should a purchaser now pay ten shillings more in the price of a piece of linen,
than when the importation was open, the merchant would receive it with freedom
and independance, as some kind of compensation for his losses; but if, instead
thereof, he should hereafter be obliged to receive it as an alms from his
country, how deep would be the wound, and where is the man so void of
sensibility as to wish to inflict it!

WHEN public calamities admit of no resource but the sacrifice of individuals,
and the misfortunes of a nation, are only to be averted by offering them up as
victims, at the altar of ruin, the wretched sufferers must bow to their unhappy
doom, and forfeit their all to their country's weal. Was this the sad case at
present, I should hold my mournful peace, and consign them with sorrow to their
fate. But will any man rise up and and say -- they are the men and they only,
who must bear the loss. -- I beseech you grant them one shadow of a reason to
make them consent; either convince them, that it is for their sakes alone, that
the present struggle is engaged in, or that you are totally unable to lend them
your assistance: -- If you do neither, where lies the virtue of your contest.
Other men's troubles, says Swift, we bear with fortitude, other men's money we
spend with freedom. I fear it is a decree that sullies both our virtue, and our
cause. -- Where are the men that will serve us with fidelity, when we consign
them and their depending families to misery and poverty? -- Where, I pray is
the sacrifice which we make on this important occasion? But I cannot, my
Brethren, persuade myself to believe, that you mean to leave it here; that you
mean to take no share of the burden. -- If you do -- though I should stand
alone -- I must protest against the injustice of the determination.

I AM not unaware of the reflections which may be cast on the hardy
impertinence of an individual, who dares to dissent from the united voice of so
respectable a body as that great committee, for sorry I am to find, that the
vote was unanimous. Had it been the resolve of a general Congress, from whence
there lay no appeal, a submissive silence might more justly be expected; but as
that grand council is yet to meet, and to take into consideration the several
resolves of the colonies, any previous strictures ought not to be suppressed.
Perhaps I may be mistaken in my apprehensions of this matter, and should be
extremely obliged to any Gentleman to quiet my scruples.

ARGUMENTS may possibly be adduced in support of the measure, which have never
occurred to my understanding; it is not from a vindictive tenacity of opinion,
that I am thus strenuous, but from a desire of observing the strictest rules of
justice in our proceedings. Some I know have objected to our considering the
hard case of the merchant and retailer, affirming " that it is a measure the
country have been ever averse to:" If it be really so, why have not the
resolves from the several counties declared it? -- I have carefully examined
most of them, if not all, and don't remember to have met with such a sentiment;
nor can I conceive the country so void of generosity as to wish to regain their
liberties without bearing their share of the burden. I will not believe they
deserve so injurious a reflection, nor that they desire so unjust an exemption.
-- Let it not be said that the measure of a non-importation, if spiritedly
entered into, will soon effect its purpose, and that by the time the merchant
has sold off his stock, the dispute will be over, therefore he will be no
sufferer by the restriction. It should be remembered, the profit of the vender
arises from the quantity of goods sold, and that whenever his store remains
without a supply his sales must be daily less. He that imports three thousand
sterling per annum, is supposed to sell annually to that amount; and of course
whenever his imports stop, his sales must begin to decrease; in less than
twelve months his store will be unsorted, and his choice of goods so small that
the profits on his sales will scarce pay his house rent.

IF for argument sake we admit that the dispute will be settled by the time his
stock is disposed of, yet he will be a considerable sufferer by the deficiency
of his sales, and the length of time that will unavoidably elapse before he
obtains a fresh supply. But on the other hand, if our opposition should be
slower in its operation than our sanguine wishes would lead us to hope, what
are the unhappy traders to do? To what branch of business can they fly for
support? Their numbers are great, their families large, and many of them far
advanced in life. Shall we send them to the woods to hew down the trees, and
learn thus late in life the laborious business of agriculture. -- Think not
that I am endeavoring to draw an exaggerated picture of distress; it is from
the feelings of my heart I speak, feelings which should awaken every mind to
attend to the situation of a brother, and impress it with a desire of assisting
to ward off an impending blow.

SOME may say the accumulated profits of their trade will amply enable them to
sustain a cessation of business; but we well know small is the number thus
circumstanced; yet admitting it was generally the case, what mode of reasoning
can be produced to show the necessity of their bearing the whole load on their
shoulders, whilst the rest of us who are equally interested, are equally able.
The incumbent expenses of government are never so large, even in times of the
greatest danger, but that a few amongst the great and rich, could provide the
supplies; yet what legislature ever undertook to levy on them more than their
just proportion. The man of inferior circumstance, is called on for his mite,
and a just contribution is assessed through the land; and thus would it be in
the case before us, should the prices of goods be advanced; the rich who
consume the most in quantity, and the highest in price, will consequently pay a
proportion suitable to their abilities; and those who are the least able to pay
will always be the smallest customers. But let us suppose that the prices of
goods should be advanced, that the merchant should have a brisk sale, and that
the contest between Britain and the colonies should be suddenly over; ought we
not to rejoice that they are gainers by the sacrifice they so frankly made, or
shall we with avaricious souls begrudge them the reward of their virtue? They
certainly risque much in the struggle, then why should we deprive them of the
chance of gain? To judge properly on this subject, let every man suppose
himself a vender of goods, and then let him be asked the question, what part he
apprehended the community ought to take in his behalf?

THE only possible reason, that I can conceive to operate against taking their
situation into notice, is a reason which I hope we shall never have occasion to
apply. I mean the stopping our exports to the West Indies. Should this be done,
I must then acknowledge, that so heavy a burden would fall on the farmer, that
we ought not to raise on them the prices of goods; they would be sufficiently
distressed, by the reduction of the prices of their own produce, and well might
they object to the increased demand of the dry good merchant, when their wheat,
their corn, their pork, and their lumber, remained drugs on their hands.

IN a former number I objected to the mode of obtaining redress of our
grievances, by distressing the West India islands, but forbore to extend my
reasonings on the subject, so far as it would bear; flattering myself, that a
measure that had neither sound policy, nor justice, for its support, would need
but small opposition: but I since find, that the committee of Pennsplvania, in
their twelfth resolve, declare, that if any proceedings of the parliament, of
which notice shall be received on this continent, before, or at the general
Congress shall render it necessary in the opinion of that Congress for the
colonies to take further steps than are mentioned in the eleventh Resolve,
(viz. non-importation from, and non-exportation to Great Britain,) in such case
the inhabitants of this province shall adopt such further steps, and do all in
their power to carry them into execution. This resolve I confess has
considerably alarmed me, a resolve which though it did not pass without
considerable debates, and had no great majority in its favor, yet is so
extensive in its nature, as to deserve a serious examination. How far the
Committee appointed by the House of Assembly in this province, will be
instructed to adopt the resolve, is best known to themselves, but I hope they
have adverted to the probable consequences of a non-exportation to the islands.

WHEN we reason from conjectures, and draw inferences from probabilities, I am
sensible of the uncertainty of our pursuits; yet many of the affairs of men are
so circumstanced, that they admit of no other guide, and hence arises the
necessity of judging of future by past transactions.

WE find the parliament of Great Britain, by a most unjustifiable exertion of
power, have divested private persons of property, a town of its trade, and a
whole country of its chartered privileges, without a charge or a hearing. When
power is vested in such hands, what is there too great, or too daring for them
to attempt. -- Mistake me not, my brethren, I am not about to persuade you to
relinquish a jot of your just pretensions, from principles of fear or
apprehensions of danger, I mean but to persuade you to a resolute and prudent
opposition; an opposition which justice will stand by, and virtue approve.
Leave not these haughty rulers the least shadow of pretense for displaying
their power, but convince them by your wisdom and perseverance, that to conquer
our resolutions, they must submit to our terms.

TO alarm with false fears of a precipice, when the wide plain is open to our
view, or to point out a danger where all is in safety, would justly merit
ridicule and contempt; but when objects intervene, or mists obscure the
prospect, let those who advance be sure they are right, when they send round
the watch word, and cry "all is well." As a faithful sentinel to my country, I
cannot help declaring, that I descry the approach of an enemy, and warn you to
keep on your guard -- What if we should mount up the tower of supposition, and
take a view of the scenes before us. -- The Congress are met -- they determine
to stop all exports of provisions and lumber to the islands; not for any
misconduct of the inhabitants, but that by pinching them with hunger and want,
their brethren and friends in England may hear their piercing cries, and urged
from motives of humanity and compassion to them, may plead for us. -- Their
cries are heard -- the Parliament is assembled; for depend on it our present
minister will not advance a step out of the common road, without the sanction
of the nation. -- He informs them that the Americans have formed the cruel
resolution of starving the islands, and that by dispatches from thence they are
under the greatest consternation, from the apprehension of a general
insurrection of their negroes and an approaching famine. As every compassionate
mind kindles quickly at scenes of distress, and fires with resentment at the
cruel perpetrators, when designedly produced, the means of speedy relief are
instantly sought for -- the general murmurs in England amongst the poor, at the
exorbitant price of the necessaries of life, render it an unadvised scheme to
supply the unhappy sufferers with provisions from thence; as thereby the prices
would be raised on themselves, and the people might clamor for submission to
our claims -- What is to be done -- a valuable part of the territories of the
nation is likely to be destroyed, by the barbarous policy of the Americans --
How are they to act? Let us take a review of the sentiments of the English,
when Corsica was invaded by the French. -- How loud did the nation clamor in
favor of distressed innocence, and how many amongst them would gladly have
plunged into a war with France, to rescue the Corsicans from their approaching
misery? And had the rulers at the helm possessed the same knight errantring
genius, their liberties might have been saved, at the expense of a few hundred
thousand lives, I hope I shall not here be understood, that I had no
commiseration for the calamities of a brave and depressed people -- but when
two evils present, the least is to be chosen. When the poor foundering bark is
tossed with the inclement storm and driven amidst the foaming rocks with
dashing fury, we may view with sympathetic agony of soul, the horrors of the
scene, and pity from our hearts the trembling sinking crew; but cannot do more,
for instant destruction to ourselves would be inevitable in the attempt. -- But
the case now before us is quite the reverse. The very summit of ministerial
wish is to " lay us prostrate at their feet:" therefore whenever the same
spirit of compassion arises in the breasts of the English nation, on behalf of
the inhabitants of their own islands, they will find a daring ministry prompt
at their service, ready to work up their wrath, and kindle their rage. -- Is it
not likely they will tell the nation -- you shall not suffer by supplying the
islands. -- Your colonies have broken through every tie of honor and humanity,
and have no further claims to the protection of justice. -- Long have they
called aloud on liberty and virtue as their patrons, but they have now swerved
from the line of their own drawing, and the nation is no longer obliged to
observe the rules of neighbourly commerce. -- What think you, my brethren, if
with sentiments like these, they should determine on obliging us to continue
our supplies? -- What if they should demand with compulsive threats at our
gates, an immediate embarkation to the islands, of our usual supplies. -- How
should we act? We might doubtless contend, that this was an exertion of power,
which no laws but those of force can warrant or support; but reasonings from,
the mouth of a cannon carry conviction not to be withstood. We know there are
times, when public emergencies supeecede an adherence to the principles of the
constitution; what law authorizes the seizing on a seaman's person, and
compelling him to serve in a state of government slavery? Where is the statute
for impressing my horses, my carriages, and my servants, for the uses of a
campaigning? Yet we know they have been the constant practices of the navy and
army. The merchant may contend that his property is his own, and that no man
can legally oblige him to venture it abroad. -- So may the sailor argue, and
nothing but the necessity of the case will be urged in support of either, an
argument which seems at present, to be one of the fundamentals in the English
constitution. -- They may tell us, that the island are actually suffering by
our unjust resolutions, and that they come to the succor of the distressed. --
We may offer to treat, and to enter into a discussion of the right, but hunger
and want will admit of no delay. -- If we continue inflexible, what must be the
consequence?

THERE is not a man on the continent more anxious than I am for the support of
our liberties; but never can I think of contending for them on the principles
of cruelty and injustice; whilst they are our suppport, we can neither look for
the approbation of good men, nor the protection of a just and discerning
Providence, and shall lose the few remaining friends we have yet in parliament.
Virtue will ever support us, and bear us out in the midst of trials and
persecutions; but if once we quit that ground, we wander into a labyrinth of
perplexity and confusion, which may bring down our gray hairs with sorrow to
the grave.

FROM what has been said, I hope it will not be objected, that if we are
deterred from entering into the measure of a non-exportation to the islands,
from an apprehension of a ministerial demand continue it, that the same power
may be exerted to oblige us to break through our resolutions, of withholding
our orders for English goods; for should they be weak enough to attempt it -- I
will dare to assert, there is not a merchant in Britain who would venture his
goods abroad on such compulsive terms.

IF my apprehensions on this, subject are wrong, and my fears groundless, I am
not the first man who has been mistaken in his judgment; I am earnest for the
preservation of our liberties, and that the inhabitants of this new world may
enjoy a happy series of unmolested joys.

THE difficulties in which we shall involve the innocent manufacturers in
England, by withholding our trade, is advancing, I am sensible, a step beyond
the line of strict moral rectitude; but the imperfections of our nature are so
great, that the forms of our policy too often interfere with that harmony of
order, which is indicated by the precepts of a christian life; and O that the
happy period was arrived, when we shall beat our swords into plow shares, our
spears into pruning hooks, -- when nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

ONE observation more I beg leave to make before I close this paper. By the
resolves of a neighboring colony just published, they recommend both a
non-importation and a non-consumption agreement. Now with submission to the
Gentlemen of that Committee, I conceive that a distinction in that case was
absolutely necessary. If a non-importation had been rejected, from an
apprehension that the merchants would not comply with such a requisition, then
I should think it a very proper expedient to determine against the consumption
of all goods imported after the agreement was entered into; but where there
appears a general disposition, amongst the merchants and traders, to enter into
the association, I cannot perceive the necessity, or propriety, of entering
into a non-consumption agreement, -- Surely it cannot be thereby meant to
decline the purchase of goods already amongst us, and imported on the honest
confidence of a probable sale, and many of them absolutely paid for: -- this
would be committing an injury which we cannot intend.

IT is not without much pain, that I have so frequently objected to the
measures, which have been proposed; and would an honest conscience have
suffered me to be silent, I should gladly have remained a solemn spectator, and
watched with anxious eye the commotions of the continent. When prosperity
flattered, I should have rejoiced in private with a few bosom friends, and when
distraction appeared in our councils, I should have stolen into some silent
retreat, and bemoaned with aching heart the distresses of my country.

July 27, 1774.
NUMBER VI.
WHILST the mind is diverted from objects of personal interest, to the more
important affairs of national concern, will it be deemed treacherous to seize
on it in that unguarded moment, and consign it a prey to the cause of virtue;
or can the subject of this paper be thought foreign or impertinent, when the
question in agitation is a question of liberty.

TO every principled and virtuous son of freedom I seriously appeal, and crave
your attention to a subject united and connected with the common cause. I
beseech you to come calm and unprejudiced -- divested of every ungenerous and
unmanly sentiment, with hearts and souls unreservedly devoted to the great
business of the day; the business of establishing the ground work of lasting
happiness to extensive continent.

GOADED by oppression, and urged by the exertions of unjust and unreasonable
power, the inhabitants of America have unitedly risen in a manly and virtuous
opposition. Unawed by the tyranny of imperious rulers we rouse with indignant
hearts, and boldly assert the extent of our rights. Every latent spark is drawn
forth to enlighten the scene. The clouds of obscuring ignorance are expelled
and dispersed, whilst the blaze of human freedom darts far and wide its
chearing rays. We trace with enquiring minds the principles of government; we
closely investigate the origin of power, and deduce from unvarying laws that
Man the image of his maker -- Man, a little lower than the angels, has a title,
an undoubted title to unlimited freedom, and though the necessities of civil
society oblige us, for the conveniences of life to deliver up part of the
unbounded liberty of our natures, yet this surrender we cautiously
circumscribe, and mark it within the bounds of public good, by which every
individual is protected in his just and equal share. At first when the
dedications of power are perverted to the injury of the people, they rise with
jealous anger and enquire the cause; but such is the depravity of human nature,
and the artfulness of vice, that the very means which were devised to secure
and protect, become the engines of destruction. With discretionary confidence
we trust power in the hands of a few, and these by a gradual insatiable desire
of unlimited sway are, with boundless pursuits, undermining the principles of
their appointment. Nation after nation have fallen victims to the lust of
power, and the wretched inhabitants can now scarcely descry the vestiges of
freedom.

ENGLAND by its constitution has the happy mixture of power and liberty; but
vice has sapped its foundation and is preparing to exhibit it to after ages, as
the mighty ruin of a once noble fabric. America with retrograde aspect arose
in the west, to display to eastern realms the comely and graceful figure of
Liberty. Raised on a throne of Truth, with Virtue at her right hand, Justice on
her left, Wisdom with the pages of antiquity displayed before her, and
Innocence supporting her shield. When first she "arose from out the main" the
morn was still, the sky was serene, the western air breathed soft and gently
its refreshing gales, and pleasingly held forth the signs of a joyful and happy
day; but soon there came a lowering cloud with black and horrid gloom, which
obscured its glories, and cast a baneful shade across the land. -- Pardon me,
my brethren, for thus roving into the fields of Fancy, and kindly receive me
again at the gates of Reason.

THE long disputes depending between England and her colonists have compelled
them into a close search after their natural rights, and as they have
repeatedly declared them in resolves from one end of the continent to the
other, I will make bold to take a review of their general sentiments of liberty.

NOV. 29th, 1765, the Assembly of South Carolina resolve, that his Majesty's
liege subjects in this province are entitled to all the inherent rights and
liberties of his natural born subjects within the kingdom of Great Britain --
that the increase, prosperity, and happiness of the people of this province
depend upon the full and free enjoyment of their rights and liberties.

SEPT. 28th, 1765, the Assembly of Maryland resolve, that the first adventurers
and settlers of this province of Maryland brought with them, and transmitted to
their posterity, and all other his Majesty's subjects since inhabiting in this
province all the liberties, privileges, franchises, and immunities that at any
time have been held, enjoyed, and possessed by the people of Great Britain.

SEPT. 21st, 1765, the Assembly of Pennsylvania resolve, that the inhabitants
of this province are entitled to all the liberties, rights and privileges of
his Majesty's subjects in Great Britain, or elsewhere, and that the
constitution of government in this province is founded on the natural rights of
mankind and the noble principles of English liberty, and therefore is, or ought
to be perfectly free.

DEC. 25th, 1765, at a large and respectable meeting in the colony of
Connecticut, for the county of Windham and parts adjacent, they resolve, that
God has by nature given us a right to freedom, and by solemn charter, compact,
and agreement made with our forefathers we are, as natural heirs by
inheritance, entitled to all the rights and privileges of the English
constitution, by which our natural rights are confirmed.

SEPT. 16, 1765, the Assembly of Rhode Island resolve, that the first
adventurers, settlers of his Majesty's colony and dominion of Rhode Island and
Providence plantation, brought with them, and transmitted to their posterity,
and all other his Majesty's subjects since inhabiting in this his Majesty's
colony, all the privileges and immunities that have at any time been held,
enjoyed, and possessed by the people of Great Britain, and that by a Charter
granted by King Charles the Second, in the 15th year of his reign, the colony
aforesaid is declared entitled to all privileges of natural born subjects to
all intents and purposes, as if they had been abiding and born within the realm
of England.

OCT. 29, 1765, the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay resolve, that there are
certain essential rights of the British constitution which are founded in the
law of God and nature, and are the common rights of mankind; therefore, that
the inhabitants of this province are unalienably entitled to those essential
rights in common with ALL MEN, and NO LAW OF SOCIETY can, consistent with the
law of God and nature, divest them of those rights. That his Majesty's subjects
in America are, in reason and common sense, entitled to the same extent of
liberty with his Majesty's subjects in Great Britain.

THESE several resolves from South Carolina to New England fully indicate the
general idea of liberty, entertained by the colonists at the time of the Stamp
Act. And the sentiments in the present opposition are much the same, some of
the resolves being couched in the same words, they rest their claims on the
just principles of " natural right," and contend for their privileges, as
founded in the law of God and nature, and the common rights of mankind; rights
which no law of society can consistently divest them of.

NOW, my brethren, I will beg leave to come close to the point, and call for an
examination of our own conduct -- Let us try if it will square with our
pretensions, whether we can reconcile the exercise of SLAVERY with our
professions of freedom, founded on the law of God and nature, and the common
rights of mankind -- I beseech you, brethren, with dispassionate and
disinterested minds to survey the subject -- Can we suppose that the people of
England will grant the force of our reasoning, when they are told, that every
colony on the continent is deeply involved in the inconsistent practice of
keeping their fellow creatures in perpetual bondage? So much has been wrote on
this subject by abler pens, that it may be difficult to set it in so new and
striking a point of light as to gain your attention; but whilst the evil
remains, the same arguments will necessarily arise; nor will they ever lose
their force. In vain shall we contend for liberty, as an " essential in our
constitution," till this barbarous inhuman practice is driven from our borders.
Let him who claims an exemption from the control of Parliamentary power, show
to the world, by what right, human or divine, he keeps in cruel slavery his
fellow man. We declare with a joint voice, that ALL the inhabitants of America
are entitled to the privileges of the inhabitants of Great Britain; if so, by
what right do we support slavery? -- the instant a slave sets his foot in
England he claims the protection of the laws, and puts his master at defiance;
if British rights extend to America, who shall detain him in bondage? If his
pretended owner can show no personal contract with the unfortunate African, is
there a court on the continent, that would unrighteously declare him a slave?
You say you bought them of those who had a right to sell. -- I dispute it -- on
behalf of the injured Blacks, I dispute it, and call on you to show your title.
When a servant is offered for sale in the colonies, are we contented with the
Captain's asseverations? -- no -- we call for the indenture, the personal
contract; if that is not to be produced, where is the man who will be hardy
enough to sell him? If he is indebted for his passage, he is at liberty to make
his own bargain with the purchaser, and enters into a voluntary temporary
servitude; even if he be a convict, and has forfeited his life to the laws of
his country, and is respited for transportation, I presume no Captain ever came
over unprovided with authentic documents from the records of Newgate; though
many contend, that servitude is no part of their sentence, as being
inconsistent with the liberty of an Englishman, and I have been assured that
some, on their landing in America, have demanded their liberty. -- If this be
the case -- if the English constitution guards the liberties of men, who have
been condemned to die for the breach of their own country's laws, how comes it
that we undertake to inflict so barbarous a punishment upon the natives of
Africa, for their transgressions in Guinea, which is the last wretched argument
of refuge, which the advocates for slavery insist on; and that not content with
gloriously taking up the cause of an Ethiopian savage government, and nobly
becoming their honorable executioners, we visit the sins of the fathers to the
latest generations; but if we admit the propriety of the argument, I request on
behalf of the injured and distressed, that you produce the records of their
courts, or the proofs of their crimes; if you do neither, what better testimony
do you show for your possession than the house-breaker or highway-man? --
Wherever a man claims and supports his property, he shall undoubtedly recover
it. Now every slave, by his personal appearance, makes that claim, -- he for
ever carries about him the strongest proofs in nature of his original right --
he is the first grand link, and unless his pretended owner shall deduce a
regular chain of conveyance, I contend that, by the laws of the English
constitution, and by our own declarations, the instant a Negro sets his foot in
America, he is as free as if he had landed in England. If force and power are
the only important links in the title, what arguments can we advance in their
favor, which will not militate against ourselves, whilst England remains
superior by land and by sea.

SHALL a climate, a color, or a country, determine the miserable inhabitants
as slaves and vassals to the rest of the world; or from what quarter shall we
derive our reasonings, to prove and support our tyrannizing power? -- Is there
such a thing with Englishmen -- high claiming Englishmen -- as partial liberty?
Has the Almighty decreed us their masters, and degrading the workmanship of his
hands, stamped slave to eternity on their foreheads? By what law has he thus
vested us with barbarous and cruel sway? Is it possible we can sit down in the
cool of the day, and laying our hands on our bosoms, say we believe they were
formed for our servants? On the other hand I would ask, Is there a single
argument to be adduced in support of our right to their services, which would
not equally hold in favor of their enslaving us, if we were trepanned into
their country? But why need I argue on the point? I cannot consent to believe
that there is a single slave holder on the continent, who is from principle a
tyrant. Their interests are so nearly connected with the subject, that their
judgments are misled. With such men it is hard to contend; their reason lies
buried and concealed; when called forth it appears with reluctance, and urges
its efforts with enervated force. Yet many there are in the several colonies,
who are earnestly concerned in this important cause. -- To you, my brethren --
you genuine sons of liberty, they look for support. Let us set foot to foot and
shoulder to shoulder, to expel this horrid demon from our land. -- How often is
my heart sunk into sorrowing sympathy with these poor and unfortunate wretches.
When I hear of the brutal cruelties exercised over them, by their inhuman
owners, when I view these usurpers of human freedom, basking in the beams of
success, and bowling through life with undaunted career, I look up with
wondering eye to the great and Almighty Author of our being, and am lost in
contemplating the dispensations of his Providence.

THE noble, spirited and virtuous Assembly of Virginia, not long ago petitioned
his Majesty for leave to pass an act to prohibit the importation of slaves, as
inconsistent with the principles of humanity; but the petition was rejected.
Yet should the colonies, with their joint voice at the Congress, make a
forcible remonstrance against the iniquity of the slave trade, it would breathe
such an independent spirit of liberty, and so corroborate our own claims, that
I should dare to hope for an intervening arm of Providence to be extended in
our favor. Should the colonies gain permission to pass prohibitory acts
against future importations, I should then, with expectant joy, look forward
for the glorious dawning of a day of liberty.

UNIMPORTANT as this may seem to some, I hesitate not to pronounce, that the
true interests and welfare of America are more intimately connected with it,
than with the repeal of every act which now agitates the continent -- one we
might probably out grow in a series of years, but the other would "strengthen
with our strength," and involve us in endless perplexities. If a stop could be
put to the importation, the grand difficulty would be over. Means might soon be
devised to discharge this unhappy race amongst us, and wear out the monstrous
badge of unrighteousness. To the Congress I would earnestly urge this weighty
point, and to the internal policy of every government I would press the
necessity of removing every legal obstruction, which stands as a bar to their
freedom. I am unacquainted with the general laws of emancipation in the
southern and the eastern colonies, but those of Maryland, Pennsylvania and New-
Jersey have fallen within my knowledge. In the first, any slave holder may set
his slaves at liberty without charge or encumbrance, provided they are not aged
or infirm, but in Pennsylvania the law requires a bond of indemnification of
thirty pounds, to prevent the slave becoming a burden to the township, and the
law is so worded as to admit of a doubt, whether such bond totally discharges
the master's estate; and in some cases the courts, before whom such
emancipation is to be declared, have so far exerted their power, as to refuse
admitting the security, though undoubtedly good, and the slaves intended for
freedom healthy and young; by which means, they were kept in bondage against
the inclinations of their owners. In New- Jersey, the law requires a security
of two hundred pounds, but the assembly of that province, at their last
session, took up the matter on virtuous principles, and made an essay toward "
an act for the more equitable manumission of slaves," by which any person
declaring his Negro free, before proper authority, at the age of twenty one,
may do it without charge or encumbrance, and for every year exceeding that age,
the owner so intending to set him free, is to pay into the hands of the
overseers of the poor, the sum of twenty shillings, which shall be a total
discharge: This with a few discretionary restrictions is published in their
votes, for the inspection of their constituents, and it is hoped by every lover
of liberty, that it will pass into a law at the next sessions.

WERE the colonies as earnest for the preservation of liberty, upon its true
and genuine principles, as they are to oppose the supremacy of an English
parliament, they would enter into a virtuous and perpetual resolve neither to
import, nor to purchase any slaves introduced among them after the meeting of
the Congress. A resolve so replete with liberty, so truly noble, would
indelibly convey to future ages a memorable record of disinterested virtue;
whilst thousands, ten thousands yet unborn, might bless them in their native
shades, carving on the smooth bark of every tree, NOBLE AMERICANS. With
grateful hearts might they look up " to the unknown God," and urge this ardent
prayer -- Great and Almighty ruler of the Universe, shower down the choicest of
thy blessings on yon western climes.

HERE I shall close these reflections, and submit them to the candor of my
countrymen. If my conceptions of equity, or conjectures on the political
interests of the continent, should differ from many of my brethren, I shall
open my heart to conviction, and stand a willing convert to the voice of
reason. The welfare of my country alone engaged my feeble pen, and prompted me
to steal on the public with a cloak of disguise; a cloak which may happily
protect me from the keenness of invective, and shield me from reproach. Though
the storms of obloquy and virulence, may pour over my head with unremitting
violence, and the loud thunders of angry zeal may roar in my ears with
incessant peals; though the flashes of political fire may dart their forky
vengeance with fierceness round my dwelling, -- snug and retired, beneath the
shelter of a humble roof, I brave the danger and defy the storm.

August 4, 1774.
FINIS.

