THE WORKS OF JOHN WOOLMAN.

IN TWO PARTS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND
AND THIRD STREETS.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

(...)

THE TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS IN YORKSHIRE, At their Quarterly Meeting, held at
YORK the 24th and 25th of the third month, 1773, concerning JOHN WOOLMAN, Of
Mount-Holly, in the province of New Jersey in America, who departed this life
at the house of our friend Thomas Priestman, in the suburbs of this city, the
7th of the tenth month, 1772, and was interred in the burying ground of friends
the 9th of the same, aged about fifty two years.
THIS our valuable friend having been under a religious engagement for some
time, to visit friends in this nation, and more especially us in the northern
parts, undertook the same in full concurrence and near sympathy with his
friends and brethren at home, as appeared by certificates from the monthly and
quarterly meetings to which he belonged, and from the spring-meeting of
ministers and elders, held at Philadelphia, for Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

He arrived in the city of London the beginning of the last yearly meeting, and
after attending that meeting traveled northward, visiting the quarterly
meetings of Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire and
Worcestershire, and diverse particular meetings in his way.

He visited many meetings on the West side of this county, also some in
Lancashire and Westmoreland, from whence he came to our quarterly meeting in
the last ninth month, and though much out of health, yet was enabled to attend
all the sittings of that meeting except the last.

His disorder then, which proved the small pox, increased speedily upon him,
and was very afflicting; under which he was supported in much meekness,
patience, and christian fortitude; to those who attended him in his illness,
his mind appeared to be centered in divine love; under the precious influence
whereof, we believe he finished his course, and entered into the mansions of
everlasting rest.

In the early part of his illness he requested a friend to write, and he broke
forth thus.

"O Lord my God! the amazing horrors of darkness were gathered around me and
covered me all over, and I saw no way to go forth; I felt the misery of my
fellow creatures separated from the divine harmony and it was heavier than I
could bear, and I was crushed down under it; I lifted up my hand, and stretched
out my arm, but there was none to help me; I looked round about and was amazed:
in the depths of misery, O Lord! I remembered that thou art omnipotent, that I
had called thee father, and I felt that I loved thee, and I was made quiet in
thy will, and I waited for deliverance from thee; thou had pity upon me, when
no man could help me; I saw that meekness under suffering was showed to us in
the most affecting example of thy son, and thou wast teaching me to follow him,
and I said, thy Will, O Father be done."

Many more of his weighty expressions might have been inserted here, but it was
deemed unnecessary, they being already published in print.

He was a man endued with a large natural capacity, and being obedient to the
manifestations of Divine Grace, having in patience and humility endured many
deep baptisms, he became thereby sanctified and fitted for the Lord's work, and
was truly serviceable in his church; dwelling in awful fear and watchfulness,
he was careful in his public appearances to feel the putting forth of the
Divine Hand, so that the spring of the gospel ministry often flowed through him
with great sweetness and purity, as a refreshing stream to the weary travelers
toward the city of God: ski^lfull in dividing the word, he was furnished by
Him in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, to communicate
freely to the several states of the people where his lot was cast. His conduct
at other times was seasoned with the like watchful circumspection and attention
to the guidance of Divine Wisdom, which rendered his whole conversation
uniformly edifying.

He was fully persuaded that as the life of Christ comes to reign in the earth,
all abuse and unnecessary oppression, both of the human and brute creation will
come to an end; but under the sense of a deep revolt, and an overflowing stream
of unrighteousness, his life has been often a life of mourning.

He was deeply concerned on account of that inhuman and iniquitous practice of
making slaves of the people of Africa, or holding them in that state; and on
that account we understand he has not only wrote some books, but traveled
much on the continent of America, in order to make the Negro masters
(especially those in profession with us) sensible of the evil of such a
practice; and though in this journey to England, he was far removed from the
outward sight of their sufferings, yet his deep exercise of mind remained, as
appears by a short treatise he wrote in this journey, and his frequent concern
to open the miserable state of this deeply injured people: his testimony in the
last meeting he attended was on this subject, wherein he remarked, that as we
as a society, when under outward sufferings had often found it our concern to
lay them before those in authority, and thereby in the Lord's time, had
obtained relief, so he recommended this oppressed part of the creation to our
notice, that we may as way may open, represent their sufferings in an
individual, if not a society, capacity to those in authority.

Deeply sensible that the desire to gratify people's inclinations in luxury and
superfluities, is the principal ground of oppression, and the occasion of many
unnecessary wants, he believed it to be his duty to be a pattern of great
self-denial, with respect to the things of this life, and earnestly to labor
with friends in the meekness of wisdom, to impress on their minds the great
importance of our testimony in these things, recommending to the guidance of
the blessed Truth in this and all other concerns, and cautioning such as are
experienced therein, against contenting themselves with acting up to the
standard of others, but to be careful to make the standard of truth manifested
to them, the measure of their obedience; for said he, "That purity of life
which proceeds from faithfulness in following the Spirit of Truth, that state
where our minds are devoted to serve God, and all our wants are bounded by his
wisdom; this habitation has often been opened before me as a place of
retirement for the children of the light, where they may stand separated from
that which disordereth and confuseth the affairs of society, and where we may
have a testimony of our innocence in the hearts of those who behold us."

We conclude with fervent desires, that we as a people may thus, by our
example, promote the Lord's work in the earth; and our hearts being prepared,
may unite in prayer to the great Lord of the harvest, that as in his infinite
wisdom he has greatly stripped the church, by removing of late diverse faithful
ministers and elders, he may be pleased to send forth many more faithful
laborers into his harvest.

Signed in, by order, and on behalf of said meeting. Thomas Bennett, John
Storr, Joseph Eglin, Thomas Perkinson, Joseph Wright, Samuel Briscoe, John
Turner, Joshua Robinson, Thomas Priestman, and diverse other Friends,


A TESTIMONY OF THE MONTHLY MEETING OF FRIENDS, Held in Burlington, the first
day of the eighth month, in the year of our Lord, 1774, concerning our esteemed
friend JOHN WOOLMAN, DECEASED.
HE was born in Northampton, in the county of Burlington, and province of
West-New-Jersey, in the eighth month, 1720, of religious parents, who
instructed him very early in the principles of the christian religion, as
professed by the people called Quakers, which he esteemed a blessing to him,
even in his young years, tending to preserve him from the infection of wicked
children; but through the workings of the enemy, and levity incident to youth,
he frequently deviated from those parental precepts, by which he laid a renewed
foundation for repentance, that was finally succeeded by a godly sorrow not to
be repented of, and so became acquainted with that sanctifying power which
qualifies for true gospel ministry, into which he was called about the
twenty-second year of his age, and by a faithful use of the talents committed
to him, he experienced an increase, until he arrived at the state of a father,
capable of dividing the word aright to the different states he ministered unto;
dispensing milk to babes, and meat to those of riper years. Thus he found the
efficacy of that power to arise, which in his own expressions, "prepares the
creature to stand like a trumpet through which the Lord speaks to his people."
-- He was a loving husband, a tender father, and very humane to every part of
the creation under his care.

His concern for the poor and those in affliction was evident by his visits to
them; whom he frequently relieved by his assistance and charity. He was for
many years deeply exercised on account of the poor enslaved Africans, whose
cause, as he sometimes mentioned, lay almost continually upon him, and to
obtain liberty to those captives, he labored both in public and private; and
was favored to see his endeavors crowned with considerable success. He was
particularly desirous that friends should not be instrumental to lay burdens
on this oppressed people, but remember the days of suffering from which they
had been providentially delivered, that if times of trouble should return, no
injustice dealt to those in slavery might rise in judgment against us, but,
being clear, we might on such occasions address the Almighty with a degree of
confidence, for his interposition and relief, being particularly careful as to
himself, not to countenance slavery even by the use of those conveniences of
life which were furnished by their labor.

He was desirous to have his own, and the minds of others, redeemed from the
pleasures and immoderate profits of this world, and to fix them on those joys
which fade not away; his principal care being after a life of purity,
endeavoring to avoid not only the grosser pollutions, but those also which,
appearing in a more refined dress, are not sufficiently guarded against by some
well disposed people. In the latter part of his life he was remarkable for the
plainness and simplicity of his dress, and as much as possible, avoided the use
of plate, costly furniture and feasting; thereby endeavoring to become an
example of temperance and self-denial, which he believed himself called unto;
and was favored with peace therein, although it carried the appearance of great
austerity in the view of some. He was very moderate in his charges in the way
of business, and in his desires after gain; and though a man of industry,
avoided, and strove much to lead others out of extreme labor, and anxiousness
after perishable things; being desirous that the strength of our bodies might
not be spent in procuring things unprofitable, and that we might use moderation
and kindness to the brute animals under our care, to prize the use of them as a
great favor, and by no means abuse them; that the gifts of Providence should
be thankfully received and applied to the uses they were designed.

He several times opened a school at Mount-Holly, for the instruction of poor
friends children and others, being concerned for their help and improvement
therein: -- his love and care for the rising youth among us was truly great,
recommending to parents and those who have the charge of them, to choose
conscientious and pious tutors, saying, "It is a lovely sight to behold
innocent children," and that "to labor for their help against that which would
mar the beauty of their minds, is a debt we owe them."

His ministry was sound, very deep and penetrating, sometimes pointing out the
dangerous situation which indulgence and custom leads into; frequently
exhorting others, especially the youth, not to be discouraged at the
difficulties which occur, but press after purity. He often expressed an earnest
engagement that pure wisdom should be attended to, which would lead into
lowliness of mind and resignation to the divine will, in which state small
possessions here would be sufficient.

In transacting the affairs of discipline, his judgment was sound and clear,
and he was very useful in treating with those who had done amiss; he visited
such in a private way in that plainness which truth dictates, showing great
tenderness and christian forbearance. He was a constant attender of our
yearly meeting, in which he was a good example, and particularly useful;
assisting in the business thereof with great weight and attention. He several
times visited most of the meetings of friends in this and the neighboring
provinces, with the concurrence of the monthly meeting to which he belonged,
and we have reason to believe had good service therein, generally or always
expressing at his return how it had fared with him, and the evidence of peace
in his mind for thus performing his duty. He was often concerned with other
friends in the important service of visiting families, which he was enabled to
go through to satisfaction.

In the minutes of the meeting of ministers and elders for this quarter, at the
foot of a list of the members of that meeting, made about five years before his
death, we find in his hand writing the following observation and reflections.
"As looking over the minutes made by persons who have put off this body, has
sometimes revived in me a thought how ages pass away; so this list may probably
revive a like thought in some, when I and the rest of the persons abovenamed,
are centered in another state of being. -- The Lord, who was the guide of my
youth, has in tender mercies helped me hitherto; he has healed me of wounds,
he has helped me out of grievous entanglements; he remains to be the strength
of my life; to whom I desire to devote myself in time, and in eternity." --
Signed, John Woolman.

In the twelfth month, 1771, he acquainted this meeting that he found his mind
drawn toward a religious visit to friends in some parts of England,
particularly in Yorkshire. In the first month 1772, he obtained our
certificate, which was approved and endorsed by our quarterly meeting, and by
the half year's meeting of ministers and elders at Philadelphia. He embarked on
his voyage in the fifth, and arrived in London in the sixth month following, at
the time of their annual meeting in that city. During his short visit to
friends in that kingdom, we are informed that his services were acceptable and
edifying. In his last illness he uttered many lively and comfortable
expressions, being "perfectly resigned, having no will either to live or die,"
as appears by the testimony of friends at York in Great Britain, in the suburbs
whereof, at the house of our friend Thomas Priestman, he died of the smallpox,
on the seventh day of the tenth month, 1772, and was buried in friends burying
ground in that city, on the ninth of the same, after a large and solid meeting
held on the occasion, at their great meeting house, aged near fifty-two years;
a minister upwards of thirty years, during which time he belonged to
Mount-Holly particular meeting, which he diligently attended when at home and
in health of body, and his labors of love and pious care for the prosperity of
friends in the blessed truth, we hope may not be forgotten, but that his good
works may be remembered to edification.

Signed in, and by order of the said meeting, by SAMUEL ALLINSON, Clerk.
Read and approved at our quarterly meeting, held at Burlington the 29th of the
8th month, 1774.

Signed by order of said meeting, DANIEL SMITH, Clerk.



A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, GOSPEL LABORS, AND CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES OF THAT
FAITHFUL MINISTER OF JESUS CHRIST, JOHN WOOLMAN, Late of MOUNT-HOLLY, in the
Province of NEW JERSEY.

ISAIAH xxxii. 17. The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by
JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street, between Second and Third Streets.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE AND TRAVELS OF JOHN WOOLMAN, IN THE SERVICE OF THE
GOSPEL.
CHAP. I.
His birth and parentage, with some account of the operations of divine grace
on his mind in his youth -- His first appearance in the ministry -- And his
considerations, while young, on the keeping of slaves.

I HAVE often felt a motion of love to leave some hints in writing of my
experience of the goodness of God: and now, in the thirty-sixth year of my age,
I begin this work.

I was born in Northampton, in Burlington county, West-Jersey, in the Year
1720; and before I was seven years old I began to be acquainted with the
operations of divine love. Through the care of my parents, I was taught to read
near as soon as I was capable of it; and as I went from school one seventh day,
I remember, while my companions went to play by the way, I went forward out of
sight, and sitting down, I read the 22d chapter of the Revelations. He showed
me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb, etc. and in reading it, my mind was drawn to
seek after that pure habitation, which, I then believed, God had prepared for
his servants. The place where I sat, and the sweetness that attended my mind,
remains fresh in my memory.

This, and the like gracious visitations, had that effect upon me, that when
boys used ill language, it troubled me; and, through the continued mercies of
God, I was preserved from it.

The pious instructions of my parents were often fresh in my mind when I
happened to be among wicked children, and were of use to me. My parents, having
a large family of children, used frequently, on first days after meeting, to
put us to read in the holy scriptures, or some religious books, one after
another, the rest sitting by without much conversation; which, I have since
often thought, was a good practice. From what I had read and heard, I believed
there had been, in past ages, people who walked in uprightness before God, in a
degree exceeding any that I knew, or heard of, now living: and the apprehension
of there being less steadiness and firmness amongst people in this age than in
past ages, often troubled me while I was a child.

A thing remarkable in my childhood was, that once going to a neighbor's
house, I saw, on the way, a robin sitting on her nest, and as I came near she
went off, but having young ones flew about, and with many cries expressed her
concern for them; I stood and threw stones at her, till one striking her, she
fell down dead: at first I was pleased with the exploit, but after a few
minutes was seized with horror, as having, in a sportive way, killed an
innocent creature while she was careful for her young: I beheld her lying dead,
and thought those young ones, for which she was so careful, must now perish for
want of their dam to nourish them; and after some painful considerations on the
subject, I climbed up the tree, took all the young birds, and killed them;
supposing that better than to leave them to pine away and die miserably: and
believed, in this case, that scripture proverb was fulfilled, The tender
mercies of the wicked are cruel. I then went on my errand, but, for some hours,
could think of little else but the cruelties I had committed, and was much
troubled. Thus He, whose tender mercies are over all his works, has placed a
principle in the human mind, which incites to exercise goodness toward every
living creature; and this being singly attended to, people become
tenderhearted and sympathizing; but being frequently and totally rejected, the
mind becomes shut up in a contrary disposition.

About the twelfth year of my age, my father being abroad, my mother reproved
me for some misconduct, to which I made an undutiful reply; and the next first
day, as I was with my father returning from meeting, he told me he understood I
had behaved amiss to my mother, and advised me to be more careful in future. I
knew myself blameable, and in shame and confusion remained silent. Being thus
awakened to a sense of my wickedness, I felt remorse in my mind, and getting
home, I retired and prayed to the Lord to forgive me; and do not remember that
I ever, after that, spoke unhandsomely to either of my parents, however foolish
in some other things.

Having attained the age of sixteen years, I began to love wanton company; and
though I was preserved from profane language, or scandalous conduct, still I
perceived a plant in me which produced much wild grapes: yet my merciful Father
forsook me not utterly, but at times, through his grace, I was brought
seriously to consider my ways; and the sight of my backslidings affected me
with sorrow; but for want of rightly attending to the reproofs of instruction,
vanity was added to vanity, and repentance to repentance: upon the whole, my
mind was more and more alienated from the truth, and I hastened toward
destruction. While I meditate on the gulf toward which I traveled, and
reflect on my youthful disobedience, for these things I weep, mine eye runs
down with water.

Advancing in age the number of my acquaintance increased, and thereby my way
grew more difficult: though I had found comfort in reading the holy scriptures,
and thinking on heavenly things, I was now estranged therefrom: I knew I was
going from the flock of Christ, and had no resolution to return; hence serious
reflections were uneasy to me, and youthful vanities and diversions my greatest
pleasure. Running in this road I found many like myself; and we associated in
that which is reverse to true friendship.

But in this swift race it pleased God to visit me with sickness, so that I
doubted of recovering; and then did darkness, horror, and amazement, with full
force, seize me, even when my pain and distress of body was very great. I
thought it would have been better for me never to have had a being, than to see
the day which I now saw. I was filled with confusion; and in great affliction,
both of mind and body, I lay and bewailed myself. I had not confidence to lift
up my cries to God, whom I had thus offended; but, in a deep sense of my great
folly, I was humbled before him: and, at length, that Word which is as a fire
and a hammer, broke and dissolved my rebellious heart, and then my cries were
put up in contrition; and in the multitude of his mercies I found inward
relief, and felt a close engagement, that if he was pleased to restore my
health, I might walk humbly before him.

After my recovery, this exercise remained with me a considerable time; but, by
degrees, giving way to youthful vanities, they gained strength, and getting
with wanton young people I lost ground. The Lord had been very gracious, and
spoke peace to me in the time of my distress; and I now most ungratefully
turned again to folly; on which account, at times, I felt sharp reproof, but
did not get low enough to cry for help. I was not so hardy as to commit things
scandalous; but to exceed in vanity, and promote mirth, was my chief study.
Still I retained a love and esteem for pious people; and their company brought
an awe upon me. My dear parents, several times, admonished me in the fear of
the Lord, and their admonition entered into my heart, and had a good effect for
a season; but not getting deep enough to pray rightly, the tempter, when he
came, found entrance. I remember, once having spent a part of the day in
wantonness as I went to bed at night, there lay in a window, near my bed, a
bible, which I opened, and first cast my eye on the text, we lie down in our
shame, and our confusion covers us; this I knew to be my case: and meeting with
so unexpected a reproof, I was somewhat affected with it, and went to bed under
remorse of conscience; which I soon cast off again.

Thus time past on: my heart was replenished with mirth and wantonness, while
pleasing scenes of vanity were presented to my imagination, till I attained the
age of eighteen years; near which time I felt the judgments of God, in my soul,
like a consuming fire; and looking over my past life, the prospect was moving.
-- I was often sad, and longed to be delivered from those vanities; then again,
my heart was strongly inclined to them, and there was in me a sore conflict: at
times I turned to folly; and then again, sorrow and confusion took hold of me.
In a while, I resolved totally to leave off some of my vanities; but there was
a secret reserve in my heart, of the more refined part of them, and I was not
low enough to find true peace. Thus, for some months, I had great troubles;
there remaining in me an unsubjected will, which rendered my labors fruitless,
till at length, through the merciful continuance of heavenly visitations, I was
made to bow down in spirit before the Lord. I remember one evening I had spent
some time in reading a pious author; and walking out alone, I humbly prayed to
the Lord for his help, that I might be delivered from all those vanities which
so ensnared me. Thus being brought low, he helped me; and as I learned to bear
the cross, I felt refreshment to come from his presence; but not keeping in
that strength which gave victory, I lost ground again; the sense of which
greatly affected me: and I sought deserts and lonely places, and there with
tears did confess my sins to God, and humbly craved help of him. And I may say
with reverence, he was near to me in my troubles, and in those times of
humiliation opened my ear to discipline. I was now led to look seriously at the
means by which I was drawn from the pure truth, and learned this, that if I
would live in the life which the faithful servants of God lived in, I must not
go into company as heretofore in my own will; but all the cravings of sense
must be governed by a divine principle. In times of sorrow and abasement these
instructions were sealed upon me, and I felt the power of Christ prevail over
selfish desires, so that I was preserved in a good degree of steadiness; and
being young, and believing, at that time, that a single life was best for me, I
was strengthened to keep from such company as had often been a snare to me.

I kept steadily to meetings; spent first days afternoon chiefly in reading the
scriptures and other good books; and was early convinced in my mind, that true
religion consisted in an inward life, wherein the heart does love and reverence
God the Creator, and learns to exercise true justice and goodness, not only
toward all men, but also toward the brute creatures -- That as the mind was
moved, by an inward principle, to love God as an invisible incomprehensible
Being; by the same principle it was moved to love him in all his manifestations
in the visible world -- That, as by his breath, the flame of life was kindled
in all animal sensible creatures, to say we love God as unseen, and, at the
same time, exercise cruelty toward the least creature moving by his life, or by
life derived from him; was a contradiction in itself.

I found no narrowness respecting sects and opinions; but believed, that
sincere upright hearted people, in every society, who truly love God, were
accepted of him.

As I lived under the cross, and simply followed the openings of truth, my
mind, from day to day, was more enlightened; my former acquaintance were left
to judge of me as they would, for I found it safest for me to live in private,
and keep these things sealed up in my own breast. While I silently ponder on
that change wrought in me, I find no language equal to it, nor any means to
convey to another a clear idea of it. I looked upon the works of God in this
visible creation, and an awfulness covered me; my heart was tender and often
contrite, and universal love to my fellow creatures increased in me: this will
be understood by such who have trodden in the same path. Some glances of real
beauty may be seen in their faces, who dwell in true meekness.

There is a harmony in the sound of that voice to which divine love gives
utterance, and some appearance of right order in their temper and conduct,
whose passions are regulated; yet all these do not fully show forth that inward
life to such who have not felt it: but this white stone and new name is known
rightly to such only who have it.

Now though I had been thus strengthened to bear the cross, I still found
myself in great danger, having many weaknesses attending me, and strong
temptations to wrestle with; in the feeling whereof I frequently withdrew into
private places, and often with tears besought the Lord to help me, whose
gracious ear was open to my cry.

All this time I lived with my parents, and wrought on the plantation; and
having had schooling pretty well for a planter, I used to improve it in
winter-evenings, and other leisure times; and being now in the twenty-first
year of my age, a man, in much business at shop-keeping and baking, asked me,
if I would hire with him to tend shop and keep books. I acquainted my father
with the proposal; and, after some deliberation, it was agreed for me to go.

At home I had lived retired; and now having a prospect of being much in the
way of company, I felt frequent and fervent cries in my heart to God, the
Father of mercies, that he would preserve me from all taint and corruption;
that, in this more public employment, I might serve Him, my gracious Redeemer,
in that humility and self-denial, with which I had been, in a small degree,
exercised in a more private life. The man, who employed me, furnished a shop in
Mount-Holly, about five miles from my father's house, and six from his own; and
there I lived alone, and tended his shop. Shortly after my settlement here, I
was visited by several young people my former acquaintance, who knew not but
vanities would be as agreeable to me now as ever; and, at these times, I cried
to the Lord in secret for wisdom and strength; for I felt myself encompassed
with difficulties, and had fresh occasion to bewail the follies of time past,
in contracting a familiarity with libertine people: and as I had now left my
father's house outwardly, I found my heavenly Father to be merciful to me
beyond what I can express.

By day I was much amongst people, and had many trials to go through; but in
the evenings, I was mostly alone, and may with thankfulness acknowledge, that,
in those times, the spirit of supplication was often poured upon me; under
which I was frequently exercised, and felt my strength renewed.

In a few months after I came here, my master bought several Scotchmen
servants, from on board a vessel, and brought them to Mount-Holly to sell; one
of which was taken sick, and died.

In the latter part of his sickness, he, being delirious, used to curse and
swear most sorrowfully; and the next night after his burial, I was left to
sleep alone in the same chamber where he died: I perceived in me a
timorousness; I knew, however, I had not injured the man, but assisted in
taking care of him according to my capacity; and was not free to ask any one,
on that occasion, to sleep with me: nature was feeble; but every trial was a
fresh incitement to give myself up wholly to the service of God, for I found no
helper like him in times of trouble.

After a while, my former acquaintance gave over expecting me as one of their
company; and I began to be known to some whose conversation was helpful to me:
and now, as I had experienced the love of God, through Jesus Christ, to redeem
me from many pollutions, and to be a succor to me through a sea of conflicts,
with which no person was fully acquainted; and as my heart was often enlarged
in this heavenly principle, I felt a tender compassion for the youth, who
remained entangled in snares like those which had entangled me from one time to
another: this love and tenderness increased; and my mind was more strongly
engaged for the good of my fellow creatures. I went to meetings in an awful
frame of mind, and endeavored to be inwardly acquainted with the language of
the true Shepherd; and one day, being under a strong exercise of spirit, I
stood up, and said some words in a meeting; but not keeping close to the divine
opening, I said more than was required of me; and being soon sensible of my
error, I was afflicted in mind some weeks, without any light or comfort, even
to that degree that I could not take satisfaction in any thing: I remembered
God, and was troubled; and, in the depth of my distress, he had pity upon me,
and sent the Comforter: I then felt forgiveness for my offense, and my mind
became calm and quiet, being truly thankful to my gracious Redeemer for his
mercies; and after this, feeling the spring of divine love opened, and a
concern to speak, I said a few words in a meeting, in which I found peace;
this, I believe, was about six weeks from the first time: and, as I was thus
humbled and disciplined under the cross, my understanding became more
strengthened to distinguish the pure spirit which inwardly moves upon the
heart, and taught me to wait in silence sometimes many weeks together, until I
felt that rise which prepares the creature to stand like a trumpet, through
which the Lord speaks to his flock.

From an inward purifying, and steadfast abiding under it, springs a lively
operative desire for the good of others: all the faithful are not called to the
public ministry; but whoever are, are called to minister of that which they
have tasted and handled spiritually. The outward modes of worship are various;
but wherever any are true ministers of Jesus Christ, it is from the operation
of his spirit upon their hearts, first purifying them, and thus giving them a
just sense of the conditions of others.

This truth was early fixed in my mind; and I was taught to watch the pure
opening, and to take heed, lest, while I was standing to speak, my own will
should get uppermost, and cause me to utter words from worldly wisdom, and
depart from the channel of the true gospel ministry. In the management of my
outward affairs, I may say with thankfulness, I found truth to be my support;
and I was respected in my master's family, who came to live in Mount-Holly
within two years after my going there.

About the twenty-third year of my age, I had many fresh and heavenly openings,
in respect to the care and providence of the Almighty over his creatures in
general, and over man as the most noble amongst those which are visible. And
being clearly convinced in my judgment, that to place my whole trust in God was
best for me, I felt renewed engagements, that in all things I might act on an
inward principle of virtue, and pursue worldly business no further, than as
truth opened my way therein.

About the time called Christmas, I observed many people from the country, and
dwellers in town, who, resorting to publick-houses, spent their time in
drinking and vain sports, tending to corrupt one another; on which account I
was much troubled. At one house in particular there was much disorder; and I
believed it was a duty incumbent on me to go and speak to the master of that
house. I considered I was young, and that several elderly friends in town had
opportunity to see these things; but though I would gladly have been excused,
yet I could not feel my mind clear.

The exercise was heavy: and as I was reading what the Almighty said to
Ezekiel, respecting his duty as a watchman, the matter was set home more
clearly; and then, with prayers and tears, I besought the Lord for his
assistance, who, in loving kindness, gave me a resigned heart: then, at a
suitable opportunity, I went to the publick-house; and seeing the man amongst
much company, I went to him, and told him, I wanted to speak with him; so we
went aside, and there, in the fear and dread of the Almighty, I expressed to him
what rested on my mind; which he took kindly, and afterward showed more regard
to me than before. In a few years afterward he died, middle-aged; and I often
thought, that had I neglected my duty in that case, it would have given me
great trouble; and I was humbly thankful to my gracious Father, who had
supported me herein.

My employer having a negro woman, sold her, and desired me to write a bill of
sale, the man being waiting who bought her: the thing was sudden; and though
the thoughts of writing an instrument of slavery for one of my fellow creatures
felt uneasy, yet I remembered I was hired by the year, that it was my master
who directed me to do it, and that it was an elderly man, a member of our
society, who bought her; so, through weakness, I gave way, and wrote it; but,
at the executing it, I was so afflicted in my mind, that I said, before my
master and the friend, that I believed slave-keeping to be a practice
inconsistent with the christian religion: this in some degree abated my
uneasiness; yet, as often as I reflected seriously upon it, I thought I should
have been clearer, if I had desired to be excused from it, as a thing against
my conscience; for such it was. And some time after this, a young man, of our
society, spoke to me to write a conveyance of a slave to him; he having lately
taken a negro into his house: I told him, I was not easy to write it; for,
though many of our meeting and in other places kept slaves, I still believed
the practice was not right; and desired to be excused from the writing. I spoke
to him in good will; and he told me, that keeping slaves was not altogether
agreeable to his mind; but that the slave being a gift made to his wife, he had
accepted of her.

CHAP. II.
His first journey, on a religious visit, into East-Jersey, in company with
Abraham Farrington -- His thoughts on merchandising, and his learning a trade
-- His second journey, with Isaac Andrews, into Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, and North Carolina. -- His third journey, with Peter Andrews, through
part of West and East-Jersey -- Some account of his sister Elizabeth, and her
death -- His fourth journey, with Peter Andrews, through New York and
Long Island, to New England -- And his fifth journey, with John Sykes, to the
Eastern Shore of Maryland, and the Lower Counties on Delaware.

MY esteemed friend Abraham Farrington, being about to make a visit to friends
on the eastern side of this province, and having no companion, he proposed to
me to go with him; and after a conference with some elderly friends, I agreed
to go: so we set out the fifth day of the ninth month, in the year 1743; had an
evening meeting at a tavern in Brunswick, a town in which none of our society
dwelt; the room was full, and the people quiet. Thence to Amboy, and had an
evening meeting in the courthouse; to which came many people, amongst whom
were several members of assembly, they being in town on the public affairs of
the province. in both these meetings my ancient companion was enlarged to
preach, in the love of the gospel. Thence we went to Wood-bridge, Raway, and
Plainfield; and had six or seven meetings in places where friends meetings are
not usually held, being made up chiefly of presbyterians, and my beloved
companion was frequently strengthened to publish the word of life amongst them:
as for me, I was often silent through the meetings; and when I spoke, it was with
much care, that I might speak only what truth opened: my mind was often tender,
and I learned some profitable lessons. We were out about two weeks.

Near this time, being on some outward business in which several families were
concerned, and which was attended with difficulties, some things relating
thereto not being clearly stated, nor rightly understood by all, there arose
some heat in the minds of the parties, and one valuable friend got off his
watch; I had a great regard for him, and felt a strong inclination, after
matters were settled, to speak to him concerning his conduct in that case; but
I being a youth, and he far advanced in age and experience, my way appeared
difficult; but after some days deliberation, and inward seeking to the Lord for
assistance, I was made subject; so that I expressed what lay upon me, in a way
which became my youth and his years: and though it was a hard task to me, it
was well taken, and, I believe, was useful to us both.

Having now been several years with my employer, and he doing less at
merchandise than heretofore, I was thoughtful of some other way of business;
perceiving merchandise to be attended with much cumber, in the way of trading
in these parts.

My mind, through the power of truth, was in a good degree weaned from the
desire of outward greatness, and I was learning to be content with real
conveniences, that were not costly; so that a way of life, free from much
entanglements, appeared best for me, though the income might be small. I had
several offers of business that appeared profitable, but did not see my way
clear to accept of them; as believing the business proposed would be attended
with more outward care and cumber than was required of me to engage in.

I saw that a humble man, with the blessing of the Lord, might live on a
little: and that where the heart was set on greatness, success in business did
not satisfy the craving; but that commonly with an increase of wealth, the
desire of wealth increased. There was a care on my mind so to pass my time,
that nothing might hinder me from the most steady attention to the voice of the
true Shepherd.

My employer, though now a retailer of goods, was by trad^ a tailor, and kept a
servant man at that business; and I began to think about learning the trade,
expecting, that if I should settle, I might, by this trade, and a little
retailing of goods, get a living in a plain way, without the load of great
business: I mentioned it to my employer, and we soon agreed on terms; and then,
when I had leisure from the affairs of merchandise, I worked with his man. I
believed the hand of Providence pointed out this business for me; and was
taught to be content with it, though I felt, at times, a disposition that would
have sought for something greater: but, through the revelation of Jesus Christ,
I had seen the happiness of humility, and there was an earnest desire in me to
enter deep into it; and, at times, this desire arose to a degree of fervent
supplication, wherein my soul was so environed with heavenly light and
consolation, that things were made easy to me which had been otherwise.

After some time, my employer's wife died; she was a virtuous woman, and
generally beloved of her neighbors: and soon after this, he left shopkeeping;
and we parted. I then wrought at my trade, as a tailor; carefully attended
meetings for worship and discipline; and found an enlargement of gospel love in
my mind, and therein a concern to visit friends in some of the back settlements
of Pennsylvania and Virginia; and being thoughtful about a companion, I
expressed it to my beloved friend Isaac Andrews, who then told me that he had
drawings to the same places; and also to go through Maryland, Virginia, and
Carolina. After considerable time past, and several conferences with him, I
felt easy ^o accompany him throughout, if way opened for it. I opened the case
in our monthly meeting, and friends expressing their unity therewith, we
obtained certificates to travel as companions; his from Haddonfield, and mine
from Burlington.

We left our province on the twelfth day of the third month, in the year 1746,
and had several meetings in the upper part of Chester county, and near
Lancaster; in some of which, the love of Christ prevailed, uniting us together
in his service. Then we crossed the river Susquehannah, and had several
meetings in a new settlement, called the Red-Lands; the oldest of which, as I
was informed, did not exceed ten years. It is the poorer sort of people that
commonly begin to improve remote deserts: with a small stock they have houses
to build, lands to clear and fence, corn to raise, clothes to provide, and
children to educate; that friends, who visit such, may well sympathize with
them in their hardships in the wilderness; and though the best entertainment
such can give, may seem coarse to some who are used to cities, or old settled
places, it becomes the disciples of Christ to be content with it. Our hearts
were sometimes enlarged in the love of our heavenly Father amongst these
people; and the sweet influence of his spirit supported us through some
difficulties: to him be the praise.

We passed on to Manoquacy, Fairfax, Hopewell, and Shanando, and had meetings;
some of which were comfortable and edifying. From Shanando we set off in the
afternoon for the old settlements of friends in Virginia; and the first night,
we, with our pilot, lodged in the woods, our horses feeding near us; but he
being poorly provided with a horse, and we young and having good horses, were
free the next day to part with him; and did so. In two days after, we reached
to our friend John Cheagle's, in Virginia: so we took the meetings in our way
through Virginia; were, in some degree, baptized into a feeling sense of the
conditions of the people; and our exercise in general was more painful in these
old settlements, than it had been amongst the back inhabitants: but through the
goodness of our heavenly Father, the well of living-waters was, at times,
opened to our encouragement, and the refreshment of the sincere hearted. We
went on to Perquimons, in North Carolina; had several meetings, which were
large; and found some openness in those parts, and a hopeful appearance amongst
the young people. So we turned again to Virginia, and attended most of the
meetings which we had not been at before, laboring amongst friends in the love
of Jesus Christ, as ability was given: and thence went to the mountains, up
James River, to a new settlement; and had several meetings amongst the people,
some of whom had lately joined in membership with our society.

In our journeying to and fro, we found some honest-hearted friends, who
appeared to be concerned for the cause of truth among a backsliding people.

From Virginia, we crossed over the river Patowmac, at Hoe's ferry, and made a
general visit to the meetings of friends on the Western Shore of Maryland; and
were at their quarterly meeting. We had some hard labor amongst them,
endeavoring to discharge our duty honestly as way opened, in the love of
truth: and thence taking sundry meetings in our way, we passed homeward; where,
through the favor of Divine Providence, we reached the sixteenth day of the
sixth month, in the year 1746; and I may say, that through the assistance of
the Holy Spirit, which mortifies selfish desires, my companion and I traveled
in harmony, and parted in the nearness of true brotherly love.

Two things were remarkable to me in this journey: first, in regard to my
entertainment; when I eat, drank, and lodged free-cost with people, who lived
in ease on the hard labor of their slaves, I felt uneasy; and as my mind was
inward to the Lord, I found, from place to place, this uneasiness return upon
me, at times, through the whole visit. Where the masters bore a good share of
the burden, and lived frugally, so that their servants were well provided for,
and their labor moderate, I felt more easy; but where they lived in a costly
way, and laid heavy burdens on their slaves, my exercise was often great, and
I frequently had conversation with them, in private, concerning it. Secondly:
this trade of importing slaves from their native country being much encouraged
amongst them, and the white people and their children so generally living
without much labor, was frequently the subject of my serious thoughts: and I
saw in these southern provinces so many vices and corruptions, increased by
this trade and this way of life, that it appeared to me as a dark gloominess
hanging over the land; and though now many willingly run into it, yet in future
the consequence will be grievous to posterity: I express it as it has appeared
to me, not at once, nor twice, but as a matter fixed on my mind.

Soon after my return home, I felt an increasing concern for friends on our sea
coast; and on the eighth day of the eighth month, in the year 1746, with the
unity of friends, and in company with my beloved friend and neighbor Peter
Andrews, brother to my companion beforementioned, we set forward, and visited
meetings generally about Salem, Cape May, Great and Little Egg-Harbour; and had
meetings at Barnagat, Mannahockin, and Mane-Squan, and so to the yearly meeting
at Shrewsbury. Through the goodness of the Lord way was opened, and the
strength of divine love was sometimes felt in our assemblies, to the comfort
and help of those who were rightly concerned before him. We were out twenty-two
days, and rode, by computation, three hundred and forty miles. At Shrewsbury
yearly meeting, we met with our dear friends Michael Lightfoot and Abraham
Farrington, who had good service there.

The winter following died my eldest sister, Elizabeth Woolman, jun. of the
smallpox, aged thirty-one years. She was, from her youth, of a thoughtful
disposition; and very compassionate to her acquaintance in their sickness or
distress, being ready to help as far as she could. She was dutiful to her
parents; one instance whereof follows: -- It happened that she, and two of her
sisters, being then near the estate of young women, had an inclination one
first day after meeting to go on a visit to some other young women at some
distance off; whose company, I believe, would have done them no good. They
expressed their desire to our parents; who were dissatisfied with the proposal,
and stopped them. The same day, as my sisters and I were together, and they
talking about their disappointment, Elizabeth expressed her contentment under it;
signifying, she believed it might be for their good.

A few years after she attained to mature-age, through the gracious visitations
of God's love, she was strengthened to live a self-denying exemplary life,
giving herself much to reading and meditation.

The following letter may show, in some degree, her disposition:

Haddonfield, 1st day, 11th month, 1743. Beloved brother John Woolman,
In that love which desires the welfare of all men, I write unto thee: I
received thine, dated second day of the tenth month last, with which I was
comforted. My spirit is bowed with thankfulness that I should be remembered,
who am unworthy; but the Lord is full of mercy, and his goodness is extended to
the meanest of his creation; therefore, in his infinite love, he has pitied
and spared and showed mercy, that I have not been cut off nor quite lost; but,
at times, I am refreshed and comforted as with the glimpse of his presence,
which is more to the immortal part, than all which this world can afford: so,
with desires for thy preservation with my own, I remain

thy affectionate sister, Eliz. Woolman, jun.


The fore part of her illness she was in great sadness and dejection of mind,
of which she told one of her intimate friends, and said, when I was a young
girl I was wanton and airy, but I thought I had thoroughly repented for it; and
added, I have of late had great satisfaction in meetings. Though she was thus
disconsolate, still she retained a hope, which was as an anchor to (...): and
some time after, the same friend came again to see her, to whom she mentioned
her former expressions, and said, it is otherwise now, for the Lord has
rewarded me sevenfold; and I am unable to express the greatness of his love
manifested to me. Her disorder appearing dangerous, and our mother being
sorrowful, she took notice of it, and said, dear mother, weep not for me; I go
to my God: and many times, with an audible voice, uttered praise to her
Redeemer.

A friend coming some miles to see her the morning before she died, asked her,
how she did? she answered, I have had a hard night, but shall not have another
such, for I shall die, and it will be well with my soul; and accordingly died
the next evening.

The following ejaculations were found amongst her writings; wrote, I believe,
at four times: I. Oh! that my head were as waters, and mine eyes as a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night, until acquainted with my God. II. O
Lord, that I may enjoy thy presence; or else my time is lost, and my life a
snare to my soul. III. O Lord, that I may receive bread from thy table, and
that thy grace may abound in me. IV. O Lord, that I may be acquainted with thy
presence, that I may be seasoned with thy salt, that thy grace may abound in me.


Of late I found drawings in my mind to visit friends in New England, and
having an opportunity of joining in company with my beloved friend Peter
Andrews; we, having obtained certificates from our monthly meeting, set forward
on the sixteenth day of the third month, in the year 1747, and reached the
yearly meeting at Long Island; at which were our friends Samuel Nottingham from
England, John Griffith, Jane Hoskins, and Elizabeth Hudson from Pennsylvania,
and Jacob Andrews from Chesterfield. Several of whom were favored in their
public exercise; and, through the goodness of the Lord, we had some edifying
meetings. After this, my companion and I visited friends on Long Island; and,
through the mercies of God, we were helped in the work.

Besides going to the settled meetings of friends, we were at a general meeting
at Setawket, chiefly made up of other societies: and had a meeting at
Oyster-Bay, in a dwelling house, at which were many people: at the first of
which there was not much said by way of testimony; but was, I believe, a good
meeting: at the latter, through the springing up of living-waters, it was a day
to be thankfully remembered. Having visited the island, we went over to the
main, taking meetings in our way, to Oblong, Nine-Partners and New-Milford. --
In these back settlements we met with several people, who, through the
immediate workings of the spirit of Christ on their minds, were drawn from the
vanities of the world, to an inward acquaintance with him: they were educated
in the way of the presbyterians. A considerable number of the youth, members of
that society, were used to spend their time often together in merriment, but
some of the principal young men of that company being visited by the powerful
workings of the spirit of Christ, and thereby led humbly to take up his cross,
could no longer join in those vanities; and as these stood steadfast to that
inward convincement, they were made a blessing to some of their former
companions; so that, through the power of truth, several were brought into a
close exercise concerning the eternal well-being of their souls. These young
people continued for a time to frequent their public worship; and besides
that, had meetings of their own; which meetings were a while allowed by their
preacher, who sometimes met with them: but, in time, their judgment in matters
of religion disagreeing with some of the articles of the presbyterians, their
meetings were disapproved by that society; and such of them who stood firm to
their duty, as it was inwardly manifested, had many difficulties to go through:
and their meetings were in a while dropped; some of them returning to the
presbyterians, and others of them, after a time, joined to our religious
society.

I had conversation with some of the latter, to my help and edification; and
believe several of them are acquainted with the nature of that worship, which
is performed in spirit and in truth. From hence, accompanied by Amos Powel, a
friend from Long Island, we rode through Connecticut, chiefly inhabited by
presbyterians; who were generally civil to us, so far as I saw: and after three
days riding, we came amongst friends in the colony of Rhode Island. We visited
friends in and about Newport, and Dartmouth, and generally in those parts; and
then to Boston; and proceeded eastward as far as Dover: and then returned to
Newport, and not far from thence, we met our friend Thomas Gawthrop from
England; who was then on a visit to these provinces. From Newport we sailed to
Nantucket; were there near a week; and from thence came over to Dartmouth: and
having finished our visit in these parts, we crossed the Sound from New London
to Long Island; and taking some meetings on the island, proceeded homeward;
where we reached the thirteenth day of the seventh month, in the year 1747,
having rode about fifteen hundred miles, and sailed about one hundred and fifty.

In this journey, I may say in general, we were sometimes in much weakness, and
labored under discouragements; and at other times, through the renewed
manifestations of divine love, we had seasons of refreshment, wherein the power
of truth prevailed.

We were taught, by renewed experience, to labor for an inward stillness; at
no time to seek for words, but to live in the spirit of truth, and utter that
to the people which truth opened in us. My beloved companion and I belonged
both to one meeting, came forth in the ministry near the same time, and were
inwardly united in the work: he was about thirteen years older than I, bore the
heaviest burden, and was an instrument of the greatest use.

Finding a concern to visit friends in the Lower Counties on Delaware, and on
the Eastern Shore of Maryland, and having an opportunity to join with my
well-beloved ancient friend John Sykes, we obtained certificates, and set off
the seventh day of the eighth month, in the year 1748, were at the meetings of
friends in the lower counties, attended the yearly meeting at Little Creek, and
made a visit to chief of the meetings on the Eastern Shore; and so home by the
way of Nottingham: were abroad about six weeks; and rode, by computation, about
five hundred and fifty miles.

Our exercise, at times, was heavy; but, through the goodness of the Lord, we
were often refreshed: and I may say, by experience, "He is a strong hold in the
day of trouble." Though our society, in these parts, appeared to me to be in a
declining condition; yet, I believe, the Lord has a people amongst them, who
labout to serve him uprightly, but have many difficulties to encounter.

CHAP. III.
His marriage -- The death of his father -- His journies into the upper part of
New Jersey, and afterward into Pennsylvania -- Considerations on keeping
slaves, and his visits to the families of friends at several times and places
-- An epistle from the general meeting -- His journey to Long Island --
Considerations on trading, and on the use of spirituous liquors and costly
apparel -- And his letter to a friend.

ABOUT this time believing it good for me to settle, and thinking seriously
about a companion, my heart was turned to the Lord with desires that he would
give me wisdom to proceed therein agreeable to his will; and He was pleased to
give me a well-inclined damsel, Sarah Ellis; to whom I was married the
eighteenth day of the eighth month, in the year 1749.

In the fall of the year 1750 died my father, Samuel Woolman, with a fever,
aged about sixty years.

In his lifetime he manifested much care for us his children, that in our
youth we might learn to fear the Lord; often endeavoring to imprint in our
minds the true principles of virtue, and particularly to cherish in us a spirit
of tenderness, not only toward poor people, but also toward all creatures of
which we had the command.

After my return from Carolina in the year 1746, I made some observations on
keeping slaves, which some time before his decease I showed him; and he perused
the manuscript, proposed a few alterations, and appeared well satisfied that I
found a concern on that account: and in his last sickness, as I was watching
with him one night, he being so far spent that there was no expectation of his
recovery, but had the perfect use of his understanding, he asked me concerning
the manuscript, whether I expected soon to proceed to take the advice of
friends in publishing it? and, after some conversation thereon, said, I have
all along been deeply affected with the oppression of the poor negroes; and
now, at last, my concern for them is as great as ever.

By his direction, I had wrote his will in a time of health, and that night he
desired me to read it to him, which I did; and he said, it was agreeable to his
mind. He then made mention of his end, which he believed was now near; and
signified, that though he was sensible of many imperfections in the course of
his life, yet his experience of the power of truth, and of the love and
goodness of God from time to time, even till now, was such, that he had no
doubt but that in leaving this life he should enter into one more happy.

The next day his sister Elizabeth came to see him, and told him of the decease
of their sister Ann; who died a few days before: he then said, I reckon sister
Ann was free to leave this world? Elizabeth said, she was: he then said, I also
am free to leave it; and being in great weakness of body said, I hope I shall
shortly go to rest. He continued in a weighty frame of mind, and was sensible
till near the last.

On the second day of the ninth month, in the year 1751, feeling drawings in my
mind to visit friends at the Great Meadows, in the upper part of West-Jersey,
with the unity of our monthly meeting, I went there; and had some searching
laborious exercise amongst friends in those parts, and found inward peace
therein.

In the ninth month of the year 1753, in company with my well-esteemed friend
John Sykes, and with the unity of friends, we traveled about two weeks,
visiting friends in Bucks-County. We labored in the love of the gospel,
according to the measure received; and, through the mercies of Him, who is
strength to the poor who trust in him, we found satisfaction in our visit: and
in the next winter, way opening to visit friends families within the compass of
our monthly meeting, partly ^y the labors of two friends from Pennsylvania, I
joined in some part of the work; having had a desire some time that it might go
forward amongst us.

About this time, a person at some distance lying sick, his brother came to me
to write his will: I knew he had slaves; and asking his brother, was told he
intended to leave them as slaves to his children. As writing is a profitable
employ, and as offending sober people was disagreeble to my inclination, I was
straitened in my mind; but as I looked to the Lord, he inclined my heart to his
testimony: and I told the man, that I believed the practice of continuing
slavery to this people was not right; and had a scruple in my mind against
doing writings of that kind: that though many in our society kept them as
slaves, still I was not easy to be concerned in it; and desired to be excused
from going to write the will. I spoke to him in the fear of the Lord; and he
made no reply to what I said, but went away: he also had some concerns in the
practice; and I thought he was displeased with me. In this case I had a fresh
confirmation, that acting contrary to present outward interest, from a motive
of divine love, and in regard to truth and righteousness, and thereby incurring
the resentments of people, opens the way to a treasure better than silver, and
to a friendship exceeding the friendship of men.

The manuscript beforementioned having laid by me several years, the
publication of it rested weightily upon me; and this year I offered it to the
revisal of friends, who, having examined and made some small alterations in it,
directed a number of copies thereof to be published and dispersed amongst
friends.

In the year 1754, I found my mind drawn to join in a visit to friends families
belonging to Chesterfield monthly meeting; and having the approbation of our
own, I went to their monthly meeting in order to confer with friends, and see
if way opened for it: I had conference with some of their members, the proposal
having been opened before in their meeting, and one friend agreed to join with
me as a companion for a beginning; but when meeting was ended, I felt great
distress of mind, and doubted what way to take, or whether to go home and wait
for greater clearness: I kept my distress secret; and going with a friend to
his house, my desires were to the great Shepherd for his heavenly instruction;
and in the morning I felt easy to proceed on the visit, being very low in my
mind: and as mine eye was turned to the Lord, waiting in families in deep
reverence before him, he was pleased graciously to afford help; so that we had
many comfortable opportunities, and it appeared as a fresh visitation to some
young people. I spent several weeks this winter in the service; part of which
time was employed near home. And again in the following winter I was several
weeks in the same service; some part of the time at Shrewsbury, in company with
my beloved friend John Sykes; and have cause humbly to acknowledge, that through
the goodness of the Lord, our hearts were, at times, enlarged in his love; and
strength was given to go through the trials which, in the course of our visit,
attended us.

From a disagreement between the powers of England and France, it was now a
time of trouble on this Continent; and an epistle to friends went forth from
our general spring meeting, which I thought good to give a place in this
journal.

An EPISTLE from our general spring meeting of ministers and elders for
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, held at Philadelphia, from the twenty-ninth of the
third month, to the first of the fourth month, inclusive, 1755.

To friends on the continent of America.

Dear friends,
IN an humble sense of divine goodness, and the gracious continuation of God's
love to his people, we tenderly salute you; and are at this time therein
engaged in mind, that all of us who profess the truth, as held forth and
published by our worthy predecessors in this latter age of the world, may keep
near to that life which is the light of men, and be strengthened to hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering, that our trust may not be in man,
but in the Lord alone, who rules in the army of heaven, and in the kingdoms of
men, before whom the earth is as the dust of the balance, and her inhabitants
as grasshoppers. Isa.xl. 22.

We (being convinced that the gracious design of the Almighty in sending his
Son into the world, was to repair the breach made by disobedience, to finish
sin and transgression, that his kingdom might come, and his will be done on
earth as it is in heaven) have found it to be our duty to cease from those
national contests productive of misery and bloodshed, and submit our cause to
Him the Most High, whose tender love to his children exceeds the most warm
affections of natural parents, and who has promised to his seed throughout the
earth, as to one individual, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Heb.
xiii. 5. And as we, through the gracious dealings of the Lord our God, have had
experience of that work which is carried on, not by earthly might, nor by
power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of Hosts: Zech. iv. 6. By which
operation, that spiritual kingdom is set up, which is to subdue and break in
pieces all kingdoms that oppose it, and shall stand for ever. In a deep sense
thereof, and of the safety, stability and peace there is in it, we are desirous
that all who profess the truth, may be inwardly acquainted with it, and thereby
be qualified to conduct in all parts of our life as becomes our peaceable
profession: And we trust, as there is a faithful continuance to depend wholly
upon the almighty arm, from one generation to another, the peaceable kingdom
will gradually be extended from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of
the earth, Zech. ix. 10. to the completion of those prophesies already begun,
that nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, nor learn war any more.
Isa. ii. 4. Micah iv. 3.

And, dearly beloved friends, seeing we have these promises, and believe that
God is beginning to fulfill them, let us constantly endeavor to have our minds
sufficiently disentangled from the surfeiting cares of this life, and redeemed
from the love of the world, that no earthly possessions nor enjoyments may bias
our judgments, or turn us from that resignation, and entire trust in God, to
which his blessing is most surely annexed; then may we say, Our Redeemer is
mighty, he will plead our cause for us. Jer. 1. 34. And if, for the further
promoting his most gracious purposes in the earth, he should give us to taste
of that bitter cup which his faithful ones have often partook of; O that we may
be rightly prepared to receive it!

And now, dear friends, with respect to the commotions and stirrings of the
powers of the earth at this time near us, we are desirous that none of us may
be moved thereat; But repose ourselves in the munition of that rock that all
these shakings shall not move, even in the knowledge and feeling of the eternal
power of God, keeping us subjectly given up to his heavenly will, and feel it
daily to mortify that which remains in any of us which is of this world: for
the worldly part in any, is the changeable part, and that is up and down, full
and empty, joyful and sorrowful, as things go well or ill in this world; for as
the truth is but one, and many are made partakers of its spirit, so the world
is but one, and many are made partakers of the spirit of it; and so many as do
partake of it, so many will be straitened and perplexed with it: but they who
are single to the truth, waiting daily to feel the life and virtue of it in
their hearts, these shall rejoice in the midst of adversity, and have to
experience with the prophet, That Although the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive sha^^ fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet will they rejoice in the Lord, and
joy in the God of their salvation. Hab. iii. 17, 18.

If, contrary to this, we profess the truth, and not living under the power and
influence of it, are producing fruits disagreeable to the purity thereof, and
trust to the strength of man to support ourselves, therein our confidence will
be vain. For He, who removed the hedge from his vineyard, and gave it to be
trodden under foot, by reason of the wild grapes it produced, (Isa. v. 5.)
remains unchangeable: and if, for the chastisement of wickedness, and the
further promoting his own glory, he does arise, even, to shake terribly the
earth, who then may oppose him, and prosper!

We remain, in the love of the gospel, your friends and brethren.

Signed by fourteen friends.


Scrupling to do writings relative to keeping slaves, having been a means of
sundry small trials to me, in which I have so evidently felt my own will set
aside, that I think it good to mention a few of them -- Tradesmen and retailers
of goods, who depend on their business for a living, are naturally inclined to
keep the good will of their customers; nor is it a pleasant thing for young men
to be under any necessity to question the judgment or honesty of elderly men,
and more especially of such who have a fair reputation. Deep-rooted customs,
though wrong, are not easily altered; but it is the duty of every one to be firm
in that which they certainly know is right for them. A charitable benevolent
man, well acquainted with a negro, may, I believe, under some circumstances,
keep him in his family as a servant, on no other motives than the negroe's
good; but man, as man knows not what shall be after him, nor has he any
assurance that his children will attain to that perfection in wisdom and
goodness necessary rightly to exercise such power: hence it is clear to me,
that I ought not to be the scribe where wills are drawn, in which some children
are made absolute masters over others during life.

About this time, an ancient man of good esteem in the neighborhood, came to
my house to get his will wrote; he had young negroes; and I asked him
privately, how he purposed to dispose of them? he told me: I then said, I
cannot write thy will without breaking my own peace; and respectfully gave him
my reasons for it: he signified that he had a choice that I should have wrote
it; but as I could not, consistent with my conscience, he did not desire it:
and so he got it wrote by some other person. And a few years after, there being
great alterations in his family, he came again to get me to write his will: his
negroes were yet young; and his son, to whom he intended to give them, was,
since he first spoke to me, from a libertine, become a sober young man; and he
supposed, that I would have been free, on that account, to write it. We had
much friendly talk on the subject, and then deferred it: and a few days after,
he came again, and directed their freedom; and so I wrote his will.

Near the time the last mentioned friend first spoke to me, a neighbor
received a bad bruise in his body, and sent for me to bleed him; which being
done, he desired me to write his will: I took notes; and, amongst other things,
he told me to which of his children he gave his young negro: I considered the
pain and distress he was in, and knew not how it would end; so I wrote his
will, save only that part concerning his slave, and carrying it to his
bedside, read it to him; and then told him in a friendly way, that I could not
write any instruments by which my fellow creatures were made slaves, without
bringing trouble on my own mind: I let him know that I charged nothing for what
I had done; and desired to be excused from doing the other part in the way he
proposed: we then had a serious conference on the subject; at length, he
agreeing to set her free, I finished his will.

Having found drawings in my mind to visit friends on Long Island, after
obtaining a certificate from our monthly meeting, I set off on the twelfth day
of the fifth month, in the year 1756. When I reached the island, I lodged the
first night at the house of my dear friend Richard Halle^: the next day, being
the first of the week, I was at the meeting in Newtown; in which we experienced
the renewed manifestations of the love of Jesus Christ, to the comfort of the
honest-hearted. I went that night to Flushing; and the next day, in company
with my beloved friend Matthew Franklin, we crossed the ferry at White-Stone;
were at three meetings on the main, and then returned to the island; where I
spent the remainder of the week in visiting meetings. The Lord, I believe, has
a people in those parts, who are honestly inclined to serve him; but many, I
fear, are too much clogged with the things of this life, and do not come
forward bearing the cross in such faithfulness as he calls for.

My mind was deeply engaged in this visit, both in public and private; and, at
several places where I was, on observing that they had slaves, I found myself
under a necessity, in a friendly way, to labor with them on that subject;
expressing, as way opened, the inconsistency of that practice with the purity
of the christian religion, and the ill effects of it manifested amongst us.

The latter end of the week, their yearly meeting began; at which were our
friends John Scarbrough, Jane Hoskins, and Susannah Brown, from Pennsylvania:
the public meetings were large, and measurably favored with divine goodness.

The exercise of my mind, at this meeting, was chiefly on account of those who
were considered as the foremost rank in the society: and in a meeting of
ministers and elders, way opened, that I expressed in some measure what lay
upon me; and at a time when friends were met for transacting the affairs of the
church, having set a while silent, I felt a weight on my mind, and stood up;
and, through the gracious regard of our heavenly Father, strength was given
fully to clear myself of a burden, which for some days had been increasing
upon me.

Through the humbling dispensations of Divine Providence, men are sometimes
fitted for his service. The messages of the prophet Jeremiah were so
disagreeable to the people, and so reverse to the spirit they lived in, that he
became the object of their reproach; and in the weakness of nature, thought of
desisting from his prophetic office; but, says he, His word was in my heart
as a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I was weary with forbearing, and
could not stay. I saw at this time, that if I was honest in declaring that
which truth opened in me, I could not please all men; and labored to be
content in the way of my duty, however disagreeable to my own inclination.
After this I went homeward, taking Woodbridge and Plainfield in my way; in both
which meetings, the pure influence of divine love was manifested; in an
humbling sense whereof I went home: having been out about twenty-four days, and
rode about three hundred and sixteen miles.

While I was out on this journey, my heart was much affected with a sense of
the state of the churches in our southern provinces; and believing the Lord was
calling me to some further labor amongst them, I was bowed in reverence before
him, with fervent desires that I might find strength to resign myself up to his
heavenly will.

Until this year, 1756, I continued to retail goods, besides following my trade
as a tailor; about which time, I grew uneasy on account of my business growing
too cumbersome. I had began with selling trimmings for garments, and from
thence proceeded to sell cloths and linens; and, at length, having got a
considerable shop of goods, my trade increased every year, and the road to
large business appeared open; but I felt a stop in my mind.

Through the mercies of the Almighty, I had, in a good degree, learned to be
content with a plain way of living: I had but a small family; and on serious
consideration, I believed truth did not require me to engage in much cumbering
affairs: it had been my general practice to buy and sell things really useful:
things that served chiefly to please the vain mind in people, I was not easy to
trade in; seldom did it; and whenever I did, I found it weaken me as a
christian.

The increase of business became my burden; for though my natural inclination
was toward merchandise, yet I believed truth required me to live more free from
outward cumbers: and there was now a strife in my mind between the two; and in
this exercise my prayers were put up to the Lord, who graciously heard me, and
gave me a heart resigned to his holy will: then I lessened my outward business;
and, as I had opportunity, told my customers of my intentions, that they might
consider what shop to turn to: and, in a while, wholly laid down merchandise,
following my trade as a tailor; myself only, having no apprentice. I also had a
nursery of apple trees; in which I employed some of my time in hoeing,
grafting, trimming, and inoculating. In merchandise it is the custom, where I
lived, to sell chiefly on credit, and poor people often get in debt; and when
payment is expected, not having wherewith to pay, their creditors often sue for
it at law. Having often observed occurrences of this kind, I found it good for
me to advise poor people to take such goods as were most useful and not costly.

In the time of trading, I had an opportunity of seeing, that the too liberal
use of spirituous liquors, and the custom of wearing too costly apparel, led
some people into great inconveniences; and these two things appear to be often
connected one with the other; for by not attending to that use of things which
is consistent with universal righteousness, there is an increase of labor
which extends beyond what our heavenly Father intends for us: and by great
labor, and often by much sweating, there is, even among such who are not
drunkards, a craving of some liquors to revive the spirits: that partly by the
luxurious drinking of some, and partly by the drinking of others, (led to it
through immoderate labor) very great quantities of rum are every year expended
in our colonies; the greater part of which we should have no need of, did we
steadily attend to pure wisdom.

Where men take pleasure in feeling their minds elevated with strong drink, and
so indulge their appetite as to disorder their understandings, neglect their
duty as members in a family or civil society, and cast off all regard to
religion, their case is much to be pitied; and where such whose lives are for
the most past regular, and whose examples have a strong influence on the minds
of others, adhere to some customs which powerfully draw to the use of more
strong liquor than pure wisdom allows; this also, as it hinders the spreading
of the spirit of meekness, and strengthens the hands of the more excessive
drinkers, is a case to be lamented.

As every degree of luxury has some connection with evil; for those who profess
to be disciples of Christ, and are looked upon as leaders of the people, to
have that mind in them, which was also in Christ, and so stand separate from
every wrong way, is a means of help to the weaker. As I have sometimes been
much spent in the heat, and taken spirits to revive me, I have found by
experience, that in such circumstances the mind is not so calm, nor so fitly
disposed for divine meditation, as when all such extremes are avoided; and I
have felt an increasing care to attend to that holy Spirit which sets right
bounds to our desires; and leads those who faithfully follow it, to apply all
the gifts of Divine Providence to the purposes for which they were intended.
Did such who have the care of great estates, attend with singleness of heart to
this heavenly Instructor, which so opens and enlarges the mind, that men love
their neighbors as themselves, they would have wisdom given them to manage,
without finding occasion to employ some people in the luxuries of life, or to
make it necessary for others to labor too hard; but for want of steadily
regarding this principle of divine love, a selfish spirit takes place in the
minds of people, which is attended with darkness and manifold confusions in the
world.

Though trading in things useful is an honest employ; yet, through the great
number of superfluities which are bought and sold, and through the corruption
of the times, they who apply to merchandise for a living, have great need to be
well experienced in that precept which the prophet Jeremiah laid down for his
scribe: Seek thou great things for thyself? seek them not.

In the winter, this year, I was engaged with friends in visiting families;
and, through the goodness of the Lord, we had oftentimes experience of his
heart-tendering presence amongst us.

A copy of a letter wrote to a friend.
IN this thy late affliction I have found a deep fellow-feeling with thee; and
had a secret hope throughout, that it might please the Father of mercies to
raise thee up, and sanctify thy troubles to thee; that thou being more fully
acquainted with that way which the world esteems foolish, may feel the
clothing of divine fortitude, and be strengthened to resist that spirit which
leads from the simplicity of the everlasting truth.

We may see ourselves crippled and halting, and from a strong bias to things
pleasant and easy, find an impossibility to advance forward; but things
impossible with men are possible with God; and our wills being made subject to
his, all temptations are surmountable.

This work of subjecting the will, is compared to the mineral in the furnace;
which, through fervent heat, is reduced from its first principle: He refines them
as silver is refined -- He shall sit as a refiner, and purifier of silver. By
these comparisons, we are instructed in the necessity of the melting operation
of the hand of God upon us, to prepare our hearts truly to adore him, and
manifest that adoration, by inwardly turning away from that spirit in all its
workings, which is not of him. To forward this work, the all-wise God is
sometimes pleased, through outward distress, to bring us near the gates of death;
that life being painful and afflicting, and the prospect of eternity open
before us, all earthly bonds may be loosened, and the mind prepared for that
deep and sacred instruction, which otherwise would not be received. If kind
parents love their children and delight in their happiness, then He, who is
perfect goodness in sending abroad mortal contagions, does assuredly direct
their use -- Are the righteous removed by it, their change is happy; are the
wicked taken away in their wickedness, the Almighty is clear: Do we pass
through with anguish and great bitterness, and yet recover, He intends that we
should be purged from dross, and our ear opened to discipline.

And now on thy part, after thy sore affliction and doubts of recovery, thou
art again restored, forget not Him who has helped thee; but in humble
gratitude hold fast his instructions, thereby to shun those bye paths which
lead from the firm foundation. I am sensible of that variety of company, to
which one in thy business must be exposed: I have painfully felt the force of
conversation proceeding from men deeply rooted in an earthly mind, and can
sympathize with others in such conflicts, in that much weakness still attends
me.

I find that to be a fool as to worldly wisdom, and commit my cause to God, not
fearing to offend men, who take offense at the simplicity of truth, is the only
way to remain unmoved at the sentiments of others.

The fear of man brings a snare; by halting in our duty, and giving back in the
time of trial, our hands grow weaker, our spirits get mingled with the people,
our ears grow dull as to hearing the language of the true Shepherd; that when
we look at the way of the righteous, it seems as though it was not for us to
follow them.

There is a love clothes my mind while I write, which is superior to all
expressions; and I find my heart open to encourage to a holy emulation, to
advance forward in christtian firmness. Deep humility is a strong bulwark; and
as we enter into it, we find safety and true exaltation: the foolishness of God
is wiser than man, and the weakness of God is stronger than man. Being
uncloathed of our own wisdom, and knowing the abasement of the creature,
therein we find that power to arise, which gives health and vigor to us.


CHAP. IV.
His visiting the families of friends at Burlington -- His journey to
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina -- Considerations on the
state of friends there; and the exercise he was under in traveling among those
so generally concerned in keeping slaves: with some observations in
conversation, at several times, on this subject -- His epistle to friends at
New-Garden and Cane-Creek -- His thoughts on the neglect of a religious care in
the education of the negroes.

THE thirteenth day of the second month, in the year 1757, being then in good
health, and abroad with friends visiting families, I lodged at a friend's
house, in Burlington; and going to bed about the time usual with me, I awoke in
the night, and my meditations, as I lay, were on the goodness and mercy of the
Lord; in a sense whereof my heart was contrite: after this, I went to sleep
again; and sleeping a short time, I awoke; it was yet dark, and no appearance
of day nor moonshine; and as I opened mine eyes, I saw a light in my chamber at
the apparent distance of five feet, about nine inches diameter, of a clear easy
brightness, and near its center the most radiant: as I lay still without any
surprise looking upon it, words were spoken to my inward ear, which filled my
whole inward man: they were not the effect of thought, nor any conclusion in
relation to the appearance, but as the language of the Holy One spoken in my
mind; the words were, CERTAIN EVIDENCE OF DIVINE TRUTH; and were again repeated
exactly in the same manner; whereupon the light disappeared.

Feeling the exercise in relation to a visit to the Southern Provinces to
increase upon me, I acquainted our monthly meeting therewith, and obtained
their certificate: expecting to go alone, one of my brothers, who lived in
Philadelphia, having some business in North Carolina, proposed going with me
part of the way; but as he had a view of s^^e outward affairs, to accept of him
as a companion seemed some difficulty with me, whereupon I had conversation
with him at sundry times; and, at length, feeling easy in my mind, I had
conversation with several elderly friends of Philadelphia on the subject; and
he obtaining a certificate suitable to the occasion, we set off in the fifth
month of the year 1757: and coming to Nottingham weekday meeting, lodged at
John Churchman's; and here I met with our friend Benjamin Buffington, from
New England, who was returning from a visit to the Southern Provinces. Thence
we crossed the river Susquehannah, and lodged at William Cox's in Maryland; and
soon after I entered this province, a deep and painful exercise came upon me,
which I often had some feeling of since my mind was drawn toward these parts,
and with which I had acquainted my brother before we agreed to join as
companions.

As the people in this and the Southern Provinces live much on the labor of
slaves, many of whom are used hardly, my concern was, that I might attend with
singleness of heart to the voice of the true Shepherd, and be so supported as
to remain unmoved at the faces of men.

As it is common for friends on such a visit to have entertainment free of
cost, a difficulty arose in my mind with respect to saving my money by kindness
received, which to me appeared to be the gain of oppression.

Receiving a gift, considered as a gift, brings the receiver under obligations
to the benefactor, and has a natural tendency to draw the obliged into a party
with the giver. To prevent difficulties of this kind, and to preserve the minds
of judges from any bias, was that divine prohibition; Thou shall not receive
any gift: for a gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of the
righteous. Exodus xxiii. 8. As the disciples were sent forth without any
provision for their journey, and our Lord said the workman is worthy of his
meat, their labor in the gospel was considered as a reward for their
entertainment, and therefore not received as a gift; yet, in regard to my
present journey, I could not see my way clear in that respect. The difference
appeared thus: The entertainment the disciples met with, was from such whose
hearts God had opened to receive them, from a love to them, and the truth they
published: but we, considered as members of the same religious society, look
upon it as a piece of civility to receive each other in such visits; and such
reception, at times, is partly in regard to reputation, and not from an inward
unity of heart and spirit. Conduct is more convincing than language; and where
people, by their actions, manifest that the slave trade is not so disagreeable
to their principles but that it may he encouraged, there is not a sound uniting
with some friends who visit them.

The prospect of so weighty a work, and being so distinguished from many who I
esteemed before myself, brought me very low; and such were the conflicts of my
soul, that I had a near sympathy with the prophet, in the time of his weakness,
when he said, If thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, if I have found
favor in thy sight; Numb. xi. 15. but I soon saw that this proceeded from the
want of a full resignation to the divine will. Many were the afflictions which
attended me; and in great abasement, with many tears, my cries were to the
Almighty, for his gracious and fatherly assistance; and then, after a time of
deep trial, I was favored to understand the state mentioned by the psalmist
more clearly than ever I had before; to wit: My soul is even as a weaned child.
Psalm cxxxi. 2. Being thus helped to sink down into resignation, I felt a
deliverance from that tempest in which I had been sorely exercised, and in
calmness of mind went forward, trusting that the Lord Jesus Christ, as I
faithfully attended to him, would be a councellor to me in all difficulties;
and that by his strength I should be enabled even to leave money with the
members of society where I had entertainment, when I found that omitting of it
would obstruct that work to which I believed he had called me: and as I copy
this after my return, I may here add, that oftentimes I did so, under a sense
of duty; the way in which I did it was thus: when I expected soon to leave a
friend's house where I had entertainment, if I believed that I should not keep
clear from the gain of oppression without leaving money, I spoke to one of the
heads of the family privately, and desired them to accept of them pieces of
silver, and give them to such of their negroes as they believed would make the
best use of them; and at other times, I gave them to the negroes myself, as the
way looked clearest to me: as I expected this before I came out, I had provided
a large number of small pieces; and thus offering them to some who appeared to
be wealthy people, was a trial both to me and them: but the fear of the Lord so
covered me at times, that my way was made easier than I expected; and few, if
any, manifested any resentment at the offer, and most of them, after some talk,
accepted of them.

The seventh day of the fifth month, in the year 1757, lodged at a friend's
house; and the next day, being the first of the week, was at Potapsco meeting;
then crossed Patuxent river, and lodged at a publick-house.

On the ninth breakfasted at a friend's house; who afterward, putting us a
little on our way, I had conversation with him, in the fear of the Lord,
concerning his slaves; in which my heart was tender, and I used much plainness
of speech with him, which he appeared to take kindly. We pursued our journey
without appointing meetings, being pressed in my mind to be at the
yearly meeting in Virginia; and in my traveling on the road, I often felt a
cry rise from the center of my mind, thus: O Lord, I am a stranger on the
earth, hide not thy face from me. On the eleventh day of the fifth month, we
crossed the rivers Patowmack and Rapahannock, and lodged at Port Royal: and on
the way we happening in company with a colonel of the militia, who appeared to
be a thoughtful man; I took occasion to remark on the difference in general
betwixt a people used to labor moderately for their living, training up their
children in frugality and business, and those who live on the labor of slaves;
the former, in my view, being the most happy life: with which he concurred, and
mentioned the trouble arising from the untoward, slothful disposition of the
negroes; adding, that one of our laborers would do as much in a day as two of
their slaves. I replied, that free men, whose minds were properly on their
business, found a satisfaction in improving, cultivating, and providing for
their families; but negroes, laboring to support others who claim them as
their property, and expecting nothing but slavery during life, had not the like
inducement to be industrious.

After some further conversation, I said, that men having power, too often
misapplied it; that though we made slaves of the negroes, and the Turks made
slaves of the Christians, I however believed that liberty was the natural right
of all men equally: which he did not deny; but said, the lives of the negroes
were so wretched in their own country, that many of them lived better here than
there: I only said, there is great odds in regard to us, on what principle we
act; and so the conversation on that subject ended: and I may here add, that
another person, some time afterward, mentioned the wretchedness of the negroes,
occasioned by their intestine wars, as an argument in favor of our fetching
them away for slaves: to which I then replied, if compassion on the Africans,
in regard to their domestic troubles, were the real motives of our purchasing
them, that spirit of tenderness being attended to, would incite us to use them
kindly; that as strangers brought out of affliction, their lives might be happy
among us; and as they are human creatures, whose souls are as precious as ours,
and who may receive the same help and comfort from the holy scriptures as we
do, we could not omit suitable endeavors to instruct them therein: but while
we manifest by our conduct, that our views in purchasing them are to advance
ourselves; and while our buying captives taken in war, animates those parties
to push on that war, and increase desolation amongst them; to say they live
unhappy in Africa, is far from being an argument in our favor: and I further
said, the present circumstances of these provinces to me appear difficult; that
the slaves look like a burdensome stone to such who burden themselves with
them; and that if the white people retain a resolution to prefer their outward
prospects of gain to all other considerations, and do not act conscientiously
toward them as fellow creatures, I believe that burden will grow heavier and
heavier, till times change in a way disagreeable to us: at which the person
appeared very serious; and owned, that in considering their condition, and the
manner of their treatment in these provinces, he had sometimes thought it might
be just in the Almighty so to order it.

Having thus traveled through Maryland, we came amongst friends at Cedar-Creek
in Virginia, on the twelfth day of the fifth month; and the next day rode, in
company with several friends, a day's journey to Camp-Creek: and as I was
riding along in the morning, my mind was deeply affected in a sense I had of
the want of divine aid to support me in the various difficulties which attended
me; and in an uncommon distress of mind, I cried in secret to the Most High, O
Lord be merciful, I beseech thee, to thy poor afflicted creature. After some
time, I felt inward relief; and soon after, a friend in company began to talk
in support of the slave trade, and said, the negroes were understood to be the
offspring of Cain, their blackness being the mark God set upon him after he
murdered Abel his brother; that it was the design of Providence they should be
slaves, as a condition proper to the race of so wicked a man as Cain was: then
another spoke in support of what had been said. To all which, I replied in
substance as follows: That Noah and his family were all who survived the flood,
according to scripture; and as Noah was of Seth's race, the family of Cain was
wholly destroyed. One of them said, that after the flood Ham went to the land
of Nod, and took a wife; that Nod was a land far distant, inhabited by Cain's
race, and that the flood did not reach it; and as Ham was sentenced to be a
servant of servants to his brethren, these two families being thus joined, were
undoubtedly fit only for slaves. I replied, the flood was a judgment upon the
world for their abominations; and it was granted, that Cain's stock was the
most wicked, and therefore unreasonable to suppose they were spared: as to
Ham's going to the land of Nod for a wife, no time being fixed, Nod might be
inhabited by some of Noah's family, before Ham married a second time; moreover
the text says, That all flesh died that moved upon the earth. Genesis vii. 21. I
further reminded them, how the prophets repeatedly declare, that the son shall
not suffer for the iniquity of the father; but every one be answerable for his
own sins. I was troubled to perceive the darkness of their imaginations; and in
some pressure of spirit said, the love of ease and gain are the motives in
general of keeping slaves, and men are wont to take hold of weak arguments to
support a cause which is unreasonable; and added, I have no interest on either
side, save only the interest which I desire to have in the truth: and as I
believe liberty is their right, and see they are not only deprived of it, but
treated in other respects with inhumanity in many places, I believe He, who is
a refuge for the oppressed, will, in his own time, plead their cause; and happy
will it be for such, who walk in uprightness before him: and thus our
conversation ended.

On the fourteenth day of the fifth month I was at Camp-Creek monthly meeting,
and then rode to the mountains up James-River, and had a meeting at a friend's
house; in both which I felt sorrow of heart, and my tears were poured out
before the Lord, who was pleased to afford a degree of strength by which way
was opened to clear my mind amongst friends in those places. From thence I went
to Fork-Creek, and so to Cedar-Creek again; at which place I now had a meeting;
here I found a tender seed: and as I was preserved in the ministry to keep low
with the truth; the same truth in their hearts answered it, that it was a time
of mutual refreshment from the presence of the Lord. I lodged at James
Standley's, father of William Standley, one of the young men who suffered
imprisonment at Winchester last summer, on account of their testimony against
fighting; and I had some satisfactory conversation with him concerning it.
Hence I went to the Swamp-meeting, and to Wayanoke-meeting; and then crossed
James-River, and lodged near Burleigh. From the time of my entering Maryland I
have been much under sorrow, which of late so increased upon me, that my mind
was almost overwhelmed; and I may say with the psalmist, in my distress I
called upon the Lord, and cried to my God; who, in infinite goodness, looked
upon my affliction, and in my private retirement sent the Comforter for my
relief; for which I humbly bless his holy name.

The sense I had of the state of the churches, brought a weight of distress
upon me: the gold to me appeared dim, and the fine gold changed; and though
this is the case too generally, yet the sense of it in these parts has, in a
particular manner, borne heavy upon me. It appeared to me, that through the
prevailing of the spirit of this world, the minds of many were brought to an
inward desolation; and instead of the spirit of meekness, gentleness, and
heavenly wisdom, which are the necessary companions of the true sheep of
Christ, a spirit of fierceness, and the love of dominion, too generally
prevailed. From small beginnings in errors, great buildings, by degrees, are
raised; and from one age to another are more and more strengthened by the
general concurrence of the people: and as men obtain reputation by their
profession of the truth, their virtues are mentioned as arguments in favor of
general error; and those of less note, to justify themselves, say, such and
such good men did the like. By what other steps could the people of Judah arise
to that height in wickedness, as to give just ground for the prophet Isaiah to
declare in the name of the Lord, that none calls for justice, nor any
pleads for truth: Isaiah lix. 4. or for the Almighty to call upon the great
city of Jerusalem, just before the Babylonish captivity, If ye can find a man,
if there be any who executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will
pardon it. Jer. v. 1. The prospect of a road lying open to the same degeneracy,
in some parts of this newly settled land of America, in respect to our conduct
toward the negroes, has deeply bowed my mind in this journey; and though to
briefly relate how these people are treated is no agreeable work; yet, after
often reading over the notes I made as I traveled, I find my mind engaged to
preserve them. Many of the white people in those provinces take little or no
care of negro marriages; and when negroes marry after their own way, some make
so little account of those marriages, that with views of outward interest, they
often part men from their wives by selling them far asunder; which is common
when estates are sold by executors at vendue. Many whose labor is heavy, being
followed, at their business in the field, by a man with a whip, hired for that
purpose, have in common little else allowed but one peck of Indian corn and
some salt for one week, with a few potatoes; the potatoes they commonly raise
by their labor on the first day of the week.

The correction ensuing on their disobedience to overseers, or slothfulness in
business, is often very severe, and sometimes desperate.

Men and women have many times scarce clothes enough to hide their nakedness,
and boys and girls, ten and twelve years old, are often quite naked amongst
their master's children: some of our society, and some of the society called
new-lights, use some endeavors to instruct those they have in reading; but in
common this is not only neglected, but disapproved. These are the people by
whose labor the other inhabitants are in a great measure supported, and many
of them in the luxuries of life: these are the people who have made no
agreement to serve us, and who have not forfeited their liberty that we know
of: these are the souls for whom Christ died; and for our conduct toward them,
we must answer before Him who is no respecter of persons.

They who know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and are
thus acquainted with the merciful, benevolent, gospel spirit, will therein
perceive that the indignation of God is kindled against oppression and cruelty;
and in beholding the great distress of so numerous a people, will find cause
for mourning.

From my lodgings I went to Burleigh meeting, where I felt my mind drawn into a
quiet resigned state; and after long silence, I felt an engagement to stand up;
and through the powerful operation of divine love, we were favored with an
edifying meeting. The next meeting we had was at Black-Water; and so to the
yearly meeting at the Western Branch: when business began, some queries were
considered, by some of their members, to be now produced; and if approved, to
be answered hereafter by their respective monthly-meetings. They were the
Pennsylvania queries, which had been examined by a committee of Virginia
yearly meeting appointed the last year, who made some alterations in them; one
of which alterations was made in favor of a custom which troubled me. The
query was, "Are there any concerned in the importation of negroes, or buying
them after imported?" which they altered thus: "Are there any concerned in the
importation of negroes, or buying them to trade in?" As one query admitted with
unanimity was, "Are any concerned in buying or vending goods unlawfully
imported, or prize goods?" I found my mind engaged to say, that as we professed
the truth, and were there assembled to support the testimony of it, it was
necessary for us to dwell deep, and act in that wisdom which is pure, or
otherwise we could not prosper. I then mentioned their alteration; and,
referring to the last mentioned query, added, as purchasing any merchandise
taken by the sword, was always allowed to be inconsistent with our principles;
negroes being captives of war, or taken by stealth, those circumstances make it
inconsistent with our testimony to buy them; and their being our
fellow creatures, who are sold as slaves, adds greatly to the iniquity. Friends
appeared attentive to what was said; some expressed a care and concern about
their negroes; none made any objection, by way of reply to what I said; but the
query was admitted as they had altered it. As some of their members have
heretofore traded in negroes, as in other merchandise, this query, being
admitted, will be one step further than they have hitherto gone: and I did not
see it my duty to press for an alteration; but felt easy to leave it all to
Him, who alone is able to turn the hearts of the mighty, and make way for the
spreading of truth on the earth, by means agreeable to his infinite wisdom. But
in regard to those they already had, I felt my mind engaged to labor with
them; and said, that, as we believe the scriptures were given forth by holy
men, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and many of us know by experience
that they are often helpful and comfortable, and believe ourselves bound in
duty to teach our children to read them, I believe, that if we were divested of
all selfish views, the same good spirit that gave them forth, would engage us
to teach the negroes to read, that they might have the benefit of them: some
there were amongst them who, at this time, manifested a concern in regard to
taking more care in the education of their negroes.

On the twenty-ninth day of the fifth month, at the house where I lodged, was a
meeting of ministers and elders, at the ninth hour in the morning; at which
time I found an engagement to speak freely and plainly to them concerning their
slaves; mentioning, how they, as the first rank in the society, whose conduct
in that case was much noticed by others, were under the stronger obligations to
look carefully to themselves: expressing how needful it was for them, in that
situation, to be thoroughly divested of all selfish views; that living in the
pure truth, and acting conscientiously toward those people in their education
and otherwise, they might be instrumental in helping forward a work so
exceeding necessary, and so much neglected amongst them. At the twelfth hour
the meeting of worship began; which was a solid meeting.

On the thirtieth day, about the tenth hour, friends met to finish their
business, and then the meeting for worship ensued, which to me was a laborious
time; but, through the goodness of the Lord, truth, I believe, gained some
ground; and it was a strengthening opportunity to the honest-hearted.

About this time I wrote an epistle to friends in the back settlements of
North Carolina, as follows:

To friends at their monthly meeting at New-Garden and Cane-Creek, in
North Carolina.

Dear friends,
IT having pleased the Lord to draw me forth on a visit to some parts of
Virginia and Carolina, you have often been in my mind; and though my way is not
clear to come in person to visit you, yet I feel it in my heart to communicate
a few things, as they arise in the love of truth: First, my dear friends, dwell
in humility; and take heed that no views of outward gain get too deep hold of
you, that so your eyes being single to the Lord, you may be preserved in the
way of safety. Where people let loose their minds after the love of outward
things, and are more engaged in pursuing the profits, and seeking the
friendships of this world, than to be inwardly acquainted with the way of true
peace; such walk in a vain shadow, while the true comfort of life is wanting:
their examples are often hurtful to others; and their treasures, thus
collected, do many times prove dangerous snares to their children.

But where people are sincerely devoted to follow Christ, and dwell under the
influence of his holy spirit, their stability and firmness, through a divine
blessing, is at times like dew on the tender plants round about them, and the
weightiness of their spirits secretly works on the minds of others; and in this
condition, through the spreading influence of divine love, they feel a care
over the flock; and way is opened for maintaining good order in the society:
and though we meet with opposition from another spirit, yet, as there is a
dwelling in meekness, feeling our spirits subject, and moving only in the
gentle peaceable wisdom, the inward reward of quietness, will be greater than
all our difficulties. Where the pure life is kept to, and meetings of
discipline are held in the authority of it, we find by experience that they are
comfortable, and tend to the health of the body.

While I write, the youth comes fresh in my way: -- Dear young people, choose
God for your portion; love his truth, and be not ashamed of it; choose for your
company such who serve him in uprightness: and shun, as most dangerous, the
conversation of those whose lives are of an ill favor; for by frequenting such
company, some hopeful young people have come to great loss, and been drawn from
less evils to greater to their utter ruin. In the bloom of youth no ornament is
so lovely as that of virtue, nor any enjoyments equal to those which we partake
of, in fully resigning ourselves to the divine will: these enjoyments add
sweetness to all other comforts, and give true satisfaction in company and
conversation, where people are mutually acquainted with it; and as your minds
are thus seasoned with the truth, you will find strength to abide steadfast to
the testimony of it, and be prepared for services in the church.

And now, dear friends and brethren, as you are improving a wilderness, and may
be numbered amongst the first planters in one part of a province, I beseech
you, in the love of Jesus Christ, to wisely consider the force of your
examples, and think how much your successors may be thereby affected: it is a
help in a country; yea, and a great favor and a blessing, when customs first
settled, are agreeable to sound wisdom: so when they are otherwise, the effect
of them is grievous; and children feel themselves encompassed with difficulties
prepared for them by their predecessors.

As moderate care and exercise, under the direction of true wisdom, is useful
both to mind and body; so, by this means in general, the real wants of life are
easily supplied: our gracious Father having so proportioned one to the other,
that keeping in the true medium we may pass on quietly. Where slaves are
purchased to do our labor, numerous difficulties attend it. To rational
creatures bondage is uneasy, and frequently occasions sourness and discontent
in them; which affects the family, and such who claim the mastery over them:
and thus people and their children are many times encompassed with vexations,
which arise from their applying to wrong methods to get a living.

I have been informed that there are a large number of friends in your parts,
who have no slaves; and in tender and most affectionate love, I beseech you to
keep clear from purchasing any. Look, my dear friends, to Divine Providence;
and follow in simplicity that exercise of body, that plainness and frugality,
which true wisdom leads to; so may you be preserved from those dangers which
attend such who are aiming at outward ease and greatness.

Treasures, though small, attained on a true principle of virtue, are sweet in
the possession; and while we walk in the light of the Lord, there is true
comfort and satisfaction. Here, neither the murmurs of an oppressed people, nor
throbbing uneasy conscience, nor anxious thoughts about the events of things,
hinder the enjoyment of it.

When we look toward the end of life, and think on the division of our
substance among our successors; if we know that it was collected in the fear of
the Lord, in honesty, in equity, and in uprightness of heart before him, we may
consider it as his gift to us; and with a single eye to his blessing, bestow it
on those we leave behind us. Such is the happiness of the plain ways of true
virtue. The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. Isa. xxxii. 17.

Dwell here, my dear friends; and then in remote and solitary deserts, you may
find true peace and satisfaction. If the Lord be our God, in truth and reality,
there is safety for us; for he is a strong hold in the day of trouble, and
knows them that trust in him.

Isle of Wight County, in Virginia, 29th of the 5th month, 1757.

From the yearly meeting in Virginia, I went to Carolina; and on the first day
of the sixth month, was at Wells monthly meeting, where the spring of the
gospel ministry was opened, and the love of Jesus Christ experienced amongst
us: to his name be the praise.

Here my brother joined with some friends from New-Garden, who were going
homeward; and I went next to Simons-Creek monthly meeting, where I was silent
during the meeting for worship: and when business came on, my mind was
exercised concerning the poor slaves; but did not feel my way clear to speak:
in this condition I was bowed in spirit before the Lord; and with tears and
inward supplication besought him, so to open my understanding, that I might
know his will concerning me; and, at length, my mind was settled in silence:
near the end of their business, a member of their meeting expressed a concern,
that had some time lain upon him, on account of friends so much neglecting
their duty in the education of their slaves; and proposed having meetings
sometimes appointed for them on a weekday, to be only attended by some friends
to be named in their monthly-meetings: many present appeared to unite with the
proposal: one said, he had often wondered that they, being our fellow creatures
and capable of religious understanding, had been so exceedingly neglected:
another expressed the like concern, and appeared zealous, that friends, in
future, might more closely consider it: at length a minute was made; and the
further consideration of it referred to their next monthly meeting. The friend
who made this proposal has negroes: he told me, that he was at New-Garden;
about two hundred and fifty miles from home, and came back alone; and that in
this solitary journey, this exercise, in regard to the education of their
negroes, was, from time to time, renewed in his mind. A friend of some note in
Virginia, who has slaves, told me, that he being far from home on a lonesome
journey, had many serious thoughts about them; and that his mind was so impressed
therewith, that he believed that he saw a time coming, when Divine Providence
would alter the circumstance of these people, respecting their condition as
slaves.

From hence I went to Newbegun-Creek, and sat a considerable time in much
weakness; then I felt truth open the way to speak a little in much plainness
and simplicity, till, at length, through the increase of divine love amongst
us, we had a seasoning opportunity. From thence to the head of Little-River on
a first day, where was a crowded meeting; and, I believe, was, through divine
goodness, made profitable to some. Thence to the Old-Neck; where I was led into
a careful searching out the secret workings of the mystery of iniquity, which,
under a cover of religion, exalts itself against that pure spirit, which leads
in the way of meekness and self-denial. From thence to Pineywoods: this was the
last meeting I was at in Carolina, and was large; and my heart being deeply
engaged, I was drawn forth into a fervent labor amongst them.

When I was at Newbegun-Creek, a friend was there who labored for his living,
having no negroes, and had been a minister many years: he came to me the next
day; and as we rode together, he signified that he wanted to talk with me
concerning a difficulty he had been under, and related it near as follows: to
wit, That as moneys had of late years been raised by a tax to carry on the
wars, he had a scruple in his mind in regard to paying it, and chose rather to
suffer distraint of his goods than pay it; and as he was the only person who
refused it in those parts, and knew not that any one else was in the like
circumstances, and signified that it had been a heavy trial to him; and more
so, for that some of his brethren had been uneasy with his conduct in that
case: and added, that from a sympathy he felt with me yesterday in meeting, he
found the freedom thus to open the matter, in the way of querying concerning
friends in our parts: whereupon I told him the state of friends amongst us, as
well as I was able; and also, that I had, for some time, been under the like
scruple. I believed him to be one who was concerned to walk uprightly before
the Lord; and esteemed it my duty to preserve this note concerning him Samuel
Newby.

From hence I went back into Virginia, and had a meeting near James Cowpland's;
it was a time of inward suffering; but, through the goodness of the Lord, I was
made content: then to another meeting; where, through the renewings of pure love,
we had a very comfortable season.

Traveling up and down of late, I have had renewed evidences, that to be
faithful to the Lord, and content with his will concerning me, is a most
necessary and useful lesson for me to be learning; looking less at the effects
of my labor, than at the pure motion and reality of the concern, as it arises
from heavenly love. In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength; and as the
mind, by a humble resignation, is united to him, and we utter words from an
inward knowledge that they arise from the heavenly spring, though our way may
be difficult, and require close attention to keep in it; and though the manner
in which we may be led may tend to our own abasement; yet, if we continue in
patience and meekness, heavenly peace is the reward of our labors.

From thence I went to Curles-meeting; which, though small, was reviving to the
honest-hearted. Thence to Black-Creek and Caroline meetings; from whence,
accompanied by William Standley beforementioned, we rode to Goose-Creek, being
much through the woods, and about one hundred miles. -- We lodged, the first
night, at a publick-house; the second, in the woods; and the next day, we
reached a friend's house, at Goose-Creek. In the woods we lay under some
disadvantage, having no fireworks nor bells for our horses; but we stopped a
little before night, and let them feed on the wild grass which was plenty; in
the mean time cutting with our knives a store against night, and then tied
them; and gathering some bushes under an oak, we lay down; but the musquetoes
being plenty and the ground damp, I slept but little: thus lying in the
wilderness, and looking at the stars, I was led to contemplate on the condition
of our first parents, when they were sent forth from the garden; but the
Almighty, though they had been disobedient, continued to be a father to them;
and showed them what tended to their felicity as intelligent creatures, and was
acceptable to him. To provide things relative to our outward living, in the way
of true wisdom is good; and the gift of improving in things useful, is a good
gift, and comes from the Father of lights. Many have had this gift; and, from
age to age, there have been improvements of this kind made in the world: but
some not keeping to the pure gift, have, in the creaturely cunning and
self-exaltation, sought out many inventions; which inventions of men, as
distinct from that uprightness in which man was created, as the first motion to
them was evil, so the effects have been and are evil. That, at this day, it is
as necessary for us constantly to attend on the heavenly gift, to be qualified
to use rightly the good things in this life amidst great improvements, as it
was for our first parents, when they were without any improvements, without any
friend or father but God only.

I was at a meeting at Goose-Creek; and next at a monthly meeting at Fairfax;
where, through the gracious dealing of the Almighty with us, his power
prevailed over many hearts. Thence to Manoquacy and Pipe-Creek, in Maryland; at
both which places I had cause humbly to adore Him, who supported me through
many exercises, and by whose help I was enabled to reach the true witness in
the hearts of others: there were some hopeful young people in those parts.
Thence I had meetings at John Everit's in Monalen, and at Huntingdon; and I was
made humbly thankful to the Lord, who opened my heart amongst the people in
these new settlements, so that it was a time of encouragement to the
honest-minded.

At Monalen, a friend gave me some account of a religious society, among the
Dutch, called mennonists; and, amongst other things, related a passage in
substance as follows: -- One of the mennonists having acquaintance with a man
of another society at a considerable distance, and being with his wagon on
business near the house of his said acquaintance, and night coming on, he had
thoughts of putting up with him; but passing by his fields, and observing the
distressed appearance of his slaves, he kindled a fire in the woods hard by,
and lay there that night: his said acquaintance hearing where he lodged, and,
afterward meeting theme nnonist, told him of it; adding, he should have been
heartily welcome at his house; and from their acquaintance in former time,
wondered at his conduct in that case: the mennonist replied, ever since I
lodged by thy field, I have wanted an opportunity to speak with thee: the
matter was; I intended to have come to thy house for entertainment, but seeing
thy slaves at their work, and observing the manner of their dress, I had no
liking to come to partake with thee: then admonished him to use them with more
humanity; and added, as I lay by the fire that night, I thought that as I was a
man of substance, thou would have received me freely; but if I had been as poor
as one of thy slaves, and had no power to help myself, I should have received
from thy hand no kinder usage than they.

Hence I was at three meetings in my way: and so I went home, under a humbling
sense of the gracious dealings of the Lord with me, in preserving me through
many trials and afflictions in my journey. I was out about two months, and
traveled about eleven hundred and fifty miles.

CHAP. V.
Considerations on the payment of a tax, laid for carrying on the war against
the Indians -- Some notes on Thomas a Kempis and John Huss -- Meetings of the
committee of the yearly meeting at Philadelphia -- The present circumstances of
friends in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, very different from those of our
predecessors -- The draughting of the militia in New Jersey to serve in the
army; with some observations on the state of the members of our society at that
time -- His visit to friends in Pennsylvania, accompanied by Benjamin Jones --
Proceedings at the monthly, quarterly and yearly meetings, in Philadelphia,
respecting those who keep slaves.

A FEW years past, money being made current in our province for carrying on
wars, and to be called in again by taxes said on the inhabitants, my mind was
often affected with the thoughts of paying such taxes; and I believe it right
for me to preserve a memorandum concerning it: I was told, that friends in
England frequently paid taxes, when the money was applied to such purposes: I
had conversation with several noted friends on the subject, who all favored
the payment of such taxes; some of whom I preferred before myself, and this
made me easier for a time; yet there was in the deeps of my mind, a scruple
which I never could get over; and, at certain times, I was greatly distressed
on that account.

I all along believed that there were some upright-hearted men, who paid such
taxes; but could not see that their example was a sufficient reason for me to
do so, while I believed that the spirit of truth required of me, as an
individual, to suffer patiently the distress of goods, rather than pay actively.

I have been informed that Thomas a Kempis lived and died in the profession of
the Roman catholic religion: and in reading his writings, I have believed him
to be a man of a true christian spirit; as fully so, as many who died martyrs
because they could not join with some superstitions in that church.

All true christians are of the same spirit, but their gifts are diverse; Jesus
Christ appointing to each one their peculiar office, agreeable to his infinite
wisdom.

John Huss contended against the errors crept into the church, in opposition to
the council of Constance; which the historian reports to have consisted of some
thousand persons. He modestly vindicated the cause which he believed was right;
and though his language and conduct toward his judges appear to have been
respectful, yet he never could be moved from the principles settled in his
mind. To use his own words: "This I most humbly require and desire of you all,
even for His sake who is the God of us all, that I be not compelled to the
thing which my conscience does repugn or strive against." And again, in his
answer to the emperor: "I refuse nothing, most noble emperor, whatsoever the
council shall decree or determine upon me, only this one thing I except, that I
do not offend God and my conscience." Fox's Acts and Monuments, page 233. At
length, rather than act contrary to that which he believed the Lord required of
him, he chose to suffer death by fire. Thomas a Kempis, without disputing
against the articles then generally agreed to, appears to have labored, by a
pious example as well as by preaching and writing, to promote virtue and the
inward spiritual religion: And I believe they were both sincere-hearted
followers of Christ.

True charity is an excellent virtue: and sincerely to labor for their good,
whose belief, in all points, does not agree with ours, is a happy state. To
refuse the active payment of a tax which our society generally paid, was
exceeding disagreeable; but to do a thing contrary to my conscience, appeared
yet more dreadful. When this exercise came upon me, I knew of none under the
like difficulty; and, in my distress, I besought the Lord to enable me to give
up all, that so I might follow him wheresoever he was pleased to lead me: and
under this exercise, I went to our yearly meeting at Philadelphia, in the year
1755; at which a committee was appointed of some from each quarter, to
correspond with the meeting for sufferings in London, and another to visit our
monthly and quarterly-meetings; and after their appointment, before the last
adjournment of the meeting, it was agreed in the meeting, that these two
committees should meet together in friends school-house in the city, at a time
then concluded on, to consider some things in which the cause of truth was
concerned; and these committees meeting together, had a weighty conference in
the fear of the Lord; at which time, I perceived, there were many friends under
a scruple like that beforementioned Christians refused to pay taxes to support
heathen temples. See Primitive Christianity, part III. page 327.
.

As scrupling to pay a tax on account of the application, has seldom been
heard of heretofore, even amongst men of integrity, who have steadily borne
their testimony against outward wars in their time; I may here note some things
which have occurred to my mind, as I have been inwardly exercised on that
account: from the steady opposition which faithful friends, in early times,
made to wrong things then approved of, they were hated and persecuted by men
living in the spirit of this world; and suffering with firmness, they were made
a blessing to the church, and the work prospered. It equally concerns men, in
every age, to take heed to their own spirit; and in comparing their situation
with ours, it looks to me there was less danger of their being infected with
the spirit of this world, in paying such taxes, than there is of us now: they
had little or no share in civil government; and many of them declared, they
were, through the power of God, separated from the spirit in which wars were;
and being afflicted by the rulers on account of their testimony, there was less
likelihood of uniting in spirit with them in things inconsistent with the
purity of truth. We, from the first settlement of this land, have known little
or no troubles of that sort: their profession, for a time, was accounted
reproachful; but, at length, the uprightness of our predecessors being
understood by the rulers, and their innocent sufferings moving them, our way of
worship was tolerated; and many of our members in these colonies became active
in civil government. Being thus tried with favor and prosperity, this world
has appeared inviting; our minds have been turned to the improvement of our
country, to merchandise and sciences, amongst which are many things useful,
being followed in pure wisdom; but in our present condition, that a carnal mind
is gaining upon us, I believe will not be denied. Some of our members, who are
officers in civil government, are, in one case or other, called upon in their
respective stations to assist in things relative to the wars; such being in
doubt whether to act, or crave to be excused from their office, seeing their
brethren united in the payment of a tax to carry on the said wars, might think
their case not much different, and so quench the tender movings of the Holy
Spirit in their minds; and thus, by small degrees, there might be an approach
toward that of fighting, till we came so near it, as that the distinction would
be little else, but the name of a peaceable people.

It requires great self-denial and resignation of ourselves to God, to attain
that state wherein we can freely cease from fighting when wrongfully invaded;
if, by our fighting, there were a probability of overcoming the invaders:
whoever rightly attains to it, does, in some degree, feel that spirit in which
our Redeemer gave his life for us; and, through divine goodness, many of our
predecessors, and many now living, have learned this blessed lesson; but many
others, having their religion chiefly by education, and not being enough
acquainted with that cross which crucifies to the world, do manifest a temper
distinguishable from that of an entire trust in God. In calmly considering
these things, it has not appeared strange to me, that an exercise has now
fallen upon some, which, as to the outward means of it, is different from what
was known to many of those who went before us.

Some time after the yearly meeting, a day being appointed, and letters wrote
to distant members, the said committees met at Philadelphia; and, by
adjournments, continued several days. The calamities of war were now
increasing; the frontier inhabitants of Pennsylvania were frequently surprised,
some slain, and many taken captive by the Indians; and while these committees
sat, the corpse of one so slain was brought in a wagon, and taken through the
streets of the city, in his bloody garments, to alarm the people, and rouse
them up to war.

Friends thus met were not all of one mind in relation to the tax; which to
such who scrupled it made the way more difficult. To refuse an active payment
at such a time, might be construed an act of disloyalty, and appeared likely to
displease the rulers, not only here but in England; still there was a scruple
so fastened upon the minds of many friends, that nothing moved it: it was a
conference the most weighty that ever I was at; and the hearts of many were
bowed in reverence before the Most High. Some friends of the said committees
who appeared easy to pay the tax, after several adjournments, withdrew; others
of them continued till the last: at length, an epistle of tender love and
caution, to friends in Pennsylvania, was drawn by some friends concerned, on
that subject; and being read several times and corrected, was then signed by
such of them as were free to sign it, and afterward sent to the monthly and
quarterly-meetings.

On the ninth day of the eighth month, in the year 1757, at night, orders came
to the military officers in our county, (Burlington) directing them to draft
the militia, and prepare a number of men to go off as soldiers, to the relief
of the English at fort William-Henry, in New York government: a few days after
which, there was a general review of the militia at Mount-Holly, and a number
of men chosen and sent off under some officers. Shortly after, there came
orders to draught three times as many, to hold themselves in readiness to march
when fresh orders came: and on the seventeenth day of the eighth month, there
was a meeting of the military officers at Mount-Holly, who agreed on a draught;
and orders were sent to the men so chosen, to meet their respective captains at
set times and places; those in our township to meet at Mount-Holly; amongst
whom were a considerable number of our society. My mind being affected
herewith, I had fresh opportunity to see and consider the advantage of living
in the real substance of religion, where practice does harmonize with
principle. Amongst the officers are men of understanding, who have some regard
to sincerity where they see it; and in the execution of their office, when they
have men to deal with whom they believe to be upright-hearted, to put them to
trouble on account of scruples of conscience, is a painful task, and likely to
be avoided as much as easily as may be: but where men profess to be so meek and
heavenly-minded, and to have their trust so firmly settled in God, that they
cannot join in wars; and yet, by their spirit and conduct in common life,
manifest a contrary disposition, their difficulties are great at such a time.

Officers in great anxiety endeavoring to get troops to answer the demands of
their superiors, seeing men, who are insincere, pretend scruple of conscience,
in hopes of being excused from a dangerous employment, they are likely to be
roughly handled. In this time of commotion some of our young men left the
parts, and tarried abroad till it was over; some came, and proposed to go as
soldiers; others appeared to have a real tender scruple in their minds against
joining in wars, and were much humbled under the apprehension of a trial so
near: I had conversation with several of them to my satisfaction. At the set
time when the captain came to town, some of those last-mentioned went and told
him in substance as follows: -- That they could not bear arms for
conscience sake; nor could they hire any to go in their places, being resigned
as to the event of it: at length the captain acquainted them all, that they
might return home for the present, and required them to provide themselves as
soldiers, and to be in readiness to march when called upon. This was such a
time as I had not seen before; and yet I may say, with thankfulness to the
Lord, that I believed this trial was intended for our good; and I was favored
with resignation to him. The French army taking the fort they were besieging,
destroyed it and went away: the company of men first draughted, after some days
march, had orders to return home; and those on the second draught, were no more
called upon on that occasion.

On the fourth day of the fourth month, in the year 1758, orders came to some
officers, in Mount-Holly, to prepare quarters, a short time, for about one
hundred soldiers: and an officer and two other men, all inhabitants of our
town, came to my house; and the officer told me, that he came to speak with me,
to provide lodging and entertainment for two soldiers, there being six
shillings a week per man allowed as pay for it. The case being new and
unexpected, I made no answer suddenly; but sat a time silent, my mind being
inward: I was fully convinced, that the proceedings in wars are inconsistent
with the purity of the christian religion; and to be hired to entertain men,
who were then under pay as soldiers, was a difficulty with me. I expected they
had legal authority for what they did; and, after a short time, I said to the
officer, if the men are sent here for entertainment, I believe I shall not
refuse to admit them into my house; but the nature of the case is such, that I
expect I cannot keep them on hire: one of the men intimated, that he thought I
might do it consistent with my religious principles: to which I made no reply;
as believing silence, at that time, best for me. Though they spoke of two,
there came only one, who tarried at my house about two weeks, and behaved
himself civilly; and when the officer came to pay me, I told him I could not
take pay for it, having admitted him into my house in a passive obedience to
authority. I was on horseback when he spoke to me: and as I turned from him, he
said, he was obliged to me: to which I said nothing; but thinking on the
expression, I grew uneasy; and afterward, being near where he lived, I went
and told him on what grounds I refused taking pay for keeping the soldier.

Near the beginning of the year 1758, I went one evening, in company with a
friend, to visit a sick person; and before our return, we were told of a woman
living near, who, of late, had several days been disconsolate, occasioned by a
dream; wherein death, and the judgments of the Almighty after death, were
represented to her mind in a moving manner: her sadness, on that account, being
worn off; the friend, with whom I was in company, went to see her, and had some
religious conversation with her and her husband: with this visit they were
somewhat affected; and the man, with many tears, expressed his satisfaction:
and, in a short time after, the poor man being on the river in a storm of wind,
he, with one more, was drowned.

In the eighth month of the year 1758, having had drawings in my mind to be at
the quarterly meeting in Chester county, and at some meetings in the county of
Philadelphia, I went first to said quarterly meeting, which was large; and
several weighty matters came under consideration and debate; and the Lord was
pleased to qualify some of his servants with strength and firmness, to bear the
burden of the day: though I said but little, my mind was deeply exercised;
and, under a sense of God's love, in the anointing and fitting some young men
for his work, I was comforted, and my heart was tendered before him. From hence
I went to the youths meeting at Darby, where my beloved friend and brother
Benjamin Jones met me, by an appointment before I left home, to join in the
visit: and we were at Radnor, Merion, Richland, North Wales, Plymouth, and
Abington meetings; and had cause to bow in reverence before the Lord our
gracious God, by whose help way was opened for us from day to day. I was out
about two weeks, and rode about two hundred miles.

The monthly meeting of Philadelphia having been under a concern, on account of
some friends, who this summer (1758) had bought negro slaves: the said meeting
moved it to their quarterly meeting, to have the minute reconsidered in the
yearly meeting, which was made last on that subject: and the said
quarterly meeting appointed a committee to consider it, and report to their
next; which committee having met once and adjourned, and I going to
Philadelphia to meet a committee of the yearly meeting, was in town the evening
on which the quarterly-meeting's committee met the second time; and finding an
inclination to sit with them, was, with some others, admitted; and friends had
a weighty conference on the subject: and soon after their next
quarterly meeting, I heard that the case was coming to our yearly meeting;
which brought a weighty exercise upon me, and under a sense of my own
infirmities, and the great danger I felt of turning aside from perfect purity,
my mind was often drawn to retire alone, and put up my prayers to the Lord,
that he would be graciously pleased to strengthen me; that setting aside all
views of self-interest and the friendship of this world, I might stand fully
resigned to his holy will.

In this yearly meeting, several weighty matters were considered; and toward
the last, that in relation to dealing with persons who purchase slaves. During
the several sittings of the said meeting, my mind was frequently covered with
inward prayer; and I could say with David, that tears were my meat day and
night. The case of slave-keeping lay heavy upon me; nor did I find any
engagement to speak directly to any other matter before the meeting. Now when
this case was opened, several faithful friends spoke weightily thereto, with
which I was comforted; and feeling a concern to cast in my mite, I said, in
substance, as follows:

"In the difficulties attending us in this life, nothing is more precious than
the mind of truth inwardly manifested; and it is my earnest desire, that in
this weighty matter, we may be so truly humbled as to be favored with a clear
understanding of the mind of truth, and follow it; this would be of more
advantage to the society, than any medium not in the clearness of divine
wisdom. The case is difficult to some who have them; but if such set aside all
self-interest, and come to be weaned from the desire of getting estates, or
even from holding them together, when truth requires the contrary, I believe
way will open that they will know how to steer through those difficulties."

Many friends appeared to be deeply bowed under the weight of the work; and
manifested much firmness in their love to the cause of truth, and universal
righteousness on the earth: and though none did openly justify the practice of
slave-keeping in general, yet some appeared concerned, lest the meeting should
go into such measures, as might give uneasiness to many brethren; alleging,
that if friends patiently continued under the exercise, the Lord, in time to
come, might open a way for the deliverance of these people: and I finding an
engagement to speak, said, "My mind is often led to consider the purity of the
Divine Being, and the justice of his judgments; and herein my soul is covered
with awfulness: I cannot omit to hint of some cases, where people have not been
treated with the purity of justice, and the event has been lamentable: Many
slaves on this continent are oppressed, and their cries have reached the ears
of the Most High. Such are the purity and certainty of his judgments, that he
cannot be partial in our favor. In infinite love and goodness, he has opened
our understandings from one time to another, concerning our duty toward this
people; and it is not a time for delay. Should we now be sensible of what he
requires of us, and through a respect to the private interest of some persons,
or through a regard to some friendships which do not stand on an immutable
foundation, neglect to do our duty in firmness and constancy, still waiting for
some extraordinary means to bring about their deliverance; it may be by
terrible things in righteousness, God may answer us in this matter."

Many faithful brethren labored with great firmness; and the love of truth, in
a good degree, prevailed. Several friends, who had negroes, expressed their
desire that a rule might be made, to deal with such friends as offenders who
bought slaves in future: to this it was answered, that the root of this evil
would never be effectually struck at, until a thorough search was made into the
circumstances of such friends who kept negroes, with respect to the
righteousness of their motives in keeping them, that impartial justice might be
administered throughout. Several friends expressed their desire, that a visit
might be made to such friends who kept slaves: and many friends said, that they
believed liberty was the negroes right; to which, at length, no opposition was
made publicly: a minute was made more full on that subject, than any
heretofore; and the names of several friends entered, who were free to join in
a visit to such who kept slaves.

CHAP. VI.
His visiting the quarterly-meetings in Chester county; and afterward joining
with Daniel Stanton and John Scarborough, in a visit to such as kept slaves
there -- Some observations on the conduct such should maintain who are
concerned to speak in meetings for discipline -- Several more visits to such
who kept slaves: and to friends near Salem -- Some account of the
yearly meeting in the year 1759; and of the increasing concern in diverse
provinces, to labor against buying and keeping slaves -- The yearly meeting
epistle -- His thoughts on the smallpox spreading -- and on inoculation.

ON the eleventh day of the eleventh month, in the year 1758, I set out for
Concord; the quarterly meeting, heretofore held there, was now, by reason of a
great increase of members, divided into two by the agreement of friends, at our
last yearly meeting. Here I met with our beloved friends Samuel Spavold and
Mary Kirby from England, and with Joseph White from Bucks county, who had taken
leave of his family in order to go on a religious visit to friends in England;
and, through divine goodness, we were favored with a strengthening opportunity
together.

After this meeting I joined with my friends Daniel Stanton and John
Scarborough, in visiting friends who had slaves; and at night we had a family
meeting at William Trimble's, many young people being there; and it was a
precious reviving opportunity. Next morning we had a comfortable sitting with a
sick neighbor; and thence to the burial of the corpse of a friend at Uwchland
meeting, at which were many people, and it was a time of divine favor; after
which, we visited some who had slaves; and, at night, had a family meeting at a
friend's house, where the channel of gospel love was opened, and my mind was
comforted after a hard day's labor. The next day we were at Goshen
monthly meeting: and thence, on the eighteenth day of the eleventh month, in
the year 1758, attended the quarterly meeting at London-Grove, it being the
first held at that place. Here we met again with all the beforementioned
friends, and had some edifying meetings: and near the conclusion of the meeting
for business, friends were incited to constancy in supporting the testimony of
truth, and reminded of the necessity which the disciples of Christ are under to
attend principally to his business, as he is pleased to open it to us: and to
be particularly careful to have our minds redeemed from the love of wealth; to
have our outward affairs in as little room as may be; that no temporal concerns
may entangle our affections, or hinder us from from diligently following the
dictates of truth, in laboring to promote the pure spirit of meekness and
heavenly-mindedness amongst the children of men, in these days of calamity and
distress; wherein God is visiting our land with his just judgments.

Each of these quarterly-meetings were large, and sat near eight hours. Here I
had occasion to consider, that it is a weighty thing to speak much in large
meetings for business: first, except our minds are rightly prepared, and we
clearly understand the case we speak to, instead of forwarding, we hinder
business, and make more labor for those on whom the burden of the work is
laid.

If selfish views, or a partial spirit, have any room in our minds, we are
unfit for the Lord's work; if we have a clear prospect of the business, and
proper weight on our minds to speak, it behooves us to avoid useless apologies
and repetitions: where people are gathered from far, and adjourning a meeting
of business is attended with great difficulty, it behooves all to be cautious
how they detain a meeting; especially when they have sat six or seven hours,
and have a great distance to ride home. After this meeting I rode home.

In the beginning of the twelfth month of the year 1758, I joined in company
with my friends John Sykes and Daniel Stanton, in visiting such who had slaves:
some, whose hearts were rightly exercised about them, appeared to be glad of
our visit; but in some places our way was more difficult; and I often saw the
necessity of keeping down to that root from whence our concern proceeded; and
have cause, in reverent thankfulness, humbly to bow down before the Lord, who
was near to me, and preserved my mind in calmness under some sharp conflicts,
and begat a spirit of sympathy and tenderness in me, toward some who were
grievously entangled by the spirit of this world.

In the first month of the year 1759, having found my mind drawn to visit some
of the more active members, in our society at Philadelphia, who had slaves, I
met my friend John Churchman there by an agreement; and we continued about a
week in the city: we visited some that were sick, and some widows and their
families; and the other part of our time was mostly employed in visiting such
who had slaves -- It was a time of deep exercise, looking often to the Lord for
his assistance; who, in unspeakable kindness, favored us with the influence of
that spirit, which crucifies to the greatness and splendour of this world, and
enabled us to go through some heavy labors, in which we found peace.

On the twenty-fourth day of the third month, of this year, I was at our
General spring meeting at Philadelphia: after which, I again joined with John
Churchman on a visit to some more, who had slaves in Philadelphia; and, with
thankfulness to our heavenly Father, I may say, that divine love and a true
sympathizing tenderness of heart, prevailed at times in this service.

Having, at times, perceived a shyness in some friends, of considerable note,
toward me, I found an engagement in gospel love to pay a visit to one of them;
and as I dwelt under the exercise, I felt a resignedness in my mind to go: so I
went, and told him in private, I had a desire to have an opportunity with him
alone; to which he readily agreed: and then, in the fear of the Lord, things
relating to that shyness were searched to the bottom; and we had a large
conference, which, I believe, was of use to both of us; and am thankful that
way was opened for it.

On the fourteenth day of the sixth month, in the same year, having felt
drawings in my mind to visit friends about Salem, and having the approbation of
our monthly meeting therein, I attended their quarterly meeting, and was out
seven days, and at seven meetings; in some of which I was chiefly silent, and
in others, through the baptizing power of truth, my heart was enlarged in
heavenly love, and found a near fellowship with the brethren and sisters, in
the manifold trials attending their christian progress through this world.

In the seventh month, I found an increasing concern on my mind to visit some
active members in our society who had slaves; and having no opportunity of the
company of such who were named on the minutes of the yearly meeting, I went
alone to their houses, and, in the fear of the Lord, acquainted them with the
exercise I was under: and thus, sometimes, by a few words, I found myself
discharged from a heavy burden.

After this, our friend John Churchman coming into our province with a view to
be at some meetings, and to join again in the visit to those who had slaves, I
bore him company in the said visit to some active members, and found inward
satisfaction.

At our yearly meeting in the year 1759, we had some weighty seasons; where the
power of truth was largely extended, to the strengthening of the honest-minded.
As friends read over the epistles, to be sent to the yearly-meetings along this
continent, I observed in most of them, both this year and last, it was
recommended to friends to labor against buying and keeping slaves; and in some
of them closely treated upon. As this practice has long been a heavy exercise
to me, and I have often waded through mortifying labors on that account; and,
at times, in some meetings been almost alone therein. Now observing the
increasing concern in our religious society, and seeing how the Lord was
raising up and qualifying servants for his work, not only in this respect, but
for promoting the cause of truth in general, I was humbly bowed in thankfulness
before him. This meeting continued near a week: and, for several days, in the
forepart of it, my mind was drawn into a deep inward stillness; and being, at
times, covered with the spirit of supplication, my heart was secretly poured
out before the Lord: and near the conclusion of the meeting for business way
opened, that, in the pure flowings of divine love, I expressed what lay upon
me; which, as it then arose in my mind, was "first to show how deep answers to
deep in the hearts of the sincere and upright; though, in their different
growths they may not all have attained to the same clearness in some points
relating to our testimony: and I was led to mention the integrity and constancy
of many martyrs, who gave their lives for the testimony of Jesus; and yet, in
some points, held doctrines distinguishable from some which we hold: and that,
in all ages where people were faithful to the light and understanding which the
Most High afforded them, they found acceptance with him; and that now, though
there are different ways of thinking amongst us in some particulars, yet, if we
mutually kept to that spirit and power which crucifies to the world, which
teaches us to be content with things really needful, and to avoid all
superfluities, giving up our hearts to fear and serve the Lord, true unity may
still be preserved amongst us: and that if such, who were, at times, under
sufferings on account of some scruples of conscience, kept low and humble, and
in their conduct in life manifested a spirit of true charity; it would be more
likely to reach the witness in others, and be of more service in the church,
than if their sufferings were attended with a contrary spirit and conduct." In
which exercise I was drawn into a sympathizing tenderness with the sheep of
Christ, however distinguished one from another in this world; and the like
disposition appeared to spread over others in the meeting. Great is the
goodness of the Lord toward his poor creatures.

An epistle went forth from this yearly meeting, which I think good to give a
place in this journal; being as follows:

From the yearly meeting held at Philadelphia, for Pennsylvania and New Jersey,
from the twenty-second day of the ninth month, to the twenty-eighth day of the
same, inclusive, 1759.

To the quarterly and monthly meetings of friends belonging to the said
yearly meeting.

Dearly beloved friends and brethren,
"IN an awful sense of the wisdom and goodness of the Lord our God, whose
tender mercies have long been continued to us in this land, we affectionately
salute you, with sincere and fervent desires, that we may reverently regard the
dispensations of his providence, and improve under them."

"The empires and kingdoms of the earth are subject to his Almighty power: He
is the God of the spirits of all flesh; and deals with his people agreeable to
that wisdom, the depth whereof is to us unsearchable: we, in these provinces,
may say, He has, as a gracious and tender parent, dealt bountifully with us,
even from the days of our fathers: it was He who strengthened them to labor
through the difficulties attending the improvement of a wilderness, and made
way for them in the hearts of the natives; so that by them they were comforted
in times of want and distress: it was by the gracious influences of his holy
spirit, that they were disposed to work righteousness, and walk uprightly one
toward another, and toward the natives, and in life and conversation to
manifest the excellency of the principles and doctrines of the christian
religion; and thereby they retain their esteem and friendship: whilst they were
laboring for the necessaries of life, many of them were fervently engaged to
promote piety and virtue in the earth, and educate their children in the fear
of the Lord."

"If we carefully consider the peaceable measures pursued in the first
settlement of the land, and that freedom from the desolations of wars, which
for a long time we enjoyed, we shall find ourselves under strong obligations to
the Almighty, who, when the earth is so generally polluted with wickedness,
gave us a being in a part so signally favored with tranquillity and plenty,
and in which the glad tidings of the gospel of Christ are so freely published,
that we may justly say with the psalmist, What shall we render unto the Lord
for all his benefits?

"Our own real good, and the good of our posterity in some measure depends on
the part we act; and it nearly concerns us to try our foundations impartially.
Such are the different rewards of the just and unjust in a future state, that
to attend diligently to the dictates of the spirit of Christ, to devote
ourselves to his service, and engage fervently in his cause, during our short
stay in this world, is a choice well becoming a free intelligent creature; we
shall thus clearly see and consider that the dealings of God with mankind in a
national capacity, as recorded in holy writ, do sufficiently evidence the truth
of that saying, it is righteousness which exalts a nation; and though he does
not at all times suddenly execute his judgments on a sinful people in this
life, yet we see by many instances, that where men follow lying vanities, they
forsake their own mercies; and as a proud selfish spirit prevails and spreads
among a people, so partial judgment, oppression, discord, envy and confusions
increase, and provinces and kingdoms are made to drink the cup of adversity as
a reward of their own doings. Thus the inspired prophet, reasoning with the
degenerated Jews, says, Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy
backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore, that it is an evil thing and
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in
thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. Jer. ii. 19.

"The God of our fathers, who has bestowed on us many benefits, furnished a
table for us in the wilderness, and made the deserts and solitary places to
rejoice; he does now mercifully call upon us to serve him more faithfully -- We
may truly say with the prophet, it is his voice which cries to the city, and
men of wisdom see his name: They regard the rod, and him who has appointed it.
-- People who look chiefly at things outward, too little consider the original
cause of the present troubles; but such who fear the Lord, and think often upon
his name, they see and feel that a wrong spirit is spreading among the
inhabitants of our country; that the hearts of many are waxed fat, and their
ears dull of hearing; that the Most High, in his visitations to us, instead of
calling, he lifts up his voice and cries; he cries to our country, and his
voice waxes louder and louder. In former wars between the English and other
nations, since the settlement of our provinces, the calamities attending them
have fallen chiefly on other places, but now of late they have reached to our
borders; many of our fellow subjects have suffered on and near our frontiers,
some have been slain in battle, some killed in their houses, and some in their
fields, some wounded and left in great misery, and others separated from their
wives and little children, who have been carried captives among the Indians: We
have seen men and women, who have been witnesses of these scenes of sorrow, and
being reduced to want, have come to our houses asking relief. -- It is not long
since it was the case of many young men in one of these provinces to be
draughted, in order to be taken as soldiers; some where at that time in great
distress, and had occasion to consider that their lives had been too little
conformable to the purity and spirituality of that religion which we profess,
and found themselves too little acquainted with that inward humility, in which
true fortitude to endure hardness for the truth's sake is experienced. -- Many
parents were concerned for their children, and in that time of trial were led
to consider, that their care to get outward treasure for them, had been greater
than their care for their settlement in that religion which crucifieth to the
world, and enableth to bear a clear testimony to the peaceable government of
the Messiah. These troubles are removed, and for a time we are released from
them."

Let us not forget that the Most High has his way in the deep, in clouds and
in thick darkness -- that it is his voice which cries to the city and to the
country; and oh! that these loud and awakening cries, may have a proper effect
upon us, that heavier chastisement may not become necessary! For though things,
as to the outward, may, for a short time, afford a pleasing prospect; yet,
while a selfish spirit, that is not subject to the cross of Christ, continues
to spread and prevail, there can be no long continuance in outward peace and
tranquillity. If we desire an inheritance incorruptible, and to be at rest in
that state of peace and happiness, which ever continues; if we desire in this
life to dwell under the favor and protection of that almighty Being, whose
habitation is in holiness, whose ways are all equal and whose anger is now
kindled, because of our backslidings let us then awfully regard these
beginnings of his sore judgments, and with abasement and humiliation turn to
Him, whom we have offended."

"Contending with one equal in strength, is an uneasy exercise; but if the Lord
is become our enemy, if we persist to contend with Him who is Omnipotent, our
overthrow will be unavoidable."

"Do we feel an affectionate regard to posterity; and are we employed to
promote their happiness? Do our minds, in things outward, look beyond our own
dissolution; and are we contriving for the prosperity of our children after us?
Let us then, like wise builders, lay the foundation deep; and by our constant
uniform regard to an inward piety and virtue, let them see that we really value
it: let us labor in the fear of the Lord, that their innocent minds, while
young and tender, may be preserved from corruptions; that as they advance in
age, they may rightly understand their true interest, may consider the
uncertainty of temporal things, and, above all, have their hope and confidence
firmly settled in the blessing of that Almighty Being, who inhabits eternity,
and preserves and supports the world."

"In all our cares about worldly treasures, let us steadily bear in mind, that
riches possessed by children, who do not truly serve God, are likely to prove
snares that may more grievously entangle them in that spirit of selfishness and
exaltation, which stands in opposition to real peace and happiness; and renders
them enemies to the cross of Christ, who submit to the influence of it."

"To keep a watchful eye toward real objects of charity, to visit the poor in
their lonesome dwelling-places, to comfort them who, through the dispensations
of Divine Providence, are in strait and painful circumstances in this life, and
steadily to endeavor to honor God with our substance, from a real sense of
the love of Christ influencing our minds thereto, is more likely to bring a
blessing to our children, and will afford more satisfaction to a christian
favored with plenty, than an earnest desire to collect much wealth to leave
behind us, for here we have no continuing city; may we therefore diligently
seek one that is to come, whose builder and maker is God.

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these
things and do them, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Signed by appointment, and on behalf of our said meeting, by seven friends.


On the twenty-eighth day of the eleventh month, in the year 1759, I was at the
quarterly meeting in Bucks county: this day being the meeting of ministers and
elders, my heart was enlarged in the love of Jesus Christ; and the favor of
the Most High was extended to us in that and the ensuing meeting.

I had conversation, at my lodging, with my beloved friend Samuel Eastburn; who
expressed a concern to join in a visit to some friends, in that county, who had
negroes; and as I had felt a draught in my mind to that work in the said
county, I came home and put things in order: on the eleventh day of the twelfth
month following, I went over the river; and on the next day was at Buckingham
meeting; where, through the descendings of heavenly dew, my mind was comforted,
and drawn into a near unity with the flock of Jesus Christ.

Entering upon this visit appeared weighty: and before I left home my mind was
often sad; under which exercise I felt, at times, the Holy Spirit which helps
our infirmities; through which, in private, my prayers were, at times, put up
to God, that he would be pleased to purge me from all selfishness, that I might
be strengthened to discharge my duty faithfully, how hard soever to the natural
part. We proceeded on the visit in a weighty frame of spirit, and went to the
houses of the most active members, throughout the county, who had negroes; and,
through the goodness of the Lord, my mind was preserved in resignation in times
of trial, and though the work was hard to nature, yet through the strength of
that love which is stronger than death, tenderness of heart was often felt
amongst us in our visits, and we parted from several families with greater
satisfaction than we expected.

We visited Joseph White's family, he being in England; had also a family
sitting at the house of an elder who bore us company, and was at Makefield on a
first day: at all which times my heart was truly thankful to the Lord, who was
graciously pleased to renew his loving kindness to us, his poor servants,
uniting us together in his work.

In the winter of this year, the smallpox being in our town, and many being
inoculated, of which a few died, some things were opened in my mind, which I
wrote as follow:

The more fully our lives are conformable to the will of God, the better it is
for us. -- I have looked on the smallpox as a messenger from the Almighty, to
be an assistant in the cause of virtue, and to incite us to consider whether we
employ our time only in such things as are consistent with perfect wisdom and
goodness.

Building houses suitable to dwell in, for ourselves and our creatures;
preparing clothing suitable for the climate and season, and food convenient,
are all duties incumbent on us: and under these general heads, are many
branches of business, in which we may venture health and life, as necessity may
require.

This disease being in a house, and my business calling me to go near it, it
incites me to think, whether this business is a real indispensible duty;
whether it is not in conformity to some custom, which would be better laid
aside; or, whether it does not proceed from too eager a pursuit after some
outward treasure. If the business before me springs not from a clear
understanding, and a regard to that use of things which perfect wisdom
approves; to be brought to a sense of it, and stopped in my pursuit, is a
kindness; for when I proceed to business without some evidence of duty, I have
found, by experience, that it tends to weakness.

If I am so situated that there appears no probability of missing the
infection, it tends to make me think, whether my manner of life, in things
outward, has nothing in it which may unfit my body to receive this messenger in
a way the most favorable to me. Do I use food and drink in no other sort, and
in no other degree, than was designed by Him, who gave these creatures for our
sustenance? Do I never abuse my body by inordinate labor, striving to
accomplish some end which I have unwisely proposed? Do I use action enough in
some useful employ? Or, do I sit too much idle, while some persons, who labor
to support me, have too great a share of it? If, in any of these things, I am
deficient, to be incited to consider it, is a favor to me.

There is employ necessary in social life; and this infection, which often
proves mortal, incites me to think, whether these social acts of mine are real
duties: if I go on a visit to the widows and fatherless, do I go purely on a
principle of charity, free from any selfish views? If I go to a religious
meeting, it puts me on thinking, whether I go in sincerity and in a clear sense
of duty; or whether it is not partly in conformity to custom, or partly from a
sensible delight which my animal spirits feel in the company of other people;
and whether to support my reputation as a religious man, has no share in it.

Do affairs, relating to civil society, call me near this infection? If I go,
it is at the hazard of my health and life; and becomes me to think seriously,
whether love to truth and righteousness is the motive of my attending; whether
the manner of proceeding, is altogether equitable; or whether aught of
narrowness, party interest, respect to outward dignities, names, or
distinctions among men, do not stain the beauty of those assemblies, and render
it doubtful, in point of duty, whether a disciple of Christ ought to attend as
a member united to the body or not.

Whenever there are blemishes which, for a series of time, remain such; that
which is a means of stirring us up to look attentively on these blemishes, and
to labor according to our capacities, to have health and soundness restored in
our country, we may justly account a kindness from our gracious Father, who
appointed that mean.

The care of a wise and good man for his only son, is inferior to the regard of
the great Parent of the universe for his creatures. He has the command of all
the powers and operations in nature; and "does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men:" chastisement is intended for instruction, and
instruction being received by gentle chastisement, greater calamities are
prevented.

By an earthquake hundreds of houses are sometimes shaken down in a few
minutes, and multitudes of people perish suddenly; and many more being crushed
and bruised in the ruins of the buildings, pine away and die in great misery.

By the breaking in of enraged merciless armies, flourishing countries have
been laid waste, and great numbers of people perished in a short time, and many
more pressed with poverty and grief.

By the pestilence people have died so fast in a city, that through fear, grief
and confusion, those in health have found great difficulty in burying the dead,
even without coffins.

By famine, great numbers of people, in some places, have been brought to the
utmost distress, and pined away for want of the necessaries of life. Thus,
where the kind invitations, and gentle chastisements, of a gracious God have
not been attended to his sore judgments have, at times, been poured out upon
people.

While some rules approved in civil society, and conformable to human policy,
so called, are distinguishable from the purity of truth and righteousness:
while many professing truth, are declining from that ardent love and heavenly
mindedness, which was amongst the primitive followers of Jesus Christ: it is a
time for us to attend diligently to the intent of every chastisement, and
consider the most deep and inward design of them.

The Most High does not often speak with an outward voice to our outward ears;
but, if we humbly meditate on his perfections, consider that he is perfect
wisdom and goodness, and to afflict his creatures to no purpose, would be
utterly reverse to his nature, we shall hear and understand his language, both
in his gentle and more heavy chastisements; and take heed that we do not, in
the wisdom of this world, endeavor to escape his hand by means too powerful
for us.

Had he endowed men with understanding to hinder the force of this disease by
innocent means, which had never proved mortal nor hurtful to our bodies, such
discovery might be considered as the period of chastisement by this distemper,
where that knowledge extended: but as life and health are his gifts, and not to
be disposed of in our own wills, to take upon us, when in health, a distemper,
of which some die, requires great clearness of knowledge, that it is our duty
to do so.

CHAP. VII.
His visit, in company with Samuel Eastburn, to Long Island, Rhode Island,
Boston, etc. in New England -- Remarks on the slave trade at Newport, and his
exercise on that account; also on lotteries -- Some observations on the island
of Nantucket.

HAVING, for some time past, felt a sympathy in my mind with friends Eastward,
I opened my concern in our monthly meeting; and, obtaining a certificate, set
forward on the seventeenth day of the fourth month, in the year 1760, joining
in company, by a previous agreement, with my beloved friend Samuel Eastburn. We
had meetings at Woodbridge, Rahaway and Plainfield; and were at their
monthly meeting of ministers and elders in Rahaway. We labored under some
discouragement; but, through the invisible power of truth, our visit was made
reviving to the lowly minded, with whom I felt a near unity of spirit, being
much reduced in my mind. We passed on, and visited chief of the meetings on
Long Island. It was my concern, from day to day, to say no more nor less than
what the spirit of truth opened in me, being jealous over myself, lest I should
speak any thing to make my testimony look agreeable to that mind in people,
which is not in pure obedience to the cross of Christ.

The spring of the ministry was often low; and, through the subjecting power of
truth, we were kept low with it; and from place to place, such whose hearts
were truly concerned for the cause of Christ, appeared to be comforted in our
labors; and, though it was in general a time of abasement of the creature,
yet, through His goodness, who is a helper of the poor, we had some truly
edifying seasons both in meetings, and in families where we tarried; and
sometimes found strength to labor earnestly with the unfaithful, especially
with those, whose station in families, or in the society was such, that their
example had a powerful tendency to open the way for others to go aside from the
purity and soundness of the blessed truth. At Jericho, on Long Island, I wrote
home as follows:

24th of the 4th month, 1760. Dearly beloved wife,
"WE are favored with health; have been at sundry meetings in East-Jersey, and
on this island: my mind has been much in an inward watchful frame since I left
thee, greatly desiring that our proceedings may be singly in the will of our
heavenly Father."

"As the present appearance of things is not joyous, I have been much shut up
from outward cheerfulness, remembering that promise, "Then shall thou delight
thyself in the Lord:" -- as this, from day to day, has been revived in my
memory, I have considered that his internal presence on our minds, is a delight
of all others the most pure; and that the honest-hearted not only delight in
this, but in the effect of it upon them. He who regards the helpless and
distressed, and reveals his love to his children under affliction, they delight
in beholding his benevolence, and feeling divine charity moving upon them: of
this I may speak a little; for though, since I left you, I have often found an
engaging love and affection toward thee and my daughter, and friends about
home, that going out at this time, when sickness is so great amongst you, is a
trial upon me; yet I often remember there are many widows and fatherless, many
who have poor tutors, many who have evil examples before them, and many whose
minds are in captivity, for whose sake my heart is, at times, moved with
compassion, that I feel my mind resigned to leave you for a season, to exercise
that gift which the Lord has bestowed on me; which, though small, compared
with some, yet in this I rejoice, that I feel love unfeigned toward my
fellow creatures. I recommend you to the Almighty, who, I trust cares for you;
and under a sense of his heavenly love, remain"

"Thy loving husband," "J. W."


We crossed from the east end of Long Island to New London, about thirty miles,
in a large open boat; while we were out, the wind rising high, the waves
several times beat over us, that to me it appeared dangerons; but my mind was,
at that time, turned to Him, who made and governs the deep, and my life was
resigned to him: and as he was mercifully pleased to preserve us, I had fresh
occasion to consider every day as a day lent to me; and felt a renewed
engagement to devote my time, and all I had, to Him who gave it.

We had five meetings in Narraganset; and went thence to Newport on
Rhode Island. Our gracious Father preserved us in an humble dependence on him
through deep exercises, that were mortifying to the creaturely will. In several
families in the country, where we lodged, I felt an engagement on my mind to
have a conference with them in private concerning their slaves; and, through
divine aid, I was favored to give up thereto: though, in this concern, I
appear singular from many, whose service in traveling, I believe, is greater
than mine; I do not think hard of them for omitting it; I do not repine at
having so unpleasant a task assigned me, but look with awfulness to Him, who
appoints to his servants their respective employments, and is good to all who
serve him sincerely.

We got to Newport in the evening: and on the next day visited two sick
persons, and had comfortable sittings with them; and in the afternoon attended
the burial of a friend.

The next day we were at meetings at Newport, in the forenoon and afternoon;
where the spring of the ministry was opened, and strength given to declare the
Word of Life to the people.

The next day we went on our journey; but the great number of slaves in these
parts, and the continuance of that trade from thence to Guinea, made deep
impression on me; and my cries were often put up to my heavenly Father in
secret, that he would enable me to discharge my duty faithfully, in such way as
he might be pleased to point out to me.

We took Swansea, Freetown, and Tanton, in our way to Boston; where also we had
a meeting; our exercise was deep, and the love of truth prevailed, for which I
bless the Lord. We went eastward about eighty miles beyond Boston, taking
meetings, and were in a good degree preserved in an humble dependence on that
arm which drew us out; and, though we had some hard labor with the
disobedient, laying things home and close to such as were stout against the
truth; yet, through the goodness of God, we had, at times, to partake of heavenly
comfort with them who were meek, and were often favored to part with friends
in the nearness of true gospel fellowship. We returned to Boston, and had
another comfortable opportunity with friends there; and thence rode back a
day's journey eastward of Boston: our guide being a heavy man, and the weather
hot, and my companion and I considering it, expressed our freedom to go on
without him, to which he consented, and we respectfully took our leave of him;
this we did, as believing the journey would have been hard to him and his horse.

We visited the meetings in those parts, and were measurably baptized into a
feeling of the state of the society; and in bowedness of spirit went to the
yearly meeting at Newport; where I understood that a large number of slaves
were imported from Africa into that town, and then on sale by a member of our
society. At this meeting we met with John Storer from England, Elizabeth
Shipley, Ann Gaunt, Hannah Foster, and Mercy Redman from our parts, all
ministers of the gospel, of whose company I was glad.

At this time my appetite failed, and I grew outwardly weak, and had a feeling
of the condition of Habbakuk, as there expressed. "When I heard my belly
trembled, my lips quivered, I trembled in myself that I might rest in the day
of trouble;" I had many cogitations, and was sorely distressed: and was
desirous that friends might petition the legislature, to use their endeavors
to discourage the future importation of slaves; for I saw that this trade was a
great evil, and tended to multiply troubles, and bring distresses on the people
in those parts, for whose welfare my heart was deeply concerned.

But I perceived several difficulties in regard to petitioning; and such was
the exercise of my mind, that I had thought of endeavoring to get an
opportunity to speak a few words in the House of Assembly, then setting in
town. This exercise came upon me in the afternoon, on the second day of the
yearly meeting, and going to bed, I got no sleep till my mind was wholly
resigned therein; and in the morning I enquired of a friend how long the
Assembly were likely to continue sitting; who told me, they were expected to be
prorogued that day or the next.

As I was desirous to attend the business of the meeting, and perceived the
Assembly were likely to depart before the business was over; after considerable
exercise, humbly seeking to the Lord for instruction, my mind settled to attend
on the business of the meeting; on the last day of which, I had prepared a
short essay of a petition to be presented to the legislature, if way opened:
and being informed that there were some appointed, by that yearly meeting, to
speak with those in authority, in cases relating to the society, I opened my
mind to several of them, and showed them the essay I had made; and afterward
opened the case in the meeting for business, in substance as follows:

"I have been under a concern for some time, on account of the great number of
slaves which are imported into this colony; I am aware that it is a tender
point to speak to, but apprehend I am not clear in the sight of heaven without
speaking to it. I have prepared an essay of a petition, if way open, to be
presented to the legislature; and what I have to propose to this meeting is,
that some friends may be named to withdraw and look over it, and report whether
they believe it suitable to be read in the meeting; if they should think well
of reading it, it will remain for the meeting, after hearing it, to consider,
whether to take any further notice of it as a meeting or not." After a short
conference some friends went out, and looking over it, expressed their
willingness to have it read; which being done, many expressed their unity with
the proposal; and some signified, that to have the subjects of the petition
enlarged upon, and to be signed out of meeting by such who were free, would be
more suitable than to do it there: though I expected at first, that if it was
done it would be in that way; yet, such was the exercise of my mind, that to
move it in the hearing of friends when assembled, appeared to me as a duty; for
my heart yearned toward the inhabitants of these parts; believing that by this
trade there had been an increase of inquietude amongst them, and a way made
easy for the spreading of a spirit opposite to that meekness and humility,
which is a sure resting place for the soul: and that the continuance of this
trade would not only render their healing more difficult, but increase their
malady.

Having thus far proceeded, I felt easy to leave the essay amongst friends, for
them to proceed in it as they believed best. And now an exercise revived on my
mind in relation to lotteries, which were common in those parts: I had once
moved it in a former sitting of this meeting, when arguments were used in
favor of friends being held excused, who were only concerned in such lotteries
as were agreeable to law: and now on moving it again, it was opposed as before;
but the hearts of some solid friends appeared to be united to discourage the
practice amongst their members; and the matter was zealously handled by some on
both sides. In this debate it appeared very clear to me, that the spirit of
lotteries was a spirit of selfishness, which tended to confusion and darkness
of understanding; and that pleading for it in our meetings, set apart for the
Lord's work, was not right: and in the heat of zeal, I once made reply to what
an ancient friend said, which when I sat down, I saw that my words were not
enough seasoned with charity; and after this, I spoke no more on the subject.
At length a minute was made; a copy of which was agreed to be sent to their
several quarterly-meetings, inciting friends to labor to discourage the
practice amongst all professing with us.

Some time after this minute was made, I remaining uneasy with the manner of my
speaking to the ancient friend, could not see my way clear to conceal my
uneasiness, but was concerned that I might say nothing to weaken the cause in
which I had labored; and then, after some close exercise and hearty
repentance, for that I had not attended closely to the safe guide, I stood up,
and reciting the passage, acquainted friends, that though I dare not go from what
I had said as to the matter, yet I was uneasy with the manner of my speaking,
as believing milder language would have been better. As this was uttered in
some degree of creaturely abasement, it appeared to have a good savor amongst
us, after a warm debate.

The yearly meeting being now over, there yet remained on my mind a secret,
though heavy, exercise in regard to some leading active members about Newport,
being in the practice of slave-keeping. This I mentioned to two ancient
friends, who came out of the country, and proposed to them, if way opened, to
have some conversation with those friends: and thereupon, one of those country
friends and I, consulted one of the most noted elders who had slaves; and he,
in a respectful manner, encouraged me to proceed to clear myself of what lay
upon me. Now I had, near the beginning of the yearly meeting, a private
conference with this said elder and his wife, concerning theirs; so that the
way seemed clear to me, to advise with him about the manner of proceeding: I
told him, I was free to have a conference with them all together in a private
house; or if he thought they would take it unkind to be asked to come together,
and to be spoke with one in the hearing of another, I was free to spend some
time among them, and visit them all in their own houses: he expressed his
liking to the first proposal, not doubting their willingness to come together:
and as I proposed a visit to only ministers, elders, and overseers; he named
some others, whom he desired might be present also: and as a careful messenger
was wanted to acquaint them in a proper manner, he offered to go to all their
houses to open the matter to them; and did so. About the eighth hour the next
morning, we met in the meeting house chamber, and the last-mentioned country
friend, also my companion, and John Storer with us: when, after a short time of
retirement, I acquainted them with the steps I had taken in procuring that
meeting, and opened the concern I was under; and so we proceeded to a free
conference upon the subject. My exercise was heavy, and I was deeply bowed in
spirit before the Lord, who was pleased to favor with the seasoning virtue of
truth, which wrought a tenderness amongst us; and the subject was mutually
handled in a calm and peaceable spirit: and, at length, feeling my mind
released from that burden which I had been under, I took my leave of them, in
a good degree of satisfaction; and by the tenderness they manifested in regard
to the practice, and the concern several of them expressed in relation to the
manner of disposing of their negroes after their decease, I believed that a
good exercise was spreading amongst them; and I am humbly thankful to God, who
supported my mind, and preserved me in a good degree of resignation through
these trials.

Thou, who sometimes travels in the work of the ministry, and art made very
welcome by thy friends, see many tokens of their satisfaction, in having thee
for their guest. It is good for thee to dwell deep, that thou may feel and
understand the spirits of people: if we believe truth points toward a
conference on some subjects, in a private way, it is needful for us to take
heed that their kindness, their freedom and affability, do not hinder us from
the Lord's work. I have seen, that in the midst of kindness and smooth conduct,
to speak close and home to them who entertain us, on points that relate to
their outward interest, is hard labor; and sometimes, when I have felt truth
lead toward it, I have found myself disqualified by a superficial friendship;
and as the sense thereof has abased me, and my cries have been to the Lord, so
I have been humbled and made content to appear weak, or as a fool for his sake;
and thus a door has opened to enter upon it. To attempt to do the Lord's work
in our own way, and to speak of that which is the burden of the word, in a way
easy to the natural part, does not reach the bottom of the disorder: To see the
failings of our friends, and think hard of them, without opening that which we
ought to open, and still carry a face of friendship, this tends to undermine
the foundation of true unity.

The office of a minister of Christ is weighty; and they who now go forth as
watchmen, had need to be steadily on their guard against the snares of
prosperity and an outside friendship.

After the yearly meeting, we were at meetings at Newtown, Cushnet, Long-Plain,
Rochester and Dartmouth: from thence we sailed for Nantucket, in company with
Ann Gaunt and Mercy Redman, and several other friends: the wind being slack, we
only reached Tarpawling Cove the first day; where, going on shore, we found
room in a publick-house, and beds for a few of us, the rest sleeping on the
floor: we went on board again about break of day; and though the wind was
small, we were favored to come within about four miles of Nantucket; and then
about ten of us getting into our boat, we rowed to the harbor before dark;
whereupon a large boat going off, brought in the rest of the passengers about
midnight: the next day but one was their yearly meeting, which held four days;
the last of which, was their monthly meeting for business. We had a laborious
time amongst them; our minds were closely exercised, and I believe it was a
time of great searching of heart: the longer I was on the island, the more I
became sensible that there was a considerable number of valuable friends there,
though an evil spirit, tending to strife, had been at work amongst them: I was
cautious of making any visits, but as my mind was particularly drawn to them;
and in that way we had some sittings in friends houses, where the heavenly wing
was, at times, spread over us, to our mutual comfort.

My beloved companion had very acceptable service on this island.

When meeting was over, we all agreed to sail the next day, if the weather was
suitable and we well; and being called up the latter part of the night, we went
on board a vessel, being in all about fifty; but the wind changing, the seamen
thought best to stay in the harbor till it altered; so we returned on shore:
and feeling clear as to any further visits, I spent my time in our chamber
chiefly alone; and after some hours, my heart being filled with the spirit of
supplication, my prayers and tears were poured out before my heavenly Father,
for his help and instruction in the manifold difficulties which attended me in
life: and while I was waiting upon the Lord, there came a messenger from the
women friends, who lodged at another house, desiring to confer with us about
appointing a meeting, which to me appeared weighty, as we had been at so many
before; but after a short conference, and advising with some elderly friends, a
meeting was appointed, in which the friend, who first moved it, and who had
been much shut up before, was largely opened in the love of the gospel: and the
next morning, about break of day, going again on board the vessel, we reached
Falmouth on the Main before night; where our horses being brought, we proceeded
toward Sandwich quarterly meeting.

Being two days in going to Nantucket, and having been there once before, I
observed many shoals in their bay, which make sailing more dangerous,
especially in stormy nights; also, that a great shoal, which encloses their
harbor, prevents their going in with sloops, except when the tide is up;
waiting without which, for the rising of the tide, is sometimes hazardous in
storms: waiting within, they sometimes miss a fair wind. I took notice, that on
that small island was a great number of inhabitants, and the soil not very
fertile; the timber so gone, that for vessels, fences, and firewood, they
depend chiefly on the buying from the Main the cost whereof, with most of their
other expenses, they depend principally upon the whale fishery to answer. I
considered, that as towns grew larger, and lands near navigable waters more
cleared, timber and wood would require more labor to get it: I understood that
the whales being much hunted, and sometimes wounded and not killed, grew more
shy and difficult to come at: I considered that the formation of the earth, the
seas, the islands, bays and rivers, the motions of the winds and great waters,
which cause bars and shoals in particular places, were all the works of Him who
is perfect wisdom and goodness; and as people attend to his heavenly
instruction, and put their trust in him, he provides for them in all parts,
where he gives them a being. And as in this visit to these people, I felt a
strong desire for their firm establishment on the sure foundation; besides what
was said more publicly, I was concerned to speak with the women friends, in
their monthly meeting of business, many being present; and in the fresh spring
of pure love, to open before them the advantage, both inward and outward, of
attending singly to the pure guidance of the Holy Spirit, and therein to
educate their children in true humility, and the disuse of all superfluities,
reminding them of the difficulties their husbands and sons were frequently
exposed to at sea; and that the more plain and simple their way of living was,
the less need of running great hazards to support them in it; encouraging the
young women in their neat decent way of attending themselves on the affairs of
the house; showing, as the way opened, that where people were truly humble,
used themselves to business, and were content with a plain way of life, that it
had ever been attended with more true peace and calmness of mind, than they
have had who, aspiring to greatness and outward show, have grasped hard for an
income to support themselves in it: and as I observed, they had few or no
slaves amongst them, I had to encourage them to be content without them; making
mention of the numerous troubles and vexations, which frequently attend the
minds of people, who depend on slaves to do their labor.

We attended the quarterly meeting at Sandwich, in company with Ann Gaunt and
Mercy Redman, which was preceeded by a monthly meeting; and in the whole held
three days: we were various ways exercised amongst them, in gospel love,
according to the several gifts bestowed on us; and were, at times, overshadowed
with the virtue of truth, to the comfort of the sincere, and stirring up of the
negligent. Here we parted with Ann and Mercy, and went to Rhode Island, taking
one meeting in our way, which was a satisfactory time; and reaching Newport the
evening before their quarterly meeting, we attended it; and after that, had a
meeting with our young people, separated from those of other societies. We went
through much labor in this town; and now, in taking leave of it, though I felt
close inward exercise to the last, I found inward peace; and was, in some
degree comforted, in a belief, that a good number remain in that place, who
retain a sense of truth; and that there are some young people attentive to the
voice of the heavenly Shepherd. The last meeting, in which friends from the
several parts of the quarter came together, was a select meeting; and through
the renewed manifestation of the Father's love, the hearts of the sincere were
united together.

That poverty of spirit and inward weakness, with which I was much tried the
fore part of this journey, has of late appeared to me as a dispensation of
kindness. Appointing meetings, never appeared more weighty to me; and I was led
into a deep search, whether in all things my mind was resigned to the will of
God; often querying with myself, what should be the cause of such inward
poverty; and greatly desired, that no secret reserve in my heart might hinder
my access to the divine fountain. In these humbling times I was made watchful,
and excited to attend the secret movings of the heavenly principle in my mind
which prepared the way to some duties, that in more easy and prosperous times
as to the outward, I believe I should have been in danger of omitting.

From Newport we went to Greenwich, Shanticut, and Warwick; and were helped to
labor amongst friends in the love of our gracious Redeemer: and then,
accompanied by our friend John Casey from Newport, we rode through Connecticut
to Oblong, visited the meetings of friends in those parts, and thence proceeded
to the quarterly meeting at Ryewoods; and, through the gracious extendings of
divine help, had some seasoning opportunities in those places: so we visited
friends at New York and Flushing; and thence to Rahaway: and here our roads
parting, I took leave of my beloved companion and true yoke-mate Samuel
Eastburn; and reached home on the tenth day of the eighth month, 1760, where I
found my family well: and for the favors and protection of the Lord, both
inward and outward, extended to me in this journey, my heart is humbled in
grateful acknowledgements; and find renewed desires to dwell and walk in
resignedness before him.

CHAP. VIII.
His visits to Pennsylvania, Shrewsbury and Squan -- His publishing the second
part of his considerations on keeping negroes -- The grounds of his appearing
in some respects singular in his dress -- His visiting the families of friends
of Ancocas and Mount-Holly meetings -- His visits to the Indians at Wehaloosing
on the river Susquehannah.

HAVING felt my mind drawn toward a visit to a few meetings in Pennsylvania, I
was very desirous to be rightly instructed as to the time of setting off: and
on the tenth day of the fifth month, 1761, being the first day of the week, I
went to Haddonfield meeting, concluding to seek for heavenly instruction, and
come home or go on, as I might then believe best for me; and there, through the
springing up of pure love, I felt encouragement, and so crossed the river. In
this visit I was at two quarterly and three monthly-meetings; and, in the love
of truth, felt my way open to labor with some noted friends, who kept negroes:
and as I was favored to keep to the root, and endeavored to discharge what I
believed was required of me, I found inward peace therein, from time to time;
and thankfulness of heart to the Lord, who was graciously pleased to be a guide
to me.

In the eighth month, 1761, having felt drawings in my mind to visit friends in
and about Shrewsbury; I went there, and was at their monthly meeting, and their
first day meeting; and had a meeting at Squan, and another at Squankum; and, as
way opened, had conversation with some noted friends concerning their slaves:
and I returned home in a thankful sense of the goodness of the Lord.

From the care I felt growing in me some years, I wrote Considerations on
keeping Negroes, part the second; which was printed this year, 1762. When the
overseers of the press had done with it, they offered to get a number printed
to be paid for, out of the yearly meeting stock, and to be given away; but I
being most easy to publish them at my own expense, and offering my reasons they
appeared satisfied.

This stock is the contribution of the members of our religious society in
general; amongst whom are some who keep negroes, and being inclined to continue
them in slavery, are not likely to be satisfied with those books being spread
amongst a people where many of the slaves are taught to read, and especially
not at their expense; and such, often receiving them as a gift, conceal them:
But as they who make a purchase, generally buy that which they have a mind for,
I believed it best to sell them; expecting, by that means, they would more
generally be read with attention. Advertisements being signed by order of the
overseers of the press, directed to be read in monthly-meetings of business
within our own yearly meeting, informing where the books were, and that the
price was no more than the cost of printing and binding them; many were taken
off in our parts; some I sent to Virginia some to New York, and some to
Newport, to my acquaintance there; and some I kept, expecting to give part of
them away, where there appeared a prospect of service.

In my youth I was used to hard labor; and though I was middling healthy, yet
my nature was not fitted to endure so much as many others: that being often
weary, I was prepared to sympathize with those whose circumstances in life, as
free men, required constant labor to answer the demands of their creditors;
and with others under oppression. In the uneasiness of body, which I have many
times felt by too much labor, not as a forced but a voluntary oppression, I
have often been excited to think on the original cause of that oppression,
which is imposed on many in the world: and the latter part of the time wherein
I labored on our plantation, my heart, through the fresh visitations of
heavenly love, being often tender; and my leisure time frequently spent in
reading the life and doctrines of our blessed Redeemer, the account of the
sufferings of martyrs, and the history of the first rise of our society: a
belief was gradually settled in my mind, that if such who had great estates,
generally lived in that humility and plainness which belongs to a christian
life, and laid much easier rents and interests on their lands and moneys, and
thus led the way to a right use of things, so great a number of people might be
employed in things useful, that labor both for men and other creatures would
need to be no more than an agreeable employ; and diverse branches of business,
which serve chiefly to please the natural inclinations of our minds, and which,
at present, seems necessary to circulate that wealth which some gather, might,
in this way of pure wisdom, be discontinued. And as I have thus considered
these things, a query, at times, has arisen: Do I, in all my proceedings, keep
to that use of things which is agreeable to universal righteousness? And then
there has some degree of sadness, at times, come over me; for that I
accustomed myself to some things, which occasioned more labor than I believe
divine wisdom intends for us.

From my early acquaintance with truth, I have often felt an inward distress,
occasioned by the striving of a spirit in me, against the operation of the
heavenly principle; and in this circumstance have been affected with a sense of
my own wretchedness, and in a mourning condition felt earnest longing for that
divine help, which brings the soul into true liberty; and sometimes in this
state, retiring into private places, the spirit of supplication has been given
me; and under a heavenly covering, have asked my gracious Father, to give me a
heart in all things resigned to the direction of his wisdom, and in uttering
language like this, the thoughts of my wearing hats and garments dyed with a
dye hurtful to them, has made lasting impressions on me.

In visiting people of note in the society who had slaves, and laboring with
them in brotherly love on that account, I have seen, and the sight has affected
me, that a conformity to some customs, distinguishable from pure wisdom, has
entangled many; and the desire of gain to support these customs, greatly
opposed the work of truth: and sometimes when the prospect of the work before
me has been such, that in bowedness of spirit, I have been drawn into retired
places, and besought the Lord with tears that he would take me wholly under his
direction, and show me the way in which I ought to walk; it has revived with
strength of conviction, that if I would be his faithful servant, I must in all
things attend to his wisdom, and be teachable; and so cease from all customs
contrary thereto, however used amongst religious people.

As he is the perfection of power, of wisdom, and of goodness; so I believe, he
has provided, that so much labor shall be necessary for men's support, in
this world, as would, being rightly divided, be a suitable employment of their
time; and that we cannot go into superfluities, or grasp after wealth in a way
contrary to his wisdom, without having connection with some degree of
oppression, and with that spirit which leads to self-exaltation and strife, and
which frequently brings calamities on countries, by parties contending about
their claims.

Being thus fully convinced, and feeling an increasing desire to live in the
spirit of peace; being often sorrowfully affected with the thinking on the
unquiet spirit in which wars are generally carried on, and with the miseries of
many of my fellow creatures engaged therein; some suddenly destroyed; some
wounded, and after much pain remain cripples; some deprived of all their
outward substance, and reduced to want; and some carried into captivity.
Thinking often on these things, the use of hats and garments dyed with a dye
hurtful to them, and wearing more clothes in summer than are useful, grew more
uneasy to me; believing them to be customs which have not their foundation in
pure wisdom. The apprehension of being singular from my beloved friends, was a
strait upon me; and thus I remained in the use of some things contrary to my
judgment.

On the thirty-first day of the fifth month, 1761, I was taken ill of a fever;
and, after having it near a week, I was in great distress of body: and one day
there was a cry raised in me, that I might understand the cause why I was
afflicted, and improve under it: and my conformity to some customs, which I
believed were not right, were brought to my remembrance; and in the
continuation of the exercise, I felt all the powers in me yield themselves up
into the hands of Him who gave me being; and was made thankful, that he had
taken hold of me by his chastisement: feeling the necessity of further
purifying, there was now no desire in me for health, until the design of my
correction was answered; and thus I lay in abasement and brokenness of spirit,
and as I felt a sinking down into a calm resignation, so I felt, as in an
instant, an inward healing in my nature; and from that time forward I grew
better.

Though I was thus settled in mind in relation to hurtful dies, I felt easy to
wear my garments heretofore made; and so continued about nine months. Then I
thought of getting a hat the natural color of the furr; but the apprehension
of being looked upon as one affecting singularity, felt uneasy to me: and here
I had occasion to consider, that things, though small in themselves, being
clearly enjoined by divine authority, became great things to us; and I trusted
that the Lord would support me in the trials that might attend singularity,
while that singularity was only for his sake: on this account, I was under
close exercise of mind in the time of our General spring meeting 1762, greatly
desiring to be rightly directed; when being deeply bowed in spirit before the
Lord, I was made willing to submit to what I apprehended was required of me;
and when I returned home, got a hat of the natural color of the furr.

In attending meetings, this singularity was a trial upon me, and more
especially at this time, white hats being used by some who were fond of
following the changeable modes of dress; and as some friends, who knew not on
what motives I wore it, carried shy of me, I felt my way for a time shut up in
the exercise of the ministry: and in this condition, my mind being turned
toward my heavenly Father, with fervent cries that I might be preserved to walk
before him in the meekness of wisdom, my heart was often tender in meetings;
and I felt an inward consolation, which to me was very precious under those
difficulties.

I had several dyed garments fit for use, which I believed it best to wear,
till I had occasion of new ones: and some friends were apprehensive, that my
wearing such a hat favored of an affected singularity: and such who spoke with
me in a friendly way, I generally informed in a few words, that I believed my
wearing it, was not in my own will. I had, at times, been sensible, that a
superficial friendship had been dangerous to me; and many friends being now
uneasy with me, I had an inclination to acquaint some with the manner of my
being led into these things; yet, upon a deeper thought, I was for a time most
easy to omit it, believing the present dispensation was profitable; and
trusting, that if I kept my place, the Lord in his own time would open the
hearts of friends toward me: since which, I have had cause to admire his
goodness and loving kindness, in leading about and instructing, and opening and
enlarging my heart in some of our meetings.

In the eleventh month of the year 1762, feeling an engagement of mind to visit
some families in Mansfield: I joined my beloved friend Benjamin Jones, and we
spent a few days together in that service. In the second month 1763, I joined
in company with Elizabeth Smith and Mary Noble, on a visit to the families of
friends at Ancocas; in both which visits, through the baptizing power of truth,
the sincere laborers were often comforted, and the hearts of friends opened to
receive us. And in the fourth month following, I accompanied some friends in a
visit to the families of friends in Mount-Holly; in which my mind was often
drawn into an inward awfulness, wherein strong desires were raised for the
everlasting welfare of my fellow creatures; and, through the kindness of our
heavenly Father, our hearts were, at times, enlarged, and friends invited in
the flowings of divine love to attend to that which would settle them on the
sure foundation.

Having many years felt love in my heart toward the natives of this land, who
dwell far back in the wilderness, whose ancestors were the owners and
possessors of the land where we dwell; and who, for a very small consideration,
assigned their inheritance to us: and being at Philadelphia in the eighth
month, 1761, on a visit to some friends who had slaves, I fell in company with
some of those natives who lived on the east branch of the river Susquehannah,
at an Indian town called Wehaloosing, two hundred miles from Philadelphia; and
in conversation with them by an interpreter, as also by observations on their
countenances and conduct, I believed some of them were measurably acquainted
with that divine power which subjects the rough and froward will of the
creature: and, at times, I felt inward drawings toward a visit to that place of
which I told none except my dear wife, until it came to some ripeness, and then
in the winter, 1762, I laid it before friends at our monthly and quarterly, and
afterward at our General spring meeting; and having the unity of friends, and
being thoughtful about an Indian pilot, there came a man and three women from a
little beyond that town to Philadelphia on business: and I being informed
thereof by letter, met them in town in the fifth month, 1763; and after some
conversation, finding they were sober people, I, by the concurrence of friends
in that place, agreed to join with them as companions in their return; and on
the seventh day of the sixth month following, we appointed to meet at Samuel
Foulk's, at Richland in Bucks county. Now as this visit felt weighty, and was
performed at a time when traveling appeared perilous, so the dispensations of
Divine Providence, in preparing my mind for it, have been memorable; and I
believe it good for me to give some hints thereof.

After I had given up to go, the thoughts of the journey were often attended
with unusual sadness; in which times, my heart was frequently turned to the
Lord with inward breathings for his heavenly support, that I might not fail to
follow him wheresoever he might lead me: and being at our youth's meeting at
Chesterfield, about a week before the time I expected to set off, was there led
to speak on that prayer of our Redeemer to his Father: I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from
the evil. And in attending to the pure openings of truth, had to mention what
He elsewhere said to his Father; I know that thou hear me at all times: so
that, as some of his followers kept their places, and as his prayer was
granted, it followed necessarily that they were kept from evil: and as some of
those met with great hardships and afflictions in this world, and at last
suffered death by cruel men; it appears, that whatsoever befalls men while they
live in pure obedience to God, as it certainly works for their good, so it may
not be considered an evil as it relates to them. As I spoke on this subject, my
heart was much tendered, and great awfulness came over me; and then, on the
first day of the next week, being at our own afternoon meeting, and my heart
being enlarged in love, I was led to speak on the care and protection of the
Lord over his people, and to make mention of that passage where a band of
Assyrians endeavoring to take captive the prophet were disappointed; and how
the psalmist said, the angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
him. And thus, in true love and tenderness, I parted from friends, expecting
the next morning to proceed on my journey; and being weary, went early to bed:
and after I had been asleep a short time, I was awaked by a man calling at my
door; and arising, was invited to meet some friends at a publick-house in our
town, who came from Philadelphia so late, that friends were generally gone to
bed: these friends informed me, that an express arrived the last morning from
Pittsburgh, and brought news that the Indians had taken a fort from the English
westward, and slain and scalped English people in diverse places, some near the
said Pittsburgh; and that some elderly friends in Philadelphia, knowing the
time of my expecting to set off, had conferred together, and thought good to
inform me of these things, before I left home, that I might consider them, and
proceed as I believed best; so I, going again to bed, told not my wife till
morning. My heart was turned to the Lord for his heavenly instruction; and it
was an humbling time to me, When I told my dear wife, she appeared to be deeply
concerned about it; but in a few hours time, my mind became settled in a
belief, that it was my duty to proceed on my journey; and she bore it with a
good degree of resignation. In this conflict of spirit, there were great
searchings of heart, and strong cries to the Lord, that no motion might be in
the least degree attended to, but that of the pure spirit of truth.

The subjects beforementioned, on which I had so lately spoke in public, were
now very fresh before me; and I was brought inwardly to commit myself to the
Lord, to be disposed of as he saw best. So I took leave of my family and
neighbors, in much bowedness of spirit, and went to our monthly meeting at
Burlington; and after taking leave of friends there, I crossed the river,
accompanied by my friends Israel and John Pemberton; and parting the next
morning with Israel, John bore me company to Samuel Foulk's; where I met the
beforementioned Indians, and we were glad to see each other: here my friend
Benjamin Parvin met me, and proposed joining as a companion, we having passed
some letters before on the subject; and now on his account I had a sharp trial;
for as the journey appeared perilous, I thought if he went chiefly to bear me
company, and we should be taken captive, my having been the means of drawing
him into these difficulties, would add to my own afflictions: so I told him my
mind freely, and let him know that I was resigned to go alone; but after all,
if he really believed it to be his duty to go on, I believed his company would
be very comfortable to me: it was indeed a time of deep exercise, and Benjamin
appeared to be so fastened to the visit, that he could not be easy to leave me;
so we went on, accompanied by our friends John Pemberton, and William Lightfoot
of Pikeland, and lodged at Bethlehem; and there parting with John, William and
we went forward on the ninth day of the sixth month, and got lodging on the
floor of a house, about five miles from Fort-Allen; here we parted with
William: and at this place we met with an Indian trader, lately come from
Wioming; and in conversation with him, I perceived that many white people do
often sell rum to the Indians, which, I believe, is a great evil; first, they
being thereby deprived of the use of their reason, and their spirits violently
agitated, quarrels often arise which end in mischief; and the bitterness and
resentments occasioned hereby, are frequently of long continuance: again, their
skins and furrs, gotten through much fatigue and hard travels in hunting, with
which they intended to buy clothing, when they become intoxicated, they often
sell at a low rate for more rum; and afterward, when they suffer for want of
the necessaries of life, are angry with those who, for the sake of gain, took
the advantage of their weakness: of this their chiefs have often complained, at
their treaties with the English. Where cunning people pass counterfeits, and
impose that on others which is good for nothing, it is considered as a
wickedness; but to sell that to people which we know does them harm, and which
often works their ruin, for the sake of gain, manifests a hardened and corrupt
heart; and is an evil, which demands the care of all true lovers of virtue to
suppress: and while my mind, this evening, was thus employed, I also
remembered, that the people on the frontiers, among whom this evil is too
common, are often poor; who venture to the outside of a colony, that they may
live more independent on such who are wealthy, who often set high rents on
their land: being renewedly confirmed in a belief, that if all our inhabitants
lived according to sound wisdom, laboring to promote universal love and
righteousness, and ceased from every inordinate desire after wealth, and from
all customs which are tinctured with luxury, the way would be easy for our
inhabitants, though much more numerous than at present, to live comfortably on
honest employments, without having that temptation they are often under of
being drawn into schemes to make settlements on lands which have not been
purchased of the Indians, or of applying to that wicked practice of selling rum
to them.

On the tenth day of the month we set out early in the morning, and crossed the
western branch of Delaware, called the Great Lehie, near Fort-Allen; the water
being high, we went over in a canoe: here we met an Indian, and had some
friendly conversation with him, and gave him some biscuit; and he having killed
a deer, gave the Indians with us some of it: then after traveling some miles,
we met several Indian men and women with a cow and horse, and some household
goods, who were lately come from their dwelling at Wioming, and going to settle
at another place; we made them some small presents; and some of them
understanding English, I told them my motive in coming into their country; with
which they appeared satisfied: and one of our guides talking a while with an
ancient woman concerning us, the poor old woman came to my companion and me,
and took her leave of us with an appearance of sincere affection. So going on,
we pitched our tent near the banks of the same river, having labored hard in
crossing some of those mountains called the Blue Ridge; and by the roughness of
the stones, and the cavities between them, and the steepness of the hills, it
appeared dangerous: but we were preserved in safety, through the kindness of
Him whose works in those mountainous deserts appeared awful; toward whom my
heart was turned during this day's travel.

Near our tent, on the sides of large trees peeled for that purpose, were
various representations of men going to, and returning from the wars, and of
some killed in battle. This being a path heretofore used by warriors; and as I
walked about viewing those Indian histories, which were painted mostly in red
but some in black, and thinking on the innumerable afflictions which the proud,
fierce spirit produces in the world; thinking on the toils and fatigues of
warriors, traveling over mountains and deserts; thinking on their miseries and
distresses when wounded far from home by their enemies; and of their bruises
and great weariness in chasing one another over the rocks and mountains; and of
their restless, unquiet state of mind, who live in this spirit; and of the
hatred which mutually grows up in the minds of the children of those nations
engaged in war with each other: during these meditations, the desire to cherish
the spirit of love and peace amongst these people, arose very fresh in me. This
was the first night that we lodged in the woods; and being wet with traveling
in the rain, the ground, our tent, and the bushes which we purposed to lay
under our blankets also wet, all looked discouraging; but I believed, that it
was the Lord who had thus far brought me forward, and that he would dispose of
me as he saw good, and therein I felt easy: so we kindled a fire, with our tent
open to it; and with some bushes next the ground, and then our blankets, we
made our bed; and lying down, got some sleep: and in the morning, feeling a
little unwell, I went into the river; the water was cold, but soon after I felt
fresh and well.

The eleventh day of the sixth month, the bushes being wet, we tarried in our
tent till about eight o'clock; when going on, crossed a high mountain supposed
to be upward of four miles over; the steepness on the north side exceeding all
the others: we also crossed two swamps; and it raining near night, we pitched
our tent and lodged.

About noon, on our way, we were overtaken by one of the moravian brethren,
going to Wehaloosing, and an Indian man with him who could talk English; and we
being together while our horses eat grass, had some friendly conversation; but
they traveling faster than we, soon left us. This moravian, I understood, had
spent some time this spring at Wehaloosing; and was, by some of the Indians,
invited to come again.

The twelfth day of the sixth month, and first of the week, it being a rainy
day, we continued in our tent; and here I was led to think on the nature of the
exercise which has attended me: Love was the first motion, and thence a
concern arose to spend some time with the Indians, that I might feel and
understand their life, and the spirit they live in, if happily I might receive
some instruction from them, or they be in any degree helped forward by my
following the leadings of truth amongst them: and as it pleased the Lord to
make way for my going at a time when the troubles of war were increasing, and
when, by reason of much wet weather, traveling was more difficult than usual
at that season, I looked upon it as a more favorable opportunity to season my
mind, and bring me into a nearer sympathy with them: and as mine eye was to the
great Father of mercies, humbly desiring to learn what his will was concerning
me, I was made quiet and content.

Our guide's horse, though hoppled, went away in the night; and after finding
our own, and searching some time for him, his footsteps were discovered in the
path going back again, whereupon my kind companion went off in the rain, and
after about seven hours returned with him: and here we lodged again; tying up
our horses before we went to bed, and loosing them to feed about break of day.

On the thirteenth day of the sixth month, the sun appearing, we set forward;
and as I rode over the barren hills, my meditations were on the alterations of
the circumstances of the natives of this land since the coming in of the
English. The lands near the sea, are conveniently situated for fishing; the
lands near the rivers, where the tides flow, and some above, are in many places
fertile, and not mountainous; while the running of the tides, makes passing up
and down easy with any kind of traffic. Those natives have, in some places,
for trifling considerations, sold their inheritance so favorably situated; and
in other places, been driven back by superior force: so that, in many places,
as their way of clothing themselves is now altered from what it was, and they,
far remote from us, have to pass over mountains, swamps, and barren deserts,
where traveling is very troublesome, in bringing their skins and furrs to
trade with us.

By the extending of English settlements, and partly by English hunters, the
wild beasts they chiefly depend on for a subsistence, are not so plenty as they
were; and people too often, for the sake of gain, open a door for them to waste
their skins and furrs, in purchasing a liquor which tends to the ruin of them
and their families.

My own will and desires being now very much broken, and my heart, with much
earnestness, turned to the Lord, to whom alone I looked for (...) in the
dangers before me. I had a prospect of the English along the coast, for upwards
of nine hundred miles, where I have traveled; and the favorable situation of
the English, and the difficulties attending the natives in many places, and the
negroes, were open before me; and a weighty and heavenly care came over my
mind, and love filled my heart toward all mankind, in which I felt a strong
engagement, that we might be obedient to the Lord while, in tender mercies, he
is yet calling to us; and so attend to pure universal righteousness, as to give
no just cause of offense to the Gentiles, who do not profess christianity,
whether the blacks from Africa or the native inhabitants of this continent: and
here I was led into a close, laborious enquiry, whether I, as an individual,
kept clear from all things which tended to stir up, or were connected with
wars, either in this land or Africa; and my heart was deeply concerned, that in
future I might in all things keep steadily to the pure truth, and live and walk
in the plainness and simplicity of a sincere follower of Christ. And in this
lonely journey, I did, this day, greatly bewail the spreading of a wrong
spirit, believing, that the prosperous, convenient situation of the English,
requires a constant attention to divine love and wisdom to guide and support us
in a way answerable to the will of that good, gracious, and almighty Being, who
has an equal regard to all mankind: and here, luxury and covetousness, with
the numerous oppressions, and other evils attending them, appeared very
afflicting to me; and I felt in that which is immutable, that the seeds of
great calamity and desolation are sown and growing fast on this continent: nor
have I words sufficient to set forth that longing I then felt, that we, who are
placed along the coast, and have tasted the love and goodness of God, might
arise in his strength; and, like faithful messengers, labor to check the
growth of these seeds, that they may not ripen to the ruin of our posterity.

We reached the Indian settlement at Wioming: and here we were told, that an
Indian runner had been at that place a day or two before us, and brought news
of the Indians taking an English fort westward, and destroying the people, and
that they were endeavoring to take another; and also, that another Indian
runner came there about the middle of the night before we got there, who came
from a town about ten miles above Wehaloosing, and brought news, that some
Indian warriors, from distant parts, came to that town with two English scalps;
and told the people, that it was war with the English.

Our guides took us to the house of a very ancient man; and soon after we had
put in our baggage, there came a man from another Indian house some distance
off; and I perceiving there was a man near the door, went out; and he having a
tomahawk wrapped under his matchcoat out of sight, as I approached him, he took
it in his hand; I, however, went forward, and speaking to him in a friendly way
perceived he understood some English: my companion then coming out, we had some
talk with him concerning the nature of our visit in these parts; and then he
going into the house with us, and talking with our guides, soon appeared
friendly, and sat down and smoaked his pipe. Though his taking his hatchet in his
hand at the instant I drew near to him, had a disagreeable appearance, I
believe he had no other intent than to be in readiness in case any violence was
offered to him.

Hearing the news brought by these Indian runners, and being told by the
Indians where we lodged, that what Indians were about Wioming expected, in a
few days, to move to some larger towns, I thought that, to all outward
appearance, it was dangerous traveling at this time; and was, after a hard
day's journey, brought into a painful exercise at night, in which I had to
trace back, and view over the steps I had taken from my first moving in the
visit; and though I had to bewail some weakness which, at times, had attended me,
yet I could not find that I had ever given way to a willful disobedience: and
then as I believed I had, under a sense of duty, come thus far, I was now
earnest in spirit beseeching the Lord to show me what I ought to do. In this
great distress I grew jealous of myself, lest the desire of reputation, as a
man firmly settled to persevere through dangers, or the fear of disgrace
arising on my returning without performing the visit, might have some place in
me: thus I lay, full of thoughts, great part of the night, while my beloved
companion lay and slept by me; till the Lord, my gracious Father, who saw the
conflicts of my soul, was pleased to give quietness: then I was again
strengthened to commit my life, and all things relating thereto, into his
heavenly hands; and getting a little sleep toward day, when morning came we
arose.

On the fourteenth day of the sixth month, we sought out and visited all the
Indians hereabouts that we could meet with; they being chiefly in one place,
about a mile from where we lodged, in all perhaps twenty. Here I expressed the
care I had on my mind for their good; and told them, that true love had made me
willing thus to leave my family to come and see the Indians, and speak with
them in their houses. Some of them appeared kind and friendly. So we took our
leave of these Indians: and went up the river Susquehannah, about three miles,
to the house of an Indian, called Jacob January, who had killed his hog; and
the women were making store of bread, and preparing to move up the river. Here
our pilots left their canoe when they came down in the spring, which, lying
dry, was leaky; so that we, being detained some hours, had a good deal of
friendly conversation with the family; and eating dinner with them, we made
them some small presents. Then putting our baggage in the canoe, some of them
pushed slowly up the stream, and the rest of us rode our horses; and swimming
them over a creek, called Lahawahamunk, we pitched our tent a little above it,
being a shower in the evening: and in a sense of God's goodness in helping me
in my distress, sustaining me under trials, and inclining my heart to trust in
him, I lay down in an humble bowed frame of mind, and had a comfortable night's
lodging.

On the fifteenth day of the sixth month, we proceeded forward till the
afternoon; when a storm appearing, we met our canoe at an appointed place; and
the rain continuing, we stayed all night, which was so heavy, that it beat
through our tent, and wet us and our baggage.

On the sixteenth day, we found, on our way, abundance of trees blown down with
the storm yesterday; and had occasion reverently to consider the kind dealings
of the Lord, who provided a safe place for us in a valley, while this storm
continued. By the falling of abundance of trees across our path, we were much
hindered, and in some swamps our way was so stopped, that we got through with
extreme difficulty.

I had this day often to consider myself as a sojourner in this world; and a
belief in the all sufficiency of God to support his people in their pilgrimage
felt comfortable to me; and I was industriously employed to get to a state of
perfect resignation.

We seldom saw our canoe but at appointed places, by reason of the path going
off from the river: and this afternoon, Job Chilaway, an Indian from
Wehaloosing, who talks good English, and is acquainted with several people in
and about Philadelphia, met our people on the river; and understanding where we
expected to lodge, pushed back about six miles, and came to us after night; and
in a while our own canoe came, it being hard work pushing up stream. Job told
us, that an Indian came in haste to their town yesterday, and told them, that
three warriors, coming from some distance, lodged in a town above Wehaloosing a
few nights past; and that these three men were going against the English at
Juniata. Job was going down the river to the province-store at Shamokin. Though
I was so far favored with health as to continue traveling, yet through the
various difficulties in our journey, and the different way of living from what
I had been used to, I grew sick: and the news of these warriors being on their
march so near us, and not knowing whether we might not fall in with them, was a
fresh trial of my faith; and though, through the strength of divine love, I had
several times been enabled to commit myself to the divine disposal, I still
found the want of my strength to be renewed, that I might persevere therein;
and my cries for help were put up to the Lord, who, in great mercy, gave me a
resigned heart, in which I found quietness.

On the seventeenth day, parting from Job Chilaway, we went on, and reached
Wehaloosing about the middle of the afternoon; and the first Indian that we
saw, was a woman of a modest countenance, with a Bible, who first spoke to our
guide; and then, with a harmonious voice, expressed her gladness at seeing us,
having before heard of our coming: then, by the direction of our guide, we sat
down on a log; and he went to the town, to tell the people we were come. My
companion and I sitting thus together, in a deep inward stillness, the poor
woman came and sat near us; and great awfulness coming over us, we rejoiced in
a sense of God's love manifested to our poor souls. After a while, we heard a
conkshell blow several times, and then came John Curtis, and another Indian
man, who kindly invited us into a house near the town, where we found, I
suppose, about sixty people sitting in silence; and after sitting a short time,
I stood up, and in some tenderness of spirit acquainted them with the nature of
my visit, and that a concern for their good had made me willing to come thus
far to see them: all in a few short sentences, which some of them
understanding, interpreted to the others, and there appeared gladness amongst
them. Then I showed them my certificate, which was explained to them; and the
moravian, who overtook us on the way, being now here, bade me welcome.

On the eighteenth day, we rested ourselves this forenoon; and the Indians
knowing that the moravian and I were of different religious societies, and as
some of their people had encouraged him to come and stay a while with them,
were, I believe, concerned, that no jarring or discord might be in their
meetings: and they, I suppose, having conferred together, acquainted me, that
the people, at my request, would, at any time, come together, and hold
meetings; and also told me, that they expected the moravian would speak in
their settled meetings, which are commonly held morning and near evening. So I
found liberty in my heart to speak to the moravian, and told him of the care I
felt on my mind for the good of these people; and that I believed no ill
effects would follow it, if I sometimes spoke in their meetings when love
engaged me thereto, without calling them together at times when they did not
meet of course: whereupon he expressed his good will toward my speaking at any
time, all that I found in my heart to say: so near evening I was at their
meeting, where the pure gospel love was felt, to the tendering some of our
hearts; and the interpreters endeavoring to acquaint the people with what I
said, in short sentences, found some difficulty, as none of them were quite
perfect in the English and Delaware tongues, so they helped one another, and we
labored along, divine love attending: and afterward feeling my mind covered
with the spirit of prayer, I told the interpreters that I found it in my heart
to pray to God, and believed, if I prayed aright, he would hear me, and
expressed my willingness for them to omit interpreting; so our meeting ended
with a degree of divine love: and before the people went out, I observed
Papunehang (the man who had been zealous in laboring for a reformation in that
town, being then very tender) spoke to one of the interpreters: and I was
afterward told that he said in substance as follows; "I love to feel where
words come from."

On the nineteenth day, and first of the week, this morning in the meeting the
Indian who came with the moravian, being also a member of that society, prayed;
and then the moravian spoke a short time to the people: and in the afternoon,
they coming together, and my heart being filled with a heavenly care for their
good, I spoke to them awhile by interpreters; but none of them being perfect in
the work, and I feeling the current of love run strong, told the interpreters,
that I believed some of the people would understand me, and so I proceeded: in
which exercise, I believe the Holy Ghost wrought on some hearts to edification,
where all the words were not understood. I looked upon it as a time of divine
favor, and my heart was tendered and truly thankful before the Lord; and after
I sat down, one of the interpreters seemed spirited to give the Indians the
substance of what I had said.

Before our first meeting this morning, I was led to meditate on the manifold
difficulties of these Indians, who, by the permission of the Six Nations, dwell
in these parts; and a near sympathy with them was raised in me; and my heart
being enlarged in the love of Christ, I thought that the affectionate care of a
good man for his only brother in affliction, does not exceed what I then felt
for that people.

I came to this place through much trouble; and though, through the mercies of
God, I believed, that if I died in the journey, it would be well with me; yet
the thoughts of falling into the hands of Indian warriors, were, in times of
weakness, afflicting to me; and being of a tender constitution of body, the
thoughts of captivity amongst them were, at times, grievous; as supposing, that
they being strong and hardy, might demand service of me beyond what I could
well bear; but the Lord alone was my keeper; and I believed, if I went into
captivity, it would be for some good end; and thus, from time to time, my mind
was centered in resignation, in which I always found quietness. And now, this
day, though I had the same dangerous wilderness between me and home, I was
inwardly joyful that the Lord had strengthened me to come on this visit, and
manifested a fatherly care over me in my poor lowly condition, when in mine own
eyes I appeared inferior to many amongst the Indians.

When the last mentioned meeting was ended, it being night Papunehang went to
bed; and one of the interpreters sitting by me, I observed Papunehang spoke
with an harmonious voice, I suppose, a minute or two: and asking the
interpreter, was told, that "he was expressing his thankfulness to God for the
favors he had received that day; and prayed that he would continue to favor
him with that same, which he had experienced in that meeting." That though
Papunehang had before agreed to receive the moravian, and join with them, he
still appeared kind and loving to us.

On the twentieth day, I was at two meetings, and silent in them.

The twenty-first day. This morning in meeting my heart was enlarged in pure
love amongst them, and in short plain sentences expressed several things that
rested upon me, which one of the interpreters gave the people pretty readily;
after which the meeting ended in supplication, and I had cause humbly to
acknowledge the loving kindness of the Lord toward us; and then I believed that
a door remained open for the faithful disciples of Jesus Christ, to labor
amongst these people.

I now feeling my mind at liberty to return, took my leave of them in general,
at the conclusion of what I said in meeting; and so we prepared to go homeward:
but some of their most active men told us, that when we were ready to move, the
people would choose to come and shake hands with us; which those who usually
came to meeting did: and from a secret draught in my mind, I went amongst some
who did not use to go to meeting, and took my leave of them also: and the
moravian and his Indian interpreter, appeared respectful to us at parting. This
town stands on the bank of Susquehannah, and consists, I believe, of about
forty houses, mostly compact together; some about thirty feet long, and
eighteen wide, some bigger, some less; mostly built of split plank, one end set
in the ground, and the other pinned to a plate, on which lay rafters, and
covered with bark. I understand a great flood last winter overflowed the chief
part of the ground where the town stands; and some were now about moving their
houses to higher ground.

We expected only two Indians to be our company; but when we were ready to go,
we found many of them were going to Bethlehem with skins and furrs, who chose
to go in company with us: so they loaded two canoes, which they desired us to
go in, telling us, that the waters were so raised with the rains, that the
horses should be taken by such who were better acquainted with the fording
places: so we, with several Indians, went in the canoes, and others went on
horses, there being seven besides ours. And we meeting with the horsemen once
on the way by appointment, and then near night, a little below a branch called
Tankhannah, we lodged there; and some of the young men going out a little
before dusk with their guns, brought in a deer.

On the twenty-second day, through diligence, we reached Wioming before night,
and understood the Indians were mostly gone from this place: here we went up a
small creek into the woods with our canoes, and, pitching our tent, carried out
our baggage; and before dark our horses came to us.

On the twenty-third day in the morning their horses were loaded, and we
prepared our baggage and so set forward, being in all fourteen; and with
diligent traveling were favored to get near half way to Fort-Allen. The land
on this road from Wioming to our frontier being mostly poor, and good grass
scarce, they chose a piece of low ground to lodge on, as the best for grasing;
and I having sweat much in traveling, and being weary slept sound; I perceived
in the night that I had taken cold, of which I was favored to get better soon.

On the twenty-fourth day we passed Fort-Allen, and lodged near it in the woods.

Having forded the westerly branch of Delaware three times, and thereby had a
shorter way, and missed going over the top of the blue mountains, called the
Second Ridge. In the second time fording, where the river cuts through the
mountain, the waters being rapid and pretty deep, and my companion's mare being
a tall tractable animal, he sundry times drove her back through the river, and
they loaded her with the burdens of some small horses, which they thought not
sufficient to come through with their loads.

The troubles westward, and the difficulty for Indians to pass through our
frontier, I apprehend was one reason why so many came; as expecting that our
being in company, would prevent the outside inhabitants from being surprised.

On the twenty-fifth day we reached Bethlehem, taking care on the way to keep
foremost, and to acquaint people on and near the road who these Indians were:
this we found very needful; for the frontier inhabitants were often alarmed at
the report of English being killed by Indians westward.

Amongst our company were some who I did not remember to have seen at meeting,
and some of these at first were very reserved; but we being several days
together, and behaving friendly toward them, and making them suitable returns
for the services they did us, they became more free and sociable.

On the twenty-sixth day and first of the week, having carefully endeavored to
settle all affairs with the Indians relative to our journey; we took leave of
them, and I thought they generally parted with us affectionately; so we getting
to Richland, had a very comfortable meeting amongst our friends: here I parted
with my kind friend and companion Benjamin Parvin; and accompanied by my friend
Samuel Foulk, we rode to John Cadwallader's, from whence I reached home the
next day, where I found my family middling well; and they and my friends all
along appeared glad to see me return from a journey which they apprehended
dangerous: but my mind, while I was out, had been so employed in striving for a
perfect resignation, and I had so often been confirmed in a belief, that
whatever the Lord might be pleased to allot for me, would work for good: I was
careful least I should admit any degree of selfishness in being glad overmuch,
and labored to improve by those trials in such a manner as my gracious Father
and protector intends for me. Between the English inhabitants and Wehaloosing,
we had only a narrow path, which in many places is much grown up with bushes,
and interrupted by abundance of trees lying across it, these, together with the
mountains, swamps, and rough stones, make it a difficult road to travel; and
the more so, for that rattlesnakes abound there, of which we killed four: that
people who have never been in such places, have but an imperfect idea of them;
but I was not only taught patience, but also made thankful to God, who thus led
me about and instructed me, that I might have a quick and lively feeling of the
afflictions of my fellow creatures, whose situation in life is difficult.

CHAP. IX.
His religious conversation with a company met to see the tricks of a juggler
-- His account of John Smith's advice, and of the proceedings of a committee,
at the yearly meeting in 1764 -- Contemplations on the nature of true wisdom,
occasioned by hearing of the cruelty of the Indians to their captives -- His
visiting the families of friends at Mount-Holly, Mansfield and Burlington in
1764, and the meetings on the sea coast from Cape May toward Squan in 1765 --
His visit to the Lower Counties on Delaware and the Eastern Shore of Maryland
in 1766, in company with John Sleeper; with some account of Joseph Nichols and
his followers; and observations on the different state of the first settlers in
Pennsylvania who depended on their own labor, and those of the southern
provinces who kept negroes -- His visiting the northern parts of New Jersey the
same year, and the western parts of Maryland and Pennsylvania in 1767, and
afterward other parts of Pennsylvania and the families of friends at
Mount-Holly; and again several parts of Maryland in 1768 -- Further
considerations on keeping slaves; and his concern for having formerly, as an
executor, been party to the sale of one; and what he did in consequence of it
-- Thoughts on friends exercising offices in civil government.

THE latter part of the summer, 1763, there came a man to Mount-Holly, who had
before published, by a printed advertisement, that at a certain publick-house,
he would show many wonderful operations, which he therein enumerated.

This man, at the time appointed, did, by slight of hand, sundry things; which,
to those gathered, appeared strange.

The next day, I hearing of it, and understanding that the show was to be
continued the next night, and the people to meet about sunset, felt an
exercise o^ that account: so I went to the publick-house in the evening, and
told the man of the house that I had an inclination to spend a part of the
evening there; with which he signified that he was content. Then sitting down
by the door, I spoke to the people as they came together, concerning this show;
and more coming and sitting down with us, the seats at the door were mostly
filled; and I had conversation with them in the fear of the Lord, and labored
to convince them that thus assembling to see those tricks or slights of hands,
and bestowing their money to support men who in that capacity were of no use in
the world, was contrary to the nature of the christian religion.

There was one of the company who, for a time, endeavored by arguments to show
the reasonableness of their proceedings herein; but after considering some
texts of scripture, and calmly debating the matter, he gave up the point. So
having spent about an hour amongst them, and feeling my mind easy, I departed.

At our yearly meeting at Philadelphia, on the twenty-fifth day of the ninth
month, 1764, John Smith of Marlborough, aged upwards of eighty years, a
faithful minister, though not eloquent, stood up in our meeting of ministers and
elders, and appearing to be under a great exercise of spirit, informed friends
in substance as follows: to wit, "That he had been a member of the society
upward of sixty years, and well remembered that in those early times friends
were a plain lowly-minded people; and that there was much tenderness and
contrition in their meetings. -- That at twenty years from that time, the
society increasing in wealth, and in some degree conforming to the fashions of
the world, true humility was less apparent, and their meetings in general not
so lively and edifying -- That at the end of forty years, many of them were
grown very rich; that wearing of fine costly garments, and using of silver (and
other) watches, became customary with them, their sons, and their daughters,
and many of the society made a spacious appearance in the world; which marks of
outward wealth and greatness, appeared on some in our meetings of ministers and
elders; and as these things became more prevalent, so the powerful
overshadowings of the Holy Ghost were less manifest in the Society -- That
there had been a continued increase of these ways of life even until now; and
that the weakness which has now overspread the society, and the barrenness
manifest amongst us, is matter of much sorrow." He then mentioned the
uncertainty of his attending these meetings in future, expecting his
dissolution was now near; and having tenderly expressed his concern for us,
signified that he had seen in the true light that the Lord would bring back his
people from these things into which they were thus degenerated, but that his
faithful servants must first go through great and heavy exercises therein.

On the twenty-ninth day, the committee appointed by the yearly meeting to
visit the quarterly and monthly meetings, now gave an account in writing of
their proceedings in that service; in which they signified, that in the course
of it, they had been apprehensive that some persons holding offices in
government, inconsistent with our principles; and others who kept slaves,
remaining active members in our meetings of discipline, had been one means of
weakness more and more prevailing in the management thereof in some places.
After this report was read, an exercise revived on my mind, which, at times,
had attended me several years, and inward cries to the Lord were raised in me,
that the fear of man might not prevent me from doing what he required of me;
and standing up, I spoke in substance as follows: "I have felt a tenderness in
my mind toward persons, in two circumstances mentioned in that report; that is,
toward such active members who keep slaves, and such who hold offices in civil
government; and have desired, that friends in all their conduct may be kindly
affectioned one toward another. Many friends, who keep slaves, are under some
exercise on that account; and, at times, think about trying them with freedom;
but find many things in their way: and the way of living, and annual expenses
of some of them are such, that it seems impracticable for them to set their
slaves free, without changing their own way of life. It has been my lot to be
often abroad; and I have observed in some places, at quarterly and yearly
meetings, and at some houses where traveling friends and their horses are
often entertained, that the yearly expense of individuals therein is very
considerable: and friends in some places crouding much on persons in these
circumstances for entertainment, has often rested as a burden on my mind for
some years past; and I now express it in the fear of the Lord, greatly desiring
that friends now present may duly consider it."

In the fall of this year, having hired a man to work, I perceived in
conversation that he had been a soldier in the late war on this continent; and
in the evening, giving a narrative of his captivity amongst the Indians, he
informed me that he saw two of his fellow captives tortured to death in a very
cruel manner.

This relation affected me with sadness, under which I went to bed; and the
next morning, soon after I awoke, a fresh and living sense of divine love was
spread over my mind; in which I had a renewed prospect of the nature of that
wisdom from above, which leads to a right use of all gifts, both spiritual and
temporal, and gives content therein: under a feeling thereof, I wrote as
follows:

"Has He, who gave me a being attended with many wants unknown to
brute-creatures, given me a capacity superior to theirs? and shown me, that a
moderate application to business is proper to my present condition; and that
this, attended with his blessing, may supply all outward wants, while they
remain within the bounds he has fixed; and no imaginary wants proceeding from
an evil spirit, have any place in me? Attend then, O my soul! to this pure
wisdom, as thy sure conductor through the manifold dangers in this world!"

"Does pride lead to vanity? Does vanity form imaginary wants? Do these wants
prompt men to exert their power in requiring that of others, which themselves
would rather be excused from, were the same required of them?"

"Do those proceedings beget hard thoughts? Do hard thoughts, when ripe, become
malice? Does malice, when ripe, become revengeful; and in the end inflict
terrible pains on their fellow creatures, and spread desolations in the world?"

"Does mankind, walking in uprightness, delight in each other's happiness? And
do these creatures, capable of this attainment by giving way to an evil spirit,
employ their wit and strength to afflict and destroy one another?"

"Remember then, O my soul! the quietude of those in whom Christ governs, and
in all thy proceedings feel after it!"

"Does he condescend to bless thee with his presence? To move and influence to
action? To dwell in thee, and walk in thee? Remember then thy station, as a
being sacred to God; accept of the strength freely offered thee; and take heed
that no weakness, in conforming to expensive, unwise, and hard-hearted customs,
gendering to discord and strife, be given way to. Does he claim my body as his
temple? And graciously grant that I may be sacred to him. Oh! that I may prize
this favor; and that my whole life may be conformable to this character!"

"Remember, O my soul! that the prince of peace is thy Lord: that he
communicates his unmixed wisdom to his family; that they living in perfect
simplicity, may give no just cause of offense to any creature, but may walk as
he walked!"

Having felt an openness in my heart toward visiting families in our own
meeting, and especially in the town of Mount-Holly, the place of my abode, I
mentioned it in our monthly meeting the forepart of the winter 1764; which
being agreed to, and several friends of our meeting being united in the
exercise, we proceeded therein; and through divine favor were helped in the
work, so that it appeared to me as a fresh reviving of godly care amongst
friends: and the latter part of the same winter, I joined my friend William
Jones, in a visit to friends families in Mansfield; in which labor, I had
cause to admire the goodness of the Lord toward us.

Having felt my mind drawn toward a visit to friends along the seacoast from
Cape May to near Squan; and also to visit some people in those parts, amongst
whom there is no settled worship; I joined, with my beloved friend Benjamin
Jones, in a visit there, having friends unity therein: and setting off the
twenty-fourth day of the tenth month, 1765, we had a prosperous and very
satisfactory journey; feeling, at times, through the goodness of the heavenly
Shepherd, the gospel to flow freely toward a poor people scattered in those
places: and soon after our return, I joined my friends John Sleeper and
Elizabeth Smith, in visiting friends families at Burlington, there being at
this time about fifty families of our society in that city; and we had cause
humbly to adore our heavenly Father, who baptized us into a feeling of the
state of the people, and strengthened us to labor in true gospel love amongst
them.

An exercise having, at times, for several years, attended me, in regard to
paying a religious visit to friends on the Eastern Shore of Maryland: such was
the nature of this exercise, that I believed the Lord moved me to travel on
foot amongst them, that by so traveling I might have a more lively feeling of
the condition of the oppressed slaves, set an example of lowliness before the
eyes of their masters, and be more out of the way of temptation to unprofitable
converse.

The time now drawing near in which I believed it my duty to lay my concern
before our monthly meeting, I perceived in conversation with my beloved friend
John Sleeper, that he was under a concern to travel the same way, and also to
travel on foot in the form of a servant amongst them, as he expressed it. This he
told me before he knew aught of my exercise.

We being thus drawn the same way, laid our exercise and the nature of it
before friends; and obtaining certificates, we set off the sixth day of the
fifth month, 1766; and were at meetings with friends at Wilmington, Duck-Creek,
Little-Creek and Motherkill; my heart being sundry times tendered under the
divine influence, and enlarged in love toward the people amongst whom we
traveled.

From Motherkill, we crossed the country about thirty-five miles to friends at
Tuckahoe in Maryland, and had a meeting there and at Marshy-Creek.

At these, our three last meetings, were a considerable number of people,
followers of one Joseph Nichols, a preacher; who, I understand, is not in
outward fellowship with any religious society of people, but professes nearly
the same principles as our society does, and often travels up and down
appointing meetings, to which many people come. I heard some friends speaking
of some of their neighbors, who had been irreligious people, that were now his
followers, and were become sober well-behaved men and women.

Some irregularities, I hear, have been amongst the people at several of his
meetings; but from the whole of what I have perceived, I believe the man and
some of his followers, are honestly disposed, but that skilful fathers are
wanting among them: from hence we went to Choptank and Third Haven; and thence
to Queen Ann's. The weather having some days past been hot and dry, and we to
attend meetings pursuant to appointment, having traveled pretty steadily, and
had hard labor in meetings, I grew weakly; at which I was for a time
discouraged; but looking over our journey, and thinking how the Lord had
supported our minds and bodies, so that we got forward much faster than I
expected before we came out, I now saw that I had been in danger of too
strongly desiring to get soon through the journey, and that this bodily
weakness now attending me was a kindness to me; and then, in contrition of
spirit, I became very thankful to my gracious Father, for this manifestation of
his love; and in humble submission to his will, my trust was renewed in him.

On this part of our journey, I had many thoughts on the different
circumstances of friends who inhabit Pennsylvania and Jersey, from those who
dwell in Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina. Pennsylvania and New Jersey were
settled by many friends, who were convinced of our principles in England in
times of sufferings, and coming over bought lands of the natives, and applied
themselves to husbandry in a peaceable way; and many of their children were
taught to labor for their living.

Few friends, I believe, came from England to settle in any of these southern
provinces; but by the faithful labors of traveling friends in early times,
there was considerable convincements amongst the inhabitants of these parts.
Here I remembered my reading of the warlike disposition of many of the first
settlers in those provinces, and of their numerous engagements with the
natives, in which much blood was shed, even in the infancy of those colonies.
These people, inhabiting those places, being grounded in customs contrary to
the pure truth, when some of them were affected with the powerful preaching of
the Word of Life, and joined in fellowship with our society, they had a great
work to go through. It is observable in the History of the Reformation from
Popery, that it had a gradual progress from age to age: the uprightness of the
first reformers, in attending to the light and understanding given them, opened
the way for sincere-hearted people to proceed further afterward; and thus each
one truly fearing God, and laboring in those works of righteousness appointed
for them in their day, finds acceptance with him: though, through the darkness
of the times, and the corruption of manners and customs, some upright men may
have had little more for their day's work than to attend to the righteous
principle in their minds, as it related to their own conduct in life, without
pointing out to others the whole extent of that, which the same principle would
lead succeeding ages into. Thus for instance; amongst an imperious warlike
people, supported by oppressed slaves, some of these masters, I suppose, are
awakened to feel and see their error; and, through sincere repentance, cease from
oppression, and become like fathers to their servants; showing, by their
example, a pattern of humility in living, and moderation in governing, for the
instruction and admonition of their oppressing neighbors; those without
carrying the reformation further, I believe have found acceptance with the
Lord. Such was the beginning; and those who succeeded them, and have faithfully
attended to the nature and spirit of the reformation, have seen the necessity
of proceeding forward; and not only to instruct others, by their example, in
governing well, but also to use means to prevent their successors from having
so much power to oppress others.

Here I was renewedly confirmed in my mind, that the Lord (whose tender mercies
are over all his works, and whose ear is open to the cries and groans of the
oppressed) is graciously moving on the hearts of people, to draw them off from
the desire of wealth, and bring them into such an humble, lowly way of living,
that they may see their way clearly, to repair to the standard of true
righteousness; and not only break the yoke of oppression, but know him to be
their strength and support in a time of outward affliction.

We passing on crossed Chester-River; and had a meeting there, and at Cecil and
Sassafras. Through my bodily weakness, joined with a heavy exercise of mind, it
was to me an humbling dispensation, and I had a very lively feeling of the
state of the oppressed; yet I often thought, that what I suffered was little,
compared with the sufferings of the blessed Jesus, and many of his faithful
followers; and may say with thankfulness, I was made content.

From Sassafras we went pretty directly home, where we found our families well;
and for several weeks after our return, I had often to look over our journey:
and though to me it appeared as a small service, and that some faithful
messengers will yet have more bitter cups to drink in those southern provinces
for Christ's sake than we had; yet I found peace in that I had been helped to
walk in sincerity, according to the understanding and strength given me.

On the thirteenth day of the eleventh month, 1766, with the unity of friends
at our monthly meeting, in company with my beloved friend Benjamin Jones, I sat
out on a visit to friends in the upper part of this province, having had
drawings of love in my heart that way a considerable time: we traveled as far
as Hardwick; and I had inward peace in my labors of love amongst them.

Through the humbling dispensations of Divine Providence, my mind has been
brought into a further feeling of the difficulties of friends and their
servants south-westward: and being often engaged in spirit on their account, I
believed it my duty to walk into some parts of the western shore of Maryland,
on a religious visit: and having obtained a certificate from friends of our
monthly meeting, I took my leave of my family under the heart-tendering
operation of truth; and on the twentieth day of the fourth month, 1767, I rode
to the ferry opposite to Philadelphia, and from thence walked to William
Horne's at Derby that evening; and next day pursued my journey alone, and
reached Concord weekday meeting.

Discouragements and a weight of distress had at times, attended me in this
lonesome walk; through which afflictions, I was mercifully preserved: and now
sitting down with friends, my mind was turned toward the Lord, to wait for his
holy leadings; who, in infinite love, was pleased to soften my heart into
humble contrition, and did renewedly strengthen me to go forward; that to me it
was a time of heavenly refreshment in a silent meeting.

The next day I came to New-Garden weekday meeting, in which I sat with
bowedness of spirit; and being baptized into a feeling of the state of some
present, the Lord gave us a heart-tendering season; to his name be the praise.

I passed on, and was at Nottingham monthly meeting; and at a meeting at Little
Britain on first day: and in the afternoon several friends came to the house
where I lodged, and we had a little afternoon-meeting; and through the humbling
power of truth, I had to admire the loving kindness of the Lord manifested to
us.

On the twenty-sixth day, I crossed Susquehannah; and coming amongst people in
outward ease and greatness, chiefly on the labor of slaves, my heart was much
affected; and in awful retiredness, my mind was gathered inward to the Lord,
being humbly engaged that in true resignation I might receive instruction from
him, respecting my duty amongst this people.

Though traveling on foot was wearisome to my body; yet thus traveling, was
agreeable to the state of my mind.

I went gently on, being weakly; and was covered with sorrow and heaviness, on
account of the spreading prevailing spirit of this world, introducing customs
grievous and oppressive on one hand, and cherishing pride and wantonness on the
other. In this lonely walk, and state of abasement and humiliation, the state
of the church in these parts was opened before me; and I may truly say with the
prophet, I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of
it. Under this exercise, I attended the quarterly meeting at Gunpowder; and, in
bowedness of spirit, I had to open, with much plainness, what I felt respecting
friends living in fullness, on the labors of the poor oppressed negroes; and
that promise of the Most High was now revived: I will gather all nations and
tongues; and they shall come and see my glory. -- Here the sufferings of
Christ, and his tasting death for every man, and the travels, sufferings, and
martyrdoms of the apostles, and primitive christians, in laboring for the
conversion of the gentiles, was livingly revived in me; and according to the
measure of strength afforded, I labored in some tenderness of spirit, being
deeply affected amongst them: and thus the difference between the present
treatment which these gentiles the negroes receive at our hands, and the
labors of the primitive christians for the conversion of the gentiles, was
pressed home, and the power of truth came over us; under a feeling of which, my
mind was united to a tenderhearted people in those parts; and the meeting
concluded in a sense of God's goodness toward his humble dependant children.

The next day was a general meeting for worship, much crowded; in which I was
deeply engaged in inward cries to the Lord for help, that I might stand wholly
resigned, and move only as he might be pleased to lead me: and I was mercifully
helped to labor honestly and fervently amongst them, in which I found inward
peace; and the sincere were comforted.

From hence I turned toward Pipe-Creek, and passed on to the Red-Lands; and had
several meetings amongst friends in those parts. My heart was often tenderly
affected, under a sense of the Lord's goodness, in sanctifying my troubles and
exercises, turning them to my comfort, and, I believe, to the benefit of many
others; for, I may say with thankfulness, that in this visit, it appeared like
a fresh tendering visitation in most places.

I passed on to the western quarterly meeting in Pennsylvania; during the
several days of this meeting, I was mercifully preserved in an inward feeling
after the mind of truth, and my public labors tended to my humiliation, with
which I was content: and after the quarterly meeting of worship ended, I felt
drawings to go to the women's meeting of business; which was very full: and
here the humility of Jesus Christ, as a pattern for us to walk by, was livingly
opened before me; and in treating on it, my heart was enlarged; and it was a
baptizing time. From hence I went on; and was at meetings at Concord,
Middletown, Providence, and Haddonfield, and so home; where I found my family
well. A sense of the Lord's merciful preservation in this my journey, excites
reverent thankfulness to him.

On the second day of the ninth month, 1767, with the unity of friends, I set
off on a visit to friends in the upper part of Berks and Philadelphia counties;
was at eleven meetings in about two weeks; and have renewed cause to bow in
reverence before the Lord, who, by the powerful extendings of his humbling
goodness, opened my way amongst friends, and made the meetings (I trust)
profitable to us. And the winter following, I joined friends on a visit to
friends families, in some part of our meeting; in which exercise, the pure
influence of divine love, made our visits reviving.

On the fifth day of the fifth month, 1768, I left home, under the humbling
hand of the Lord, having obtained a certificate, in order to visit some
meetings in Maryland; and to proceed without a horse looked clearest to me. I
was at the quarterly-meetings at Philadelphia and Concord; and then went on to
Chester river; and crossing the Bay with friends, was at the yearly meeting at
West-River: thence back to Chester-River; and taking a few meetings in my way,
proceeded home. It was a journey of much inward waiting; and as my eye was to
the Lord, way was, several times, opened to my humbling admiration, when things
had appeared very difficult.

In my return, I felt a relief of mind, very comfortable to me; having, through
divine help, labored in much plainness, both with friends selected, and in the
more public meetings: so that (I trust) the pure witness, in many minds, was
reached.

The eleventh day of the sixth month, 1769. Sundry cases have happened of late
years, within the limits of our monthly meeting, respecting that of exercising
pure righteousness toward the negroes; in which I have lived under a labor of
heart, that equity might be steadily kept to. On this account, I have had some
close exercises amongst friends; in which, I may thankfully say, I find peace:
and as my meditations have been on universal love, my own conduct in time past,
became of late very grievous to me.

As persons setting negroes free in our province, are bound by law to maintain
them, in case they have need of relief; some who scrupled keeping slaves for
term of life, in the time of my youth, were wont to detain their young negroes
in their service till thirty years of age, without wages, on that account: and
with this custom I so far agreed, that I, being joined to another friend, in
executing the will of a deceased friend, once sold a negro lad till he might
attain the age of thirty years, and applied the money to the use of the estate.

With abasement of heart, I may now say, that sometimes, as I have set in a
meeting, with my heart exercised toward that awful Being, who respects not
persons nor colors, and have looked upon this lad, I have felt that all was
not clear in my mind respecting him: and as I have attended to this exercise,
and fervently sought the Lord, it has appeared to me, that I should make some
restitution, but in what way I saw not till lately; when being under some
concern, that I may be resigned to go on a visit to some part of the
West Indies; and was under close engagement of spirit, seeking to the Lord for
counsel herein: that of my joining in the sale aforesaid, came heavily upon me;
and my mind, for a time, was covered with darkness and sorrow; and under this
sore affliction, my heart was softened to receive instruction: and here I first
saw, that as I had been one of the two executors, who had sold this lad nine
years longer than is common for our own children to serve, so I should now
offer a part of my substance to redeem the last half of that nine years; but as
the time was not yet come, I executed a bond, binding me, and my executors, to
pay to the man he was sold to, what to candid men might appear equitable, for
the last four years and a half of his time, in case the said youth should be
living, and in a condition likely to provide comfortably for himself.

The ninth day of the tenth month, 1769. My heart has often been deeply
afflicted under a feeling I have had, that the standard of pure righteousness,
is not lifted up to the people by us, as a society, in that clearness which it
might have been, had we been so faithful to the teachings of Christ, as we
ought to have been: and as my mind has been inward to the Lord, the purity of
Christ's government has been opened in my understanding; and under this
exercise, that of friends being active in civil society, in putting laws in
force which are not agreeable to the purity of righteousness, has, for several
years, been an increasing burden upon me; having felt, in the openings of
universal love, that where a people convinced of the truth of the inward
teachings of Christ, are active in putting laws in execution, which are not
consistent with pure wisdom, it has a necessary tendency to bring dimness over
their minds: and as my heart has been thus exercised, and a tender sympathy in
me toward my fellow members, I have, within a few months past, in several
meetings for discipline, expressed my concern on this subject.

CHAP X.
Under some bodily indisposition, his body, by abstinence, much weakened; and
his mind, at that time, exercised for the good of the people in the West Indies
-- His afterward communicating to friends his being resigned to visit some of
these islands -- The state of his mind, and the close considerations he was led
into, while under this exercise -- His preparations to embark, and his
considerations on the trade to these islands; and his being, when the vessel
was ready to sail, released from the concern he had been under -- His religious
engagements after his return home -- His sickness, in which he was brought to a
very low state; and the prospects he then had.

THE twelfth day of the third month, having, for some years past, dieted myself
on account of a lump gathering on my nose; under this diet, I grew weak in
body, and not of ability to travel by land as heretofore: I was, at times,
favored to look with awfulness toward the Lord, before whom are all my ways,
who alone has the power of life and death; and to feel thankfulness raised in
me, for this his fatherly chastisement, believing, if I was truly humbled under
it, all would work for good. While I was under this bodily weakness, my mind
being, at times, exercised for my fellow creatures in the West Indies, I grew
jealous over myself, lest the disagreeableness of the prospect should hinder me
from obediently attending thereto: for though I knew not that the Lord required
me to go there; yet I believed, that resignation was now called for in that
respect: and feeling a danger of not being wholly devoted to him, I was
frequently engaged to watch unto prayer, that I might be preserved; and upwards
of a year having passed, I walked one day in a soliry wood, my mind being
covered with awfulness, cries were raised in me to my merciful Father, that he
would graciously keep me in faithfulness; and it then settled on my mind as a
duty, to open my condition to friends at our monthly meeting; which I did soon
after, as follows:

"An exercise has attended me for some time past, and of late been more
weighty upon me; under which, I believe it is required of me to be resigned to
go on a visit to some part of the West Indies:" and in the quarterly and
general spring meeting, I found no clearness to express any thing further, than
that I believed resignation herein was required of me; and having obtained
certificates from all said meetings, I felt like a sojourner at my outward
habitation, kept free from worldly encumbrances, and was often bowed in spirit
before the Lord, with inward breathings to him, that I might be rightly
directed. And I may here note, that what I have before related of my being,
when young, joined as an executor with another friend, in executing the will of
the deceased, our having sold a negro lad till he might attain the age of
thirty years, was now the occasion of great sorrow to me: and after having
settled matters relating to this youth, I provided a sea-store and bed, and
things for the voyage; and hearing of a vessel likely to sail from Philadelphia
for Barbados, I spoke with one of the owners at Burlington, and soon after
went to Philadelphia on purpose to speak with him again: at which time he told
me, there was a friend in town who was part owner of the said vessel; but I
felt no inclination to speak with him, but returned home: and a while after, I
took leave of my family; and going to Philadelphia, had some weighty
conversation with the first-mentioned owner, and showed him a writing, as
follows:

"On the twenty-fifth day of the eleventh month, 1769, as an exercise, with
respect to a visit to Barbados, has been weighty on my mind, I may express
some of the trials which have attended me; under these trials I have, at times,
rejoiced, in that I have felt my own self-will subjected."

"I once, some years ago, retailed rum, sugar, and molasses, the fruits of the
labor of slaves; but then, had not much concern about them, save only that the
rum might be used in moderation; nor was this concern so weightily attended to,
as I now believe it ought to have been: but of late years being further
informed, respecting the oppressions too generally exercised in these islands,
and thinking often on the degrees that are in connections of interest and
fellowship with the works of darkness, Ephe. v. 11. And feeling an increasing
concern to be wholly given up to the leadings of the Holy Spirit, it has
appeared, that the small gain I got by this branch of trade, should be applied
in promoting righteousness on the earth; and were the first motion toward a
visit to Barbados: I believed the outward substance I possess should be
applied in paying my passage, if I go, and providing things in a lowly way for
my subsistence; but when the time drew near, in which, I believed, it required
of me to be in readiness, a difficulty arose, which has been a continued trial
for some months past; under which, I have, with abasement of mind, from day to
day, sought the Lord for instruction; and often had a feeling of the condition
of one formerly, who bewailed himself, for that the Lord hid his face from him.
-- During these exercises, my heart has been often contrite; and I have had a
tender feeling of the temptations of my fellow creatures, laboring under those
expensive customs distinguishable from the simplicity that there is in Christ,
2 Cor. ii. 3. and sometimes in the renewings of gospel love, have been helped
to minister to others."

"That which has so closely engaged my mind, in seeking to the Lord for
instruction is, whether, after so full information of the oppression the slaves
in the West Indies lie under, who raise the West India produce, as I had in
reading a caution and warning to Great Britain and her colonies, wrote by
Anthony Benezet) it is right for me to take a passage in a vessel, employed in
the West India trade?"

"To trade freely with oppressors, and without laboring to dissuade from such
unkind treatment, seek for gain by such traffic, tends, I believe, to make
them more easy, respecting their conduct, than they would be, if the cause of
universal righteousness was humbly and firmly attended to, by those in general
with whom they have commerce; and that complaint of the Lord by his prophet,
They have strengthened the hands of the wicked, has very often revived in my
mind; and I may here add some circumstances preceding any prospect of a visit
there: the case of David has often been before me of late years: he longed for
some water in a well beyond an army of Philistines, at war with Israel; and
some of his men, to please him, ventured their lives in passing through this
army, and brought that water."

"It does not appear that the Israelites were then scarce of water, but rather,
that David gave way to delicacy of taste; but having thought on the danger
these men were exposed to, he considered this water as their blood, and his
heart smote him that he could not drink it, but poured it out to the Lord. And
the oppression of the slaves, which I have seen in several journies southward,
on this continent, and the report of their treatment in the West Indies has
deeply affected me; and a care to live in the spirit of peace, and minister
just cause of offense to none of my fellow creatures, has, from time to time,
livingly revived on my mind; and under this exercise, I, for some years past,
declined to gratify my palate with those sugars."

"I do not censure my brethren in these things; but believe the Father of
mercies, to whom all mankind by creation are equally related, has heard the
groans of these oppressed people; and is preparing soon to have a tender
feeling of their condition: and the trading in, or frequent use of, any produce
known to be raised by the labors of those who are under such lamentable
oppression, has appeared to be a subject which may yet more require the
serious consideration of the humble followers of Christ, the prince of peace."

"After long and mournful exercise, I am now free to mention how things have
opened in my mind, with desires that if it may please the Lord, to further open
his will to any of his children in this matter, they may faithfully follow him
in such further manifestation."

"The number of those who decline the use of the West India produce, on account
of the hard usage of the slaves who raise it, appears small, even amongst
people truly pious; and the labors in christian love, on that subject, of
those who do, not very extensive."

"Were the trade from this continent to the West Indies to be quite stopped at
once, I believe many there would suffer for want of bread."

"Did we on this continent, and the inhabitants of the West Indies, generally
dwell in pure righteousness, I believe a small trade between us might be right:
that under these considerations, when the thoughts of wholly declining the use
of trading vessels, and of trying to hire a vessel to go under ballast have
arose in my mind, I have believed that the labors in gospel love, yet bestowed
in the cause of universal righteousness, are not arrived to that height."

"If the trade to the West Indies were no more than was consistent with pure
wisdom, I believe the passage-money would, for good reasons, be higher than it
is now; and here, under deep exercise of mind, I have believed, that I should
not take the advantage of this great trade, and small passage-money; but as a
testimony in favor of less trading, should pay more than is common for others
to pay, if I go at this time."

The first-mentioned owner having read the paper, expressed a willingness to go
with me to the other owner; and we going, the said other owner read over the
paper, and we had some solid conversation; under which, I felt my soul bowed in
reverence before the Most-High: and, at length, one of them asked me, if I
would go and see the vessel? but I had not clearness in my mind to go; but went
to my lodgings, and retired in private.

I was now under great exercise of mind; and my tears were poured out before
the Lord, with inward cries, that he would graciously help me under these
trials.

In this case, I believe my mind was resigned, but did not feel clearness to
proceed; and my own weakness, and the necessity of divine instruction, was
impressed upon me.

I was, for a time, as one who knew not what to do, and was tossed as in a
tempest; under which affliction, the doctrine of Christ "Take no thought for
the morrow," arose livingly before me. I remembered it was some days before
they expected the vessel to sail, and was favored to get into a good degree of
stillness; and having been near two days in town, I believe my obedience to my
heavenly Father consisted in returning homeward; and then I went over amongst
friends on the Jersey shore, and tarried till the morning on which they had
appointed to sail: and as I lay in bed the latter part of that night, my mind
was comforted; and I felt what I esteemed a fresh confirmation, that it was the
Lord's will, that I should pass through some further exercises near home.

So I went home, and still felt like a sojourner with my family: and in the
fresh spring of pure love, had some labors in a private way amongst friends,
on a subject relating to truth's testimony; under which, I had frequently been
exercised in heart for some years. I remember, as I walked on the road under
this exercise, that passage in Ezekiel came fresh before me: Whithersoever
their faces were turned, thither they went. and I was graciously helped to
discharge my duty, in the fear and dread of the Almighty.

After a few weeks, it pleased the Lord to visit me with a pleurisy; and after
I had lain a few days, and felt the disorder very grievous, I was thoughtful
how it might end.

I had of late, through various exercises, been much weaned from the pleasant
things of this life; and I now thought, if it was the Lord's will to put an end
to my labors, and graciously receive me into the arms of his mercy, death
would be acceptable to me; but if it was his will to farther refine me under
affliction, and make me, in any degree, useful in his church, I desired not to
die. I may, with thankfulness, say, that in this case I felt resignedness
wrought in me, and had no inclination to send for a doctor; believing, if it
was the Lord's will, through outward means, to raise me up, some sympathizing
friends would be sent to minister to me; which were accordingly: but though I
was carefully attended, yet the disorder was, at times, so heavy, that I had no
thoughts of recovery: one night in particular, my bodily distress was great; my
feet grew cold, and cold increased up my legs toward my body; and, at that
time, I had no inclination to ask my nurse to apply anything warm to my feet,
expecting my end was near: and after I had lain near ten hours in this
condition, I closed my eyes, thinking whether I might now be delivered out of
the body; but in these awful moments, my mind was livingly opened to behold the
church; and strong engagements were begotten in me, for the everlasting
well-being of my fellow creatures: and I felt, in the spring of pure love, that
I might remain some time longer in the body, in filling up, according to my
measure, that which remains of the affections of Christ and in laboring for
the good of the church; after which, I requested my nurse to apply warmth to my
feet; and I revived: and the next night, feeling a weighty exercise of spirit,
and having a solid friend sitting up with me, I requested him to write what I
said; which he did, as follows:

"Fourth day of the first month, 1770, about five in the morning. -- I have
seen in the Light of the Lord, that the day is approaching, when the man that
is the most wise in human policy, shall be the greatest fool; and the arm that
is mighty to support injustice, shall be broken to pieces: the enemies of
righteousness shall make a terrible rattle, and shall mightily torment one
another; for He that is omnipotent is rising up to judgment, and will plead the
cause of the oppressed; and he commanded me to open the vision."

Near a week after this, feeling my mind livingly opened, I sent for a
neighbor, who, at my request, wrote as follows:

"The place of prayer is a precious habitation; for I now saw that the prayers
of the saints was precious incense: and a trumpet was given me, that I might
sound forth this language; that the children might hear it, and be invited
together to this precious habitation, where the prayers of the saints, as
precious incense, arises up before the throne of God and the Lamb -- I saw
this habitation to be safe; to be inwardly quiet, when there were great
stirrings and commotions in the world."

"Prayer, at this day, in pure resignation, is a precious place: the trumpet is
sounded, the call goes forth to the church, that she gather to the place of
pure inward prayer; and her habitation is safe."

CHAP. XI.
His preparing to visit friends in England -- His embarking at Chester, in
company with Samuel Emlen, in a ship bound to London -- His deep exercise, in
observing the difficulties and hardships the common sailors are exposed to --
Considerations on the dangers to which youth are exposed, in being trained to a
seafaring life; and its inconsistency with a pious education -- His thoughts
in a storm at sea: with many instructive contemplations on the voyage -- And
his arrival at London.

HAVING been some time under a religious concern to prepare for crossing the
seas, in order to visit friends in the northern parts of England, and more
particularly in Yorkshire: after weighty consideration, I thought it expedient
to inform friends, at our monthly meeting at Burlington, of it; who, having
unity with me therein, gave me a certificate; and I afterward communicated the
same to our quarterly meeting, and they likewise certified their concurrence
therewith. Some time after which, at the general spring-meeting of ministers
and elders, I thought it my duty to acquaint them of the religious exercise
which attended my mind; with which, they likewise signified their unity by a
certificate, dated the twenty-fourth day of the eighth month, 1772, directed to
friends in Great Britain.

In the fourth month following, I thought the time was come for me to make some
enquiry for a suitable conveyance; being apprehensive, that as my concern was
principally toward the northern parts of England, it would be most proper to go
in a vessel bound to Liverpool or Whitehaven: and while I was at Philadelphia,
deliberating on this occasion, I was informed, that my beloved friend Samuel
Emlen, jun. intending to go to London; and having taken a passage for himself
in the cabin of the ship, called Mary and Elizabeth, of which James Sparks was
master, and John Head, of the city of Philadelphia, one of the owners; and I
feeling a draft in my mind toward the steerage of the same ship, went first and
opened to Samuel the feeling I had concerning it.

My beloved friend wept when I spoke to him, and appeared glad that I had
thoughts of going in the vessel with him, though my prospect was toward the
steerage; and he offering to go with me, we went on board, first into the
cabin, a commodious room, and then into the steerage; where we sat down on a
chest, the sailors being busy about us: then the owner of the ship came, and
sat down with us.

Here my mind was turned toward Christ, the heavenly counselor; and I feeling,
at this time, my own will subjected, my heart was contrite before him.

A motion was made by the owner, to go and set in the cabin, as a place more
retired; but I felt easy to leave the ship, and made no agreement as to a
passage in her; but told the owner, if I took a passage in the ship, I believed
it would be in the steerage; but did not say much as to my exercise in that
case.

After I went to my lodgings, and the case was a little known in town, a friend
laid before me the great inconvenience attending a passage in the steerage;
which, for a time, appeared very discouraging to me.

I soon after went to bed, and my mind was under a deep exercise before the
Lord; whose helping hand was manifested to me as I slept that night, and his
love strengthened my heart: and in the morning, I went with two friends on
board the vessel again; and after a short time spent therein, I went with
Samuel Emlen to the house of the owner; to whom, in the hearing of Samuel only,
I opened my exercise, in substance as follows, in relation to a scruple I felt
with regard to a passage in the cabin:

I told the owner, that on the outside of that part of the ship where the
cabin was, I observed sundry sorts of carved work and imagery; and that in the
cabin I observed some superfluity of workmanship of several sorts; and that
according to the ways of men's reckoning, the sum of money to be paid for a
passage in that apartment, has some relation to the expense in furnishing it
to please the minds of such who give way to a conformity to this world; and
that in this case, as in other cases, the moneys received from the passengers,
are calculated to answer every expense relating to their passage, and amongst
the rest of these superfluities: and that in this case, I felt a scruple with
regard to paying my money to defray such expenses.

As my mind was now opened, I told the owner, that I had, at several times in
my travels, seen great oppressions on this continent; at which my heart had
been much affected, and brought into a feeling of the state of the sufferers.
And having many times been engaged, in the fear and love of God, to labor with
those under whom the oppressed have been borne down and afflicted; I have often
perceived, that a view to get riches, and provide estates for children, to live
conformable to customs, which stand in that spirit wherein men have regard to
the honors of this world -- that in the pursuit of these things, I had seen
many entangled in the spirit of oppression; and the exercise of my soul had
been such, that I could not find peace, in joining in any thing which I saw was
against that wisdom which is pure.

After this, I agreed for a passage in the steerage; and hearing in town that
Joseph White had a desire to see me, I felt the reviving of a desire to see
him, and went then to his house, and next day home; where I tarried two nights:
and then early in the morning, I parted with my family, under a sense of the
humbling hand of God upon me; and going to Philadelphia, had opportunity with
several of my beloved friends; who appeared to be concerned for me, on account
of the unpleasant situation of that part of the vessel, where I was likely to
lodge.

In these opportunities, my mind, through the mercies of the Lord, was kept
low, in an inward waiting for his help; and friends having expressed their
desire, that I might have a place more convenient than the steerage, did not
urge, but appeared disposed to leave me to the Lord.

Having stayed two nights in Philadelphia, I went the next day to Derby
monthly meeting; where, through the strength of divine love, my heart was
enlarged toward the youth then present; under which I was helped to labor in
some tenderness of spirit. Then lodging at William Horne's, I, with one friend,
went to Chester; where meeting with Samuel Emlen, we went on board the first
day of the fifth month, 1772: and as I sat down alone, on a seat on the deck, I
felt a satisfactory evidence, that my proceedings were not in my own will, but
under the power of the cross of Christ.

Seventh day of the fifth month: have had rough weather, mostly since I came on
board; and the passengers, James Reynolds, John Till-Adams, Sarah Logan and her
hired maid, and John Bispham, all sea-sick, more or less, at times; from which
sickness, through the tender mercies of my heavenly Father, I have been
preserved: my afflictions now being of another kind.

There appeared an openness in the minds of the master of the ship and in the
cabin passengers toward me; we were often together on the deck, and sometimes
in the cabin.

My mind, through the merciful help of the Lord, has been preserved in a good
degree watchful, and inward; and have, this day, great cause to be thankful, in
that I remain to feel quietness of mind.

As my lodgings in the steerage, now near a week, has afforded me sundry
opportunities of seeing, hearing, and feeling, with respect to the life and
spirit of many poor sailors: an inward exercise of soul has attended me, in
regard to placing out children and youth where they may be likely to be
exampled and instructed in the pure fear of the Lord; and I being much amongst
the seamen, have from a motion of love, sundry times taken opportunities, with
one of them at a time alone; and in a free conversation, labored to turn their
minds toward the fear of the Lord: and this day we had a meeting in the cabin,
where my heart was contrite under a feeling of divine love.

Now concerning lads being trained up as seamen: I believe a communication from
one part of the world to some other parts of it, by sea, is, at times,
consistent with the will of our heavenly Father; and to educate some youth in
the practice of sailing, I believe may be right: but how lamentable is the
present corruption of the world! how impure are the channels through which trade
has a conveyance! how great is that danger, to which poor lads are now
exposed, when placed on shipboard to learn the art of sailing?

Five lads, training up for the seas, were now on board this ship; two of them
brought up amongst our society; one of which has a right amongst friends, by
name James Nailor, to whose father James Nailor, mentioned in Sewel's history,
appears to have been uncle.

I often feel a tenderness of heart toward these poor lads; and, at times, look
at them as though they were my children according to the flesh.

O that all may take heed and beware of covetousness! O that all may learn of
Christ, who was meek and low of heart! Then in faithfully following him, he
will teach us to be content with food and raiment, without respect to the
customs or honors of this world.

Men thus redeemed, will feel a tender concern for their fellow creatures, and
a desire that those in the lowest stations may be assisted and encouraged; and
where owners of ships attain to the perfect law of liberty, and are doers of
the word, these will be blessed in their deeds.

A ship at sea commonly sails all night, and the seamen take their watches four
hours at a time.

Rising to work in the night, is not commonly pleasant in any case; but in dark
rainy nights it is very disagreeable, even though each man were furnished with
all conveniences: but if men must go out at midnight to help manage the ship in
the rain, and having small room to sleep and lay their garments in, are often
beset to furnish themselves for the watch; their garments or some thing
relating to their business being wanting, and not easily found; when from the
urgency occasioned by high winds, they are hastened and called up suddenly:
here is a trial of patience on the poor sailors, and the poor lads their
companions.

If after they have been on deck several hours in the night, and come down into
the steerage soaking wet, and are so close stowed that proper convenience for
change of garment is not easily come at, but for want of proper room their wet
garments thrown in heaps, and sometimes, through much crowding, are trodden
under foot, in going to their lodgings and getting out of them, and great
difficulties, at times, each one to find his own: here are trials on the poor
sailors.

Now as I have been with them in my lodge, my heart has often yearned for
them; and tender desires been raised in me, that all owners and masters of
vessels may dwell in the love of God, and therein act uprightly; and by seeking
less for gain, and looking carefully to their ways, may earnestly labor to
remove all cause of provocation from the poor seamen, either to fret or use
excess of strong drink; for, indeed, the poor creatures, at times, in the wet
and cold, seem to apply to strong drink to supply the want of other convenience.

Great reformation in the world is wanting, and the necessity of it, amongst
these who do business on great waters, has, at this time, been abundantly
opened before me.

The eighth day of the fifth month. -- This morning the clouds gathered, the
wind blew strong from south-eastward, and before noon increased to that degree
that sailing appeared dangerous: the seamen then bound up some of their sails,
and took down some; and the storm increasing, they put the dead lights, so
called, into the cabbin-windows, and lighted a lamp as at night.

The wind now blew vehemently, and the sea wrought to that degree, that an
awful seriousness prevailed in the cabin, in which I spent, I believe, about
seventeen hours; for I believed the poor wet toiling seamen, had need of all
the room in the crowded steerage, and the cabin passengers had given me
frequent invitations.

They ceased now from sailing; and put the vessel in the posture, called
lying-to.

My mind in this tempest, through the gracious assistance of the Lord, was
preserved in a good degree of resignation; and I felt, at times, a few words in
his love to my ship-mates, in regard to the all sufficiency of Him who formed
the great deep, and whose care is so extensive, that a sparrow falls not
without his notice: and thus in a tender frame of mind, spoke to them of the
necessity of our yielding, in true obedience, to the instructions of our
heavenly Father, who sometimes, through adversities, intends our refinement.

About eleven at night, I went out on the deck, when the sea wrought
exceedingly, and the high foaming waves, all round about, had in some sort the
appearance of fire; but did not give much, if any, light.

The sailor, then at the helm, said, he lately saw a corposant at the head of
the mast.

About this time I observed the master of the ship ordered the carpenter to
keep on the deck; and though he said little, I apprehended his care was, that the
carpenter with his axe might be in readiness, in case of any extremity.

Soon after this, the vehemence of the wind abated; and before morning, they
again put the ship under sail.

The tenth day of the month, and first of the week, it being fine weather, we
had a meeting in the cabin, at which most of the seamen were present: this
meeting to me was a strengthening time.

The thirteenth day of the month. As I continue to lodge in the steerage, I
feel an openness this morning, to express something further of the state of my
mind, in respect to poor lads bound apprentice to learn the art of sailing. As
I believe sailing is of some use in the world, a labor of soul attends me,
that the pure counsel of truth may be humbly waited for in this case, by all
concerned in the business of the seas.

A pious father, whose mind is exercised for the everlasting welfare of his
child, may not, with a peaceable mind, place him out to an employment amongst a
people, whose common course of life is manifestly corrupt and profane; so
great is the present defect amongst seafaring men, in regard to piety and
virtue: and through an abundant traffic, and many ships of war, so many people
are employed on the sea, that this subject of placing lads to the employment
appears very weighty.

Profane examples are very corrupting, and very forcible. And as my mind, day
after day, and night after night, has been affected with a sympathizing
tenderness toward poor children, put to the employment of sailors, I have
sometimes had weighty conversation with the sailors in the steerage, who were
mostly respectful to me, and more and more so the longer I was with them: they
mostly appeared to take kindly what I said to them; but their minds have
appeared to be so deeply impressed with that almost universal depravity amongst
sailors, that the poor creatures in their answers to me on this subject, have
revived in my remembrance, that of the degenerate Jews a little before the
captivity, as repeated by Jeremiah the prophet, "There is no hope."

Now under this exercise, a sense of the desire of outward gain prevailing
amongst us, has felt grievous; and a strong call to the professed followers of
Christ, has been raised in me; that, all may take heed, lest, through loving
this present world, they be found in a continued neglect of duty, with respect
to a faithful labor for a reformation.

Silence, as to every motion proceeding from the love of money, and an humble
waiting upon God, to know his will concerning us, has now appeared necessary:
he alone is able to strengthen us to dig deep, to remove all which lies between
us and the safe foundation, and so direct us in our outward employments, that
pure universal love may shine forth in our proceedings.

Desires arising from the spirit of truth, are pure desires; and when a mind,
divinely opened toward a young generation, is made sensible of corrupting
examples, powerfully working, and extensively spreading amongst them, how
moving is the prospect!

A great trade to the coast of Africa for slaves; of which I now heard frequent
conversation among the sailors!

A great trade in that which is raised and prepared through grievous oppression!

A great trade in superfluity of workmanship, formed to please the pride and
vanity of people's minds!

Great and extensive is that depravity, which prevails amongst the poor sailors!

When I remember that saying of the Most High, through his prophet, This people
have I formed for myself; they shall show forth my praise: and think of placing
children amongst them, to learn the practice of sailing, the consistency of it
with a pious education, seems to me like that mentioned by the prophet, There
is no answer from God.

In a world of dangers and difficulties, like a desolate thorny wilderness, how
precious! how comfortable! how safe! are the leadings of Christ, the good
shepherd; who said, "I know my sheep; and am known of mine."

The sixteenth day of the month. Wind for several days past often high, what
the sailors call squally, rough sea and frequent rains. This last night a very
trying night to the poor seamen; the water, chief part of the night, running
over the main deck, and sometimes breaking waves came on the quarter deck. The
latter part of the night, as I lay in bed, my mind was humbled under the power
of divine love; and resignedness to the great Creator of the earth and the
seas, renewedly wrought in me, whose fatherly care over his children felt
precious to my soul: and desires were now renewed in me, to embrace every
opportunity of being inwardly acquainted with the hardships and difficulties of
my fellow creatures, and to labor in his love for the spreading of pure
universal righteousness on the earth. The opportunities being frequent of
hearing conversation amongst the sailors, in respect to the voyages to Africa,
and the manner of bringing the deeply oppressed slaves into our islands. The
thoughts of their condition, frequently in chains and setters on board the
vessels, with hearts loaded with grief, under the apprehensions of miserable
slavery; my mind was frequently opened to meditate on these things.

On the seventeenth day of the month, and first of the week, we had a meeting
in the cabin; to which the seamen generally came. My spirit was contrite
before the Lord; whose love, at this time, affected my heart.

This afternoon I felt a tender sympathy of soul, with my poor wife and family
left behind; in which state, my heart was enlarged in desires, that they may
walk in that humble obedience wherein the everlasting Father may be their guide
and support, through all the difficulties in this world; and a sense of that
gracious assistance, through which my mind has been strengthened to take up the
cross and leave them, to travel in the love of truth, has begotten
thankfulness in my heart to our great Helper.

On the twenty-fourth day of the month, and first of the week, a clear pleasant
morning: and as I sat on deck, I felt a reviving in my nature; which, through
much rainy weather, and high winds, being shut up in a close unhealthy air, was
weakened.

Several nights of late I felt breathing difficult; that a little after the
rising of the second watch (which is about midnight) I got up, and stood, I
believe, near an hour, with my face near the hatchway, to get the fresh air at
the small vacancy under the hatch door; which is commonly shut down, partly to
keep out rain, and sometimes to keep the breaking waves from dashing into the
steerage.

I may, with thankfulness to the Father of mercies, acknowledge, that in my
present weak state, my mind has been supported to bear the affliction with
patience; and have looked at the present dispensation as a kindness from the
great Father of mankind, who, in this my floating pilgrimage, is in some degree
bringing me to feel that, which many thousands of my fellow creatures often
suffer in a greater degree.

My appetite failing, the trial has been the heavier; and I have felt tender
breathings in my soul after God, the fountain of comfort, whose inward help
has supplied, at times, the want of outward convenience: and strong desires
have attended me, that his family, who are acquainted with the movings of his
Holy Spirit, may be so redeemed from the love of money, and from that spirit in
which men seek honor one of another; that in all business, by sea or land, we
may constantly keep in view the coming of his kingdom on earth, as it is in
heaven; and by faithfully following this safe guide, show forth examples,
tending to lead out of that under which the creation groans!

This day we had a meeting in the cabin; in which I was favored in some
degree to experience the fulfilling of that saying of the prophet, The Lord
has been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in their distress;
for which, my heart is bowed in thankfulness before him.

The twenty-eighth day of the month: wet weather of late, small winds inclining
to calms; our seamen have cast a lead, I suppose about one hundred fathom, but
find no bottom: foggy weather this morning.

Through the kindness of the great Preserver of men, my mind remains quiet; and
a degree of exercise, from day to day, attends me, that the pure peaceable
government of Christ may spread and prevail amongst mankind.

The leading on of a young generation, in that pure way, in which the wisdom of
this world has no place: where parents and tutors, humbly waiting for the
heavenly Counselor, may example them in the truth, as it is in Jesus. This,
for several days, has been the exercise of my mind; O how safe, how quiet is
that state, where the soul stands in pure obedience to the voice of Christ, and
a watchful care is maintained, not to follow the voice of the stranger!

Here Christ is felt to be our shepherd; and under his leading, people are
brought to a stability: and where he does not lead forward, we are bound in the
bonds of pure love, to stand still and wait upon him. In the love of money, and
in the wisdom of this world, business is proposed, then the urgency of affairs
push forward; nor can the mind, in this state, discern the good and perfect
will of God concerning us.

The love of God is manifested, in graciously calling us to come out of that
which stands in confusion; but if we bow not in the name of Jesus; if we give
not up those prospects of gain, which, in the wisdom of this world, are open
before us, but say in our hearts, I must needs go on; and in going on, I hope
to keep as near to the purity of truth, as the business before me will admit
of: here the mind remains entangled, and the shining of the light of life into
the soul is obstructed.

This query opens in my mind in the love of Christ. Where shall a pious father
place his son apprentice, to be instructed in the practice of crossing the
seas; and have faith to believe, that Christ, our holy Shepherd, leads him to
place his son there?

Surely the Lord calls to mourning and deep humiliation, that in his fear we
may be instructed, and led safely on through the great difficulties and
perplexities in this present age.

In an entire subjection of our wills, the Lord graciously opens a way for his
people, where all their wants are bounded by his wisdom; and here we experience
the substance of what Moses the prophet figured out in the water of separation,
as a purification from sin.

Esau is mentioned as a child red all over, like a hairy garment: in Esau is
represented the natural will of man. In preparing the water of separation, a
red heifer without blemish, on which there had been no yoke, was to be slain,
and her blood sprinkled by the priest seven times toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: then her skin, her flesh, and all pertaining to her, was to be
burnt without the camp; and of her ashes the water was prepared. Thus the
crucifying the old man, or natural will, is represented; and hence comes a
separation from that carnal mind, which is death.

He who touches the dead body of a man, and purisieth not himself with the
water of separation, he defiles the tabernacle of the Lord; he is unclean.
Numb. xix. 13.

If any, through the love of gain, go forth into business, wherein they dwell
as amongst the tombs, and touch the bodies of those who are dead: if these,
through the infinite love of God, feel the power of the cross of Christ to
crucify them to the world, and therein learn humbly to follow the divine
leader: -- here is the judgment of this world -- here the prince of this world
is cast out.

The water of separation is felt; and though we have been amongst the slain, and
through the desire of gain have touched the dead body of a man; yet, in the
purifying love of Christ, we are washed in the water of separation, are brought
off from that business, from that gain, and from that fellowship, which was not
agreeable to his holy will: and I have felt a renewed confirmation in the time
of this voyage, that the Lord, in his infinite love, is calling to his visited
children, so to give up all outward possessions, and means of getting
treasures, that his Holy Spirit may have free course in their hearts, and
direct them in all their proceedings.

To feel the substance pointed at in this figure, man must know death, as to
his own will.

"No man can see God, and live:" This was spoken by the Almighty to Moses the
prophet; and opened by our blessed Redeemer.

As death comes on our own wills, and a new life is formed in us, the heart is
purified, and prepared to understand clearly. Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God. In purity of heart, the mind is divinely opened to
behold the nature of universal righteousness, or the righteousness of the
kingdom of God. No man has seen the Father, save he that is of God; he has
seen the Father.

The natural mind is active about the things of this life; and in this natural
activity, business is proposed, and a will in us to go forward in it. And as
long as this natural will remains unsubjected, so long there remains an
obstruction against the clearness of divine light operating in us; but when we
love God with all our heart, and with all our strength; then, in this love, we
love our neighbors as ourselves; and a tenderness of heart is felt toward all
people for whom Christ died, even such who as to outward circumstances may be
to us as the Jews were to the Samaritans. Who is my neighbor? See this
question answered by our Savior, Luke x. 30.

In this love we can say, that Jesus is the Lord; and the reformation in our
souls, manifested in a full reformation of our lives, wherein all things are
new, and all things are of God; 2 Cor. v. 18. in this the desire of gain is
subjected.

When employment is honestly followed in the light of truth; and people become
diligent in business, fervent in spirit; serving the Lord: Romans xii. 11. Here
the name is opened: This is the name by which he shall be called, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jere. xxiii. 6. Oh, how precious is this name! It is like
ointment poured out. The chaste virgins are in love with the Redeemer; and for
the promoting his peaceable kingdom in the world, are content to endure
hardness like good soldiers; and are so separated in spirit, from the desire of
riches, that in their employments, they become extensively careful to give none
offense, neither to Jews nor heathen, nor the church of Christ.

On the thirty-first day of the month, and first of the week, we had a meeting
in the cabin, with near all the ship's company; the whole being near thirty.
In this meeting the Lord, in mercy, favored us with the extendings of his love.

The second day of the sixth month. Last evening the seamen found bottom at
about seventy fathom.

This morning fair wind, and pleasant: and as I sat on deck, my heart was
overcome with the love of Christ, and melted into contrition before him: and in
this state, the prospect of that work, to which I have felt my mind drawn when
in my native land, being in some degree opened before me, I felt like a little
child; and my cries were put up to my heavenly Father for preservation, that in
a humble dependence on him, my soul may be strengthened in his love, and kept
inwardly waiting for his counsel.

This afternoon we saw that part of England called the Lizard.

Some dunghill fowls yet remained of those the passengers took for their
sea-store: I believe about fourteen perished in the storms at sea, by the waves
breaking over the quarter deck; and a considerable number with sickness, at
different times. -- I observed the cocks crew coming down the Delaware, and
while we were near the land; but afterward, I think I did not hear one of them
crow till we came near the land in England, when they again crowed a few times.

In observing their dull appearance at sea, and the pining sickness of some of
them, I often remembered the fountain of goodness, who gave being to all
creatures, and whose love extends to that of caring for the sparrows; and
believe, where the love of God is verily perfected, and the true spirit of
government watchfully attended to, a tenderness toward all creatures made
subject to us will be experienced; and a care felt in us, that we do not lessen
that sweetness of life, in the animal creation, which the great Creator intends
for them under our government.

The fourth day of the month. Wet weather, high winds, and so dark that we
could see but a little way. I perceived our seamen were apprehensive of danger
of missing the Channel; which, I understood, was narrow. In a while, it grew
lighter; and they saw the land, and they knew where we were. Thus the Father of
mercies was pleased to try us with the sight of dangers; and then graciously,
from time to time, deliver from them: thus sparing our lives, that in humility
and reverence, we may walk before him, and put our trust in him.

About noon a pilot came off from Dover; where my beloved friend Samuel Emlen
went on shore, and thence to London, about seventy-two miles by land; but I
felt easy in staying in the ship.

The seventh day of the month, and first of the week. Clear morning, lay at
anchor for the tide, and had a parting meeting with the ship's company; in
which, my heart was enlarged in a fervent concern for them, that they may come
to experience salvation through Christ. -- Had a head wind up the Thames; lay
sometimes at anchor; saw many ships passing, and some at anchor near; and had
large opportunity of feeling the spirit in which the poor bewildered sailors
too generally live. -- That lamentable degeneracy, which so much prevails on
the people employed on the seas, so affected my heart, that I may not easily
convey the feeling I have had to another.

The present state of the seafaring life in general, appears so opposite to
that of a pious education; so full of corruption, and extreme alienation from
God; so full of examples, the most dangerous to young people, that in looking
toward a young generation, I feel a care for them, that they may have an
education different from the present education of lads at sea: and that all of
us, who are acquainted with the pure gospel spirit, may lay this case to heart,
may remember the lamentable corruptions which attends the conveyance of
merchandise across the seas, and so abide in the love of Christ, that being
delivered from the love of money, from the entangling expenses of a curious,
delicate luxurious life, we may learn contentment with a little; and promote
the seafaring life no further, than that spirit, which leads into all truth,
attends us in our proceedings.

CHAP. XII.
His attending the yearly meeting in London; and after it, proceeding toward
Yorkshire, visiting several quarterly and other meetings in the counties of
Hertford, Warwick, Oxford, Nottingham, York, and Westmoreland; and thence again
into Yorkshire, and to the city of York; with some instructive thoughts and
observations, and letters on diverse subjects -- His hearing of the decease of
William Hunt; and some account of him -- His sickness at York; and end of his
pilgrimage there.

ON the eighth day of the sixth month, 1772, we landed at London; and I went
straightway to the yearly meeting of ministers and elders, which had been
gathered (I suppose) about half an hour.

In this meeting, my mind was humbly contrite: in the afternoon, the meeting of
business opened; which, by adjournments, held near a week. -- in these
meetings, I often felt a living concern for the establishment of friends in the
pure life of truth: and my heart was enlarged in the meeting of ministers,
meeting of business, and in several meetings of public worship; and I felt my
mind united in true love, to the faithful laborers now gathered at this
yearly meeting.

On the fifteenth day of the month, I left London, and went to a
quarterly meeting at Hertford.

The first day of the seventh month. I have been at quarterly-meetings at
Sherrington, Northampton, Banbury and Shipton; and had sundry meetings between:
my mind has been bowed under a sense of divine goodness manifested amongst us;
my heart has been often enlarged in true love, both amongst ministers and
elders, and in public meetings; that through the Lord's goodness, I believe it
has been a fresh visitation to many, in particular to the youth.

The seventeenth day of the month. Was this day at Birmingham: have been at
meetings at Coventry, Warwick, in Oxfordshire, and sundry other places; have
felt the humbling hand of the Lord upon me; and through his tender mercies find
peace in the labors I have gone through.

The twenty-sixth day of the month. I have continued traveling northward,
visiting meetings: was this day at Nottingham; which, in the forenoon
especially, was, through divine love, a heart-tendering season: next day had a
meeting in a friend's house with friends children and some friends; this, through
the strengthening arm of the Lord, was a time to be thankfully remembered.

The second day of the eighth month, and first of the week, was this day at
Sheffield, a large inland town: have been at sundry meetings last week; and
feel inward thankfulness for that divine support, which has been graciously
extended to me.

The ninth day of the month, and first of the week, was at Rushworth: have
lately passed through some painful labor; but have been comforted, under a
sense of that divine visitation, which I feel extended toward many young people.

The sixteenth day of the month, and first of the week, was at Settle: it has
of late been a time of inward poverty; under which, my mind has been preserved
in a watchful tender state, feeling for the mind of the holy Leader, and find
peace in the labors I have passed through.

On enquiry, in many places, I find the price of rye about five shillings,
wheat about eight shillings, per bushel; oatmeal twelve shillings for an
hundred and twenty pounds; mutton from threepence to five-pence per pound;
bacon, from seven-pence to nine-pence; cheese, from four-pence to sixpence;
butter, from eight-pence to ten-pence; house-rent, for a poor man, from
twenty-five shillings to forty shillings per year, to be paid weekly; wood, for
fire, very scarce and dear; coal, in some places, two shillings and sixpence
per hundred weight; but near the pits, not a quarter so much. O, may the
wealthy consider the poor!

The wages of laboring men in several counties toward London, is ten-pence per
day in common business, the employer finds small-beer, and the labourer finds
his own food; but in harvest and hay time, wages is about one shilling per day,
and the labourer has all his diet. In some parts of the north of England, poor
laboring men have their food where they work; and appear, in common, to do
rather better than nearer London: industrious women, who spin in the factories,
get some four-pence, some five-pence, and so on to six, seven, eight, nine or
ten-pence per day, and find their own house-room and diet. Great numbers of
poor people live chiefly on bread and water in the southern parts of England,
and some in the northern parts; and there are many poor children not taught
even to read. May those who have plenty, lay these things to heart!

Stage-coaches frequently go upwards of an hundred miles in twenty-four hours;
and I have heard friends say, in several places, that it is common for horses
to be killed with hard driving, and many others driven till they grow blind.

Post-boys pursue their business, each one to his stage, all night through the
winter: some boys, who ride long stages, suffer greatly on winter nights; and,
at several places, I have heard of their being froze to death. So great is the
hurry in the spirit of this world, that in aiming to do business quick, and to
gain wealth, the creation, at this day, does loudly groan!

As my journey has been without a horse, I have had several offers of being
assisted on my way in these stage-coaches; but have not been in them: nor have
I had freedom to send letters by these posts, in the present way of their
riding; the stages being so fixed, and one boy dependant on another as to time,
that they commonly go upward of one hundred miles in twenty-four hours; and in
the cold long winter nights, the poor boys suffer much.

I heard in America of the way of these posts; and cautioned friends in the
general meeting of ministers and elders at Philadelphia, and in the
yearly meeting of ministers and elders at London, not to send letters to me on
any common occasion by post. And though, on this account, I may be likely to
hear seldomer from my family left behind; yet, for righteousness sake, I am,
through divine favor, made content.

I have felt great distress of mind, since I came on this island, on account of
the members of our society being mixed with the world in various sorts of
business and traffic, carried on in impure channels. Great is the trade to
Africa for slaves! and in loading these ships, abundance of people are employed
in the factories; amongst whom are many of our society. Friends, in early
times, refused, on a religious principle, to make or trade in superfluities; of
which, we have many large testimonies on record: but for want of faithfulness,
some gave way; even some, whose examples were of note in our society; and from
thence others took more liberty. Members of our society worked in
superfluities, and bought and sold them; and thus dimness of sight came over
many: at length, friends got into the use of some superfluities in dress, and
in the furniture of their houses; and this has spread from less to more, till
superfluity of some kinds is common amongst us.

In this declining state, many look at the example one of another, and too much
neglect the pure feeling of truth. Of late years, a deep exercise has attended
my mind, that friends may dig deep, may carefully cast forth the loose matter,
and get down to the Rock, the sure foundation, and there hearken to that divine
voice which gives a clear and certain sound; and I have felt in that which does
not deceive, that if friends, who have known the truth, keep in that tenderness
of heart, where all views of outward gain are given up, and their trust is only
on the Lord, he will graciously lead some to be patterns of deep self-denial in
things relating to trade and handicraft labor; and that some, who have plenty
of the treasures of this world, will example in a plain frugal life, and pay
wages to such whom they may hire, more liberally than is now customary in some
places.

The twenty-third day of the month, was this day at Preston-Patrick, and had a
comfortable meeting. I have, several times, been entertained at the houses of
friends, who had sundry things about them which had the appearance of outward
greatness; and as I have kept inward, way has opened for conversation with
such in private, in which divine goodness has favored us together, with
heart-tendering times.

The twenty-sixth day of the month. Being now at George Crosfields, in the
county of Westmoreland, I feel a concern to commit to writing, that which to me
has been a case uncommon.

In a time of sickness with the pleurisy, a little upward of two years and a
half ago, I was brought so near the gates of death, that I forgot my name:
being then desirous to know who I was, I saw a mass of matter of a dull gloomy
color, between the south and the east; and was informed, that this mass was
human beings in as great misery as they could be, and live; and that I was
mixed in with them, and that henceforth I might not consider myself as a
distinct or separate being. In this state I remained several hours. I then
heard a soft melodious voice, more pure and harmonious than any I had heard
with my ears before; I believed it was the voice of an angel, who spoke to the
other angels: the words were -- John Woolman is dead. I soon remembered that I
once was John Woolman; and being assured that I was alive in the body, I
greatly wondered what that heavenly voice could mean.

I believed, beyond doubting, that it was the voice of an holy angel; but, as
yet, it was a mystery to me.

I was then carried in spirit to the mines, where poor oppressed people were
digging rich treasures for those called christians; and heard them blaspheme
the name of Christ, at which I was grieved; for his name to me was precious.

Then I was informed, that these heathen were told, that those who oppressed
them were the followers of Christ; and they said amongst themselves, If Christ
directed them to use us in this sort, then Christ is a cruel tyrant.

All this time the song of the angel remained a mystery; and in the morning, my
dear wife and some others coming to my bedside, I asked them, if they knew who
I was: and they telling me, I was John Woolman, thought I was lightheaded: for
I told them not what the angel said, nor was I disposed to talk much to any
one; but was very desirous to get so deep, that I might understand this mystery.

My tongue was often so dry, that I could not speak till I had moved it about
and gathered some moisture, and as I lay still for a time, at length I felt
divine power prepare my mouth that I could speak; and then I said, I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ that lives
in me: and the life I now live in the flesh, is by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me.

Then the mystery was opened; and I perceived there was joy in heaven over a
sinner who had repented; and that that language ( John Woolman is dead) meant
no more than the death of my own will.

Soon after this I coughed, and raised much bloody matter; which I had not done
during this vision: and now my natural understanding returned as before. --
Here I saw, that people getting silver vessels to set off their tables at
entertainments, was often stained with worldly glory; and that in the present
state of things, I should take heed how I fed myself from out of silver vessels.

Soon after my recovery, I, going to our monthly meeting, dined at a friend's
house where drink was brought in silver vessels, and not in any other; and I
wanting some drink, told him my case with weeping: and he ordered some drink
for me in another vessel.

The like I afterward went through in several friend's houses in America, and
have also in England, since I came here: and have cause, with humble reverence,
to acknowledge the loving kindness of my heavenly Father, who has preserved me
in such a tender frame of mind, that none, I believe, have ever been offended
at what I have said on that occasion.

After this sickness, I spoke not in public meetings for worship for near one
year; but my mind was very often in company with the oppressed slaves, as I sat
in meetings: and though, under this dispensation, I was shut up from speaking,
yet the spring of the gospel ministry was, many times, livingly opened in me;
and the divine gift operated by abundance of weeping, in feeling the oppression
of this people. It being so long since I passed through this dispensation, and
the matter remaining fresh and livingly in my mind, I believe it safest for me
to commit it to writing.

The thirtieth day of the month. This morning I wrote a letter, in substance as
follows:

Beloved friend,
"MY mind is often affected as I pass along, under a sense of the state of many
poor people, who sit under that sort of ministry which requires much outward
labor to support it; and the loving kindness of our heavenly Father, in
opening a pure gospel ministry in this nation, has often raised thankfulness
in my heart to him. I often remember the conflicts of the faithful under
persecution, and now look at the free exercise of the pure gift uninterrupted
by outward laws, as a trust committed to us; which requires our deepest
gratitude, and most careful attention. I feel a tender concern, that the work
of reformation, so prosperously carried on in this land within a few ages past,
may go forward and spread amongst the nations; and may not go backward, through
dust gathering on our garments, who have been called to a work so great and so
precious."

"Last evening I had a little opportunity at thy house, with some of thy
family, in thy absence; in which I rejoiced: and feeling a sweetness on my mind
toward thee, I now endeavor to open a little of the feeling I had there."

"I have heard, that you, in these parts, have, at certain seasons, meetings of
conference, in relation to friends living up to our principles, in which
several meetings unite in one; with which I feel unity: I having, in some
measure, felt truth lead that way amongst friends in America; and have found,
my dear friend, that in these labors all superfluities in our own living, are
against us. I feel that pure love toward thee, in which there is freedom."

"I look at that precious gift bestowed on thee, with awfulness before Him who
gave it: and feel a care, that we may be so separated to the gospel of Christ,
that those things which proceed from the spirit of this world, may have no
place amongst us."

"Thy friend, "John Woolman."


I rested a few days, in body and mind, with our friend Jane Crosfield; who was
once in America: was, on the sixth day of the week, at Kendal in Westmoreland;
and at Greyrig meeting the thirtieth day of the month, and first of the week.

I have known poverty of late; and been graciously supported to keep in the
patience: and am thankful, under a sense of the goodness of the Lord toward
those that are of a contrite spirit.

The sixth day of the ninth month, and first of the week, was this day at
Counter-side; a large meeting house, and very full: and through the opening of
pure love, it was a strengthening time to me, and (I believe) to many more.

The thirteenth day of the month. Was this day at Richmond, a small meeting;
but the town's people coming in, the house was crowded: it was a time of heavy
labor; and (I believe) was a profitable meeting.

At this place I heard that my kinsman William Hunt from North Carolina, who
was on a religious visit to friends in England, departed this life on the ninth
day of the ninth month, instant, of the smallpox, at Newcastle. -- He appeared
in the ministry when a youth; and his labors therein were of good savor. He
traveled much in that work in America. I once heard him say in public
testimony, that his concern was (in that visit) to be devoted to the service of
Christ so fully, that he might not spend one minute in pleasing himself: which
words, joined with his example, was a means of stirring up the pure mind in me.

Having of late traveled often in wet weather, through narrow streets in towns
and villages, where dirtiness under foot, and the scent arising from that
filth, which more or less infects the air of all thick settled towns; and I
being but weakly, have felt distress both in body and mind with that which is
impure.

In these journies I have been where much cloth has been dyed; and sundry
times walked over ground, where much of their dye stuffs have drained away.

Here I have felt a longing in my mind, that people might come into cleanness
of spirit, cleanness of person, cleanness about their houses and garments.

Some, who are great, carry delicacy to a great height themselves, and yet the
real cleanliness is not generally promoted. Dies being invented partly to
please the eye, and partly to hide dirt, I have felt in this weak state,
traveling in dirtiness and affected with unwholesome scents, a strong desire
that the nature of dyeing cloth to hide dirt may be more fully considered.

To hide dirt in our garments, appears opposite to real cleanliness.

To wash garments, and keep them sweet, this appears cleanly.

Through giving way to hiding dirt in our garments, a spirit which would cover
that which is disagreeable, is strengthened.

Real cleanness becomes a holy people: but hiding that which is not clean by
coloring our garments, appears contrary to the sweetness of sincerity.

Through some sorts of dies, cloth is less useful; and if the value of
dye-stuffs, the expense of dyeing, and the damage done to cloth, were all added
together, and that expense applied to keep all sweet and clean, how much more
cleanly would people be.

On this visit to England I have felt some instructions sealed on my mind,
which I am concerned to leave in writing, for the use of such who are called to
the station of a minister of Christ.

Christ being the Prince of Peace, and we being no more than ministers, I find
it necessary for us, not only to feel a concern in our first going forth, but
to experience the renewing thereof, in the appointment of meetings.

I felt a concern in America, to prepare for this voyage; and being through the
mercy of God, brought safe here, my heart was like a vessel that wanted vent;
and for several weeks at first, when my mouth was opened in meetings, it often
felt like the raising of a gate in a water course, where a weight of water lay
upon it; and in these labors there appeared a fresh visitation to many,
especially the youth; but sometimes after this, I felt empty and poor, and yet
felt a necessity to appoint meetings.

In this state I was exercised to abide in the pure life of truth, and in all
my labors to watch diligently against the motions of self in my own mind.

I have frequently felt a necessity to stand up, when the spring of the
ministry was low, and to speak from the necessity, in that which subjecteth the
will of the creature; and herein I was united with the suffering seed, and
found inward sweetness in these mortifying labors.

As I have been preserved in a watchful attention to the divine leader, under
these dispensations, enlargement at times has followed, and the power of truth
has rose higher in some meetings, than I ever knew it before through me.

Thus I have been more and more instructed, as to the necessity of depending,
not upon a concern which I felt in America, to come on a visit to England; but
upon the fresh instructions of Christ the Prince of Peace, from day to day.

Now of late, I felt a stop in the appointment of meetings, not wholly but in
part; and I do not feel liberty to appoint them so quick one after another as I
have heretofore.

The work of the ministry, being a work of divine love, I feel that the
openings thereof are to be waited for, in all our appointments.

Oh how deep is divine wisdom! Christ puts forth his ministers, and goes
before them; and oh how great is the danger of departing from the pure feeling
of that which leads safely!

Christ knows the state of the people, and in the pure feeling of the gospel
ministry, their states are opened to his servants.

Christ knows when the fruit-bearing branches themselves have need of purging.

Oh that these lessons may be remembered by me! and that all who appoint
meetings, may proceed in the pure feeling of duty.

I have sometimes felt a necessity to stand up, but that spirit which is of the
world has so much prevailed in many, and the pure life of truth been so
pressed down, that I have gone forward, not as one traveling in a road cast
up, and well prepared, but as a man walking through a miry place, in which are
stones here and there, safe to step on; but so situated that one step being
taken, time is necessary to see where to step next.

Now I find that in the pure obedience, the mind learns contentment, in
appearing weak and foolish to that wisdom which is of the world; and in these
lowly labors, they who stand in a low place, rightly exercised under the
cross, will find nourishment.

The gift is pure, and while the eye is single in attending thereto, the
understanding is preserved clear; self is kept out; we rejoice in filling up
that which remains of the afflictions of Christ, for his body's sake, which is
the church.

The natural man loves eloquence, and many love to hear eloquent orations; and
if there is not a careful attention to the gift, men who have once labored in
the pure gospel ministry, growing weary of suffering, and ashamed of appearing
weak, may kindle a fire, compass themselves about with sparks, and walk in the
light; not of Christ who is under suffering; but of that fire, which they,
going from the gift, have kindled: And that in hearers, which is gone from the
meek suffering state, into the worldly wisdom, may be warmed with this fire,
and speak highly of these labors. That which is of God gathers to God; and
that which is of the world is owned by the world.

In this journey a labor has attended my mind, that the ministers amongst us
may be preserved in the meek feeling life of truth, where we may have no
desire, but to follow Christ and be with him; that when he is under suffering
we may suffer with him; and never desire to rise up in dominion, but as he by
the virtue of his own spirit may raise us.

A few days after writing these considerations, our dear friend in the course
of his religious visits, came to the city of York, and attended most of the
sittings of the quarterly meeting there; but before it was over, was taken ill
of the smallpox. Our friend Thomas Priestman and others who attended him,
preserved the following minutes of his expressions in the time of his sickness,
and of his decease.

1st day, the 27th of the 9th month 1772. His disorder appeared to be the
smallpox: being asked to have a doctor's advice, he signified he had not
freedom or liberty in his mind so to do, standing wholly resigned to his will,
who gave him life, and whose power he had witnessed to raise and heal him in
sickness before, when he seemed nigh unto death; and if he was to wind up now,
he was perfectly resigned, having no will either to live or die, and did not
choose any should be sent for to him: but a young man, an apothecary, coming of
his own accord the next day, and desiring to do something for him, he said he
found a freedom to confer with him and the other friends about him, and if any
thing should be proposed, as to medicine that did not come through defiled
channels or oppressive hands, he should be willing to consider and take it, so
far as he found freedom.

2d day. He said he felt the disorder to affect his head, so that he could
think little, and but as a child; and desired if his understanding should be
more affected, to have nothing given him that those about knew he had a
testimony against.

Third-day he uttered the following prayer. -- O Lord my God, the amazing
horrors of darkness were gathered around me and covered me all over, and I saw
no way to go forth; I felt the depth and extent of the misery of my fellow
creatures separated from the divine harmony, and it was heavier than I could
bear, and I was crushed down under it, I lifted up my hand, I stretched out my
arm, but there was none to help me; I looked round about and was amazed; in the
depths of misery, O Lord! I remembered that thou art omnipotent, that I had
called thee Father, and I felt that I loved thee, and I was made quiet in thy
will, and I waited for deliverance from thee; thou had pity upon me when no
man could help me; I saw that meekness under suffering was showed to us in the
most affecting example of thy Son, and thou taught me to follow him, and I said
"thy will O Father be done."

Fourth day morning, being asked how he felt himself, he meekly answered, I
don't know that I have slept this night, I feel the disorder making its
progress, but my mind is mercifully preserved in stillness and peace: sometime
after he said he was sensible the pains of death must be hard to bear, but if
he escaped them now, he must sometime pass through them, and he did not know that
he could be better prepared, but had no will in it. He said he had settled his
outward affairs to his mind, had taken leave of his wife and family as never to
return, leaving them to the divine protection; adding, and though I feel them
near to me at this time, yet I freely give them up, having a hope that they
will be provided for. And a little after said, This trial is made easier than I
could have thought, my will being wholly taken away; for if I was anxious for
the event it would have been harder, but I am not, and my mind enjoys a perfect
calm.

In the night a young woman having given him something to drink, he said, My
child thou seems very kind to me a poor creature, the Lord will reward thee for
it. A while after he cried out with great earnestness of spirit, Oh my Father!
my Father! and soon after he said, Oh my Father! my Father! how comfortable art
thou to my soul in this trying season. Being asked if he could take a little
nourishment; after some pause he replied, my child I cannot tell what to say to
it; I seem nearly arrived where my soul shall have rest from all its troubles.
After giving in something to be inserted in his journal, he said, I believe the
Lord will now excuse me from exercises of this kind; and I see no work but one
which is to be the last wrought by me in this world, the messenger will come
that will release me from all these troubles; but it must be in the Lord's
time, which I am waiting for. He said he had labored to do whatever was
required, according to the ability received, in the remembrance of which he had
peace; and though the disorder was strong at times, and would like a whirlwind
come over his mind; yet it had hitherto been kept steady and centered in
everlasting love; adding, and if that be mercifully continued, I ask nor desire
no more. Another time he said, he had long had a view of visiting this nation,
and sometime before he came had a dream, in which he saw himself in the
northern parts of it, and that the spring of the gospel was opened in him much
as in the beginning of friends, such as George Fox and William Dewsberry, and
he saw the different states of the people, as clear as he had ever seen flowers
in a garden; but in his going along he was suddenly stopped, though he could not
see for what end; but looking toward home, fell into a flood of tears which
waked him.

At another time he said, my draught seemed strongest toward the North, and I
mentioned in my own monthly meeting, that attending the quarterly meeting at
York, and being there looked like home to me.

Fifth-day night, having repeatedly consented to take medicine with a view to
settle his stomach, but without effect; the friend then waiting on him, said
through distress, what shall I do now? He answered with great composure, Rejoice
ever more, and in every thing give thanks; but added a little after, this is
sometimes hard to come at.

Sixth-day morning he broke forth early in supplication on this wise, O Lord it
was thy power that enabled me to forsake sin in my youth, and I have felt thy
bruises for disobedience; but as I bowed under them thou healed me, continuing
a father and a friend; I feel thy power now, and I beg that in the approaching
trying moment Thou will keep my heart steadfast unto thee. Upon his giving
directions to a friend concerning some little things, she said I will take
care, but hope thou will live to order them thyself; he replied, my hope is in
Christ, and though I may seem a little better, a change in the disorder may soon
happen, and my little strength be dissolved, and if it so happens, I shall be
gathered to my everlasting rest. On her saying she did not doubt that, but
could not help mourning to see so many faithful servants removed at so low a
time; he said all good comes from the Lord, whose power is the same, and can
work as he sees best. The same day he had given directions about wrapping his
corpse; perceiving a friend to weep, he said I would rather thou would guard
against weeping for me, my sister, I sorrow not, though I have had some painful
conflicts, but now they seem over and matters well settled, and I took at the
face of my dear redeemer, for sweet is his voice and his countenance is comely.

First Day, fourth of the tenth month, being very weak and in general difficult
to be understood, he uttered a few words in commemoration of the Lord's
goodness; and added, how tenderly have I been waited on in this time of
affliction, in which I may say in Job's words, Tedious days and wearisome
nights are appointed unto me, and how many are spending their time and money in
vanity and superfluities, while thousands and tens of thousands want the
necessaries of life, who might be relieved by them, and their distresses at
such a time as this, in some degree softened by the administering suitable
things.

Second-day morning the apothecary who appeared very anxious to assist him,
being present, he queried about the probability of such a load of matter being
thrown off his weak body, and the apothecary making some remarks implying he
thought it might; he spoke with an audible voice on this wise, My dependence is
on the Lord Jesus, who I trust will forgive my sins, which is all I hope for,
and if it be his will to raise up this body again, I am content; and if to die,
I and resigned; and if thou can not be easy without trying to assist nature,
I submit: after which his throat was so much affected, that it was very
difficult for him to speak so as to be understood, and frequently wrote when he
wanted any thing. About the second hour on fourth-day morning he asked for pen
and ink, and at several times with much difficulty wrote thus, I believe my
being here is in the wisdom of Christ, I know not as to life or death.

About a quarter before six the same morning he seemed to fall into an easy
sleep, which continued about half an hour, when seeming to awake, he breathed a
few times with more difficulty, and expired without sigh, groan, or struggle.

END OF THE JOURNAL.
THE WORKS OF JOHN WOOLMAN.

PART the SECOND.

Containing his LAST EPISTLE and his other WRITINGS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND
AND THIRD STREETS.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS On the KEEPING of NEGROES. Recommended to the Professors
of Christianity of every Denomination. First printed in the year 1754.
INTRODUCTION.
CUSTOMS generally approved, and opinions received by youth from their
superiors, become like the natural produce of a soil, especially when they are
suited to favorite inclinations: but as the judgments of God are without
partiality, by which the state of the soul must be tried, it would be the
highest wisdom to forego customs and popular opinions, and try the treasures of
the soul by the infallible standard truth.

Natural affection needs a careful examination: operating upon us in a soft
manner, it kindles desires of love and tenderness, and there is danger of
taking it for something higher. To me it appears an instinct like that which
inferior creatures have; each of them, we see, by the ties of nature, love self
best; that which is a part of self, they love by the same tie or instinct. In
them it, in some measure, does the offices of reason, by which, among other
things, they watchfully keep, and orderly feed their helpless offspring. Thus
natural affection appears to be a branch of self-love, good in the animal race,
in us likewise, with proper limitations; but otherwise is productive of evil,
by exciting desires to promote some by means prejudicial to others.

Our blessed Savior seems to give a check to this irregular fondness in
nature, and, at the same time, a precedent for us: Who is my mother, and who
are my brethren? thereby intimating, that the earthly ties of relationship,
are, comparatively, inconsiderable to such, who, through a steady course of
obedience, have come to t^^ happy experience of the spirit of God hearing
witness with their spirits that they are his children: -- And he stretched
forth his hands toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother, and my
brethren: For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven (
arrives at the more noble part of true relationship) the same is my brother,
and sister, and mother, Matt. xii. 48.

This doctrine agrees well with a state truly complete, where love necessarily
operates according to the agreeableness of things on principles unalterable and
in themselves perfect.

If endeavoring to have my children eminent amongst men after my death, be
that which no reasons grounded on those principles can be brought to support;
then to be temperate in my pursuit after gain, and to keep always within the
bounds of those principles, is an indispensable duty, and to depart from it, a
dark unfruitful toil.

In our present condition, to love our children is needful; but except this
love proceeds from the true heavenly principle which sees beyond earthly
treasures, it will rather be injurious than of any real advantage to them:
where the fountain is corrupt, the streams must necessarily be impure.

That important injunction of our Savior, Matt. vi. 33. with the Promise
annexed, contains a short but comprehensive view of our duty and happiness: --
If then the business of mankind in this life, is, to first seek another; if
this cannot be done, but by attending to the means; if a summary of the means
is, Not to do that to another which, in like circumstances, we would not have
done unto us, then these are points of moment, and worthy of our most serious
consideration.

What I write on this subject is with reluctance, and the hints given are in as
general terms as my concern would allow: I know it is a point about which, in
all its branches, men that appear to aim well are not generally agreed; and for
that reason, I chose to avoid being very particular. -- If I may happily have
let drop any thing that may excite such as are concerned in the practice to a
close thinking on the subject treated of, the candid amongst them may easily do
the subject such further justice, as, on an impartial enquiry, it may appear to
deserve; and such an enquiry I would earnestly recommend.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
MATT. xxv. 40. Forasmuch as ye did it to the least of these my brethren, ye
did it unto me.
AS many times there are different motives to the same actions; and one does
that from a generous heart, which another does for selfish ends. -- The like
may be said in this case.

There are various circumstances amongst them that keep negroes, and different
ways by which they fall under their care; and, I doubt not, there are many
well-disposed persons amongst them who desire rather to manage wisely and
justly in this difficult matter, than to make gain of it.

But the general disadvantage which these poor Africans lie under in an
enlight'ned christian country, having often filled me with real sadness, and
been like undigested matter on my mind, I now think it my duty, through divine
aid, to offer some thoughts thereon to the consideration of others.

When we remember that all nations are of one blood, Gen iii. 20. that in this
world we are but sojourners, that we are subject to the like afflictions and
infirmities of body, the like disorders and frailties in mind, the like
temptations, the same death, and the same judgment, and, that the all-wise
Being is Judge and Lord over us all, it seems to raise an idea of a general
brotherhood, and a disposition easy to be touched with a feeling of each others
afflictions: but when we forget those things, and look chiefly at our outward
circumstances, in this and some ages past, constantly retaining in our minds
the distinction betwixt us and them, with respect to our knowledge and
improvement in things divine, natural and artificial, our breasts being apt to
be filled with fond notions of superiority, there is danger of erring in our
conduct toward them.

We allow them to be of the same species with ourselves; the odds is, we are in
a higher station, and enjoy greater favors than they. And when it is thus,
that our heavenly Father endoweth some of his children with distinguished
gifts, they are intended for good ends; but if those thus gifted are thereby
lifted up above their brethren, not considering themselves as debtors to the
weak, nor behaving themselves as faithful stewards, none who judge impartially
can suppose them free from ingratitude.

When a people dwell under the liberal distribution of favors from heaven, it
behooves them carefully to inspect their ways, and consider the purposes for
which those favors were bestowed, lest, through forgetfulness of God, and
misusing his gifts, they incur his heavy displeasure, whose judgments are just
and equal, who exalts and humbles to the dust as he sees meet.

It appears, by Holy Record, that men under high favors have been apt to err
in their opinions concerning others. Thus Israel, according to the description
of the prophet, Isa. lxv. 5. when exceedingly corrupted and degenerated, yet
remembered they were the chosen people of God; and could say, Stand by thyself,
come not near me, for I am holier than thou. That this was no chance language,
but their common opinion of other people, more fully appears, by considering
the circumstances which attended when God was beginning to fulfill his precious
promises concerning the gathering of the Gentiles.

The Most-High, in a vision, undeceived Peter, first prepared his heart to
believe; and, at the house of Cornelius, showed him of a certainty that God was
no respecter of persons.

The effusion of the Holy Ghost upon a people, with whom they, the Jewish
christians would not so much as eat, was strange to them: All they of the
circumcision were astonished to see it; and the apostles and brethren of Judea
contended with Peter about it, till he, having rehearsed the whole matter, and
fully shown that the Father's love was unlimited, they are thereat struck with
admiration, and cry out, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life!

The opinion of peculiar favors being confined to them, was deeply rooted, or
else the above instance had been less strange to them, for these reasons:
First, They were generally acquainted with the writings of the prophets, by
whom this time was repeatedly spoken of, and pointed at. Secondly, Our blessed
Lord shortly before expressly said, I have other sheep, not of this fold, them
also must I bring, etc. Lastly, His words to them after his resurrection, at
the very time of his ascension, Ye shall be witnesses to me, not only in
Jerusalem, Judea, and Samaria, but to the uttermost parts of the earth.

Those concurring circumstances, one would think, might have raised a strong
expectation of seeing such a time; yet, when it came, it proved matter of
offense and astonishment.

To consider mankind otherwise than brethren, to think favors are peculiar to
one nation, and exclude others, plainly supposes a darkness in the
understanding: for as God's love is universal, so where the mind is
sufficiently influenced by it, it begets a likeness of itself, and the heart is
enlarged toward all men. Again, to conclude a people froward, perverse, and
worse by nature than others (who ungratefully receive favors, and apply them
to bad ends) this will excite a behavior toward them unbecoming the excellence
of true religion.

To prevent such error, let us calmly consider their circumstance; and, the
better to do it, make their case ours. Suppose, then, that our ancestors and we
had been exposed to constant servitude, in the more servile and inferior
employments of life; that we had been destitute of the help of reading and good
company; that amongst ourselves we had had few wise and pious instructors; that
the religious amongst our superiors seldom took notice of us; that while
others, in ease, have plentifully heaped up the fruit of our labor, we had
received barely enough to relieve nature; and being wholly at the command of
others, had generally been treated as a contemptible, ignorant part of mankind:
should we, in that case, be less abject than they now are? Again, If oppression
be so hard to bear, that a wise man is made mad by it, Eccl. vii. 7. then a
series of those things altering the behavior and manners of a people, is what
may reasonably be expected.

When our property is taken contrary to our mind, by means appearing to us
unjust, it is only through divine influence, and the enlargement of heart from
thence proceeding, that we can love our reputed oppressors: if the Negroes fall
short in this, an uneasy, if not a disconsolate disposition, will be awakened,
and remain like seeds in their minds, producing sloth and many other habits
appearing odious to us; with which, being free men, they, perhaps, had not been
chargeable. These, and other circumstances, rightly considered, will lessen
that too great disparity, which some make between us and them.

Integrity of heart has appeared in some of them; so that, if we continue in
the word of Christ (previous to discipleship, John viii. 31.) and our conduct
toward them be seasoned with his love, we may hope to see the good effect of
it: the which, in a good degree, is the case with some into whose hands they
have fallen: but that too many treat them otherwise, not seeming conscious of
any neglect, is, alas! too evident.

When self-love presides in our minds, our opinions are biassed in our own
favor; in this condition, being concerned with a people so situated, that they
have no voice to plead their own cause, there is danger of using ourselves to an
undisturbed partiality, till, by long custom, the mind becomes reconciled with
it, and the judgment itself infected.

To humbly apply to God for wisdom, that we may thereby be enabled to see
things as they are, and ought to be, is very needful; hereby the hidden things
of darkness may be brought to light, and the judgment made clear: we shall then
consider mankind as brethren. Though different degrees and a variety of
qualifications and abilities, one dependant on another, be admitted, yet high
thoughts will be laid aside, and all men treated as becomes the sons of one
father, agreeable to the doctrine of Christ Jesus.

"He has laid down the best criterion, by which mankind ought to judge of
their own conduct, and others judge for them of theirs, one toward another,
viz. Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. I
take it, that all men by nature, are equally entitled to the equity of this
rule, and under the indispensable obligations of it. One man ought not to look
upon another man, or society of men, as so far beneath him; but that he should
put himself in their place, in all his actions toward them, and bring all to
this test, viz. How should I approve of this conduct, were I in their
circumstance, and they in mine?" A. Arscot's Considerations, p. III. fol. 107.

This doctrine being of a moral unchangeable nature, has been likewise
inculcated in the former dispensation; If a stranger sojourn with thee in your
land, ye shall not vex him; but the stranger that dwells with you, shall be
as one born amongst you, and thou shall love him as thyself, Lev. xix. 33, 34.
Had these people come voluntary and dwelt amongst us, to have called them
strangers would be proper; and their being brought by force, with regret, and a
languishing mind, may well raise compassion in a heart rightly disposed: but
there is nothing in such treatment, which upon a wise and judicious
consideration, will any ways lessen their right of being treated as strangers.
If the treatment which many of them meet with, be rightly examined and compared
with those precepts, Thou shall not vex him nor oppress him; he shall be as one
born amongst you, and thou shall love him as thyself, Lev. xix. 33. Deuteronomy.
xxvii. 19, there will appear an important difference betwixt them.

It may be objected there is cost of purchase, and risque of their lives to
them who possess 'em, and therefore needful that they make the best use of
their time: in a practice just and reasonable, such objections may have weight;
but if the work be wrong from the beginning, there is little or no force in
them. If I purchase a man who has never forfeited his liberty, the natural
right of freedom is in him; and shall I keep him and his posterity in servitude
and ignorance? "How should I approve of this conduct, were I in his
circumstances, and he in mine?" It may be thought, that to treat them as we
would willingly be treated, our gain by them would be inconsiderable: and it
were, in diverse respects, better that there were none in our country.

We may further consider, that they are now amongst us, and those of our nation
the cause of their being here; that whatsoever difficulty accrues thereon, we
are justly chargeable with, and to bear all inconveniences attending it, with
a serious and weighty concern of mind to do our duty by them, is the best we
can do. To seek a remedy by continuing the oppression, because we have power to
do it, and see others do it, will, I apprehend, not be doing as we would be
done by.

How deeply soever men are involved in the most exquisite difficulties,
sincerity of heart, and upright walking before God, freely submitting to his
providence, is the most sure remedy: He only is able to relieve, not only
persons, but nations, in their greatest calamities.

David, in a great strait, when the sense of his past error, and the full
expectation of an impending calamity, as the reward of it, were united to the
aggravating his distress, after some deliberation, says, Let me fall now into
the hands of the Lord, for very great are his mercies; let me not fall into the
hand of man. 1 Chronicles. xxi. 13.

To act continually with integrity of heart, above all narrow or selfish
motives, is a sure token of our being partakers of that salvation which God
has appointed for walls and bulwarks, Isa. v. 26. Romans xv. 8. and is, beyond
all contradiction, a more happy situation than can ever be promised by the
utmost reach of art and power united, not proceeding from heavenly wisdom.

A supply to nature's lawful wants, joined with a peaceful, humble mind, is the
truest happiness in this life; and if here we arrive to this, and remain to
walk in the path of the just, our case will be truly happy: and though herein
we may part with, or miss of some glaring shows of riches, and leave our
children little else but wise instructions, a good example, and the knowledge
of some honest employment; these, with the blessing of Providence, are
sufficient for their happiness, and are more likely to prove so, than laying up
treasures for them, which are often rather a snare, than any real benefit;
especially to them, who, instead of being exampled to temperance, are in all
things taught to prefer the getting of riches, and to eye the temporal
distinctions they give, as the principal business of this life. These readily
overlook the true happiness of man, as it results from the enjoyment of all
things in the fear of God, and, miserably substituting an inferior good,
dangerous in the acquiring, and uncertain in the fruition, they are subject to
many disappointments, and every sweet carries its sting.

It is the conclusion of our blessed Lord and his apostles, as appears by their
lives and doctrines, that the highest delights of sense, or most pleasing
objects visible, ought ever to be accounted infinitely inferior to that real
intellectual happiness suited to man in his primitive innocence, and now to be
found in true renovation of mind; and that the comforts of our present life,
the things most grateful to us, ought always to be received with temperance,
and never made the chief objects of our desire, hope, or love: but that our
whole heart and affections be principally looking to that city, which has
foundations, whose maker and builder is God. Did we so improve the gifts
bestowed on us, that our children might have an education suited to these
doctrines, and our example to confirm it, we might rejoice in hopes of their
being heirs of an inheritance incorruptible.

This inheritance, as christians, we esteem the most valuable; and how then can
we fail to desire it for our children? O that we were consistent with
ourselves, in pursuing means necessary to obtain it!

It appears, by experience, that where children are educated in fullness, ease
and idleness, evil habits are more prevalent, than in common amongst such who
are prudently employed in the necessary affairs of life: and if children are
not only educated in the way of so great temptation, but have also the
opportunity of lording it over their fellow creatures, and being masters of men
in their childhood, how can we hope otherwise than that their tender minds will
be possessed with thoughts too high for them? which, by continuance, gaining
strength, will prove, like a slow current, gradually separating them from (or
keeping from acquaintance with) that humility and meekness in which alone
lasting happiness can be enjoyed.

Man is born to labor, and experience abundantly shows, that it is for our
good: but where the powerful lay the burden on the inferior, without affording
a christian education, and suitable opportunity of improving the mind, and a
treatment which we, in their case, should approve, that themselves may live at
ease, and fare sumptuously, and lay up riches for their posterity, this seems
to contradict the design of Providence, and, I doubt, is sometimes the effect
of a perverted mind: for while the life of one is made grievous by the rigor
of another, it entails misery on both.

Amongst the manifold works of Providence, displayed in the different ages of
the world, these which follow (with many others) may afford instruction.

Abraham was called of God to leave his country and kindred, to sojourn amongst
strangers: through famine, and danger of death, he was forced to flee from one
kingdom to another: he, at length, not only had assurance of being the father
of many nations, but became a mighty prince. Genesis xxiii. 6.

Remarkable were the dealings of God with Jacob in a low estate, the just sense
he retained of them after his advancement, appears by his words: I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies. Genesis xxxii. 10. xlviii. 15.

The numerous afflictions of Joseph are very singular; the particular
providence of God therein, no less manifest: he, at length, became governor of
Egypt, and famous for wisdom and virtue.

The series of troubles David passed through, few amongst us are ignorant of; and
yet he afterward became as one of the great men of the earth.

Some evidences of the divine wisdom appears in those things, in that such who
are intended for high stations, have first been very low and dejected, that
truth might be sealed on their hearts; and that the characters there imprinted
by bitterness and adversity, might in after years remain, suggesting
compassionate ideas, and, in their prosperity, quicken their regard to those in
the like condition: which yet further appears in the case of Israel: they were
well acquainted with grievous sufferings, a long and rigorous servitude; then,
through many notable events, were made chief amongst the nations: to them we find
a repetition of precepts to the purpose abovesaid: though, for ends agreeable
to infinite wisdom, they were chose as a peculiar people for a time; yet the
Most High acquaints them, that his love is not confined, but extends to the
stranger; and, to excite their compassion, reminds them of times past, Ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. x. 19. Again, Thou shall not oppress a
stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt, Exodus xxiii. 9.

If we call to mind our beginning, some of us may find a time, wherein our
fathers were under afflictions, reproaches, and manifold sufferings.

Respecting our progress in this land, the time is short since our beginning
was small and number few, compared with the native inhabitants. He that sleeps
not by day nor night, has watched over us, and kept us as the apple of his
eye. His almighty arm has been round about us, and saved us from dangers.

The wilderness and solitary deserts in which our fathers passed the days of
their pilgrimage, are now turned into pleasant fields; the natives are gone
from before us, and we established peaceably in the possession of the land,
enjoying our civil and religious liberties; and, while many parts of the world
have groaned under the heavy calamities of war, our habitation remains quiet,
and our land fruitful.

When we trace back the steps we have trodden, and see how the Lord has opened
a way in the wilderness for us, to the wise it will easily appear, that all
this was not done to be buried in oblivion; but to prepare a people for more
fruitful returns, and the remembrance thereof, ought to humble us in
prosperity, and excite in us a christian benevolence toward our inferiors.

If we do not consider these things aright, but, through a stupid indolence,
conceive views of interest, separate from the general good of the great
brotherhood, and, in pursuance thereof, treat our inferiors with rigor, to
increase our wealth, and gain riches for our children; What then shall we do
when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall we answer him? did not he
that made us, make them? and did not one fashion us in the womb? Job xxxi. 13,
14.

To our great master we stand or all, to judge or condemn us as is most
suitable toh is wisdom or authority; my inclination is to persuade, and
entreat, and simply give hints of my way of thinking.

If the christian religion be considered, both respecting its doctrines, and
the happy influence which it has on the minds and manners of all real
christians, it looks reasonable to think, that the miraculous manifestation
thereof to the world, is a kindness beyond expression.

Are we the people thus favored? are we they whose minds are opened,
influenced, and governed by the Spirit of Christ, and thereby made sons of God?
is it not a fair conclusion, that we, like our heavenly Father, ought, in our
degree, to be active in the same great cause, of the eternal happiness of, at
least, our whole families, and more, if thereto capacitated?

If we, by the operation of the Spirit of Christ, become heirs with him in the
kingdom of his Father, and are redeemed from the alluring counterfeit joys of
this world, and the joy of Christ remain in us, to suppose that one remaining
in this happy condition, can, for the sake of earthly riches; not only deprive
his fellow creatures of the sweetness of freedom, (which, rightly used, is one
of the greatest temporal blessings) but therewith neglect using proper means,
for their acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures, and the advantage of true
religion, seems, at least, a contradiction to reason.

Whoever rightly advocates the cause of some, thereby promotes the good of all.
The state of mankind was harmonious in the beginning, and though sin has
introduced discord, yet, through the wonderful love of God, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, the way is open for our redemption, and means appointed to restore us to
primitive harmony. That if one suffer by the unfaithfulness of another, the
mind, the most noble part of him that occasions the discord, is thereby
alienated from its true and real happiness.

Our duty and interest is inseparably united, and when we neglect or misuse our
talents, we necessarily depart from the heavenly fellowship, and are in the way
to the greatest of evils.

Therefore to examine and prove ourselves, to find what harmony the power
presiding in us bears with the divine nature, is a duty not more incumbent and
necessary, than it would be beneficial.

In Holy Writ the Divine Being faith of himself, I am the Lord, which exercise
loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; for in these things I
delight, says the Lord, Jer. ix. 24. Again, speaking in the way of man, to
show his compassion to Israel, whose wickedness had occasioned a calamity, and
then being humbled under it, it is said, His soul was grieved for their
miseries, Judges x. 16. If we consider the life of our blessed Savior when on
earth, as it is recorded by his followers, we shall find, that one uniform
desire for the eternal, and temporal good of mankind, discovered itself in all
his actions.

If we observe men, both apostles and others, in many different ages, who have
really come to the unity of the Spirit, and the fellowship of the saints, there
still appears the like disposition, and in them the desire of the real
happiness of mankind, has outbalanced the desire of ease, liberty, and, many
times, life itself.

If upon a true search, we find that our natures are so far renewed, that to
exercise righteousness and loving kindness (according to our ability) toward
all men, without respect of persons, is easy to us, or is our delight; if our
love be so orderly, and regular, that he who does the will of our Father, who
is in heaven, appears in our view, to be our nearest relation, our brother, and
sister, and mother; if this be our case, there is a good foundation to hope,
that the blessing of God will sweeten our treasures during our stay in this
life, and our memory be savory, when we are entered into rest.

To conclude, It Is a truth most certain, that a life guided by wisdom from
above, agreeable with justice, equity, and mercy, is throughout consistent and
amiable, and truly beneficial to society; the serenity and calmness of mind in
it, affords an unparallelled comfort in this life, and the end of it is blessed.

And, no less true, that they, who in the midst of high favors, remain
ungrateful, and under all the advantages that a christian can desire, are
selfish, earthly, and sensual, do miss the true fountain of happiness, and
wander in a maze of dark anxiety, where all their treasures are insufficient to
quiet their minds: hence, from an insatiable craving, they neglect doing good
with what they have acquired, and too often add oppression to vanity, that they
may compass more.

O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end! Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29.

CONSIDERATIONS On the KEEPING of NEGROES. Recommended to the Professors of
Christianity of every Denomination.
PART the SECOND. First printed in the year 1762.
DEUTERONOMY. i. 17. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
small as well as the great: ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the
judgment is God's.
PREFACE.
ALL our actions are of like nature with their root; and the Most High weighs
them more skilfully than Men can weigh them one for another,

I believe that one Supreme Being made and supports the world; nor can I
worship any other Deity without being an idolater, and guilty of wickedness.

Many nations have believed in, and worshipped a plurality of deities; but I do
not believe they were therefore all wicked. Idolatry indeed is wickedness; but
it is the thing, not the name, which is so. Real idolatry is to pay that
adoration to a creature, which is known to be due only to the true God.

He who professes to believe one Almighty Creator, and in his Son Jesus
Christ, and is yet more intent on the honors, profits and friendships of the
world, than he is in singleness of heart to stand faithful to the christian
religion, is in the channel of idolatry; while the Gentile, who, under some
mistaken opinions, is notwithstanding established in the true principle of
virtue, and humbly adores and almighty power, may be of that number who fear
God, and work righteousness.

I believe the bishop of Rome assumes a power, that does not belong to any
officer in the church of Christ; and if I should knowingly do any thing,
tending to strengthen him in that capacity, it would be great iniquity. There
are many thousands of people, who by their profession acknowledge him to be the
representative of Jesus Christ on earth; and to say that none of them are
upright in heart, would be contrary to my sentiments.

Men who sincerely apply their minds to true virtue, and find an inward support
from above, by which all vicious inclinations are made subject; that they love
God sincerely, and prefer the real good of mankind universally to their own
private interest; though these, through the strength of education and
tradition, may remain under some speculative and great errors, it would be
uncharitable to say, that therefore God rejects them. -- He who creates,
supports and gives understanding to all men, his knowledge and goodness is
superior to the various cases and circumstances of his creatures, which to us
appear the most difficult.

The apostles and primitive christians did not censure all the Gentiles as
wicked men, Romans ii. 14. Col. iii. 11. but as they were favored with a gift to
discern things more clearly, respecting the worship of the true God, they with
much firmness declared against the worshipping of Idols; and with true patience
endured many sufferings, on that account.

Great numbers of faithful Protestants have contended for the truth, in
opposition to papal errors; and with true fortitude laid down their lives in
the conflict, without saying, That no man was saved who made profession of that
religion.

While we have no right to keep men as servants for term of life, but that of
superior power; to do this, with design by their labor to profit ourselves and
our families, I believe is wrong; but I do not believe that all who have kept
slaves, have therefore been chargeable with guilt. If their motives thereto
were free from selfishness, and their slaves content, they were a sort of
freemen; which I believe has sometimes been the case.

Whatever a man does in the sptiri of charity, to him it is not sin: and while
be lives and acts in this spirit, he learns all things essential to his
happiness, as an individual: and if he does not see that any injury or
injustice, to any other person, is necessarily promoted by any part of his form
of government, I believe the merciful Judge will not lay iniquity to his
charge. Yet others, who live in the same spirit of charity, from a clear
convincement, may see the relation of one thing to another, and the necessary
tendency of each; and hence it may be absolutely binding on them to desist from
some parts of conduct, which some good men have been in.

CONSIDERATIONS On the KEEPING of NEGROES.
PART the SECOND.
AS some in most religious societies amongst the English are concerned in
importing or purchasing the inhabitants of Africa as slaves; and as the
professors of christianity of several other nations do the like; these
circumstances tend to make people less apt to examine the practice so closely
as they would, if such a thing had not been, but was now proposed to be entered
upon. It is however our duty, and what concerns us individually, as creatures
accountable to our Creator, to employ rightly the understanding which he has
given us, in humbly endeavoring to be acquainted with his will concerning us,
and with the nature and tendency of those things which we practice: for as
justice remains to be justice, so many people, of reputation in the world,
joining with wrong things, do not excuse others in joining with them, nor make
the consequence of their proceedings less dreadful in the final issue, than it
would be otherwise.

Where unrighteousness is justified from one age to another, it is like dark
matter gathering into clouds over us. We may know that this gloom will remain
till the cause be removed by a reformation, or change of times; and may feel a
desire, from a love of equity, to speak on the occasion; yet where error is so
strong, that it may not be spoken against, without some prospect of
inconvenience to the speaker, this difficulty is likely to operate on our
weakness, and quench the good desires in us; except we dwell so steadily under
the weight of it, as to be made willing to "endure hardness" on that account.

Where men exert their talents against vices generally accounted such, the ill
effects whereof are presently perceived in a government, all men who regard
their own temporal good, are likely to approve the work. But when that which is
inconsistent with perfect equity, has the law, or countenance of the great in
its favor, though the tendency thereof be quite contrary to the true happiness
of mankind in an equal, if not greater, degree, than many things accounted
reproachful to christians; yet, as these ill effects are not generally
perceived, they who labor to dissuade from such things, which people believe
accord with their interest, have many difficulties to encounter.

The repeated charges, which God gave to his prophets, imply the danger they
were in of erring on this Hand. Be not afraid of their faces; for I am with
thee, to deliver thee, says the Lord. Jer. i. 8. Speak all the words that I
command thee to speak to them; diminish not a word. Jer. xxvi. 2. And thou, son
of man, be not afraid of them, nor dismayed at their looks. Speak my words to
them, whether they will hear or forbear. Ezekiel. ii. 6, 7.

Under an apprehension of duty, I offer some further considerations on this
subject, having endeavored some years to consider it heartily. I have observed
people of our own color, whose abilities have been inferior to the affairs
which relate to their convenient subsistence, who have been taken care of by
others, and the profit of such work as they could do, applied toward their
support. -- I believe there are such amongst negroes; and that some people, in
whose hands they are, keep them with no view of outward profit, do not consider
them as black men, who, as such, ought to serve white men; but account them
persons who have need of guardians, and as such take care of them: yet where
equal care is taken in all parts of education, I do not apprehend cases of this
sort are likely to occur more frequently amongst one sort of people than
another.

It looks to me that the slave trade was founded, and has generally been
carried on, in a wrong spirit; that the effects of it are detrimental to the
real prosperity of our country; and will be more so, except we cease from the
common motives of keeping them, and treat them in future agreeable to truth and
pure justice.

Negroes may be imported, who, for their cruelty to their countrymen, and the
evil disposition of their minds, may be unfit to be at liberty; and if we, as
lovers of righteousness, undertake the management of them, we should have a
full and clear knowledge of their crimes, and of those circumstances which
might operate in their favor; but the difficulty of obtaining this is so
great, that we have great reason to be cautious therein. But, should it plainly
appear that absolute subjection was a condition the most proper for the person
who is purchased, yet the innocent children ought not to be made slaves,
because their parents sinned.

We have account in holy scripture of some families suffering, where mention is
only made of the heads of the family committing wickedness; and it is likely
that the degenerate Jews, misunderstanding some occurrences of this kind, took
occasion to charge God with being unequal; so that a saying became common, The
Fathers have eaten four grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, two of the inspired prophets, who lived near the same
time, were concerned to correct this error. Ezekiel is large on the subject.
First, he reproves them for their error. What mean ye, that ye do so, chap.
xviii. verse 2. As I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any
more to use this proverb in Israel. The words, "any more," have reference to
time past; intimating, that though they had not rightly understood some things
they had heard or seen, and thence supposed the proverb to be well grounded;
yet henceforth they might know of a certainty, that the ways of God are all
equal; that as sure as the Most High lives, so sure men are only answerable
for their own sins. -- He thus sums up the matter, ver. 20. The soul that
sins, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father;
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. The righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him; and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

Where men are wicked, they commonly are a means of corrupting the succeeding
age; and thereby hasten those outward calamities, which fall on nations, when
their iniquities are full.

Men may pursue means which are not agreeable to perfect purity, with a view to
increase the wealth and happiness of their offspring, and thereby make the way
of virtue more difficult to them. And though the ill example of a parent, or a
multitude, does not excuse a man in doing evil, yet the mind being early
impressed with vicious notions and practices, and nurtured up in ways of
getting treasure, which are not the ways of truth; this wrong spirit getting
first possession, and being thus strengthened, frequently prevents due
attention to the true spirit of wisdom, so that they exceed in wickedness those
who lived before them. And in this channel, though parents labor, as they
think, to forward the happiness of their children, it proves a means of
forwarding their calamity. This being the case in the age next before the
grievous calamity in the siege of Jerusalem, and carrying Judah captive to
Babylon, they might say with propriety, This came upon us, because our fathers
forsook God, and because we did worse than our fathers. See Jer. vii. 26.

As the generation next before them inwardly turned away from God, who yet
waited to be gracious; and as they in that age continued in those things which
necessarily separated from perfect goodness, growing more stubborn, till the
judgments of God were poured out upon them; they might properly say, Our
fathers have sinned, and we have borne their iniquities: Lam. v. 7. And yet,
wicked as their fathers were, had they not succeeded them in their wickedness,
they had not borne their iniquities.

To suppose it right, that an innocent man shall at this day be excluded from
the common rules of justice; be deprived of that liberty, which is the natural
right of human creatures; and be a slave to others during life, on account of a
sin committed by his immediate parents; or a sin committed by Ham, the son of
Noah; is a supposition too gross to be admitted into the mind of any person,
who sincerely desires to be governed by solid principles.

It is alleged, in favor of the practice, that Joshua made slaves of the
Gibeonites.

What men do by the command of God, and what comes to pass as a consequence of
their neglect, are different; such as the latter case now mentioned was.

It was the express command of the Almighty to Israel, concerning the
inhabitants of the promised land, Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor
with their Gods: They shall not dwell in thy land, Exodus xxiii. 32. Those
Gibeonites came craftily, telling Joshua, that they were come from a far
country; that their elders had sent them to make a league with the people of
Israel; and as an evidence of their being foreigners, showed their old clothes,
etc. And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of
the Lord; and Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let
them live; and the princes swear to them. Josh. xcvi. 14, 15.

When the imposition was discovered, the congregation murmured against the
princes: But all the princes said to all the congregation, we have sworn to
them by the Lord God of Israel; now therefore we may not touch them; we will
even let them live, lest wrath be upon us; but let them be hewers of wood, and
drawers of water unto the congregation.

Omitting to ask counsel, involved them in great difficulty. The Gibeonites
were of those cities, of which the Lord said, Thou shall save alive nothing
that breaths; and of the stock of the Hivites, concerning whom he commanded
by name, Thou shall smite them, and utterly destroy them: Thou shall make no
covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them, Deuteronomy. vii. 1. Thus Joshua and the
princes, not knowing them, had made a league with them, to let them live; and
in this strait they resolve to make them servants. Joshua and the princes
suspected them to be deceivers: Peradventure you dwell amongst us: and how
shall we make a league with you? Which words show, that they remembered the
command before mentioned; and yet did not enquire at the mouth of the Lord, as
Moses directed Joshua, when he gave him a charge respecting his duty as chief
man among that people, Numb. xxvii. 21. By this omission things became so
situated, that Joshua and the princes could not execute the judgments of God on
them, without violating the oath which they had made.

Moses did amiss at the waters of Meribah; and doubtless he soon repented; for
the Lord was with him. And it is likely that Joshua was deeply humbled, under a
sense of his omission; for it appears that God continued him in his office, and
spared the lives of those people, for the sake of the league and oath made in
his name.

The wickedness of these people was great, and they worthy to die, or perfect
justice had not passed sentence of death upon them; and as their execution was
prevented by this league and oath, they appear content to be servants: As it
seems good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.

These criminals, instead of death, had the sentence of servitude pronounced on
them, in these words, Now therefore ye are cursed; and there shall none of you
be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
house of my God.

We find, Deuteronomy. xx. 10. that there were cities far distant from Canaan, against
which Israel went to battle; unto whom they were to proclaim peace, and if the
inhabitants made answer of peace, and opened their gates, they were not to
destroy them, but make them tributaries.

The children of Israel were then the Lord's host, and executioners of his
judgments on people hardened in wickedness. -- They were not to go to battle,
but by his appointment. The men who were chief in his army, had their
instructions from the Almighty; sometimes immediately, and sometimes by the
ministry of angels. Of these, amongst others, were Moses, Joshua, Othniel, and
Gideon; see Exodus iii. 2. and xviii. 19. Josh. v. 13. These people far off from
Canaan, against whom Israel was sent to battle, were so corrupt, that the
creator of the universe saw it good to change their situation; and in case of
their opening their gates, and coming under tribute, this their subjection,
though probably more mild than absolute slavery, was to last little or no
longer than while Israel remained in the true spirit of government.

It was pronounced by Moses the prophet, as a consequence of their wickedness,
The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee very high; and thou shall
come down very low: he shall be the head, and thou the tail. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 43,
44.

This we find in some measure verified in their being made tributaries to the
Moabites, Midianites, Amorites and Philistines.

It is alleged in favor of the practice of slave-keeping, that the Jews by
their law made slaves of the Heathen, Levit. xxv. 45. Moreover, of the children
of the strangers that do sojourn amongst you, of them shall ye buy, and of
their children, which are with you, which they begat in your land; and they
shall be your possession; and you shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them as a possession, they shall be your bondmen
for ever. -- It is difficult for us to have any certain knowledge of the mind
of Moses, in regard to keeping slaves, any other way than by looking upon him
as a true servant of God, whose mind and conduct were regulated by an inward
principle of justice and equity. To admit a supposition that he in that case
was drawn from perfect equity by the alliance of outward kindred, would be to
disown his authority.

Abraham had servants born in his house, and bought with his money: And the
Almighty said of Abraham, I know him, that he will order his house after him.
Which implies, that he was as a father, an instructor, and a good governor over
his people. -- And Moses, considered as a man of God, must necessarily have had
a prospect of some real advantage in the strangers and heathens being servants
to the Israelites for a time.

As mankind had received and established many erroneous opinions and hurtful
customs, their living and conversing with the Jews, while the Jews stood
faithful to their principles, might be helpful to remove those errors, and
reform their manners. -- But for men, with private views, to assume an absolute
power over the persons and properties of others; and continue it from age to
age in the line of natural generation, without regard to the virtues and vices
of their successors, as it is manifestly contrary to true universal love, and
attended with great evils, there requires the clearest evidence to beget a
belief in us, that Moses intended that the strangers should as such be slaves
to the Jews.

He directed them to buy strangers and sojourners. -- It appears that there
were strangers in Israel who were free men; and considering with what
tenderness and humanity the Jews, by their law, were obliged to use their
servants, and what care was to be taken to instruct them in the true religion,
it is not unlikely that some strangers in poverty and distress were willing to
enter into bonds to serve the Jews as long as they lived; and in such case the
Jews, by their law, had a right to their service during life.

When the awl was bored through the ear of the Hebrew servant, the text says,
He shall serve for ever; yet we do not suppose that by the word "for ever," it
was intended that none of his posterity should afterward be free; when it is
said in regard to the strangers which they bought, They shall be your
possession, it may be well understood to mean only the persons so purchased;
all preceding relates to buying them; and what follows, to the continuance of
their service, You shall take them as an inheritance to your children after
you; they shall be your bondmen for ever. It may be well understood to stand
limited to those they purchased.

Moses, directing Aaron and his sons to wash their hands and feet, when they
went into the tabernacle of the congregation, says, It shall be a statute for
ever to them, even to him and his seed throughout all generations. And to
express the continuance of the law, it was his common language, It shall be a
statute for ever throughout your generations. So that had he intended the
posterity of the strangers so purchased to continue in slavery to the Jews, it
looks likely that he would have used some terms clearly to express it. The Jews
undoubtedly had slaves, whom they kept as such from one age to another; but
that this was agreeable to the genuine design of their inspired lawgiver, is
far from being a clear case.

Making constructions of the law contrary to the true meaning of it, was common
amongst that people. -- Samuel's sons took bribes, and perverted judgment. --
Isaiah complained that they justified the wicked for reward. -- Zephaniah,
cotemporary with Jeremiah, on account of the injustice of the civil
magistrates, declared that those judges were evening wolves; and that the
priests did violence to the law.

Jeremiah acquaints us, that the priests cried peace, peace, when there was no
peace; by which means the people grew bold in their wickedness; and having
committed abominations, were not ashamed; but, through wrong constructions of the
law, they justified themselves, and boastingly said We are wise; and the law of
the Lord is with us. These corruptions continued till the days of our Savior,
who told the Pharisees, You have made the commandment of God of none effect
through your tradition.

Thus it appears that they corrupted the law of Moses; nor is it unlikely that
among many others this was one; for oppressing the strangers was a heavy charge
against the Jews, and very often strongly represented by the Lord's faithful
prophets.

That the liberty of man was, by the inspired lawgiver, esteemed precious,
appears in this; that such who unjustly deprived men of it, were to be punished
in like manner as if they had murdered them. He that steals a man, and
sells him; or if he be found in his hand, shall surely be put to death. This
part of the law was so considerable, that Paul, the learned Jew, giving a brief
account of the uses of the law, adds this, "It was made for men-stealers," 1 Timothy i. 10.

The great men amongst that people were exceeding oppressive; and, it is
likely, exerted their whole strength and influence to have the law construed to
suit their turns. -- The honest servants of the lord had heavy work with them
in regard to their oppression; a few instances follow. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways, and your doings; and I will cause
you to dwell in this place. If you thoroughly execute judgment between a man and
his neighbor; if you oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and the widow;
and shed not innocent blood in this place; neither walk after other gods to
your hurt, then will I cause you to dwell in this place, Jer. vii -- Again a
message was sent not only to the inferior ministers of justice, but also to the
chief ruler. Thus says the Lord, go down to the house of the king of Judah,
and speak there this word; execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver
the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; and do no wrong; do no violence
to the stranger, the fatherless and the widow; neither shed innocent blood in
this place. Then adds, That in so doing they should prosper; but if ye will not
hear these words, I swear by myself, says the Lord, that this house shall
become a desolation, Jer. xxii.

The king, the princes and rulers were agreed in oppression before the
Babylonish captivity; for whatever courts of justice were retained amongst
them; or however they decided matters betwixt men of estates, it is plain that
the cause of the poor was not judged in equity.

It appears that the great men amongst the Jews were fully resolved to have
slaves, even of their own brethren, Jer. xxxiv. Notwithstanding the promises
and threatenings of the Lord, by the prophet, and their solemn covenant to set
them free, confirmed by the imprecation of passing between the parts of a calf
cut in twain; intimating, by that ceremony, that on breach of the covenant, it
were just for their bodies to be so cut in pieces. -- Yet after all, they held
fast to their old custom, and called home the servants whom they had set free.
-- And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming
liberty every man to his neighbor; and ye had made a covenant before me, in
the house which is called by my name; but ye turned, and polluted my name, and
caused every man his servant, whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure, to
return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants, and for
handmaids: therefore thus says the Lord, ye have not hearkened unto me, in
proclaiming liberty every one to his neighbor, and every one to his brother.
Behold, I proclaim liberty to you, says the Lord, to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the
kingdoms of the earth. -- The men who transgressed my covenant which they made,
and passed between the parts of the calf, I will give into the hands of their
enemies, and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven,
and the beasts of the earth.

Soon after this their city was taken and burnt; the king's sons and the
princes slain; and the king, with the chief men of his kingdom, carried captive
to Babylon. -- Ezekiel, prophesying the return of that people to their own
land, directs, Ye shall divide the land by lot, for an inheritance unto you,
and to the strangers that sojourn amongst you; in what tribe the stranger
sojourns, there shall ye give him his inheritance, says the Lord God. Nor is
this particular direction, and the authority with which it is enforced, without
a tacit implication, that their ancestors had erred in their conduct toward
the stranger.

Some who keep slaves, have doubted as to the equity of the practice; but as
they knew men, noted for their piety, who were in it, this, they say, has made
their minds easy.

To lean on the example of men in doubtful cases, is difficult: for only admit,
that those men were not faithful and upright to the highest degree, but that in
some particular case they erred, and it may follow that this one case was the
same, about which we are in doubt; and to quiet our minds by their example, may
be dangerous to ourselves; and continuing in it, prove a stumbling block to
tender-minded people who succeed us, in like manner as their examples are to us.

But supposing charity was their only motive, and they not foreseeing the
tendency of paying robbers for their booty, were not justly under the
imputation of being partners with a thief, Prove. xxix. 24. but were really
innocent in what they did, are we assured that we keep them with the same views
they kept them? If we keep them from no other motive than a real sense of duty,
and true charity governs us in all our proceedings toward them, we are so far
safe: but if another spirit, which inclines our minds to the ways of this
world, prevail upon us, and we are concerned for our own outward gain more than
for their real happiness, it will avail us nothing that some good men have had
the care and management of Negroes.

Since mankind spread upon the earth, many have been the revolutions attending
the several families, and their customs and ways of life different from each
other. This diversity of manners, though some are preferable to others,
operates not in favor of any, so far as to justify them to do violence to
innocent men; to bring them from their own to another way of life. The mind,
when moved by a principle of true love, may feel a warmth of gratitude to the
universal father, and a lively sympathy with those nations, where divine Light
has been less manifest.

This desire for their real good may beget a willingness to undergo hardships
for their sakes, that the true knowledge of God may be spread amongst them: but
to take them from their own land, with views of profit to ourselves, by means
inconsistent with pure justice, is foreign to that principle which seeks the
happiness of the whole creation. Forced subjection, of innocent persons of full
age, is inconsistent with right reason; on one side, the human mind is not
naturally fortified with that firmness in wisdom and goodness, necessary to an
independent ruler; on the other side, to be subject to the uncontrollable will
of a man, liable to err, is most painful and afflicting to a conscientious
creature.

It is our happiness faithfully to serve the divine Being, who made us; his
perfection makes our service reasonable; but so long as men are biassed by
narrow self-love, so long an absolute power over other men is unfit for them.

Men, taking on them the government of others, may intend to govern reasonably,
and make their subjects more happy than they would be otherwise; but, as
absolute command belongs only to him who is perfect, where frail men, in their
own wills, assume such command, it has a direct tendency to vitiate their
minds, and make them more unfit for government.

Placing on men the ignominious title SLAVE, dressing them in uncomely
garments, keeping them to servile labor, in which they are often dirty, tends
gradually to fix a notion in the mind, that they are a sort of people below us
in nature, and leads us to consider them as such in all our conclusions about
them. And, moreover, a person which in our esteem is mean and contemptible, if
their language or behavior toward us is unseemly or disrespectful, it excites
wrath more powerfully than the like conduct in one we accounted our equal or
superior; and where this happens to be the case, it disqualifies for candid
judgment; for it is unfit for a person to sit as judge in a case where his own
personal resentments are stirred up; and, as members of society in a well
framed government, we are mutually dependent. Present interest incites to duty,
and makes each man attentive to the convenience of others; but he whose will is
a law to others, and can enforce obedience by punishment; be whose wants are
supplied without feeling any obligation to make equal returns to his
benefactor, his irregular appetites find an open field for motion, and he is in
danger of growing hard, and inattentive to their convenience who labor for his
support; and so loses that disposition, in which alone men are fit to govern.

The English government has been commended by candid foreigners for the disuse
of racks and tortures, so much practiced in some states; but this multiplying
slaves now leads to it; for where people exact hard labor of others, without a
suitable reward, and are resolved to continue in that way, severity to such who
oppose them becomes the consequence; and several Negroe criminals, among the
English in America, have been executed in a lingering, painful way, very
terrifying to others.

It is a happy case to set out right, and persevere in the same way: a wrong
beginning leads into many difficulties; for to support one evil, another
becomes customary; two produces more; and the further men proceed in this way,
the greater their dangers, their doubts and fears, and the more painful and
perplexing are their circumstances; so that such who are true friends to the
real and lasting interest of our country, and heartily consider the tendency of
things, cannot but feel some concern on this account.

There is that superiority in men over the brute creatures, and some of them so
manifestly dependent on men for a living, that for them to serve us in
moderation, so far as relates to the right use of things, looks consonant to
the design of our Creator.

There is nothing in their frame, nothing relative to the propagating their
species, which argues the contrary; but in men there is. The frame of men's
bodies, and the disposition of their minds are different; some, who are tough
and strong, and their minds active, choose ways of life requiring much labor to
support them; others are soon weary; and though use makes labor more
tolerable, yet some are less apt for toil than others, and their minds less
sprightly. These latter laboring for their subsistence, commonly choose a life
easy to support, being content with a little. When they are weary they may
rest, take the most advantageous part of the day for labor; and in all cases
proportion one thing to another, that their bodies be not oppressed.

Now, while each is at liberty, the latter may be as happy, and live as
comfortably as the former; but where men of the first sort have the latter
under absolute command, not considering the odds in strength and firmness, do
sometimes, in their eager pursuit, lay on burdens grievous to be borne; by
degrees grow rigorous, and, aspiring to greatness, they increase oppression,
and the true order of kind Providence is subverted.

There are weaknesses sometimes attending us, which make little or no
alteration in our countenances, nor much lessen our appetite for food, and yet
so affect us, as to make labor very uneasy. In such case masters, intent on
putting forward business, and jealous of the sincerity of their slaves, may
disbelieve what they say, and grievously afflict them.

Action is necessary for all men, and our exhausting frame requires a support,
which is the fruit of action. The earth must be labored to keep us alive:
labor is a proper part of our life; to make one answer the other in some
useful motion, looks agreeable to the design of our Creator. Motion, rightly
managed, tends to our satisfaction, health and support.

Those who quit all useful business, and live wholly on the labor of others,
have their exercise to seek; some such use less than their health requires;
others choose that which, by the circumstances attending it, proves utterly
reverse to true happiness. Thus, while some are diverse ways distressed for want
of an open channel of useful action, those who support them sigh, and are
exhausted in a stream too powerful for nature, spending their days with too
little cessation from labor.

Seed sown with the tears of a confined oppressed people, harvest cut down by
an overborne discontented reaper, makes bread less sweet to the taste of an
honest man, than that which is the produce, or just reward of such voluntary
action, which is one proper part of the business of human creatures.

Again, the weak state of the human species, in bearing and bringing forth
their young, and the helpless condition of their young beyond that of other
creatures, clearly show that Perfect Goodness designs a tender care and regard
should be exercised toward them; and that no imperfect, arbitrary power should
prevent the cordial effects of that sympathy, which is, in the minds of
well-met pairs, to each other, and toward their offspring.

In our species the mutual ties of affection are more rational and durable than
in others below us; the care and labor of raising our offspring much greater.
The satisfaction arising to us in their innocent company, and in their advances
from one rational improvement to another, is considerable, when two are thus
joined, and their affections sincere. It however happens among slaves, that
they are often situate in different places; and their seeing each other depends
on the will of men, liable to human passions, and a bias in judgment; who, with
views of self-interest, may keep them apart more than is right. Being absent
from each other, and often with other company, there is a danger of their
affections being alienated, jealousies arising, the happiness otherwise
resulting from their offspring frustrated, and the comforts of marriage
destroyed. -- These things being considered closely, as happening to a near
friend, will appear to be hard and painful.

He who reverently observes that goodness manifested by our gracious Creator
toward the various species of beings in this world, will see, that in our frame
and constitution is clearly shown that innocent men, capable to manage for
themselves, were not intended to be slaves.

A person lately traveling amongst the Negroes near Senegal, has this remark;
Which way soever I turned my eyes on this pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect
image of pure nature; an agreeable solitude, bounded on every side by charming
land-skips, the rural situation of cottages in the midst of trees. The ease and
indolence of the Negroes reclined under the shade of their spreading foliage;
the simplicity of their dress and manners; the whole revived in my mind the
idea of our first parents, and I seemed to contemplate the world in its
primitive state. M. Adanson, page 55.

Some Negroes in these parts, who have had an agreeable education, have
manifested a brightness of understanding equal to many of us. A remark of this
kind we find in Bosman, page 328. The Negroes of Fida, says he, are so
accurately quick in their merchandise accounts, that they easily reckon as
justly and quickly in their heads only, as we with the assistance of pen and
ink, though the sum amounts to several thousands.

Through the force of long custom, it appears needful to speak in relation to
color. -- Suppose a white child, born of parents of the meanest sort, who died
and left him an infant, falls into the hands of a person, who endeavors to
keep him a slave, some men would account him an unjust man in doing so, who yet
appear easy while many black people, of honest lives, and good abilities, are
enslaved, in a manner more shocking than the case here supposed. This is owing
chiefly to the idea of slavery being connected with the black color, and
liberty with the white: -- and where false ideas are twisted into our minds, it
is with difficulty we get fairly disentangled.

A traveller, in cloudy weather, misseth his way, makes many turns while he is
lost; still forms in his mind, the bearing and situation of places, and though
the ideas are wrong, they fix as fast as if they were right. Finding how things
are, we see our mistake; yet the force of reason, with repeated observations on
places and things, do not soon remove those false notions, so fastened upon us,
but it will seem in the imagination as if the annual course of the sun was
altered; and though, by recollection, we are assured it is not, yet those ideas
do not suddenly leave us.

Selfishness being indulged, clouds the understanding; and where selfish men,
for a long time, proceed on their way, without opposition, the deceiveableness
of unrighteousness gets so rooted in their intellects, that a candid
examination of things relating to self-interest is prevented; and in this
circumstance, some who would not agree to make a slave of a person whose color
is like their own, appear easy in making slaves of others of a different
color, though their understandings and morals are equal to the generality of
men of their own color.

The color of a man avails nothing, in matters of right and equity. Consider
color in relation to treaties; by such, disputes betwixt nations are sometimes
settled. And should the father of us all so dispose things, that treaties with
black men should sometimes be necessary, how then would it appear amongst the
princes and ambassadors, to insist on the prerogative of the white color?

Whence is it that men, who believe in a righteous omnipotent Being, to whom
all nations stand equally related, and are equally accountable, remain so easy
in it; but for that the ideas of Negroes and slaves are so interwoven in the
mind, that they do not discuss this matter with that candor and freedom of
thought, which the case justly calls for?

To come at a right feeling of their condition, requires humble serious
thinking; for, in their present situation, they have but little to engage our
natural affection in their favor.

Had we a son or a daughter involved in the same case, in which many of them
are, it would alarm us, and make us feel their condition without seeking for
it. The adversity of an intimate friend will incite our compassion, while
others, equally good, in the like trouble, will but little affect us.

Again, the man in worldly honor, whom we consider as our superior, treating
us with kindness and generosity, begets a return of gratitude and friendship
toward him. We may receive as great benefits from men a degree lower than
ourselves, in the common way of reckoning, and feel ourselves less engaged in
favor of them. Such is our condition by nature; and these things being
narrowly watched and examined, will be found to center in self-love.

The blacks seem far from being our kinsfolks, and did we find an agreeable
disposition and sound understanding in some of them, which appeared as a good
foundation for a true friendship between us, the disgrace arising from an open
friendship with a person of so vile a stock, in the common esteem, would
naturally tend to hinder it. -- They have neither honors, riches, outward
magnificence nor power; their dress coarse, and often ragged; their employ
drudgery, and much in the dirt: they have little or nothing at command; but
must wait upon and work for others, to obtain the necessaries of life; so that,
in their present situation, there is not much to engage the friendship, or move
the affection of selfish men: but such who live in the spirit of true charity,
to sympathise with the afflicted in the lowest stations of life, is a thing
familiar to them.

Such is the kindness of our Creator, that people, applying their minds to
sound wisdom, may, in general, with moderate exercise, live comfortably, where
no misapplied power hinders it. -- We in these parts have cause gratefully to
acknowledge it. But men leaving the true use of things, their lives are less
calm, and have less of real happiness in them.

Many are desirous of purchasing and keeping slaves, that they may live in some
measure conformable to those customs of the times, which have in them a
tincture of luxury; for when we, in the least degree, depart from that use of
the creatures, for which the Creator of all things intended them, there luxury
begins.

And if we consider this way of life seriously, we shall see there is nothing
in it sufficient to induce a wise man to choose it, before a plain, simple way
of living. If we examine stately buildings and equipage, delicious food,
superfine clothes, silks and linens; if we consider the splendor of choice
metal fastened upon raiment, and the most showy inventions of men; it will yet
appear that the humble-minded man, who is contented with the true use of
houses, food and garments, and cheerfully exercises himself agreeable to his
station in civil society, to earn them, acts more reasonably, and discovers
more soundness of understanding in his conduct, than such who lay heavy burdens
on others, to support themselves in a luxurious way of living.

George Buchanan, in his history of Scotland, page 62, tells of some ancient
inhabitants of Britain, who were derived from a people that "had a way of
marking their bodies, as some said, with instruments of iron, with variety of
pictures, and with animals of all shapes, and wear no garments, that they
should not hide their pictures; and were therefore called Picts."

Did we see those people shrink with pain, for a considerable time together,
under the point or edge of this iron instrument, and their bodies all bloody
with the operation; did we see them sometimes naked, suffering with cold, and
refuse to put on garments, that those imaginary ensigns of grandeur might not
be concealed, it is likely we should pity their folly, and fondness for those
things: but if we heartily compare their conduct, in that case, with some
conduct amongst ourselves, will it not appear that our folly is the greatest?

In true gospel simplicity, free from all wrong use of things, a spirit which
breathes peace and good will is cherished; but when we aspire after imaginary
grandeur, and apply to selfish means to attain our end, this desire, in its
original, is the same with the Picts in cutting figures on their bodies; but
the evil consequences attending our proceedings are the greatest.

A covetous mind, which seeks opportunity to exalt itself, is a great enemy to
true harmony in a country: envy and grudging usually accompany this
disposition, and it tends to stir up its likeness in others. And where this
disposition arises so high, as to embolden us to look upon honest industrious
men as our own property during life, and to keep them to hard labor, to
support us in those customs which have not their foundation in right reason; or
to use any means of oppression; a haughty spirit is cherished on one side, and
the desire of revenge frequently on the other, till the inhabitants of the land
are ripe for great commotion and trouble; and thus luxury and oppression have
the seeds of war and desolation in them.

Some Account of the SLAVE TRADE, From the writings of persons who have been at
the places where they are first purchased, viz.
BOSMAN on Guinea, who was a factor for the Dutch about sixteen years in that
country, (page 339) thus remarks: But since I have so often mentioned that
commerce, I shall describe how it is managed by our factors. The first business
of one of our factors, when he comes to Fida, is to satisfy the customs of the
king, and the great men, which amounts to about one hundred pounds, in Guinea
value, as the goods must sell there. After which we have free license to trade,
which is published throughout the whole land by the crier. And yet before we
can deal with any person, we are obliged to buy the king's whole stock of
slaves, at a set price; which is commonly one third or fourth higher than
ordinary. After which, we have free leave to deal with all his subjects, of
what rank soever. But if there happen to be no stock of slaves, the factor must
resolve to run the risk of trusting the inhabitants with goods, to the value of
one or two hundred slaves; which commodities they send into the inland country,
in order to buy with them slaves at all markets, and that sometimes two hundred
miles deep in the country: for you ought to be informed, that markets of men
are here kept in the same manner as they of beasts are with us.

Most of the slaves which are offered to us, are prisoners of war, which are
sold by the victors as their booty. -- When these slaves come to Fida, they are
put in prisons all together; and when we treat concerning them, they are all
brought out in a large plain, where, by our surgeons, whose province it is,
they are thoroughly examined, even to the smallest member, and that naked, both
men and women, without the least distinction or modesty. Those which are
approved as good, are set on one side. The invalids and maimed being thrown
out, the remainder are numbered, and it is entered who delivered them: in the
mean while a burning iron, with the arms or name of the company, lies in the
fire, with which ours are marked on the breast. This is done, that we may
distinguish them from the slaves of the English, French, or others. When we
have agreed with the owners of the slaves, they are returned to their prisons,
where, from that time forward, they are kept at our charge, cost us twopence a
day a slave, which serves to subsist them, like our criminals, on bread and
water: so that, to save charges, we send them on board our ships the first
opportunity; before which their masters strip them of all they have on their
backs, so that they come aboard stark naked, as well women as men; in which
condition they are obliged to continue, if the master of the ship is not so
charitable (which he commonly is) as to bestow something on them, to cover
their nakedness.

Same author, page 310. The inhabitants of Popo, as well as those of Coto,
depend on plunder, and the slave trade, in both which they very much exceed the
latter; for being endowed with more courage, they rob more successfully, and by
that means increase their trade: notwithstanding which, to freight a vessel
with slaves, requires some months attendance. In the year 1697, in three days
time I could get but three slaves; but they assured me, that if I would have
patience for other three days only, they should be able to deliver me one or
two hundred.

Bosman, page 440. We cast anchor at cape Mizurada, but not one Negroe coming
on board, I went on shore; and being desirous to be informed why they did not
come on board, was answered, That about two months before, the English had been
there with two vessels, and had ravaged the country, destroyed all their
canoes, plundered their houses, and carried off some of their people for
slaves; upon which the remainder fled to the inland country. They tell us, they
live in peace with all their neighbors, and have no notion of any other enemy
than the English; of which nation they had taken some then: and publicly
declared, that they would endeavor to get as many of them, as the two
mentioned ships had carried off of their natives. These unhappy English were in
danger of being sacrificed to the the memory of their friends, which some of
their nation carried off.

EXTRACTS from a Collection of VOYAGES. Vol. 1.
THE author, a popish missionary, speaking of his departing from the Negroe
country to Brazil, faith, "I remember the duke of Bambay (a Negroe chief) one
day sent me several blacks, to be my slaves, which I would not accept of; but
sent them back to him. I afterward told him, I came not into his country to
make slaves; but rather to deliver those from the slavery of the devil, whom he
kept in miserable thraldom. The ship I went aboard was loaded with elephants
teeth, and slaves, to the number of six hundred and eighty men, women and
children. It was a pitiful sight to behold how all these people were bestowed.
The men were standing in the hold, fastened one to another with stakes, for
fear they should rise and kill the whites: the women were between the decks,
and those that were with child in the great cabin: the children in the
steerage, pressed together like herrings in a barrel; w^^^h caused an
intolerable heat and stench." Page 507.

"It is now time (says the same author) to speak of a brutish custom these
people have amongst them in making slaves; which I take not to be lawful for
any person of a good conscience to buy." --

He then describes how women betray m^n into slavery, and adds, "There are
others going up into the inland country, and, through pretense of jurisdiction,
seize men upon any trifling offense, and sell them for slaves." Page 537.

The author of this treatise, conversing with a person of good credit, was
informed by him, that in his youth, while in England, he was minded to come to
America, and happening on a vessel bound for Guinea, and from thence into
America, he, with a view to see Africa, went on board her, and continued with
them in their voyage, and so came into this country. Among other circumstances
he related these. "They purchased on the coast about three hundred slaves; some
of them he understood were captives of war; some stolen by other Negroes
privately. -- When they had got many slaves on board, but were still on that
coast, a plot was laid by an old Negroe, notwithstanding the men had irons on
their hands and feet, to kill the English and take the vessel; which being
discovered, the man was hanged, and many of the slaves made to shoot at him as
he hung up."

"Another slave was charged with having a design to kill the English; and the
captain spoke to him in relation to the charge brought against him, as he stood
on deck; whereupon he immediately threw himself into the sea, and was drowned."

"Several Negroes, confined on board, were, he said, so extremely uneasy with
their condition, that after many endeavors used, they could never make them
eat nor drink after they came in the vessel; but in a desperate resolution
starved themselves to death, behaving toward the last like madmen."

In Randall's geography, printed 1744, we are informed, "That in a time of full
peace nothing is more common than for the Negroes of one nation to steal those
of another, and sell them to the Europeans. It is thought that the English
transmit annually near fifty thousand of these unhappy creatures; and the other
European nations together, about two hundred thousand more."

It is through the goodness of God that the reformation from gross idolatry and
barbarity has been thus far effected; if we consider our conditions as
christians, and the benefits we enjoy, and compare them with the condition of
those people, and consider that our nation trading with them for their country
produce, have had an opportunity of imparting useful instructions to them, and
remember that but little pains have been taken therein, it must look like an
indifference in us. -- But when we reflect on a custom the most shocking of any
amongst them, and remember that, with a view to outward gain, we have joined as
parties in it; that our concurrence with them in their barbarous proceedings,
had tended to harden them in cruelty, and been a means of increasing calamities
in their country, we must own that herein we have acted contrary to those
worthies whose lives and substance were spent in propagating truth and
righteousness amongst the heathen. When Saul, by the hand of Doeg, slew four
score priests at once, he had a jealousy that one of them at least was
confederate with David, whom he considered as his enemy. -- Herod slaying all
the male children in Bethlehem of two years old and under, was an act of
uncommon cruelty; but he supposed there was a male child there, within that
age, who was likely to be king of the Jews, and finding no way to destroy him,
but by destroying them all, thought this the most effectual means to secure the
kingdom to his own family.

When the sentence against the protestants of Marindol, etc. in France, was put
in execution, great numbers of people fled to the wilderness; amongst whom were
ancient people, women great with child, and others with babes in their arms,
who endured calamities grievous to relate, and in the end some perished with
hunger, and many were destroyed by fire and sword; but they had this objection
against them, That they obstinately persisted in opposition to holy mother
church, and being heretics, it was right to work their ruin and extirpation,
and raze out their memory from among men. Fox's Acts and Monuments, page 646.

In favor of those cruelties, every one had what they deemed a plea. -- These
scenes of blood and cruelty among the barbarous inhabitants of Guinea, are not
less terrible than those now mentioned. They are continued from one age to
another, and we make ourselves parties and fellow-helpers in them; nor do I see
that we have any plea in our favor more plausible than the plea of Saul, of
Herod, or the French in those slaughters.

Many who are parties in this trade, by keeping slaves with views of
self-interest, were they to go as soldiers in one of these inland expeditions
to catch slaves, they must necessarily grow dissatisfied with such employ, or
cease to profess their religious principles. And though the first and most
striking part of the scene is done at a great distance, and by other hands, yet
every one who is acquainted with the circumstances, and notwithstanding joins
in it for the sake of gain only, must, in the nature of things, be chargeable
with the others.

Should we consider ourselves present as spectators, when cruel Negroes
privately catch innocent children, who are employed in the fields; hear their
lamentable cries, under the most terrifying apprehensions; or should we look
upon it as happening in our own families, having our children carried off by
savages, we must needs own, that such proceedings are contrary to the nature of
christianity; should we meditate on the wars which are greatly increased by
this trade, and on that affliction which many thousands live in, through
apprehensions of being taken or slain; on the terror and amazement that
villages are in, when surrounded by these troops of enterprisers; on the great
pain and misery of groaning dying men, who get wounded in those skirmishes; we
shall necessarily see, that it is impossible to be parties in such a trade, on
the motives of gain, and retain our innocence.

Should we consider the case of multitudes of those people, who in a fruitful
soil, and hot climate, with a little labor, raise grain, roots and pulse to
eat; spin and weave cotton, and fasten together the large feathers of fowls, to
cover their nakedness; many of whom, in much simplicity, live inoffensively in
their cottages, and take great comfort in raising up children.

Should we contemplate on their circumstances, when suddenly attacked, and
labor to understand their inexpressible anguish of soul, who survive the
conflict; should we think on inoffensive women, who fled at the alarm, and at
their return saw that village, in which they and their acquaintance were raised
up, and had pleasantly spent their youthful days, now lying in a gloomy
desolation; some shocked at finding the mangled bodies of their near friends
amongst the slain; others bemoaning the absence of a brother, a sister, a
child, or a whole family of children, who, by cruel men, are bound and carried
to market, to be sold, without the least hopes of seeing them again: add to
this, the afflicted condition of these poor captives, who are separated from
family connections, and all the comforts arising from friendship and
acquaintance, carried amongst a people of a strange language, to be parted from
their fellow captives, put to labor in a manner more servile and wearisome
than what they were used to, with many sorrowful circumstances attending their
slavery; and we must necessarily see, that it belongs not to the followers of
Christ to be parties in such a trade, on the motives of outward gain.

Though there were wars and desolation among the Negroes, before the Europeans
began to trade there for slaves, yet now the calamities are greatly increased,
so many thousands being annually brought from thence; and we, by purchasing
them, with views of self-interest, are become parties with them, and accessory
to that increase.

In this case, we are not joining against an enemy who is fomenting discords on
our continent, and using all possible means to make slaves of us and our
children; but against a people who have not injured us.

If those who were spoiled and wronged, should at length make slaves of their
oppressors, and continue slavery to their posterity, it would look rigorous to
candid men: but to act that part toward a people, when neither they nor their
fathers have injured us, has something in it extraordinary, and requires our
serious attention.

Our children breaking a bone; getting so bruised, that a leg or an arm must be
taken off; lost for a few hours, so that we despair of their being found again;
a friend hurt, so that he dies in a day or two; these move us with grief: and
did we attend to these scenes in Africa, in like manner as if they were
transacted in our presence; and sympathise with the Negroes, in all their
afflictions and miseries, as we do with our children or friends: we should be
more careful to do nothing in any degree helping forward a trade productive of
so many, and so great calamities. Great distance makes nothing in our favor.
-- To willingly join with unrighteousness, to the injury of men who live some
thousand miles off, is the same in substance, as joining with it to the injury
of our neighbors.

In the eye of pure justice, actions are regarded according to the spirit and
disposition they arise from: some evils are accounted scandalous, and the
desire of reputation may keep selfish men from appearing openly in them; but he
who is shy on that account, and yet by indirect means promotes that evil, and
shares in the profit of it, cannot be innocent.

He who, with a view to self-interest, buys a slave, made so by violence, and
only on the strength of such purchase holds him a slave, thereby joins hands
with those who committed that violence, and in the nature of things becomes
chargeable with the guilt.

Suppose a man wants a slave, and being in Guinea, goes and hides by the path
where boys pass from one little town to another, and there catches one the day
he expects to sail; and taking him on board, brings him home, without any
aggravating circumstances. Suppose another buys a man, taken by them who live
by plunder and the slave trade: they often steal them privately, and often shed
much blood in getting them. He who buys the slaves thus taken, pays those men
for their wickedness, and makes himself party with them.

Whatever nicety of distinction there may be, betwixt going in person on
expeditions to catch slaves, and buying those, with a view to self-interest,
which others have taken; it is clear and plain to an upright mind, that such
distinction is in words, not in substance; for the parties are concerned in the
same work, and have a necessary connection with, and dependence on, each other;
for were there none to purchase slaves, they who live by stealing and selling
them, would of consequence do less at it.

Some would buy a Negroe brought from Guinea, with a view to self-interest, and
keep him a slave, who yet would seem to scruple to take arms, and join with men
employed in taking slaves.

Others have civil Negroes, who were born in our country, capable and likely to
manage well for themselves; whom they keep as slaves, without ever trying them
with freedom, and take the profit of their labor as a part of their estates,
and yet disapprove bringing them from their own country.

If those Negroes had come here, as merchants, with their ivory and gold dust,
in order to trade with us, and some powerful person had took their effects to
himself, and then put them to hard labor, and ever after considered them as
slaves, the action would be looked upon as unrighteous.

Those Negroe merchants having children after their being among us, whose
endowments and conduct were like other people's in common, if on their
attaining to mature age, and requesting to have their liberty, they should be
told they were born in slavery, and were lawful slaves, and therefore their
request should be denied; such conduct toward them, would be looked upon as
unfair and oppressive.

In the present case, relating to home-born Negroes, whose understandings and
behavior are as good as common among other people, if we have any claim to
them as slaves, that claim is grounded on their being the children or offspring
of slaves, who, in general, were made such through means as unrighteous, and
attended with more terrible circumstances than the case last supposed; so that
when we trace our claim to the bottom, these home-born Negroes having paid for
their education, and given reasonable security to those who owned them, in case
of their becoming chargeable, we have no more equitable right to their service,
than we should if they were the children of honest merchants who came from
Guinea in an English vessel to trade with us.

If we claim any right to them as the children of slaves, we build on the
foundation laid by them, who made slaves of their ancestors; so that of
necessity we must either justify the trade, or relinquish our right to them, as
being the children of slaves.

Why should it seem right to honest men to make advantage by these people more
than by others? Others enjoy freedom, receive wages equal to their work, at or
near such time as they have discharged these equitable obligations they are
under to those who educated them. -- These have made no contract to serve; been
no more expensive in raising up than others, and many of them appear as likely
to make a right use of freedom as other people; which way then can an honest
man withhold from them that liberty, which is the free gift of the Most High to
his rational creatures?

THE upright in heart cannot succeed the wicked in their wickedness; nor is it
consonant to the life they live, to hold fast an advantage unjustly gained.

The Negroes who live by plunder, and the slave trade, steal poor innocent
children, invade their neighbors territories, and spill much blood to get
these slaves: and can it be possible for an honest man to think that, with a
view to self-interest, we may continue slavery to the offspring of these
unhappy sufferers, merely because they are the children of slaves, and not have
a share of this guilt?

It is granted by many, that the means used in getting them are unrighteous,
and that buying them, when brought here, is wrong; yet as setting them free is
attended with some difficulty, they do not comply with it; but seem to be of
the opinion, that to give them food and raiment, and keep them servants,
without any other wages, is the best way to manage them that they know of: and
hoping that their children after them will not be cruel to the Negroes,
conclude to leave them as slaves to their children.

While present outward interest is the chief object of our attention, we shall
feel many objections in our minds against renouncing our claim to them, as the
children of slaves; for being prepossessed with wrong opinions, prevents our
seeing things clearly, which, to indifferent persons, are easy to be seen.

Suppose a person seventy years past, in low circumstances, bought a Negroe man
and woman, and that the children of such person are now wealthy, and have the
children of such slaves. Admit that the first Negroe man and his wife did as
much business as their master and mistress, and that the children of the slaves
have done some more than their young masters: suppose, on the whole, that the
expense of living has been less on the Negroes side, than on the other (all
which are no improbable suppositions) it follows, that in equity these Negroes
have a right to a part of this increase; that should some difficulties arise on
their being set free, there is reason for us patiently to labor through them.

As the conduct of men varies, relating to civil society; so different
treatment is justly due to them. Indiscreet men occasion trouble in the world;
and it remains to be the care of such, who seek the good of mankind, to
admonish as they find occasion.

The slothfulness of some of them, in providing for themselves and families, it
is likely, would require the notice of their neighbors; nor is it unlikely
that some would, with justice, be made servants, and others punished for their
crimes. Pure justice points out to each individual their due; but to deny a
people the privilege of human creatures, on a supposition that, being free,
many of them would be troublesome to us, is to mix the condition of good and
bad men together, and treat the whole as the worst of them deserve.

If we seriously consider, that liberty is the right of innocent men; that the
mighty God is a refuge for the oppressed; that in reality we are indebted to
them; that they being set free, are still liable to the penalties of our laws,
and as likely to have punishment for their crimes as other people: this may
answer all our objections. And to retain them in perpetual servitude, without
just cause for it, will produce effects, in the event, more grievous than
setting them free would do, when a real love to truth and equity was the motive
to it.

Our authority over them stands originally in a purchase made from those who,
as to the general, obtained theirs by unrighteousness. Whenever we have
recourse to such authority, it tends more or less to obstruct the channels,
through which the perfect plant in us receives nourishment.

There is a principle, which is pure, placed in the human mind, which in
different places and ages has had different names; it is, however, pure, and
proceeds from God. -- It is deep, and inward, confined to no forms of religon,
nor excluded from any, where the heart stands in perfect sincerity. In
whomsoever this takes root, and grows, of what nation soever, they become
brethren, in the best sense of the expression. Using ourselves to take ways
which appear most easy to us, when inconsistent with that purity which is
without beginning, we thereby set up a government of our own, and deny
obedience to him, whose service is true liberty.

He that has a servant, made so wrongfully, and knows it to be so, when he
treats him otherwise than a free man, when he reaps the benefit of his labor,
without paying him such wages as are reasonably due to free men for the like
service, clothes excepted; these things, though done in calmness, without any
show of disorder, do yet deprave the mind in like manner, and with as great
certainty, as prevailing cold congeals water. These steps taken by masters, and
their conduct striking the minds of their children, whilst young, leave less
room for that which is good to work upon them. The customs of their parents,
their neighbors, and the people with whom they converse, working upon their
minds; and they, from thence, conceiving ideas of things, and modes of conduct,
the entrance into their hearts becomes, in a great measure, shut up against the
gentle movings of uncreated purity.

From one age to another, the gloom grows thicker and darker, till error gets
established by general opinion; that whoever attends to perfect goodness, and
remains under the melting influence of it, finds a path unknown to many, and
sees the necessity to lean upon the arm of divine strength, and dwell alone, or
with a few, in the right committing their cause to him, who is a refuge for his
people, in all their troubles.

Where, through the agreement of a multitude, some channels of justice are
stopped, and men may support their characters as just men, by being just to a
party, there is great danger of contracting an alliance with that spirit, which
stands in opposition to the God of love, and spreads discord, trouble, and
vexation among such who give up to the influence of it.

Negroes are our fellow creatures, and their present condition amongst us
requires our serious consideration. We know not the time when those scales, in
which mountains are weighed, may turn. The Parent of mankind is gracious: his
care is over his smallest creatures; and a multitude of men escape not his
notice: And though many of them are trodden down, and despised, yet he
remembers them: he sees their affliction, and looks upon the spreading
increasing exaltation of the oppressor. He turns the channels of power, humbles
the most haughty people, and gives deliverance to the oppressed, at such
periods as are consistent with his infinite justice and goodness. And wherever
gain is preferred to equity, and wrong things publicly encouraged to that
degree, that wickedness takes root, and spreads wide amongst the inhabitants of
a country, there is real cause for sorrow to all such, whose love to mankind
stands on a true principle, and who wisely consider the end and event of things.

FINIS.
CONSIDERATIONS ON PURE WISDOM, AND HUMAN POLICY; ON LABOR; ON SCHOOLS; And on
the RIGHT USE of the LORD'S OUTWARD GIFTS. First printed in the year 1768.
JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.
INTRODUCTION.
MY mind has often been affected with sorrow, on account of the prevailing of
that spirit, which leads from an humble waiting on the inward teaching of
Christ, to pursue ways of living, attended with unnecessary labor, and which
draws forth the minds of many people to seek after outward power, and to strive
for riches, which frequently introduce oppression, and bring forth wars and
grievous calamities.

It is with reverence that I acknowledge the mercies of our heavenly Father,
who, in infinite love, did visit me in my youth, and wrought a belief in me,
that through true obedience a state of inward purity may be known in this life,
in which we may love mankind in the same love with which our Redeemer loves
us, and therein learn resignation to endure hardships, for the real good of
others.

While the eye is single, the whole body is full of light, Mat. vi. 22. but for
want of this, selfish desires, and an imaginary superiority, darken the mind;
hence injustice frequently proceeds; and where this is the case, to convince
the judgment, is the most effectual remedy.

Where violent measures are pursued in opposing injustice, the passions, and
resentments of the injured, frequently operate in the prosecution of their
designs; and after conflicts productive of very great calamities, the minds of
contending parties often remain as little acquainted with the pure principle of
divine love, as they were before; but where people walk in that pure light in
which all their works are wrought in God, John iii. 21. and under oppression
persevere in the meek spirit, and abide firm in the cause of truth, without
actively complying with oppressive demands, through those the Lord has often
manifested his power, in opening the understandings of others, to the promoting
righteousness in the earth.

A time, I believe, is coming, wherein this divine work will so spread and
prevail, that Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, nor learn war any
more, Isaiah ii. 4. And as we, through the tender mercies of God, do feel that
this precious work is begun, I am concerned to encourage my brethren and
sisters in a holy care and diligence, that each of us may so live, under the
sanctifying power of truth, as to be redeemed from all unnecessary cares; that
our eye being single to him, no customs, however prevalent, which are contrary
to the wisdom from above, may hinder us from faithfully following his holy
leadings, in whatsoever he may graciously appoint for us.

CONSIDERATIONS ON PURE WISDOM, AND HUMAN POLICY.
TO have our trust settled in the Lord, and not to seek after, nor desire
outward treasures, any further than his holy spirit leads us therein, is a
happy state, as says the prophet, Blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

Pure wisdom leads people into lowliness of mind, in which they learn
resignation to the divine will, and contentment in suffering for his cause,
when they cannot keep a clear conscience without suffering.

In this pure wisdom the mind is attentive to the root, and original spring of
motions and desires; and as we know the Lord to be our refuge, and find no
safety, but in humbly walking before him; we feel an holy engagement, that
every desire which leads therefrom may be brought to judgment.

While we proceed in this precious way, and find ardent longings for a full
deliverance from every thing which defiles, all prospects of gain, that are not
consistent with the wisdom from above, are considered as snares, and an inward
concern is felt, that we may live under the cross, and faithfully attend to
that holy spirit, which is sufficient to preserve out of them.

When I have considered that saying of Christ, Mat. vi. 19, Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, his omnipotence has often occurred to my mind.

While we believe that he is every where present with his people, and that
perfect goodness, wisdom and power, are united in him, how comfortable is the
consideration.

Our wants may be great, but his power is greater. We may be oppressed and
despised, but he is able to turn our patient sufferings into profit to
ourselves, and to the advancement of his work on earth. His people, who feel
the power of his cross, to crucify all that is selfish in them, who are engaged
in outward concerns, from a convincement that it is their duty, and resign
themselves, and their treasures, to him; these feel that it is dangerous to
give way to that in us, which craves riches and greatness in this world.

As the heart truly contrite, earnestly desires to know Christ, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, Phil. iii. 10, so far as the Lord for gracious
ends may lead into them; as such feel that it is their interest to put their
trust in God, and to seek no gain but that which he, by his holy spirit, leads
into; so, on the contrary, they who do not reverently wait for this divine
teacher, and are not humbly concerned, according to their measure, to fill up
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, Col. i. 24, in patiently
suffering for the promoting righteousness in the earth; but have an eye toward
the power of men, and the outward advantage of wealth, these are often
attentive to those employments which appear profitable, even though the gains
arise from such trade and business which proceeds from the workings of that
spirit, which is estranged from the self-denying life of an humble contrite
christian.

While I write on this subject, I feel my mind tenderly affected toward those
honestly disposed people, who have been brought up in employments attended with
those difficulties.

To such I may say, in the feeling of our heavenly Father^s love, and number
myself with you, O that our eyes may be single to the Lord! may we reverently
wait on him for strength, to lay aside all unnecessary expense of every kind,
and learn contentment, in a plain simple life.

May we, in lowliness, submit to the leadings of his spirit, and enter upon any
outward employ which he graciously points out to us, and then whatever
difficulties arise, in consequence of our faithfulness, I trust they will work
for our good.

Small treasure to a resigned mind is sufficient. How happy is it to be content
with a little, to live in humility, and feel that in us, which breathes out
this language, Abba! Father.

If that, called the wisdom of this world, had no resemblance of true wisdom,
the name of wisdom, I suppose, had not been given to it.

As wasting outward substance, to gratify vain desires, on one hand; so
slothfulness and neglect, on the other, do often involve men and their families
in trouble, and reduce them to want and distress; to shun both these opposite
vices, is good in itself, and has a resemblance of wisdom; but while people
thus provident, have it principally in view to get riches, and power, and the
friendship of this world, and do not humbly wait for the spirit of truth to
lead them in purity; these, through an anxious care to obtain the end desired,
reach forth for gain in worldly wisdom, and, in regard to their inward state,
fall into diverse temptations and snares. And though such may think of applying
wealth to good purposes, and to use their power to prevent oppression, yet
wealth and power is often applied otherwise; nor can we depart from the
leadings of our holy shepherd, without going into confusion.

Great wealth is frequently attended with power, which nothing but divine love
can qualify the mind to use rightly; and as to the humility, and uprightness of
our children after us, how great is the uncertainty! If, in acquiring wealth,
we take hold on the wisdom which is from beneath, and depart from the leadings
of truth, and example our children herein, we have great cause to apprehend,
that wealth may be a snare to them; and prove an injury to others, over whom
their wealth may give them power.

To be redeemed from that wisdom which is from beneath, and walk in the light
of the Lord, is a precious situation; thus his people are brought to put their
trust in him; and in this humble confidence in his wisdom, goodness and power,
the righteous find a refuge in adversities, superior to the greatest outward
helps, and a comfort more certain than any worldly advantages can afford.

ON LABOR.
HAVING from my childhood been used to bodily labor for a living, I may
express my experience therein.

Right exercise affords an innocent pleasure in the time of it, and prepares us
to enjoy the sweetness of rest; but from the extremes each way, arise
inconveniences.

Moderate exercise opens the pores, gives the blood a lively circulation, and
the better enables us to judge rightly respecting that portion of labor which
is the true medium.

The fowls of the air sow not, nor gather into barns, yet our heavenly Father
feeds them, Mat. vi. 26; nor do I believe that infinite goodness and power
would have allotted labor to us, had he not seen that labor was proper for us
in this life.

The original design, and true medium of labor, is a subject, that, to me,
appears worthy of our serious consideration.

Idle men are often a burden to themselves, neglect the duty they owe to their
families, and become burdensome to others also.

As outward labor, directed by the wisdom from above, tends to our health, and
adds to our happiness in this life; so, on the contrary, entering upon it in a
selfish spirit, and pursuing it too long, or too hard, has a contrary effect.

I have observed, that too much labor not only makes the understanding dull,
but so intrudes upon the harmony of the body, that after ceasing from our toil,
we have another to pass through, before we can be so composed as to enjoy the
sweetness of rest.

From too much labor in the heat, frequently proceeds immoderate sweats, which
do often, I believe, open the way for disorders, and impair our constitutions.

When we go beyond the true medium, and feel weariness approaching, but think
business may suffer if we cease, at such a time spirituous liquors are
frequently taken, with a view to support nature under these fatigues.

I have found that too much labor in the summer heats the blood, that taking
strong drink to support the body under such labor, increases that heat, and
though a person may be so far temperate as not to manifest the least disorder,
yet the mind, in such a circumstance, does not retain that calmness and
serenity, which we should endeavor to live in.

Thus toiling in the heat, and drinking strong liquor, makes men more resolute,
and less considerate, and tends very much to disqualify from successfully
following him who is meek and low of heart.

As laying out business, more than is consistent with pure wisdom, is an evil,
so this evil frequently leads into more. Too much business leads to hurry. In
the hurry and toil too much strong drink is often used, and hereby many proceed
to noise and wantonness, and some, though more considerate, do often suffer loss,
as to a true composedness of mind.

I feel sincere desires in my heart that no rent, nor interest, might be laid
so high as to be a snare to tenants. That no desires of gain may draw any too
far in business. That no cares to support customs, which have not their
foundation in pure wisdom, may have place in our minds, but that we may build
on the sure foundation, and feel our holy shepherd to lead us, who alone is
able to preserve us, and bring forth from every thing which defiles.

Having several times, in my travels, had opportunity to observe the labor and
manner of life of great numbers of slaves, it appears to me that the true
medium is lamentably neglected by many, who assign them their portion of labor.

Without saying much at this time, concerning buying and selling men for term
of life, who have as just a right to liberty as we have; nor about the great
miseries, and effusion of blood, consequent to promoting the slave trade; and
to speak as favorably as may be, with regard to continuing those in bondage
who are amongst us, we cannot say there is no partiality in it: for whatever
tenderness may be manifested by individuals in their life time toward them, yet
for people to be transmitted from a man to his posterity, in the helpless
condition of slaves, appears inconsistent with the nature of the gospel spirit.
From such proceedings it often follows, that persons in the decline of life,
are deprived of moneys equitably due to them, and committed to the care, and
subjected to the absolute power of young unexperienced men, who know but little
about the weakness of old age, nor understand the language of declining life.

Where parents give their estates to their children, and then depend on them
for a maintenance, they sometimes meet with great inconveniences; but if the
power of possession, thus obtained, does often reverse the obligations of
gratitude and filial duty, and makes manifest, that youth are often ignorant of
the language of old age, how hard is the case of ancient Negroes, who, deprived
of the wages equitably due to them, are left to young people, who have been
used to look upon them as their inferiors.

For men to behold the fruits of their labor withheld from them, and possessed
by others, and in old age find themselves destitute of those comfortable
accommodations, and that tender regard which their time of life requires:

When they feel pains, and stiffness in their joints and limbs, weakness of
appetite, and that a little labor is wearisome, and still behold themselves in
the neglected uncomfortable condition of a slave, and oftentimes to a young
unsympathising man:

For men to be thus treated from one generation to another, who, besides their
own distresses, think on the slavery entailed on their posterity, and are
grieved! what disagreeable thoughts must they have of the professed followers
of Jesus! and how must their groans ascend to that almighty being, who "will be
a refuge for the oppressed," Psalm ix. 9.

ON SCHOOLS.
Suffer the little children to come unto me, and so bid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of God,
Mark. x. 14.
TO encourage children to do things with a view to get praise of men, to me
appears an obstruction to their being inwardly acquainted with the spirit of
truth. For it is the work of the Holy Spirit to direct the mind to God, that in
all our proceedings we may have a single eye to him. To give alms in secret, to
fast in secret, and labor to keep clear of that disposition reproved by our
Savior, But all their works they do for to be seen of men. Matt. xxiii. 5.

That divine light which enlightens all men, I believe, does often shine in the
minds of children very early, and to humbly wait for wisdom, that our conduct
toward them may tend to forward their acquaintance with it, and strengthen them
in obedience thereto, appears to me to be a duty on all of us.

By cherishing the spirit of pride, and the love of praise in them, I believe
they may sometimes improve faster in learning, than otherwise they would, but
to take measures to forward children in learning, which naturally tend to
divert their minds from true humility, appears to me to favor of the wisdom of
this world.

If tutors are not acquainted with sanctification of spirit, nor experienced in
an humble waiting for the leadings of truth, but follow the maxims of the
wisdom of this world, such children who are under their tuition, appear to me
to be in danger of imbibing thoughts, and apprehensions, reverse to that
meekness, and lowliness of heart, which is necessary for all the true followers
of Christ.

Children at an age fit for schools, are in a time of life which requires the
patient attention of pious people, and if we commit them to the tuition of
such, whose minds we believe are not rightly prepared to train them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, we are in danger of not acting the part of
faithful parents toward them; for our heavenly father does not require us to do
evil, that good may come of it; and it is needful that we deeply examine
ourselves, lest we get entangled in the wisdom of this world, and, through
wrong apprehensions, take such methods in education, as may prove a great
injury to the minds of our children.

It is a lovely sight to behold innocent children! and when they are sent to
such schools where their tender minds are in imminent danger of being led
astray by tutors, who do not live a self-denying life, or by the conversation
of such children who do not live in innocence, it is a case much to be lamented.

While a pious tutor has the charge of no more children than he can take due
care of, and keeps his authority in the truth, the good spirit in which he
leads and governs, works on the minds of such who are not hardened, and his
labors not only tend to bring them forward in outward learning, but to open
their understandings with respect to the true christian life; but where a
person has charge of too many, and his thoughts and time are so much employed
in the outward affairs of his school, that he does not so weightily attend to
the spirit and conduct of each individual, as to be enabled to administer
rightly to all in due season; through such omission he not only suffers, as to
the state of his own mind, but the minds of the children are in danger of
suffering also.

To watch the spirit of children, to nurture them in gospel love, and labor to
help them against that which would mar the beauty of their minds, is a debt we
owe them; and a faithful performance of our duty, not only tends to their
lasting benefit, and our own peace, but also to render their company agreeable
to us.

Instruction, thus administered, reaches the pure witness in the minds of such
children who are not hardened, and begets love in them toward those who thus
lead them on; but where too great a number are committed to a tutor, and he,
through much cumber, omits a careful attention to the minds of children, there
is danger of disorders gradually increasing amongst them, till the effects
thereof appear in their conduct, too strong to be easily remedied.

A care has lived on my mind, that more time might be employed by parents at
home, and by tutors at school, in weightily attending to the spirit and
inclinations of children, and that we may so lead, instruct, and govern them,
in this tender part of life, that nothing may be omitted in our power, to help
them on their way to become the children of our father, who is in heaven.

Meditating on the situation of schools in our provinces, my mind has, at
times, been affected with sorrow, and under these exercises it has appeared to
me, that if those who have large estates, were faithful stewads, and laid no
rent, nor interest, nor other demand, higher than is consistent with universal
love; and those in lower circumstances would, under a moderate employ, shun
unnecessary expense, even to the smallest article; and all unite in humbly
seeking to the Lord, he would graciously instruct us, and strengthen us, to
relieve the youth from various snares, in which many of them are entangled.

On the RIGHT USE of the LORD's OUTWARD GIFTS.
AS our understandings are opened by the pure light, we experience that,
through an inward approaching to God, the mind is strengthened in obedience;
and that by gratifying those desires which are not of his begetting, those
approaches to him are obstructed, and the deceivable spirit gains strength.

These truths, being as it were engraven upon our hearts, and our everlasting
interest in Christ evidently concerned herein, we become fervently engaged,
that nothing may be nourished which tends to feed pride or self-love in us.
Thus in pure obedience, we are not only instructed in our duty to God, but also
in the affairs which necessarily relate to this life, and the spirit of truth
which guides into all truth, leavens the mind with a pious concern, that
whatsoever we do in word or deed, may be done in his name, Col. iii. 17.

Hence such buildings, furniture, food, and raiment, as best answer our
necessities, and are the least likely to feed that selfish spirit which is our
enemy, are the most acceptable to us.

In this state the mind is tender, and inwardly watchful, that the love of gain
draw us not into any business, which may weaken our love to our heavenly
father, or bring unnecessary trouble to any of his creatures.

Thus the way gradually opens to cease from that spirit which craves riches and
things fetched far, which so mixeth with the customs of this world, and so
intrudes upon the true harmony of life, that the right medium of labor is very
much departed from. And as the minds of people are settled in a steady concern,
not to hold nor possess any thing but what may be held consistent with the
wisdom from above, they consider what they possess as the gift of God, and are
inwardly exercised, that in all parts of their conduct they may act agreeable
to the nature of the peaceable government of Christ.

A little supports such a life; and in a state truly resigned to the Lord, the
eye is single, to see what outward employ he leads into, as a means of our
subsistence, and a lively care is maintained to hold to that without launching
further.

There is a harmony in the several parts of this divine work in the hearts of
people; he who leads them to cease from those gainful employments, carried on
in that wisdom which is from beneath, delivers also from the desire after
worldly greatness, and reconciles the mind to a life so plain, that a little
does suffice.

Here the real comforts of life are not lessened. Moderate exercise, in the way
of true wisdom, is pleasant both to mind and body.

Food and raiment sufficient, though in the greatest simplicity, is accepted
with content and gratitude.

The mutual love, subsisting between the faithful followers of Christ, is more
pure than that friendship which is not seasoned with humility, how specious
soever the appearance.

Where people depart from pure wisdom in one case, it is often an introduction
to depart from it in many more; and thus a spirit which seeks for outward
greatness, and leads into worldly wisdom to attain it, and support it, gets
possession of the mind.

In beholding the customary departure from the true medium of labor, and that
unnecessary toil which many go through, in supporting outward greatness, and
procuring delicacies:

In beholding how the true calmness of life is changed into hurry, and that
many, by eagerly pursuing outward treasure, are in great danger of withering as
to the inward state of the mind:

In meditating on the works of this spirit, and on the desolations it makes
amongst the professors of christianity, I may thankfully acknowledge, that I
often feel pure love beget longings in my heart, for the exaltation of the
peaceable kingdom of Christ, and an engagement to labor according to the gift
bestowed on me, for the promoting an humble, plain, temperate way of living: a
life where no unnecessary cares, nor expenses, may encumber our minds, nor
lessen our ability to do good; where no desires after riches, or greatness, may
lead into hard dealing; where no connections with wordly minded men, may abate
our love to God, nor weaken a true zeal for righteousness: a life, wherein we
may diligently labor for resignedness to do, and suffer, whatever our heavenly
father may allot for us, in reconciling the world to himself.

When the prophet Isaiah had uttered his vision, and declared that a time was
coming wherein swords should be beat into plowshares, and spears into pruning
hooks, and that nation should not lift up sword against nation, nor learn war
any more; he immediately directs the minds of people to the divine teacher, in
this remarkable language, O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the
light of the Lord, Isaiah ii. 5.

To wait for the direction of this light, in all temporal as well as spiritual
concerns, appears necessary; for if in any case we enter lightly into temporal
affairs, without feeling this spirit of truth to open our way therein, and
through the love of this world proceed on, and seek for gain by that business
or traffic, which is not of the father, but of the world, 1 John ii. 16, we
fail in our testimony to the purity and peace of his government; and get into
that which is for chastisement.

This matter has lain heavy on my mind, it being evident, that a life less
humble, less simple and plain, than that which Christ leads his sheep into,
does necessarily require a support, which pure wisdom does not provide for;
hence there is no probability of our being a peculiar people, so zealous of
good works, as to have no fellowship with works of darkness, Titus ii. 14.
Ephesians. v. 11, while we have wants to supply which have their foundation in
custom, and do not come within the meaning of those expressions, your heavenly
father knows that ye have need of all these things, Matt. vi. 32.

These things which he beholds necessary for his people, he fails not to give
them in his own way, and time; but as his ways are above our ways, and his
thoughts above our thoughts, so imaginary wants are different from these things
which he knows that we have need of.

As my meditations have been on these things, compassion has filled my heart
toward my fellow creatures, involved in customs, grown up in the wisdom of this
world, which is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. iii. 19; and O that the youth may
be so thoroughly experienced in an humble walking before the Lord, that they
may be his children, and know him to be their refuge, their safe unfailing
refuge! through the various dangers attending this uncertain state of being.

If those whose minds are redeemed from the love of wealth, and who are content
with a plain, simple way of living, do yet find that to conduct the affairs of
a family, without giving countenance to unrighteous proceeding or having
fellowship with works of darkness, the most diligent care is necessary:

If customs, distinguishable from universal righteousness, and opposite to the
true self-denying life, are now prevalent, and so mixed with trade, and with
almost every employ, that it is only through humble waiting on the inward
guidance of truth, that we may reasonably hope to walk safely, and support an
uniform testimony to the peaceable government of Christ:

If this be the case, how lamentably do they expose themselves to temptations,
who give way to the love of riches, conform to expensive living, and reach
forth for gain, to support customs, which our holy shepherd leads not into.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE TRUE HARMONY OF MANKIND; AND HOW IT IS TO BE MAINTAINED.
First printed in the year 1770.
MICAH v. 7. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as
a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man,
nor waits for the sons of men.
INTRODUCTION.
AS mankind from one parent are divided into many families, and as trading to
sea is greatly increased within a few ages past; amidst this extended commerce,
how necessary is it that the professed followers of Christ keep sacred his holy
name, and be employed about trade and traffic no farther than justice and
equity evidently accompanies? that we may give no just cause of offense to any,
however distant, or unable to plead their own cause; and may continually keep
in view, the spreading of the true and saving knowledge of God, and his son
Jesus Christ, amongst our fellow creatures, which through his infinite love,
some feel to be more precious than any other treasure.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE TRUE HARMONY OF MANKIND; AND HOW IT IS TO BE MAINTAINED.
CHAP. I.
On serving the Lord in our outward employments.
UNDER the humbling dispensations of the Father of mercies, I have felt an
inward labor for the good of my fellow creatures, and a concern that the holy
spirit, which alone can restore mankind to a state of true harmony, may with
singleness of heart be waited for and followed.

I trust there are many under that visitation, which, if faithfully attended
to, will make them quick of understanding in the fear of the Lord, and qualify
with firmness to be true patterns of the christian life, who in living and
walking may hold forth an invitation to others, to come out of the
entanglements of the spirit of this world.

And that which I feel first to express is, a care for those who are in
circumstances, which appear difficult, with respect to supporting their
families in a way answerable to pure wisdom, that they may not be discouraged,
but remember that in humbly obeying the leading of Christ, he owneth us as his
friends, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you; and to be a
friend to Christ, is to be united to him, who has all power in heaven and in
earth; and though a woman may forget her sucking child, yet will he not forget
his faithful ones.

The condition of many who dwell in cities has often affected me with a
brotherly sympathy, attended with a desire that resignation may be labored
for; and where the holy leader directs to a country life or some change of
employ, he may be faithfully followed; for under the refining hand of the Lord
I have seen, that the inhabitants of some cities are greatly increased through
some branches of business which his holy spirit does not lead into, and that
being entangled in these things, tends to bring a cloud over the minds of
people convinced of the leadings of this holy leader, and obstructs the coming
of the kingdom of Christ on earth as it is in heaven.

Now if we indulge a desire to imitate our neighbors in those things which
harmonise not with the true christian walking, these entanglements may hold
fast to us, and some, who in an awakening time, feel tender scruples, with
respect to their manner of life, may look on the example of others more noted
in the church, who yet may not be refined from every degree of dross; and by
looking on these examples, and desiring to support their families in a way
pleasant to the natural mind, there may be danger of the worldly wisdom gaining
strength in them, and of their departure from that pure feeling of truth, which
if faithfully attended to, would teach contentment in the divine will, even in
a very low estate.

One formerly speaking on the profitableness of true humility, faith, "He that
troubles not himself with anxious thoughts for more than is necessary, lives
little less than the life of angels, whilst by a mind content with little, he
imitates their want of nothing." Cave's primitive christianity, page 31.

"It is not enough, says Tertullian, that a christian be chaste and modest, but
he must appear to be so: a virtue of which he should have so great a store,
that it should flow from his mind upon his habit, and break from the
retirements of his conscience, into the superficies of his life." Same book,
page 43.

"The garments we wear, says Clemens, ought to be mean and frugal -- that is
true simplicity of habit, which takes away what is vain and superfluous; that
the best and most solid garment, which is the farthest from curiosity." Page 49.

Though the change from day to night, is by a motion so gradual as scarcely to
be perceived, yet when night is come we behold it very different from the day;
and thus as people become wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight, customs rise up from the spirit of this world, and spread by little and
little, till a departure from the simplicity that there is in Christ, becomes
as distinguishable as light from darkness, to such who are crucified to the
world.

Our holy shepherd, to encourage his flock in firmness and perseverance,
reminds them of his love for them, As the father has loved me, so have I loved
you; continue ye in my love; and in another place graciously points out the
danger of departing therefrom, by going into unsuitable employments; this he
represents in the similitude of offense from that useful active member, the
hand; and to fix the instruction the deeper, names the right hand, If thy right
hand offend thee cut it off and cast it from thee -- If thou feel offense in
thy employment, humbly follow him who leads into all truth, and is a strong and
faithful friend to those who are resigned to him.

Again, he points out those things which appearing pleasant to the natural
mind, are not best for us, in the similitude of offense from the eye, If thy
right eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee. To pluck out the
eye, or cut off the hand, is attended with sharp pain; and how precious is the
instruction which our redeemer thus opens to us, that we may not faint under
the most painful trials, but put our trust in him, even in him who sent an
angel to feed Elijah in the wilderness; who fed a multitude with a few barley
loaves, and is now as attentive to the wants of his people as ever.

The prophet Isaiah, represents the unrighteous doings of the Israelites toward
the poor, as the fruits of an effeminate life, As for my people, children are
their oppressors, and women rule over them; what mean ye that ye beat my people
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord God. Then he
mentions the haughtiness of the daughters of Sion, and enumerates many
ornaments, as instances of their vanity, to uphold which, the poor were so
hardly dealt with, that he sets forth their poverty, their leanness and
inability to help themselves, in the similitude of a man maimed by violence or
"beaten to pieces," and forced to endure the painful operation of having his
face gradually worn away in the manner of grinding.

And I may here add, that at times, when I have felt true love open my heart
toward my fellow creatures, and been engaged in weighty conversation in the
cause of righteousness, the instructions I have received under these exercises,
in regard to the true use of the outward gifts of God, have made deep and
lasting impressions on my mind.

I have here beheld, how the desire to provide wealth, and to uphold a delicate
life has grievously entangled many, and been like snares to their offspring;
and though some have been affected with a sense of their difficulties, and
appeared desirous, at times, to be helped out of them; yet for want of abiding
under the humbling power of truth, they have continued in these entanglements;
for in remaining conformable to this world, and giving way to a delicate life,
this expensive way of living, in parents and in children, has called for a
large supply, and in answering this call "the faces of the poor" have been
ground away, and made thin through hard dealing.

There is balm, there is a physician! and O what longings do I feel! that we
may embrace the means appointed for our healing, know that removed which now
ministers cause for the cries of many people to ascend to heaven against their
oppressors, and that we may see the true harmony restored.

Behold how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity. The nature of this unity is thus opened by the apostle, If we walk in
the light, as Christ is in the light, we shall have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Christ will cleanse us from all sin.

The land may be polluted with innocent blood, which like the blood of Abel may
cry to the Almighty; but those who walk in the light as Christ is in the light,
they know the lamb of God, who takes away sin.

Walking is a phrase frequently used in scripture, to represent our journey
through life, and appears to comprehend the various affairs and transactions
properly relating to our being in this world.

Christ being the light, dwells always in the light, and if our walking be
thus, and in every affair and concern we faithfully follow this divine leader;
he preserves from giving just cause for any to quarrel with us; and where this
foundation is laid and mutually kept to, by families conversant with each
other, the way is open for these comforts in society, which our heavenly father
intends as a part of our happiness in this world; and then we may experience
the goodness, and pleasantness of dwelling together in unity; but where ways of
living take place, which tend to oppression, and in the pursuit of wealth,
people do that to others which they know would not be acceptable to themselves,
either in exercising an absolute power over them, or otherwise laying on them
unequitable burdens; here a fear lest that measure should be meeted to them,
which they have measured to others, incites a care to support that by craft and
cunning devices which stands not on the firm foundation of righteousness: thus
the harmony of society is broken, and from hence commotions and wars do
frequently arise in the world.

Come out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. Rev. xv. 3, 4. This Babel, or Babylon, was built
in the spi^^^ of self-exaltation: Let us build us a (...) and a tower, whose
top may reach to heaven, and let us make us a name. Genesis xi. 4. In departing
from an humble trust in God, and following a selfish spirit, people have
intentions to get the upperhand of their fellow creatures, privately meditate
on means to obtain their ends, have a language in their hearts which is hard to
understand. In Babel the language is confounded.

This city is represented as a place of business and those employed in it, as
merchants of the earth: The merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the
abundance of her delicacies. Rev. xviii. 3.

And it is remarkable in this call, that the language from the father of
mercies is, my people, "Come out of Babylon my people!" Thus his tender mercies
are toward us in an imperfect state; and as we faithfully attend to the call,
the path of righteousness is more and more opened; cravings, which have not
their foundation in pure wisdom, more and more cease; and in an inward purity
of heart, we experience a restoration of that which was lost at Babel,
represented by the inspired prophet in the returning of a pure language. Zeph.
iii. 9.

Happy for them who humbly attend to the call, "Come out of Babylon my people."
For though in going forth we may meet with trials, which for a time may be
painful, yet as we bow in true humility, and continue in it, an evidence is
felt that God only is wise; and that in weaning us from all that is selfish, he
prepares the way to a quiet habitation where all our desires are bounded by his
wisdom. And an exercise of spirit attends me, that we who are convinced of the
pure leadings of truth, may bow in the deepest reverence, and so watchfully
regard this leader, that many who are grievously entangled in a wilderness of
vain customs, may look upon us, and be instructed. And O that such who have
plenty of this world's goods, may be faithful in that with which they are
entrusted! and example others in the true christian walking.

Our blessed Savior, speaking on worldly greatness, compares himself to one
waiting and attending on a company at dinner: Whether is greater, he that
sits at meat or he that serves? Is not he that sits at meat? but I am
amongst you as he that serves. Luke xxii. 27.

Thus in a world greatly disordered, where men aspiring to outward greatness
were wont to oppress others to support their designs, he who was of the highest
descent, being the Son of God, and greater than any amongst the greatest
families of men, by his example and doctrines foreclosed his followers from
claiming any show of outward greatness, from any supposed superiority in
themselves, or derived from their ancestors.

He who was greater than earthly princes, was not only meek and low of heart,
but his outward appearance was plain and lowly, and free from every stain of
the spirit of this world.

Such was the example of our blessed Redeemer, of whom the beloved disciple
said, He that says he abides in him, ought also to walk even as he walked.

John Bradford, who suffered martyrdom, under queen Mary, wrote a letter to his
friends out of prison, a short time before he was burnt, in which are these
expressions; "Consider your dignity as children of God and temples of the Holy
Ghost, and members of Christ, be ashamed therefore to think, speak, or do any
thing unseemly, for God's children and the members of Christ." Fox's Acts and
Monuments, page 1177.

CHAP. II.
On the example of CHRIST.
AS my mind has been brought into a brotherly feeling with the poor, as to the
things of this life, who are under trials in regard to getting a living in a
way answerable to the purity of truth; a labor of heart has attended me, that
their way may not be made difficult through the love of money in those who are
tried with plentiful estates, but that they with tenderness of heart may
sympathize with them.

It was the saying of our blessed Redeemer, "Ye cannot serve God and mammon."
There is a deep feeling of the way of purity, a way in which the wisdom of the
world has no part, but is opened by the spirit of truth, and is "called the
way of holiness;" a way in which the traveller is employed in watching unto
prayer; and the outward gain we get in this journey is considered as a trust
committed to us, by HIM who formed and supports the world; and is the rightful
director of the use and application of the product of it.

Now except the mind be preserved chaste, there is no safety for us; but in an
estrangement from true resignation, the spirit of the world casts up a way, in
which gain is many times principally attended to, and in which there is a
selfish application of outward treasures.

How agreeable to the true harmony of society, is that exhortation of the
apostle? Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.

A person in outward prosperity may have the power of obtaining riches, but the
same mind being in him which is in Christ Jesus, he may feel a tenderness of
heart toward those of low degree; and instead of setting himself above them,
may look upon it as an unmerited favor, that his way through life is more easy
than the way of many others; may improve every opportunity of leading forth out
of those customs which have entangled the family; employ his time in looking
into the wants of the poor members, and hold forth such a perfect example of
humiliation, that the pure witness may be reached in many minds; and the way
opened for a harmonious walking together.

Jesus Christ, in promoting the happiness of others, was not deficient in
looking for the helpless, who lay in obscurity, nor did he save any thing to
render himself honorable amongst men, which might have been of more use to the
weak members in his Father's family; of whose compassion toward us I may now
speak a little. He who was perfectly happy in himself, moved with infinite
love, took not upon him the nature of angels, but our imperfect natures, and
therein wrestled with the temptations which attend us in this life; and being
the Son of HIM who is greater than earthly princes, yet became a companion to
poor, sincere hearted men; and though he gave the clearest evidence that divine
power attended him, yet the most unfavourable constructions were framed by a
self righteous people; those miracles represented as the effect of a diabolical
power, and endeavors used to render him hateful, as having his mission from
the prince of darkness; nor did their envy cease till they took him like a
criminal and brought him to trial. Though some may affect to carry the
appearance of being unmoved at the apprehension of distress, our dear Redeemer,
who was perfectly sincere, having the same human nature which we have, and
feeling, a little before he was apprehended, the weight of that work upon him,
for which he came into the world, was sorrowful even unto death; here the human
nature struggled to be excused from a cup so bitter; but his prayers centered
in resignation, Not my will but thine be done. In this conflict, so great was
his agony that sweat like drops of blood fell from him to the ground.

Behold now as foretold by the prophet, he is in a judicial manner numbered
with the transgressors. Behold him as some poor man of no reputation, standing
before the high priest and elders, and before Herod and Pilate, where witnesses
appear against him, and he mindful of the most gracious design of his coming,
declineth to plead in his own defense, but as a sheep that is dumb before his
shearer, so under many accusations, revilings, and buffetings, remained silent.
And though he signified to Peter that he had access to power sufficient to
overthrow all their outward forces; yet retaining a resignation to suffer for
the sins of mankind, he exerted not that power, but permitted them to go on in
their malicious designs, and pronounce him to be worthy of death, even him who
was perfect in goodness; thus in his humiliation his judgment was taken away,
and he, like some vile criminal, led as a lamb to the slaughter. Under these
heavy trials (though poor unstable Pilate was convinced of his innocence, yet)
the people generally looked upon him as a deceiver, a blasphemer, and the
approaching punishment as a just judgment upon him, They esteemed him smitten
of God and afflicted. So great had been the surprise of his disciples, at his
being taken by armed men, that they "forsook him and fled;" thus they hid their
faces from him, he was despised, and by their conduct it appeared as though
"they esteemed him not."

But contrary to that opinion, of his being smitten of God and afflicted, it
was for our sakes that he was put to grief; he was wounded for our
transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; and under the weight of them
manifesting the deepest compassion for the instruments of his misery, labored
as their advocate, and in the deeps of affliction, with an unconquerable
patience, cried out, Father forgive them, they know not what they do!

Now this mind being in us, which was in Christ Jesus, it removes from our
hearts the desire of superiority, worldly honor or greatness; a deep attention
is felt to the divine counselor, and an ardent engagement to promote, as far
as we may be enabled, the happiness of mankind universally; this state, where
every motion from a selfish spirit yields to pure love, I may, with gratitude
to the father of mercies acknowledge, is often opened before me as a pearl to
dig after; attended with a living concern, that amongst the many nations and
families on the earth, those who believe in the Messiah, that he was manifested
to destroy the works of the Devil, and thus to take away the sins of the world,
may experience the will of our heavenly Father, may be done on earth as it is
in heaven. Strong are the desires I often feel, that this holy profession may
remain unpolluted, and the believers in Christ may so abide in the pure inward
feeling of his spirit, that the wisdom from above may shine forth in their
living, as a light by which others may be instrumentally helped on their way,
in the true harmonious walking.

CHAP. III.
On Merchandising.
WHERE the treasures of pure love are opened, and we obediently follow him who
is the light of life, the mind becomes chaste; and a care is felt, that the
unction from the holy one may be our leader in every undertaking.

In being crucified to the world, broken off from that friendship which is
enmity with God, and dead to the customs and fashions which have not their
foundation in the truth; the way is prepared to lowliness in outward living,
and to a disentanglement from those snares which attend the love of money; and
where the faithful friends of Christ are so situated that merchandise appears
to be their duty, they feel a restraint from proceeding farther than he owns
their proceeding; being convinced that we are not our own but are bought with a
price, that none of us may live to ourselves, but to him who died for us. 2
Corin. v. 15. Thus they are taught, not only to keep to a moderate advance and
uprightness in their dealings; but to consider the tendency of their
proceeding; to do nothing which they know would operate against the cause of
universal righteousness; and to keep continually in view the spreading of the
peaceable kingdom of Christ amongst mankind.

The prophet Isaiah spoke of the gathered church, in the similitude of a city,
where many being employed were all preserved in purity; They shall call them
the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord, and thou shall be called sought out,
a city not forsaken. lxiii. 10. And the apostle after mentioning the mystery of
Christ's sufferings exhorts, Be ye holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet.
i. 15. There is a conversation necessary in trade; and there is a conversation
so foreign from the nature of Christ's kingdom, that it is represented in the
similitude of one man pushing another with a warlike weapon; There is that
speaks like the piercings of a sword. Prove. xii. 18. Now in all our concerns
it is necessary that the leading of the spirit of Christ be humbly waited for
and faithfully followed, as the only means of being preserved chaste as an holy
people, who "in all things are circumspect." Exodus xxiii. 13, that nothing we
do may carry the appearance of approbation of the works of wickedness, make the
unrighteous more at ease in unrighteousness, or occasion the injuries committed
against the oppressed to be more lightly looked over.

Where morality is kept to, and supported by the inhabitants of a country,
there is a certain reproach attends those individuals amongst them, who
manifestly deviate therefrom. Thus, if a person of good report, is charged with
stealing goods out of an open shop in the day time, and on a public trial found
guilty, and the law in that case put in execution, he therein sustains a loss
of reputation; but if he be convicted a second and third time of the like
offense, his good name would cease amongst such who knew these things. If his
neighbor, reputed an honest man, being charged with buying goods of this
thief, at a time when the purchaser knew they were stolen, and on a public
trial is found guilty, this purchaser would meet with disesteem, but if he
persisted in buying stolen goods, knowing them to be such, and was publicly
convicted thereof a second and third time, he would no longer be considered as
an honest man by them who knew these things; nor would it appear of good report
to be found in his company, buying his traffic, till some evident tokens of
sincere repentance appeared in him. But where iniquity is committed openly, and
the authors of it are not brought to justice, nor put to shame, their hands
grow strong. Thus the general corruption of the Jews shortly before their state
was broke up by the Chaldeans, is described by their boldness in impiety; for
as their leaders were connected together in wickedness, they strengthened one
another, and grew confident, Were they ashamed when they had committed
abominations? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush. Jer.
vi. 15, on which account the Lord thus expostulates with them, What has my
beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many? and the
holy flesh is passed from thee; when thou do evil, then thou rejoicest. Jer.
xi. 15.

Now the faithful friends of Christ, who hunger and thirst after righteousness,
and inwardly breath that his kingdom may come on earth as it is in heaven, he
teaches them to be quick of understanding in his fear, and to be very
attentive to the means he may appoint for promoting pure righteousness in the
earth; and as shame is due to those whose works manifestly operate against the
gracious design of his sufferings for us, a care lives on their minds that no
wrong customs however supported, may biass their judgments, but that they may
humbly abide under the cross and be preserved in a conduct which may not
contribute to strengthen the hands of the wicked in their wickedness, or to
remove shame from those to whom it is justly due. The coming of that day is
precious in which we experience the truth of this expression. "The Lord our
righteousness." Jer. xiii. 6, and feel him to be made unto us wisdom and
sanctification.

The example of a righteous man is often looked at with attention. Where
righteous men join in business their company gives encouragement to others; and
as one grain of incense deliberately offered to the prince of this world,
renders an offering to God in that state unacceptable; and from those esteemed
leaders of the people may be injurious to the weak; it requires deep humility
of heart, to follow him faithfully, who alone gives sound wisdom and the spirit
of true discerning; and O how necessary it is, to consider the weight of a holy
profession!

The conduct of some formerly, gave occasion of complaint against them, Thou
have defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the
iniquity of thy traffic. Ezekiel. xxviii. 18, and in several places it is charged
against Israel that they had polluted the holy name.

The prophet Isaiah represents inward sanctification in the similitude of being
purged from that which is fuel for fire; and particularly describes the outward
fruits, brought forth by those who dwell in this inward holiness, they walk
righteously, and speak uprightly. By walking he represents the journey through
life, as a righteous journey; and "by speaking uprightly," seems to point at
that which Moses appears to have had in view, when he thus expressed himself,
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor speak in a case to decline
after many to wrest judgment. Exodus xxiii. 2.

He goes on to show their firmness in equity; representing them as persons
superior to all the arts of getting money, which have not righteousness for
their foundation; They despise the gain of oppressions: and further shows how
careful they are that no prospects of gain may induce them to become partial in
judgment respecting an injury; They shake their hands from holding bribes.

Again, where any interest is so connected with shedding blood, that the cry of
innocent blood goes also with it; he points out their care to keep innocent
blood from crying against them, in the similitude of a man stopping his ears to
prevent a sound from entering his head, They stop their ears from hearing
blood; and where they know that wickedness is committed, he points out with
care, that they do not by an unguarded friendship with the authors of it,
appear like unconcerned lookers on, but as people so deeply affected with
sorrow, that they cannot endure to stand by and behold it; this he represents
in the similitude of a man shutting his eyes from seeing evil.

Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly.
He that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding
of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil. Isaiah xxxiii. 14, 15.

He proceeds in the spirit of prophecy to show how the faithful being supported
under temptations, would be preserved from that defilement that there is in the
love of money; that as they who in a reverent waiting on God, feel their
strength renewed, are said to "mount upward;" so here their preservation from
the snare of unrighteous gain, is represented in the likeness of a man, borne
up above all crafty, artful means of getting the advantage of another, They
shall dwell on high; and points out the stability and firmness of their
condition, His place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks; and that under
all the outward appearances of loss, in denying himself of gainful profits for
righteousness sake, yet through the care of him who provides for the sparrows,
he should have a supply answerable to his infinite wisdom, Bread shall be given
him, his waters shall be sure. And as our Savior mentions the sight of God to
be attainable by "the pure in heart," so here the prophet pointed out, how in
true sanctification the understanding is opened, to behold the peaceable
harmonious nature of his kingdom, "thine eyes shall see the king in his
beauty:" and that looking beyond all the afflictions which attend the
righteous, to a habitation eternal in the heavens, they with an eye divinely
open shall behold the land that is very far off.

He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks,
bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the
king in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off. Isaiah
xxxiii. 16, 17.

I often remember, and to me the subject is awful, that the great Judge of all
the earth does that which is right, and that he before whom the nations are as
the drop of a bucket, is "no respecter of persons." Happy for them, who like
the inspired prophet, "in the way of his judgments wait for him." Isaiah xxvi.
8.

When we feel him to sit as a refiner with fire, and know a resignedness
wrought in us, to that which he appoints for us, his blessing in a very low
estate, is found to be more precious than much outward treasure in those ways
of life where the leadings of his spirit are not followed.

The prophet in a sight of divine work amongst many people, declared in the
name of the Lord, I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come
and see my glory. Isaiah lxvi. 18. And again, from the rising of the sun to the
going down of the same, my name shall be great amongst the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering. Malachi
i. 11.

Behold here how the prophets had an inward sense of the spreading of the
kingdom of Christ; and how he was spoken of as one who should take the heathen
for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession.
Psalm. ii. 8. That he was given for a light to the Gentiles; and for salvation
to the ends of the earth. Isaiah xlix. 6.

When we meditate on this divine work, as a work of ages; a work that the
prophets felt long before Christ appeared visibly on earth, and remember the
bitter agonies he endured when he "poured out his soul unto death," that the
heathen nations, as well as others, might come to the knowledge of the truth
and be saved.

When we contemplate on this mavelous work, as that which the angels desire
to look into. 1 Pet. i. 12. And behold people amongst whom this light has
eminently broken forth, and who have received many favors from the bountiful
hand of our heavenly Father; not only indifferent with respect to publishing
the glad tidings amongst the Gentiles, as yet sitting in darkness and entangled
with many superstitions; but aspiring after wealth and worldly honors, take
hold of means to obtain their ends, tending to stir up wrath and indignation,
and to beget an abhorrence in them to the name of christianity. When these
things are weightily attended to, how mournful is the subject?

It is worthy of remembrance, that people in different ages, deeply baptized
into the nature of that work for which Christ suffered, have joyfully offered
up their liberty and lives for the promoting of it in the earth.

Policarp, who was reputed a disciple of St. John, having attained to great
age, was at length sentenced to die for his religion, and being brought to the
fire, prayed nearly as follows, "Thou God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom I have received the knowledge of thee! O God of the angels and powers,
and of every living creature, and of all sorts of just men which live in thy
presence. I thank thee! that thou have graciously vouchsafed this day and this
hour to allot me a portion among the number of martyrs, among the people of
Christ, unto the resurrection of everlasting life; among whom I shall be
received in thy sight, this day, as a fruitful and acceptable sacrifice,
wherefore for all this, I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee through the
everlasting high Priest, Jesus Christ, thy well beloved son; to whom, with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all glory, world without end. Amen.

Bishop Latimer, when sentence of death by fire, was pronounced against him, on
account of his firmness in the cause of religion, he said, "I thank God most
heartily! that he has prolonged my life to this end; that I may, in this case
glorify him by this kind of death." Fox's Acts and Mon. 936.

William Dewsbery, who had suffered much for his religion, in his last
sickness, encouraging his friends to faithfulness, made mention, like good old
Jacob, of the loving kindness of God to him in the course of his life, and that
through the power of divine love, he for Christ's sake had joyfully entered
prisons. See introduction to his works.

I mention these, as a few examples, out of many, of the powerful operation of
the spirit of Christ, where people are fully devoted to it, and of the ardent
longings in their minds for the spreading of his kingdom amongst mankind. Now
to those, in the present age, who truly know Christ, and feel the nature of his
peaceable government opened in their understandings, how loud is that call
wherewith we are called to faithfulness; that in following this pure light of
life, we as workers together with him, may labor in that great work for which
he was offered as a sacrifice on the cross; and that his peaceable doctrines
may shine through us in their real harmony, at a time when the name of
christianity is become hateful to many of the heathen.

When Gehazi had obtained treasures, which the prophet under divine direction
had refused, and was returned from the business; the prophet troubled at his
conduct, queried if it was a time thus to prepare for a specious living.

Is it a time to receive money and garments, men servants and maid servants,
the leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave to thee and to thy seed forever. 2
Kings v. 26. And O that we may lay to heart the condition of the present time!
and humbly follow his counsel, who alone is able to prepare the way for a true
harmonious walking amongst mankind.

CHAP. IV.
On divine Admonitions.
SUCH are the perfections of our heavenly Father, that in all the dispensations
of his providence, it is our duty, in every thing, to give thanks. Though from
the first settlement of this part of America, he has not extended his
judgments to the degree of famine, yet worms at times have come forth beyond
numbering, and laid waste fields of grain and grass, where they have appeared:
another kind, in great multitudes, working out of sight, in grass ground, have
so eat the roots that the surface, being loosened from the soil beneath, might
be taken off in great sheets.

These kind of devouring creatures appearing seldom, and coming in such
multitudes, their generation appears different from most other reptiles, and by
the prophet were called "God's army sent amongst the people." Joel ii. 25.

There have been tempests of hail, which have very much destroyed the grain
where they extended. Through long drought in summer, grain in some places has
been less than half the usual quantity When crops sail, I often feel a tender
care that the case ^
; and in the continuance thereof, I have beheld with attention, from week to
week, how dryness from the top of the earth, has extended deeper and deeper,
while the corn and plants have languished; and with reverence my mind has been
turned toward HIM, who being perfect in goodness, in wisdom and power, does
all things right. And after long drought, when the sky has grown dark with a
collection of matter, and clouds like lakes of water hung over our heads, from
whence the thirsty land has been soaked; I have at times, with awfulness,
beheld the vehement operation of lightning, made sometimes to accompany these
blessings, as a messenger from HIM who created all things, to remind us of our
duty in a right use of those benefits, and give striking admonitions, that we
do not misapply those gifts, in which an Almighty power is exerted, in
bestowing them upon us.

When I have considered that many of our fellow creatures suffer much in some
places, for want of the necessaries of life, whilst those who rule over them
are too much given to luxury, and diverse vanities; and behold the apparent
deviation from pure wisdom amongst us, in the use of the outward gifts of God;
those marks of famine have appeared like humbling admonitions from him, that we
might be instructed by gentle chastisements, and might seriously consider our
ways; remembering that the outward supply of life is a gift from our heavenly
Father, and that we should no more venture to use, or apply his gifts, in a way
contrary to pure wisdom.

Should we continue to reject those merciful admonitions, and use his gifts at
home, contrary to the gracious design of the giver, or send them abroad in a
way of trade, which the spirit of truth does not lead into; and should he whose
eyes are upon all our ways, extend his chastisements so far as to reduce us to
much greater distress than has yet been felt by these provinces; with what
sorrow of heart might we meditate on that subject, Have thou not procured this
unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by
thee way? Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord God of hosts. Jer. ii. 17, 19.

My mind has often been affected with sorrow, in beholding a wrong application
of the gifts of our heavenly Father; and those expressions concerning the
defilement of the earth have been opened to my understanding, The earth was
corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. Genesis vi. 11. Again,
Isaiah xxiv. 5. The earth also, is defiled under the inhabitants thereof,
because they have -- broken the everlasting covenant.

The earth being the work of a divine power, may not as such be accounted
unclean; but when violence is committed thereon, and the channel of
righteousness so obstructed, that in our skirts are found the blood of the
souls of poor innocents; not by a secret search, but upon all these. Jerem. ii.
34. See a caution and warning to Great Britain and her co-


When blood, shed unrighteously, remains unattoned for, and the inhabitants are
not effectually purged from it, when they do not wash their hands in innocence,
as was figured in the law, in the case of one being found slain; but seek for
gain arising from scenes of violence and oppression, here the land is polluted
with blood. Deuteronomy. xxi. 6.

Moreover, when the earth is planted and tilled, and the fruits brought forth
are applied to support unrighteous purposes; here the gracious design of
infinite goodness, in these his gifts being perverted, the earth is defiled;
and the complaint formerly uttered becomes applicable; Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins; thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. Isaiah xliii.
24.

THE END.
REMARKS ON SUNDRY SUBJECTS. First printed in London, 1773.
CHAP. I.
On loving our Neighbors as ourselves.
WHEN we love the Lord with all our hearts, and his creatures in his love, we
are then preserved in tenderness both toward mankind and the animal creation;
but if another spirit gets room in our minds, and we follow it in our
proceedings, we are then in the way of disordering the affairs of society.

If a man successful in business expends part of his income in things of no
real use, while the poor employed by him pass through great difficulties in
getting the necessaries of life, this requires his serious attention.

If several principal men in business unite in setting the wages of those who
work for hire, and therein have regard to a profit to themselves answerable to
unnecessary expense in their families, while the wages of the others on a
moderate industry will not afford a comfortable living for their families, and
a proper education for their children; this is like laying a temptation in the
way of some to strive for a place higher than they are in, when they have not
stock sufficient for it.

Now I feel a concern in the spring of pure love, that all who have plenty of
outward substance, may example others in the right use of things; may carefully
look into the condition of poor people, and beware of exacting on them with
regard to their wages.

While hired laborers, by moderate industry, through the divine blessing, may
live comfortably, raise up families, and give them suitable education, it
appears reasonable for them to be content with their wages.

If they who have plenty, love their fellow creatures in that love which is
divine, and in all their proceedings have an equal regard to the good of
mankind universally, their place in society is a place of care, an office
requiring attention, and the more we possess, the greater is our trust, and
with an increase of treasure, an increase of care becomes necessary.

When our will is subject to the will of God, and in relation to the things of
this world, we have nothing in view, but a comfortable living equally with the
rest of our fellow creatures, then outward treasures are no farther desirable
than as we feel a gift in our minds equal to the trust, and strength to act as
dutiful children in his service, who has formed all mankind, and appointed a
subsistence for us in this world.

A desire for treasures on any other motive, appears to be against that command
of our blessed Savior, Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, Mat. vi.
19.

He forbids not laying up in the summer against the wants of winter; nor does
he teach us to be slothful in that which properly relates to our being in this
world; but in this prohibition he puts in yourselves Lay not up for yourselves
treasures here on earth.

Now in the pure light, this language is understood, for in the love of Christ
there is no respect of persons; and while we abide in his love, we live not to
ourselves, but to him who died for us. And as we are thus united in spirit to
Christ, we are engaged to labor in promoting that work in the earth for which
he suffered.

In this state of mind our desires are, that every honest member in society may
have a portion of treasure, and share of trust, answerable to that gift, with
which our heavenly Father has gifted us.

In great treasure, there is a great trust.
A great trust requires great care.
But the laborious mind wants rest.
A pious man is content to do a share of business in society, answerable to the
gif^s with which he is endowed, while the channels of business are free from
unrighteousness, but is careful lest at any time his heart be overcharged.

In the harmonious spirit of society Christ is all in all, Col. iii. 11.

Here it is that old things are past away, all things are new, all things are
of God, 2 Cor. v. 17, 18. and the desire for outward riches is at an end.

They of low degree who have small gifts, enjoy their help who have large
gifts; those with their small gifts, have a small degree of care, while these
with their large gifts, have a large degree of care: and thus to abide in the
love of Christ, and enjoy a comfortable living in this world is all that is
aimed at by those members in society, to whom Christ is made wisdom and
righteousness.

But when they who have much treasure, are not faithful stewards of the gifts
of God, great difficulties attend it.

Now this matter has deeply affected my mind. The Lord, through merciful
chastisements, has given me a feeling of that love, in which the harmony of
society stands, and a sight of the growth of that seed which brings forth
wars and great calamities in the world, and a labor attends me to open it to
others.

Now to act with integrity, according to that strength of mind and body with
which our creator has endowed each of us, appears necessary for all, and he
who thus stands in the lowest station, appears to be entitled to as comfortable
and convenient a living, as he whose gifts of mind are greater, and whose cares
are more extensive.

If some endowed with strong understandings as men, abide not in the harmonious
state, in which we love our neighbors as ourselves, but walk in that spirit in
which the children of this world are wise in their generation; these by the
strength of contrivance may sometimes gather great treasure, but the wisdom of
this world is foolishness with God; and if we gather treasures in worldly
wisdom, we lay up treasures for ourselves; and great treasures managed in any
other spirit, than the spirit of truth, disordereth the affairs of society, for
hereby the good gifts of God in this outward creation are turned into the
channels of worldly honor, and frequently applied to support luxury, while the
wages of poor laborers are such, that with moderate industry and frugality
they may not live comfortably, raise up families, and give them suitable
education, but through the streightness of their condition, are often drawn on
to labor under weariness, to toil through hardships themselves, and frequently
to oppress those useful animals with which we are entrusted.

From age to age, throughout all ages, divine love is that alone, in which
dominion has been, is, and will be rightly conducted.

In this the endowments of men are so employed, that the friend and the
governor are united in one, and oppressive customs come to an end.

Riches in the hands of individuals in society, is attended with some degree of
power; and so far as power is put forth separate from pure love, so far the
government of the Prince of Peace is interrupted; and as we know not that our
children after us will dwell in that state in which power is rightly applied,
to lay up riches for them appears to be against the nature of his government.

The earth, through the labor of men under the blessing of him who formed it,
yields a supply for the inhabitants from generation to generation, and they
who walk in the pure light, their minds are prepared to taste and relish not
only those blessings which are spiritual, but also feel a sweetness and
satisfaction in a right use of the good gifts of God in the visible creation.

Here we see that man's happiness stands not in great possessions, but in a
heart devoted to follow Christ; in that use of things, where customs contrary
to universal love have no power over us.

In this state our hearts are prepared to trust in God, and our desires for our
children and posterity are, that they, with the rest of mankind, in ages to
come, may be of that number, of whom he has said, I will be a father to them,
and they shall be my sons and daughter, 2 Cor. vi. 18.

When wages in a fruitful land bear so small a proportion to the necessaries of
life, that poor honest people who have families cannot by a moderate industry
attain to a comfortable living, and give their children sufficient learning,
but must either labor to a degree of oppression, or else omit that which
appears to be a duty.

While this is the case with the poor, there is an inclination in the minds of
most people, to prepare at least so much treasure for their children, that they
with care and moderate industry may live free from these hardships which the
poor pass through.

Now this subject requires our serious consideration: to labor that our
children may be put in a way to live comfortably, appears in itself to be a
duty, so long as these our labors are consistent with universal righteousness;
but if in striving to shun poverty, we do not walk in that state where Christ
is our life, then we wander; He that has the Son, has life, 1 John v. 12.
This life is the light of men, John i. 4. If we walk not in this light, we walk
in darkness, and he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes,
John xii. 35.

To keep to right means in laboring to attain a right end is necessary: if in
striving to shun poverty, we strive only in that state, where Christ is the
light of our life, our labors will stand in the true harmony of society; but
if people are confident that the end aimed at is good, and in this confidence
pursue it so eagerly, as not to wait for the spirit of truth to lead them, then
they come to loss. Christ is given to be a leader and commander of the people,
Isaiah lv. 4. Again; The Lord shall guide thee continually, Isaiah lviii. 12.
Again; Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our
works in us. Isaiah xxvi. 12.

In the Lord have we righteousness and strength, Isaiah xlv. 24.

In this state our minds are preserved watchful in following the leadings of
his spirit in all our proceedings in this world, and a care is felt for a
reformation in general; that our own posterity, with the rest of mankind in
succeeding ages, may not be entangled by oppressive customs, transmitted to
them through our hands: but if people in the narrowness of natural love, are
afraid that their children will be oppressed by the rich, and through an eager
desire to get treasures, depart from the pure leadings of truth in one case,
though it may seem to be a small matter, yet the mind even in that small matter
may be emboldened to continue in a way of proceeding, without waiting for the
divine Leader.

Thus people may grow expert in business, wise in the wisdom of this world,
retain a fair reputation amongst men, and yet being strangers to the voice of
Christ, the safe leader of his flock, the treasures thus gotten, may be like
snares to the feet of their posterity.

Now to keep faithful to the pure counselor, and under trying circumstances
suffer adversity for righteousness sake, in this there is a reward.

If we, being poor, are hardly dealt with by those who are rich, and under this
difficulty are frugal and industrious, and in true humility open our case to
them who oppress us, this may reach the pure witness in their minds; and though
we should remain under difficulties as to the outward, yet if we abide in the
love of Christ, all will work for our good.

When we feel what it is to suffer in the true suffering state, then we
experience the truth of those expressions, that, as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. i. 5.

But if poor people who are hardly dealt with, do not attain to the true
suffering state, do not labor in true love with those who deal hardly with
them, but envy their outward greatness, murmur in their hearts because of their
own poverty, and strive in the wisdom of this world to get riches for
themselves and their children; this is like wandering in the dark.

If we who are of a middle station between riches and poverty, are affected at
times with the oppressions of the poor, and feel a tender regard for our
posterity after us; O how necessary is it that we wait for the pure counsel of
truth!

Many have seen the hardships of the poor, felt an eager desire that their
children may be put in a way to escape these hardships; but how few have
continued in that pure love which opens our understandings to proceed rightly
under these difficulties!

How few have faithfully followed that holy Leader who prepares his people to
labor for the restoration of true harmony amongst our fellow creatures!

In the pure gospel spirit we walk by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. v. 7.

In the obedience of faith we die to the narrowness of self-love, and our life
being hid with Christ in God, our hearts are enlarged toward mankind
universally; but in departing from the true light of life, many in striving to
get treasures have stumbled upon the dark mountains.

Now that purity of life which proceeds from faithfulness in following the
spirit of truth, that state where our minds are devoted to serve God, and all
our wants are bounded by his wisdom, this habitation has often been opened
before me as a place of retirement for the children of the light, where we may
stand separated from that which disordereth and confuseth the affairs of
society, and where we may have a testimony of our innocence in the hearts of
those who behold us.

Through departing from the truth as it is in Jesus, through introducing ways
of life attended with unnecessary expenses, many wants have arisen, the minds
of people have been employed in studying to get wealth, and in this pursuit
some departing from equity, have retained a profession of religion; others have
looked at their example, and thereby been strengthened to proceed further in
the same way: thus many have encouraged the trade of taking men from Africa,
and selling them as slaves.

It has been computed that near one hundred thousand Negroes have of late
years been taken annually from that coast, by ships employed in the English
trade.

As I have traveled on religious visits in some parts of America, I have seen
many of these people under the command of overseers, in a painful servitude.

I have beheld them as Gentiles under people professing christianity, not only
kept ignorant of the holy scriptures, but under great provocations to wrath; of
whom it may truly be said, They that rule over them make them to howl, and the
holy Name is abundantly blasphemed, Isaiah lii. 5. Where children are taught to
read the sacred writings, while young, and exampled in meekness and humility,
it is often helpful to them; nor is this any more than a debt due from us to a
succeeding age.

But where youth are pinched for want of the necessaries of life, forced to
labor hard under the harsh rebukes of rigorous overseers, and many times
endur^ unmerciful whippings: in such an education, how great are the
disadvantages they lie under! And how forcibly do these things work against the
increase of the government of the Prince of Peace!

Humphrey Smith, in his works, p. 125, speaking of the tender feelings of the
love of God in his heart when he was a child, said, "By the violent wrathful
nature that ruled in others, was my quietness disturbed, and anger begotten in
me toward them, yet that of God in me was not wholly overcome, but his love was
felt in my heart, and great was my grief when the earthly-mindedness and
wrathful nature so provoked me, that I was estranged from it."

"And this I write as a warning to parents and others, that in the fear of the
living God, you may train up the youth, and may not be a means of bringing them
into such alienation."

Many are the vanities and luxuries of the present age, and in laboring to
support a way of living conformable to the present world, the departure from
that wisdom that is pure and peaceable, has been great.

Under the sense of a deep revolt, and an overflowing stream of
unrighteousness, my life has been often a life of mourning, and tender desires
are raised in me, that the nature of this practice may be laid to heart.

I have read some books wrote by people who were acquainted with the manner of
getting slaves in Africa.

I have had verbal relations of this nature from several Negroes brought from
Africa, who have learned to talk English.

I have sundry times heard Englishmen speak on this subject, who have been in
Africa on this business; and from all these accounts it appears evident that
great violence is committed, and much blood shed in Africa in getting slaves.

When three or four hundred slaves are put in the hold of a vessel in a hot
climate, their breathing soon affects the air. Were that number of free people
to go passengers with all things proper for their voyage, there would
inconvenience arise from their number; but slaves are taken by violence, and
frequently endeavor to kill the white people, that they may return to their
native land. Hence they are frequenty kept under such a sort of confinement, by
means of which a scent arises in the hold of a ship, and distempers often
break out amongst them, of which many die. Of this tainted air in the hold of
ships freighted with slaves, I have had several accounts, some in print, and
some verbal, and all agree that the scent is grievous. When these people are
sold in America, and in the islands, they are made to labor in a manner more
servile and constant, than that which they were used to at home, that with
grief, with different diet from what has been common with them, and with hard
labor, some thousands are computed to die every year, in what is called the
seasoning.

Thus it appears evident, that great numbers of these people are brought every
year to an untimely end; many of them being such who never injured us.

Where the innocent suffer under hard-hearted men, even unto death, and the
channels of equity are so obstructed, that the cause of the sufferers is not
judged in righteousness, "the land is polluted with blood," Numb. xxxv. 33.

Where blood has been shed unrighteously, and remains unattoned for, the cry
thereof is very piercing.

Under the humbling dispensations of divine Providence, this cry has deeply
affected my heart, and I feel a concern to open, as I may be enabled, that
which lies heavy on my mind.

When the iniquity of the house of Israel and of Judah was exceeding great,
when the land was defiled with blood, and the city full of perverseness, Ezekiel.
ix. 9. Some were found sighing and crying for the abominations of the times,
Ezekiel. ix. 4. and such who live under a right feeling of our condition as a
nation, these I trust will be sensible that the Lord at this day does call to
mourning, though many are ignorant of it. So powerful are bad customs when they
become general, that people growing bold through the examples one of another,
have often been unmoved at the most serious warnings.

Our blessed Savior speaking of the people of the old world, said, They eat,
they drank, they married, and were given in marriage, until the day that Noah
went into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all, Luke xvii. 27.

The like he spoke concerning the people of Sodom, who are also represented by
the prophet as haughty, luxurious, and oppressive; This was the sin of Sodom,
pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was found in her, and in her
daughters; neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, Ezekiel.
xvi. 49.

Now in a revolt so deep as this, when much blood has been shed unrighteously,
in carrying on the slave trade, and in supporting the practice of keeping
slaves, which at this day is unattoned for, and cries from the earth, and from
the seas against the oppressor!

While this practice is continued, and under a great load of guilt there is
more unrighteousness committed, the state of things is very moving!

There is a love which stands in nature, and a parent beholding his child in
misery has a feeling of the affliction; but in divine love the heart is
enlarged toward mankind universally, and prepared to sympathise with
strangers, though in the lowest stations in life.

Of this the prophet appears to have had a feeling, when he said, Have we not
all one Father? Has not one God created us? Why then do we deal treacherously
every man with his brother, in profaning the covenant of our fathers? Mal. ii.
10.

He who of old heard the groans of the children of Israel under the hard
taskmasters in Egypt, I trust has looked down from his holy habitation on the
miseries of these deeply oppressed people. Many lives have been shortened
through extreme oppression, while they labored to support luxury and worldly
greatness; and though many people in outward prosperity may think little of those
things, yet the gracious Creator has regard to the cries of the innocent,
however unnoticed by men.

The Lord in the riches of his goodness is leading some into the feeling of the
condition of this people, who cannot rest without laboring as their advocates;
of which in some measure I have had experience, for, in the movings of his love
in my heart, these poor sufferers have been brought near to me.

The unoffending aged and infirm made to labor too hard, kept on a diet less
comfortable than their weak state required, and exposed to great difficulties
under hard-hearted men, to whose sufferings I have often been a witness, and
under the heart-melting power of divine love, their misery has felt to me like
the misery of my parents.

Innocent youth taken by violence from their native land, from their friends
and acquaintance; put on board ships with hearts laden with sorrow; exposed to
great hardships at sea; placed under people, where their lives have been
attended with great provocation to anger and revenge.

With the condition of these youth, my mind has often been affected, as with
the afflictions of my children, and in a feeling of the misery of these people,
and of that great offense which is ministered to them, my tears have been often
poured out before the Lord.

That holy Spirit which affected my heart when I was a youth, I trust is often
felt by the Negroes in their native land, inclining their minds to that which
is righteous, and had the professed followers of Christ in all their conduct
toward them, manifested a disposition answerable to the pure principle in their
hearts, how might the holy Name have been honored amongst the Gentiles, and
how might we have rejoiced in the fulfilling of that prophecy, I the Lord love
judgment, I hate robbery for burnt-offerings, and I will direct their work in
truth, and make an everlasting covenant with them. Their seed shall be known
amongst the Gentiles, and their offspring amongst the people: all that see them
shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed,
Isaiah lxi. 8, 9.

But in the present state of things, how contrary is this practice to that meek
spirit, in which our Savior laid down his life for us, that all the ends of
the earth might know salvation in his name!

How are the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer set at naught, and his name
blasphemed amongst the Gentiles, through the unrighteous proceedings of his
professed followers!

My mind has often been affected, even from the days of my youth, under a
sense of that mavelous work, for which God, in infinite goodness, sent his
Son into the world.

The opening of that spring of living waters, which the true believers in
Christ experience, by which they are redeemed from pride and covetousness, and
brought into a state of meekness, where their hearts are enlarged in true love
toward their fellow creatures universally; this work to me has been precious,
and the spreading the knowledge of the truth amongst the Gentiles been very
desirable. And the professed followers of Christ joining in customs evidently
unrighteous, which manifestly tend to stir up wrath, and increase wars and
desolations, has often covered my mind with sorrow.

If we bring this matter home, and as Job proposed to his friends, Put our soul
in their soul's stead, Job xvi. 4.

If we consider ourselves and our children as exposed to the hardships which
these people lie under in supporting an imaginary greatness.

Did we in such case behold an increase of luxury and superfluity amongst our
oppressors, and therewith felt an increase of the weight of our burdens, and
expected our posterity to groan under oppression after us.

Under all this misery, had we none to plead our cause, nor any hope of relief
from man, how would our cries ascend to the God of the spirits of all flesh,
who judges the world in righteousness, and in his own time is a refuge for the
oppressed!

If they who thus afflicted us, continued to lay claim to religion, and were
assisted in their business by others, esteemed pious people, who through a
friendship with them strengthened their hands in tyranny.

In such a state, when we were hunger-bitten, and could not have sufficient
nourishment, but saw them in fullness pleasing their taste with things fetched
from far:

When we were wearied with labor, denied the liberty to rest, and saw them
spending their time at case: when garments answerable to our necessities were
denied us, while we saw them clothed in that which was costly and delicate:

Under such affliction, how would these painful feelings rise up as witnesses
against their pretended devotion! And if the name of their religion was
mentioned in our hearing, how would it sound in our ears like a word which
signified self-exaltation, and hardness of heart!

When a trade is carried on, productive of much misery, and they who suffer by
it are some thousand miles off, the danger is the greater, of not laying their
sufferings to heart.

In procuring slaves on the coast of Africa, many children are stolen
privately; wars also are encouraged amongst the Negroes, but all is at a great
distance.

Many groans arise from dying men, which we hear not.

Many cries are uttered by widows and fatherless children, which reach not our
ears.

Many cheeks are wet with tears, and faces sad with unutterable grief, which we
see not.

Cruel tyranny is encouraged. The hands of robbers are strengthened, and
thousands reduced to the most abject slavery, who never injured us.

Were we for the term of one year only to be eyewitnesses to what passes in
getting these slaves:

Was the blood which is there shed to be sprinkled on our garments:

Were the poor captives bound with thongs, heavy laden with elephants teeth, to
pass before our eyes on their way to the sea:

Were their bitter lamentations day after day to ring in our ears, and their
mournful cries in the night to hinder us from sleeping:

Were we to hear the sound of the tumult when the slaves on board the ships
attempt to kill the English, and behold the issue of those bloody conflicts:

What pious man could be a witness to these things, and see a trade carried on
in this manner, without being deeply affected with sorrow?

Through abiding in the love of Christ we feel a tenderness in our hearts
toward our fellow creatures, entangled in oppressive customs; and a concern so
to walk, that our conduct may not be a means of strengthening them in error.

It was the command of the Lord through Moses, Thou shall not suffer sin upon
thy brother: thou shall in anywise rebuke thy brother, and shall not suffer sin
upon him. Lev. xix. 17.

Again; Keep far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou
not. Exodus xxiii. 7.

The prophet Isaiah mentions oppression as that which the true church in time
of outward quiet should not only be clear of, but should be far from it; Thou
shall be far from oppression. Isaiah live. 14. Now these words, far from, appear
to have an extensive meaning, and to convey instruction in regard to that of
which Solomon speaks, Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go
unpunished. Prove. xvi. 5.

It was a complaint against one of old, When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst with him. Psalm. l, 18.

The prophet Jeremiah represents the degrees of preparation toward idolatrous
sacrifice, in the similitude of a work carried on by children, men, and women.
The children gather wood, the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the
dough to bake cakes for the queen of heaven. Jer. vii. 18.

It was a complaint of the Lord against Israel, through his prophet Ezekiel,
that they strengthened the hands of the wicked, and made the hearts of the
righteous sad. Ezekiel. xiii. 12.

Some works of iniquity carried on by the people were represented by the
prophet Hosea, in the similitude of ploughing, reaping, and eating the fruit;
You have ploughed wickedness, reaped iniquity, eaten the fruit of lying,
because thou did trust in thy own way, to the multitude of thy mighty men.
Hosea x. 13.

I have felt great distress of mind since I came on this island, on account of
the members of our society being mixed with the world in various sorts of
business and traffic, carried on in impure channels. Great is the trade to
Africa for slaves; and in loading these ships abundance of people are employed
in the manufactories.

Friends in early time refused, on a religious principle, to make or trade in
superfluities, of which we have many large testimonies on record, but for want
of faithfulness some gave way, even some whose examples were of note in
society, and from thence others took more liberty: members of our society
worked in superfluities, and bought and sold them, and thus dimness of sight
came over many. At length, friends got into the use of some superfluities in
dress, and in the furniture of their houses, and this has spread from less to
more, till superfluity of some kinds is common amongst us.

In this declining state many look at the example one of another, and too much
neglect the pure feeling of truth. Of late years a deep exercise has attended
my mind, that friends may dig deep, may carefully cast forth the loose matter,
and get down to the rock, the sure foundation, and there hearken to that divine
voice which gives a clear and certain sound.

And I have felt in that which does not deceive, that if friends who have known
the truth, keep in that tenderness of heart, where all views of outward gain
are given up, and their trust is only on the Lord, he will graciously lead some
to be patterns of deep self-denial, in things relating to trade, and handicraft
labor; and that some who have plenty of the treasures of this world, will
example in a plain frugal life, and pay wages to such whom they may hire, more
liberally than is now customary in some places.

The prophet, speaking of the true church, said, Thy people also shall be all
righteous.

Of the depth of this divine work several have spoken.

John Gratton, in his journal, p. 45, said, "The Lord is my portion, I shall
not want. He has wrought all my works in me. I am nothing but what I am in
him."

Gilbert Latey, through the powerful operations of the spirit of Christ in his
soul, was brought to that depth of self-denial, that he could not join with
that proud spirit in other people, which inclined them to want vanities and
superfluities. This friend was often amongst the chief rulers of the nation in
times of persecution, and it appears by the testimony of friends, that his
dwelling was so evidently in the pure life of truth, that in his visits to
those great men, he found a place in their minds; and that king James the
second, in the times of his troubles, made particular mention in a very
respectful manner of what Gilbert once said to him.

The said Gilbert found a concern to write an epistle, in which are these
expressions; "Fear the Lord, ye men of all sorts, trades, and callings, and
leave off all the evil that is in them, for the Lord is grieved with all the
evils used in your employments which you are exercised in."

"It is even a grief to see how you are servants to sin, and instruments of
Satan." See his works, p. 42, etc.

George Fox, in an epistle, writes thus: "Friends, stand in the eternal power
of God, witnesses against the pomps and vanities of this world."

"Such tradesmen who stand as witnesses in the power of God, cannot fulfill the
people's minds in these vanities, and therefore they are offended at them."

"Let all trust in the Lord, and wait patiently on him; for when truth first
broke forth in London, many tradesmen could not take so much money in their
shops for some time, as would buy them bread and water, because they withstood
the world's ways, fashions, and customs; yet by their patient waiting on the
Lord in their good life and conversation, they answered the truth in people's
hearts, and thus their business increased." Book of Doctrinals, p. 824.

Now Christ our holy leader graciously continues to open the understandings of
his people, and as circumstances alter from age to age, some who are deeply
baptized into a feeling of the state of things, are led by his holy spirit into
exercises in some respect different from those which attended the faithful in
foregoing ages, and through the constrainings of pure love, are engaged to open
the feelings they have to others.

In faithfully following Christ, the heart is weaned from the desire of riches,
and we are led into a life so plain and simple, that a little does suffice, and
thus the way opens to deny ourselves, under all the tempting allurements of
that gain, which we know is the gain of unrighteousness.

The apostle speaking on this subject, asks, this question; What fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? 2 Cor. vi. 14. And again says, Have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
Ephesians. v. 11. Again, Be not partaker of other men's sins, keep thyself pure. 1 Timothy v. 22.

Where people through the power of Christ are thoroughly settled in a right use
of things, freed from all unnecessary care and expense, the mind in this true
resignation is at liberty from the bands of a narrow self-interest, to attend
from time to time on the movings of his spirit upon us, though he leads into
that, through which our faith is closely tried.

The language of Christ is pure, and to the pure in heart, this pure language
is intelligible; but in the love of money, the mind being intent on gain, is
too full of human contrivance to attend to it.

It appears evident, that some channels of trade are defiled with
unrighteousness, that the minds of many are intent on getting treasures to
support a life, in which there are many unnecessary expenses.

And I feel a living concern attend my mind, that under these difficulties we
may humbly follow our heavenly shepherd, who graciously regards his flock,
and is willing and able to supply us both inwardly and outwardly with clean
provender, that has been winnowed with the shovel and the fan, where we may
sow to ourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy, Hosea x. 12. and not be
defiled with the works of iniquity.

Where customs contrary to pure wisdom are transmitted to posterity, it appears
to be an injury committed against them; and I often feel tender compassion
toward a young generation, and desires that their difficulties may not be
increased through unfaithfulness in us of the present age.

CHAP. II.
On a Sailor's Life.
IN the trade to Africa for slaves, and in the management of ships going on
these voyages, many of our lads and young men have a considerable part of their
education.

Now what pious father beholding his son placed in one of these ships, to learn
the practice of a mariner, could forbear mourning over him?

Where youth are exampled in means of getting money, so full of violence, and
used to exercise such cruelties on their fellow creatures, the disadvantage to
them in their education is very great.

But I feel it in my mind to write concerning the seafaring life in general.

In the trade carried on from the West Indies, and from some parts of the
continent, the produce of the labor of slaves is a considerable part.

And sailors who are frequently at ports where slaves abound, and converse
often with people who oppress them without the appearance of remorse, and often
with sailors employed in the slave trade, how powerfully do these evil examples
spread amongst the seafaring youth!

I have had many opportunities to feel and understand the general state of the
seafaring life amongst us, and my mind has often been sad on account of so
many lads and young men being trained up amidst so great corruption.

Under the humbling power of Christ I have seen, that if the leadings of his
holy spirit were faithfully attended to by his professed followers in general,
the heathen nations would be exampled in righteousness. A less number of people
would be employed on the seas. The channels of trade would be more free from
defilement. Fewer people would be employed in vanities and superfluities.

The inhabitants of cities would be less in number.

Those who have much lands would become fathers to the poor.

More people would be employed in the sweet employment of husbandry, and in the
path of pure wisdom, labor would be an agreeable, healthful employment.

In the opening of these things in my mind, I feel a living concern that we who
have felt divine love in our hearts may faithfully abide in it, and like good
soldiers endure hardness for Christ's sake.

He, our blessed Savior, exhorting his followers to love one another, adds, As
I have loved you. John xiii. 34.

He loved Lazarus, yet in his sickness did not heal him, but left him to endure
the pains of death, that in restoring him to life, the people might be
confirmed in the true faith.

He loved his disciples, but sent them forth on a message attended with great
difficulty, amongst hard-hearted people, some of whom would think that in
killing them they did God service.

So deep is divine love, that in steadfastly abiding in it, we are prepared to
deny ourselves of all that gain which is contrary to pure wisdom, and to follow
Christ, even under contempt, and through sufferings.

While friends were kept truly humble, and walked according to the purity of
our principles, the divine witness in many hearts was reached; but when a
worldly spirit got entrance, therewith came in luxuries and superfluities, and
spread by little and little, even amongst the foremost rank in society, and
from thence others took liberty in that way more abundantly.

In the continuation of these things from parents to children, there were many
wants to supply, even wants unknown to friends while they faithfully followed
Christ. And in striving to supply these wants many have exacted on the poor,
many have entered on employments, in which they often labor in upholding pride
and vanity. Many have looked on one another, been strengthened in these things,
one by the example of another, and as to the pure divine seeing, dimness has
come over many, and the channels of true brotherly love been obstructed.

People may have no intention to oppress, yet by entering on expensive ways of
life, their minds may be so entangled therein, and so engaged to support
expensive customs, as to be estranged from the pure sympathizing spirit.

As I have traveled in England, I have had a tender feeling of the condition
of poor people, some of whom though honest and industrious, have nothing to
spare toward paying for the schooling of their children.

There is a proportion between labor and the necessaries of life, and in true
brotherly love the mind is open to feel after the necessities of the poor.

Amongst the poor there are some that are weak through age, and others of a
weakly nature, who pass through straits in very private life, without asking
relief from the public.

Such who are strong and healthy may do that business, which to the weakly may
be oppressive; and in performing that in a day which is esteemed a day's
labor, by weakly persons in the field and in the shops, and by weakly women
who spin and knit in the manufactories, they often pass through weariness; and
many sighs I believe are uttered in secret, unheard by some who might ease
their burdens.

Labor in the right medium is healthy, but in too much of it there is a
painful weariness; and the hardships of the poor are sometimes increased
through want of more agreeable nourishment, more plentiful fuel for the fire,
and warmer clothing in the winter than their wages will answer.

When I have beheld plenty in some houses to a degree of luxury, the condition
of poor children brought up without learning, and the condition of the weakly
and aged, who strive to live by their labor, have often revived in my mind, as
cases of which some who live in fullness need to be put in remembrance.

There are few, if any, could behold their fellow creatures lie long in
distress and forbear to help them, when they could do it without any
inconvenience; but customs requiring much labor to support them, do often lie
heavy on the poor, while they who live in these customs are so entangled in a
multitude of unnecessary concerns, that they think but little of the hardships
which the poor people go through.

CHAP. III.
On silent Worship.
WORSHIP in silence has often been refreshing to my mind, and a care attends
me that a young generation may feel the nature of this worship.

Great expense arises in relation to that which is called divine worship.

A considerable part of this expense is applied toward outward greatness, and
many poor people in raising of tithe, labor in supporting customs contrary to
the simplicity that there is in Christ, toward whom my mind has often been
moved with pity.

In pure silent worship, we dwell under the holy anointing, and feel Christ to
be our shepherd.

Here the best of teachers ministers to the several conditions of his flock,
and the soul receives immediately from the divine fountain, that with which it
is nourished.

As I have traveled at times where those of other societies have attended our
meetings, and have perceived how little some of them knew of the nature of
silent worship; I have felt tender desires in my heart that we who often sit
silent in our meetings, may live answerable to the nature of an inward
fellowship with God, that no stumbling block through us, may be laid in their
way.

Such is the load of unnecessary expense which lies on that which is called
divine service in many places, and so much are the minds of many people
employed in outward forms and ceremonies, that the opening of an inward silent
worship in this nation to me has appeared to be a precious opening.

Within the last four hundred years, many pious people have been deeply
exercised in soul on account of the superstition which prevailed amongst the
professed followers of Christ, and in support of their testimony against
oppressive idolatry, some in several ages have finished their course in the
flames.

It appears by the history of the reformation, that through the faithfulness of
the martyrs, the understandings of many have been opened, and the minds of
people, from age to age, been more and more prepared for a real spiritual
worship.

My mind is often affected with a sense of the condition of those people, who
in different ages have been meek and patient, following Christ through great
afflictions: And while I behold the several steps of reformation, and that
clearness, to which through divine goodness, it has been brought by our
ancestors; I feel tender desires that we who sometimes meet in silence, may
never by our conduct lay stumbling blocks in the way of others, and hinder the
progress of the reformation in the world.

It was a complaint against some who were called the Lord's people, that they
brought polluted bread to his altar, and said the table of the Lord was
contemptible.

In real silent worship the soul feeds on that which is divine; but we cannot
partake of the table of the Lord, and that table which is prepared by the God
of this world.

If Christ is our shepherd, and feeds us, and we are faithful in following
him, our lives will have an inviting language, and the table of the lord will
not be polluted.

AN EPISTLE TO THE QUARTERLY AND MONTHLY MEETINGS OF FRIENDS.
Beloved Friends,
FEELING at this time a renewed concern that the pure principle of light and
life, and the righteous fruits thereof may spread and prevail amongst mankind,
there is an engagement on my heart to labor with my brethren in religious
profession, that none of us may be a stumbling block in the way of others; but
may so walk that our conduct may reach the pure witness in the hearts of such
who are not in profession with us.

And, dear friends, while we publicly own that the holy Spirit is our leader,
the profession is in itself weighty, and the weightiness thereof increases, in
proportion as we are noted among the professors of truth, and active in dealing
with such who walk disorderly.

Many under our profession for want of due attention, and a perfect resignation
to this Divine Teacher, have in some things manifested a deviation from the
purity of our religious principles, and these deviations having crept in
amongst us by little and little, and increasing from less to greater, have been
so far unnoticed, that some living in them, have been active in putting
discipline in practice, with relation to others, whose conduct has appeared
more dishonorable in the world.

Now as my mind has been exercised before the Lord, I have seen, that the
discipline of the church of Christ stands in that which is pure; that it is
the wisdom from above which gives authority to discipline; and that the
weightiness thereof stands not in any outward circumstances, but in the
authority of Christ who is the author of it; and where any walk after the
flesh, and not according to the purity of truth, and at the same time are
active in putting discipline in practice, a veil is gradually drawn over the
purity of discipline, and over that holiness of life, which Christ leads those
into, in whom the love of God is verily perfected, 1 John ii. 5.

When we labor in true love with offenders, and they remain obstinate, it
sometimes is necessary to proceed as far as our Lord directed, Let him be to
thee as an heathen man, or a publican, Mat. xviii. 17.

Now when such are disowned, and they who act therein feel Christ made unto
them wisdom, and are preserved in his meek, restoring spirit, there is no just
cause of offense ministered to any; but when such who are active in dealing with
offenders indulge themselves in things which are contrary to the purity of
truth, and yet judge others whose conduct appears more dishonorable than
their's, here the pure authority of discipline cease as to such offenders,
and a temptation is laid in their way to wrangle and contend -- Judge not, said
our Lord, that ye be not judged. Now this forbidding, alludes to man's
judgment, and points out the necessity of our humbly attending to that
sanctifying power under which the faithful experience the Lord to be a spirit
of judgment to them, Isa. xxviii. 6. And as we feel his Holy Spirit to mortify
the deeds of the body in us, and can say, it is no more I that live, but Christ
that lives in me, here right judgment is known.

And while divine love prevails in our hearts, and self in us is brought under
judgment, a preparation is felt to labor in a right manner with offenders; but
if we abide not in this love, our outward performance in dealing with others,
degenerates into formality; for this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, John i. 3.

How weighty are those instructions of our Redeemer concerning religious
duties, when he points out, that they who pray, should be so obedient to the
teachings of the Holy Spirit, that humbly confiding in his help, they may say,
Thy name O Father be hallowed! Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as
it is in heaven: -- In this awful state of mind is felt that worship which
stands in doing the will of God, on earth, as it is done in heaven, and keeping
the holy Name sacred. To take a holy profession upon us is awful, nor can we
keep this holy Name sacred, but by humbly abiding under the cross of Christ.
The apostle made a heavy complaint against some who profaned this holy Name by
their manner of living, through you, he says, the name of God is blasphemed
amongst the Gentiles, Romans ii. 24.

Some of our ancestors through many tribulations were gathered into the state
of true worshippers, and had fellowship in that which is pure, and as one was
inwardly moved to kneel down in their assemblies, and publicly call on the name
of the Lord, those in the harmony of united exercise then present, joined in
the prayer; I mention this in order that we of the present age, may look unto
the Rock from whence we were hewn, and remember that to unite in worship, is a
union in prayer, and that prayer acceptable to the Father is only in a mind
truly sanctified, where the sacred name is kept holy, and the heart resigned to
do his will on earth as it is done in heaven, "If ye abide in me," says
Christ, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will in my name, and it
shall be done unto you. -- Now we know not what to pray for as we ought, but as
the Holy Spirit does open and direct our minds, and as we faithfully yield to
its influences, our prayers are in the will of our heavenly Father, who fails
not to grant that which his own spirit, through his children, asks; -- thus
preservation from sin is known, and the fruits of righteousness are brought
forth by such who inwardly unite in prayer.

How weighty are our solemn meetings when the name of Christ is kept holy?

"How precious is that state in which the children of the Lord are so redeemed
from the love of this world, that they are accepted and blessed in all that
they do." R. Barclay's Apology, p. 404.

How necessary is it that we who profess these principles, and are outwardly
active in supporting them, should faithfully abide in divine strength, that As
He who has called us, is holy, so we may be holy in all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. i. 15.

If one professing to be influenced by the spirit of Christ, proposes to unite
in a labor to promote righteousness in the earth, and in time past he has
manifestly deviated from the path of equity, then to act consistent with this
principle, his first work is to make restitution so far as he may be enabled;
for if he attempts to contribute toward a work intended to promote
righteousness, while it appears that he neglects, or refuses to act
righteously himself, his conduct has a tendency to entangle the minds of those
who are weak in the says, who behold these things, and to draw a veil over the
purity of righteousness, by carrying an appearance as though that was
righteousness which is not.

Again, if I propose to assist in supporting those doctrines wherein that
purity of life is held forth, in which customs proceeding from the spirit of
this world have no place, and at the same time strengthen others in those
customs by my example; the first step then in an orderly proceeding, is to
cease from those customs myself, and afterward to labor, as I may be enabled,
to promote the like disposition and conduct in others.

To be convinced of the pure principle of truth, and diligently exercised in
walking answerable thereto, is necessary before I can consistently recommend
this principle to others. -- I often feel a labor in spirit, that we who are
active members in religious society may experience in ourselves the truth of
those expressions of the Holy One -- I will be sanctified in them that come
nigh me. Lev. x. 3. -- in this case, my mind has been often exercised when
alone, year after year, for many years, and in the renewings of divine love, a
tender care has been incited in me, that we who profess the inward principle
of light to be our teacher, may be a family united in that purity of worship,
which comprehends a holy life, and ministers instruction to others.

My mind is often drawn toward children in the truth, who having a small share
of the things of this life, and coming to have families may be inwardly
exercised before the Lord to support them in a way agreeable to the purity of
truth, in which they may feel his blessing upon them in their labors; the
thoughts of such being entangled with customs (contrary to pure wisdom)
conveyed to them through our hands, does often very tenderly and movingly
affect my heart, and when I look toward and think on the succeeding
generation, fervent desires are raised in me, that we by yielding to that Holy
Spirit which leads into all truth, may not do the work of the Lord deceitfully,
may not live contrary to the purity of the divine principle we profess; but
that as faithful laborers in our age, we may be instrumental in removing
stumbling blocks out of the way of those who may succeed us.

So great was the love of Christ, that he gave himself for the church, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, that it should be holy, and without blemish, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. v. 25. and where any take the
name of Christ upon them, professing to be members of his church, and led by
his Holy Spirit, and yet manifestly deviate from the purity ^f truth, they
herein act against the gracious ^^sign of his giving himself for them, and
minister cause for the continuance of his afflictions, viz. in his body the
church.

Christ suffered afflictions in a body of flesh prepared by the father, but the
afflictions of his mystical body are yet unfinished; for they who are baptized
into Christ are baptized into his death, and as we humbly abide under his
sanctifying power, and are brought forth into newness of life, we feel Christ
to live in us, who being the same yesterday, today, and forever, and always at
unity with himself, his spirit in the hearts of his people leads to an inward
exercise for the salvation of mankind; and when under a travail of spirit, we
behold a visited people entangled by the spirit of this world with its
wickedness and customs, and thereby rendered incapable of being faithful
examples to others, sorrow and heaviness under a sense of these things, is
often experienced, and thus in some measure is filled up that which remains of
the afflictions of Christ.

Our blessed Savior speaking concerning gifts offered in divine service, says,
If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Mat. v.
23, 24. -- Now there is no true unity, but in that wherein the Father and the
Son are united, nor can there be a perfect reconciliation but in ceasing from
that which ministers cause for the continuation of the afflictions of Christ;
and if any professing to bring their gift to the altar, do remember the
customary contradiction which some of their fruits bear to the pure, spiritual
worship, here it appears necessary to lay to heart this command, leave thy gift
by the altar.

Christ graciously calls his people brethren, whosoever shall do the will of
God the same is my brother. Mark iii. 35. Now if we walk contrary to the truth
as it is in Jesus while we continue to profess it, we offend against Christ,
and if under this offense we bring our gift to the altar, our Redeemer does not
direct us to take back our gift, he does not discourage our proceeding in a
good work; but graciously points out the necessary means by which the gift may
be rendered acceptable, "leave," says he, thy gift by the altar, first go and
be reconciled to thy brother, cease from that which grieves the Holy Spirit,
cease from that which is against the truth, as it is in Jesus, and then come,
and offer thy gift.

I feel, while I am writing, a tenderness to those who through divine favor,
are preserved in a lively sense of the state of the churches, and at times may
be under discouragements with regard to proceeding in that pure way which
Christ by his Holy Spirit leads into: the depth of disorder and weakness, which
so much prevails, being opened, doubtings are apt to arise as to the
possibility of proceeding as an assembly of the Lord's people in the pure
counsel of truth; and here I feel a concern to express in uprightness, that
which has been opened in my mind, under the power of the cross of Christ,
relating to a visible gathered church, the members whereof are guided by the
Holy Spirit.

The church is called the body of Christ, Col. i. 25.

Christ is called the head of the church, Ephesians. i. 22.

The church is called the pillar, and ground of truth, 1 Timothy iii. 15.

Thus the church has a name that is sacred, and the necessity of keeping this
name holy, appears evident; for where a number of people unite in a profession
of being led by the spirit of Christ, and publish their principles to the
world, the acts and proceedings of that people may in some measure be
considered as such which Christ is the author of.

Now while we stand in this station, if the pure light of life is not followed
and regarded in our proceedings, we are in the way of profaning the holy Name,
and of going back toward that wilderness of sufferings and persecution, out of
which, through the tender mercies of God, a church has been gathered; "Christ
lives in sanctified vessels," Gal. ii. 20. and where they behold his holy Name
profaned, and the pure gospel light eclipsed through the unfaithfulness of any
who by their station appear to be standard bearers under the Prince of Peace,
the living members in the body of Christ in beholding these things, do in some
degree experience the fellowship of his sufferings, and as the wisdom of the
world more and more takes place in conducting the affairs of this visible
gathered church, and the pure leadings of the Holy Spirit are less waited for
and followed, so the true suffering seed is more and more oppressed.

My mind is often affected with a sense of the condition of sincere hearted
people in some kingdoms, where liberty of conscience is not allowed, many of
whom being burdened in their minds with prevailing superstition, joined with
oppressions, are often under sorrow; and where such have attended to that pure
light which has in some degree opened their understandings, and for their
faithfulness thereto, have been brought to examination and trial, how heavy are
the persecutions which in diverse parts of the world are exercised upon them?
How mighty, as to the outward, is that power by which they are borne down and
oppressed?

How deeply affecting is the condition of many upright hearted people who are
taken into the papal inquisition? What lamentable cruelties, in deep vaults, in
a private way, are exercised on many of them? and how lingering is that death
by a small slow fire, which they have frequently endured, who have been
faithful to the end?

How many tender-spirited protestants have been sentenced to spend the
remainder of their lives in a galley chained to oars, under hard-hearted
masters, while their young children are placed out for education, and taught
principles so contrary to the consciences of the parents, that by dissenting
from them, they have hazarded their liberty, lives, and all that was dear to
them of the things of this world?

There have been in time past severe persecutions under the English government,
and many sincere-hearted people have suffered death for the testimony of a good
conscience, whose faithfulness in their day has ministered encouragement to
others, and been a blessing to many who have succeeded them; thus from age to
age, the darkness being more and more removed, a channel at length, through the
tender mercies of God, has been opened for the exercise of the pure gift of
the gospel ministry, without interruption from outward power, a work, the like
of which is rare, and unknown in many parts of the world.

As these things are often fresh in my mind, and this great work of God going
on in the earth has been open before me, that liberty of conscience with which
we are favored, has appeared not as a light matter.

A trust is committed to us, a great and weighty trust, to which our diligent
attention is necessary: wherever the active members of this visible gathered
church use themselves to that which is contrary to the purity of our
principles, it appears to be a breach of this trust, and one step back toward
the wilderness, one step toward undoing what God in infinite love has done
through his faithful servants, in a work of several ages, and is like laying
the foundation for future sufferings.

I feel a living invitation in my mind to such who are active in our religious
society, that we may lay to heart this matter, and consider the station in
which we stand; a place of outward liberty under the free exercise of our
conscience toward God, not obtained but through great and manifold afflictions
of those who lived before us. There is gratitude due from us to our heavenly
Father, and justice to our posterity; can our hearts endure, or our hands be
strong, if we desert a cause so precious, if we turn aside from a work under
which so many have patiently labored?

May the deep sufferings of our Savior be so dear to us, that we may never
trample under foot the adorable Son of God, nor count the blood of the covenant
unholy!

May the faithfulness of the martyrs when the prospect of death by fire was
before them, be remembered! and may the patient constant sufferings of the
upright-hearted servants of God in latter ages be revived in our minds! and may
we so follow on to know the Lord, that neither the faithful in this age, nor
those in ages to come, may ever be brought under suffering, through our sliding
back from the work of reformation in the world!

While the active members in the visible gathered church stand upright, and the
affairs thereof are carried on under the leadings of the Holy Spirit, although
disorders may arise among us, and cause many exercises to those who feel the
care of the churches upon them; yet while these continue under the weight of
the work, and labor in the meekness of wisdom for the help of others, the name
of Christ in the visible gathered church may be kept sacred; but while they who
are active in the affairs of this church, continue in a manifest opposition to
the purity of our principles, this as the prophet Isaiah x. 18. expresses it,
is like as when a standard bearer sainteth: and thus the way opens to great,
and prevailing degeneracy, and to sufferings for such who through the power of
divine love, are separated to the gospel of Christ, and cannot unite with any
thing which stands in opposition to the purity of it.

The necessity of an inward stillness, has under these exercises appeared
clear to my mind; in true silence strength is renewed, the mind herein is
weaned from all things, but as they may be enjoyed in the divine will, and a
lowliness in outward living opposite to worldly honor, becomes truly
acceptable to us; -- in the desire after outward gain, the mind is prevented
from a perfect attention to the voice of Christ; but being weaned from all
things, but as they may be enjoyed in the divine will, the pure light shines
into the soul: and where the fruits of that spirit which is of this world, are
brought forth by many who profess to be led by the spirit of truth, and
cloudiness is felt to be gathering over the visible gathered church, the
sincere in heart who abide in true stillness, and are exercised therein before
the Lord for his name sake, have a knowledge of Christ in the fellowship of his
sufferings, and inward thankfulness is felt at times, that through divine love
our own wisdom is cast out, and that forward active part in us subjected, which
would rise and do something in the visible gathered church, without the pure
leadings of the Spirit of Christ.

While aught remains in us different from a perfect resignation of our wills,
it is like a seal to a book wherein is written that good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God concerning us, Romans xii. 2. but when our minds entirely
yield to Christ, that silence is known, which follows the opening of the last
of the seals, Rev. viii. 1. in this silence we learn abiding in the divine
will, and there feel, that we have no cause to promote but that only in which
the light of life directs us in our proceedings, and that the alone way to be
useful in the church of Christ, is to abide faithfully under the leadings of
his Holy Spirit in all cases, and being preserved thereby in purity of heart,
and holiness of conversation, a testimony to the purity of his government may
be held forth through us, to others.

As my mind has been thus exercised, I have seen that to be active, and busy
in the visible gathered church, without the leadings of the Holy Spirit is not
only unprofitable, but tends to increase dimness, and where way is not opened
to proceed in the light of truth, a stop is felt by those who humbly attend to
the Divine Leader, a stop which in relation to good order in the visible
gathered church, is of the greatest consequence to be observed; thus Robert
Barclay in his treatise on discipline holds forth, page 65. 68. 84. "That the
judgment or conclusion of the church or congregation, is no further effectual
as to the true end and design thereof, but as such judgment or conclusion
proceeds from the Spirit of God operating on their minds who are sanctified in
Christ Jesus."

Now in this stop I have learned the necessity of waiting on the Lord in
humility, that the works of all may be brought to light, and those to judgment
which are wrought in the wisdom of this world, and have also seen, that in a
mind thoroughly subjected to the power of the cross, there is a favor of life
to be felt, which evidently tends to gather souls to God, while the greatest
works in the visible gathered church brought forth in man's wisdom, remain to
be unprofitable.

Where people are divinely gathered into a holy fellowship, and faithfully
abide under the influence of that Spirit which leads into all truth, "they are
the light of the world." Mat. v. 14. Now holding this profession, to me has
appeared weighty, even beyond what I can fully express, and what our blessed
Lord seemed to have in view, when he proposed the necessity of counting the
cost, before we begin to build.

I trust there are many who at times, under divine visitation, (...) inward
enquiry after God, and when such in the simplicity of their hearts mark the
lives of a people who profess to walk by the leadings of his Spirit, of what
great concernment is it that our lights shine clear, that nothing of our
conduct carry a contradiction to the truth as it is in Jesus, or be a means of
profaning his holy Name, and be a stumbling block in the way of those sincere
enquirers.

When such seekers who wearied with empty forms, look toward uniting with us
as a people, and behold active members among us depart in their customary way
of living, from that purity of life, which under humbling exercises has been
opened before them, as the way of the Lord's people, how mournful and
discouraging is the prospect! and how strongly does such unfaithfulness operate
against the spreading of the peaceable, harmonious principle and testimony of
truth amongst mankind?

In entering into that life, which is hid with Christ in God, we behold his
peaceable government, where the whole family are governed by the same spirit,
and the doing to others as we would they should do unto us, grows up as good
fruit from a good tree, the peace, quietness, and harmonious walking in this
government is beheld with humble reverence to him who is the author of it, and
in partaking of the Spirit of Christ, we partake of that which labors, and
suffers for the increase of this peaceable government among the inhabitants of
the world; and I have felt a labor of long continuance that we who profess
this peaceable principle, may be faithful standard bearers under the Prince of
Peace, and that nothing of a defiling nature, tending to discord and wars, may
remain among us.

May each of us query with ourselves, have the treasures I possess, been
gathered in that wisdom which is from above, so far as has appeared to me?

Have none of my fellow creatures an equitable right to any part which is
called mine?

Have the gifts, and possessions received by me from others been conveyed in a
way free from all unrighteousness so far as I have seen?

The principle of peace in which our trust is only on the Lord, and our minds
weaned from a dependence on the strength of armies, has appeared to me very
precious, and I often feel strong desires, that we who profess this principle,
may so walk, as to give just cause for none of our fellow creatures to be
offended at us; that our lives may evidently manifest, that we are redeemed
from that spirit in which wars are: our blessed Savior in pointing out the
danger of so leaning on man, as to neglect the leadings of his Holy Spirit,
said, Call no man your father upon the earth; for one is your father which is
in heaven, Mat. xxiii. 9. where the wisdom from above is faithfully followed,
and therein we are entrusted with substance, it is a treasure committed to our
care in the nature of an inheritance, as an inheritance from him, who formed,
and supports the world. Now in this condition the true enjoyment of the good
things of this life is understood, and that blessing felt, in which is real
safety; this is what I apprehend our blessed Lord had in view, when he
pronounced, Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Selfish worldly minded men may hold lands in the selfish spirit, and depending
on the strength of the outward power, be perplexed with secret uneasiness, lest
the injured should sometime overpower them, and that measure meted to them,
which they measure to others. -- Thus selfish men may possess the earth; but it
is the meek who inherit it, and enjoy it as an inheritance from the heavenly
Father, free from all the defilements and perplexities of unrighteousness.

Where proceedings have been in that wisdom which is from beneath, and
inequitable gain gathered by a man, and left as a gift to his children, who
being entangled by the same worldly spirit, have not attained to that clearness
of light in which the channels of righteousness are opened, and justice done to
those who remain silent under injuries: here I have seen under humbling
exercise of mind, that the sins of the fathers are embraced by the children,
and become their sins, and thus in the days of tribulation, the iniquities of
the fathers are visited upon these children, who take hold of the
unrighteousness of their fathers, and live in that spirit in which those
iniquities were committed; to which agrees the prophecy of Moses, concerning a
rebellious people. They that are left of you shall pine away in their
iniquities, in your enemy's land, and in the iniquities of their fathers shall
they pine away. Lev. xxvi. 39. and our blessed Lord in beholding the hardness
of heart in that generation, and feeling in himself, that they lived in the
same spirit in which the prophets had been persecuted unto death, signified,
that the blood of all the prophets which was shed from the foundation of the
world, should be required of that generation, from the blood of Abel, unto the
blood of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and the temple. Luke xi.
51.

Tender compassion fills my heart toward my fellow creatures estranged from the
harmonious government of the Prince of Peace, and a labor attends me, that
they may be gathered to this peaceable habitation.

In being inwardly prepared to suffer adversity for Christ's sake, and weaned
from a dependence on the arm of flesh, we feel, that there is a rest for the
people of God, and that it stands in a perfect resignation of ourselves to his
holy Will; in this condition, all our wants and desires are bounded by pure
wisdom, and our minds wholly attentive to the council of Christ inwardly
communicated, which has appeared to me as a habitation of safety for the
Lord's people, in times of outward commotion and trouble, and desires from the
fountain of pure love, are opened in me, to invite my brethren and fellow
creatures to feel for, and seek after that which gathers the mind into it.

Mount-Holly, New Jersey, 4 th Month, 1772. JOHN WOOLMAN.

FINIS.

