REMARKS on the Nature and bad Effects of SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
THE common use of Spirituous liquors distilled from molasses, grain, fruit,
etc. is a matter that calls for the particular attention of every lover of
mankind.

Several physicians of note, Doctors Hoffman, Cheyne, Short, Lind, Buchan, etc.
have given it as their sentiments, that those distilled spirits when taken
inwardly, even though mixed with water, destroy the human frame; being burning
spirits, the use of which bring on many fatal diseases, such as fevers,
jaundice, dropsies, consumptions, and whereby multitudes are daily destroyed.
That they parch up and contract the stomach to half its natural size, like
burnt leather, and rot the entrails, as is evident, not only by opening the
bodies of those persons who are killed by drinking them; but also by what
Doctor Hoffman says, was observed of the effects which the caustic fiery
remaining wash of the distillers, has on the guts of those hogs which in some
places are fed by it, which are thereby so tendered, that puddings cannot be
made in them: Wherefore all people, who have any regard to their health and
lives, ought to tremble at the cravings for such poisonous liquors, which
shorten and destroy the lives of such multitudes of people. It is farther
observable, that the free use of those Spirits, deprave the morals of those who
addict themselves thereto; the feelings of their minds are gradually benumbed;
an insensibility to the healing influences of grace prevails, and many become
profane and regardless of their duty to God and Man.

Doctor Cheyne in his Essay of health and long life, says, "All people, who
have any regard to their health and lives, ought to tremble at the first
cravings for such poisonous liquors. The maladies begot by them bring forth
necessity upon necessity of drams and gills; till at last, a kind dropsy,
nervous convulsion, flux, if not a fever, or phrensy sets the poor soul free.
It has often raised in me, says the Doctor, the most melancholy reflections,
to see the virtuous and sensible, bound in such chains and fetters, as nothing
less than omnipotent grace or the unrelenting grave could release them from."

It is pretended, that drams comfort, warm, and defend from the severity of
weather, to which men are sometimes exposed; without which they say, they
should perish with cold; which is probably, in a great measure, true of those
who are habituated to drink them; the blood of such being thereby so much
improverished, that it is well known many of the drinkers of drams are cold and
lifeless in the midst of summer, without frequent repetitions; this is what
some of them have owned. But on the other hand, how much more able are sober
persons to endure cold and hardships; their vital heat not being extinguished
by intemperance, does by its kindly genial warmth, more effectually secure them
from the inclemency of the weather, than the false flash of a dram. Besides, it
is well known, that men did not perish in the coldest countries for want of
drams formerly, when they were not to be had, of the undoubted truth of this,
Captain Ellis gives a full proof in the account of his voyage to Hudson's bay,
page 199: Where he observes, "That the natives of the very cold coast of that
Bay, to whom the French are kinder than to sell distilled spirituous liquors,
are tall, hardy, robust and active; whereas those of them that are supplied
with drams from the English, are a meagre, dwarfish, indolent people, hardly
equal to the feverity of the country and subject to many disorders. And as to
the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors in very hot climates, (as on the
coast of Guinea) it is observed, that the French and Portuguese, who do not
indulge in distilled spirits, are healthy compared with the English; who,
drinking freely of spirits, etc. die fast."

The unhappy dram-drinkers are so absolutely bound in slavery to these infernal
spirits, that they seem to have lost the power of delivering themselves from
this worst of bondage. How much then is it the bounden duty of those, who have
it in their power to withhold this destructive man-bane, either as parents,
masters, or rulers to the people committed to their trust. This is a case so
calamitous to mankind, that to have a thorough sense of it, and yet not to
remonstrate, nor earnestly caution against it, is certainly as criminal as it
is unfriendly not to warn a blind person of a dangerous precipice or pit. Yet,
alas how unconcerned are the greatest part of mankind at this enormous ruin of
multitudes! In trials for life, what diligence is used to find the occasion of
the loss of one subject. What care will not a faithful Physician bestow for the
preservation of one life. How did the wise Romans honor him, who saved the
life of one Roman citizen. But in the present case it is not one, nor one
hundred, nor one thousand, but probably no less than a million that perish
yearly.

The mistaken use and grievous abuse of rum and other distilled spirits, in no
case appears more palpably than at the time of harvest, a business which the
people under the Mosaic dispensation were enjoined to carry on with humiliation
and thanksgiving; but which amongst us, through the free use of spirituous
liquors, is made an occasion of a greater abuse of the creatures and dishonor
of the Creator; this arises in many, from a mistaken persuasion that hard
labor, particularly that of the harvest field, cannot be carried on without
using a quantity of rum or other distilled spirits. In support of this opinion,
we are frequently told of the many people who have died at those times through
the extreme heat and fatigue, and it is supposed that many more would die, if a
plentiful use of spirituous liquors was not allowed; but this is a mistaken
notion, it being much more likely that the free use of rum occasioned the death
of those people, the quantity they had swallowed down, sending a great flow of
spirits into the head in proportion to the strength of their body, caused them
to strain their strength beyond what nature could bear; and in general the
repeated large quantities of spirit commonly drank during the whole time of
harvest, keeps up the blood in so continual a ferment and fever, that people
cannot have a proper restorative sleep; their constitutions are thereby
enervated, their lives shortened and an unfitness for religious impressions
generally prevails.

These weighty considerations have induced some well minded people to endeavor
to induce, by their examples, their friends and neighbors into a contrary
practice; and under these attempts experience has made it manifest that very
little or no strong liquor is necessary at those times; indeed they have been
convinced that the harvest, and other laborious work, can be very well managed
without making use of any spirituous liquors at all. If such labor was carried
on with steadiness and proper moderation, there would certainly be no need of a
recruit of strength being sought for by that means; more frequent intervals of
rest, with a little food oftener allowed the reapers, and small drinks, such as
molasses and water, either alone or made more agreeable with a little cider,
small beer, or even milk and water would fully enable them to perform their
work to their employer's satisfaction and their own advantage, and the overplus
wages they would receive to the value of the spirits usually given them, might
be sufficient to purchase bread for their families. Several persons who from a
persuasion that the common method of giving spirituous liquors to laborers was
exceeding hurtful, have made it a condition with those they have employed, not
to use any spirituous liquors in their fields; these have had their work
performed to good satisfaction and without any damage ensuing to their
laborers. Nay, where they have remained any considerable time with such
employers, they have generally acknowledged themselves sensible of the benefit
arising from having thus totally refrained the use of those liquors.

Should this practice take place, it would prove a great blessing, particularly
to the laboring people, one half of whom (a physician of this country has
given as his sentiment) die sooner than they otherwise would do, solely by the
use of spirituous liquors. Besides that, it would discourage the distillation
of rye and other grain; a practice which is not only a great hurt to the poor
in raising the price of bread, but must also be very offensive to God the great
and good father of the family of mankind, that people should, in their earthly
and corrupt wisdom, pervert their Maker's benevolent intention, in converting
the grain he has given to us as the staff of life, unto a fiery spirit, so
destructive of the human frame and attended with the other dreadful
consequences already mentioned. Here it may be noted, that any quantity of good
molasses will by distillation, yield more than the same quantity of proof
spirit. And that a considerable quantity of molasses if taken with bread at one
time, as the Indians will sometimes do, will not intoxicate, the spirituous
parts in the molasses being properly united, by our good and wise creator, with
the earthy and balsamic parts, so as to make it quite friendly to our nature;
but when by distillation the spirituous parts are separated from the other
parts, that measure of spirits proceeding from the same quantity of molasses,
becomes a fiery liquid, destructive of the human frame. Doctor Buchan in his
Domestic Medicine, or Family Physician, a book which has gained so much esteem
as to be twice published in this city, at page 71 of the English Edition says,
many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without drinking strong
liquors. This, though a common is a very erroneous notion, men who never tasted
strong liquors are not only able to endure more fatigue, but also live much
longer than those who use them daily. Doctor Smollet, in the account of his
travels, speaking of the bad effects even of fermented liquors, observes, ' The
longer I live, the more I am convinced that wine and all fermented liquors are
pernicious to the human constitution, and that for the preservation of health
and exhileration of the spirits, there is no beverage comparable to simple
water.
But suppose strong liquors did enable a man to do more work, they must
nevertheless waste the powers of life, and of course occasion premature old
age. They keep up a constant fever, which wastes the spirits, heats and
inflames the blood and predisposes the body to numberless diseases. At page the
same author tells us, that all intoxicating liquors may be considered as
poisons. However disguised, that is their real character, and sooner or later
they will have their effect.

Amongst the several prejudices in favor of the mistaken use of spirituous
liquors, there is none gives it a greater sanction or support, than the
prevailing opinion, even with persons of reputation, that what they term a
moderate quantity of rum mixed with water, is the best and safest liquor that
can be drank; hence confirming the opinion, that spirit in one form or other is
necessary. To such who have not been accustomed, and think they cannot
habituate themselves to drink water, there may appear to be some kind of plea
in this argument, especially to travelers, who often meet with beer, cider, or
other fermented liquors that are dead, hard, sour, or not properly fermented,
which tend to generate air in the bowels, producing colicks, etc. But if those
persons suffered the weight of the subject, and the encouragement they thereby
give to the use of those destructive spirits, to take proper place with them,
it might suggest the propriety, if not necessity of introducing a more salutary
practice.

That pure fluid (water) which the benevolent father of the family of mankind,
points out for general use, is so analogous to the human frame, that people
might with safety gradually use themselves to it. Dr. Cheyne observes, that
without all doubt, water is the primitive original beverage, as it is the only
simple fluid fitted for diluting, moistening and cooling; the ends of drink,
appointed by nature, and he adds happy had it been for the race of mankind, if
other mixed and artificial liquors had never been invented. Water alone is
sufficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in drink: Strong
liquors were never designed for common use. Speaking of the effect of wine,
which he says to have been so much in use at the time he wrote, that the better
sort of people scarcely diluted their food with any other liquor, he remarks,
That as natural causes will always produce their proper effects, their blood
was inflamed in gout, stone, and rheumatism, raging fevers, pleurisies, etc.
Water is the only disolvent or menstruum, and the most certain diluter of all
bodies proper for food.

Doctor Short, in his discourse of the inward use of water, speaks much in its
commendation. He says, we can draw a very convincing argument of the excellency
of water, from the longevity and healthfulness of those who at first had no
better liquor, and the health and strength of body and ferenity of mind, of
those who at this day have no other common liquor to drink, of this the common
people amongst the Highlands of Scotland, are a sufficient instance, amongst
whom it is no rarity to find persons of eighty, ninety, yea an hundred years of
age, as healthy, strong and nimble, as wine or ale bibbers are at thirty six or
forty. The Doctor says, There is a ridiculous maxim used by drinkers, that
water makes but thin blood, not fit for business. I say, says he, it is water
only that can enduce its drinkers with the strongest bodies and most robust
constitutions, where execise or labor is joined with it, since it best assists
the stomach and lungs to reduce the aliments into the smallest particles, that
they may better pass the strainers of the body, which separates the nutritious
parts of the blood to be applied to the sides of the of the vessels, and
exercise invigorates the fibers and muscles; whereas the rapid motion of blood
excited by drinking spirituous liquors, cannot fail of being prejudicial to the
body, it will cause the watery parts to dissipate, and the remaining to grow
thick and tough, and the event be obstructions, inflammations, imposthumations,
etc. -- and though strong liquors afford a greater flow of spirits for a short
time, yet this is always followed with as much lowness of spirit; so that to
gain a necessary stock of spirits, the person is obliged to repeat the same
force, till he learns a custom of drinking drams. In this we are confirmed, if
we consider the great strength and hardiness of poor rusticks in many parts of
the world, whose provisions is mostly vegetable food, and their drink water.
The Doctor adds, that it often happens that persons of tender, weakly, crazy
constitutions, by refraining from strong liquors and accustoming themselves to
drink water, make a shift to spin out many years.

After describing the many distempers produced by drinking malt or other
fermented liquors he adds, that seeing constitutions differ, it is not to be
expected that spirituous liquors should produce all the same symptoms in one
and the same person, yet that all drinkers have several of them; and if they
come not to that height, it is because they afterward use great exercise or
hard labor, with sometimes thin diluting liquors, which prevent their
immediate hurting.

And with respect to such well disposed people, who still retain a favorable
opinion of the use of spirits mixed with water, ought they not, even from love
to mankind, to endeavor to refrain from it, on account of the effect their
example may have in encouraging others in the use of spirituous, liquors,
agreeable to the example left us by the apostle Paul, 1. Cor. viii. 13. If meat
make my brother to offend I will eat no flesh white the world stands, lest I
make my brother to offend. How much more ought they to refrain from that which
tends to establish mankind, in a practice so generally destructive, more
especially when they consider the danger themselves are in of increasing the
quantity of spirit with their water, as it has been observed, that the use of
this mixture is particularly apt, almost imperceptible to gain upon those that
use it, so that many otherwise good and judicious people have unwarily to
themselves and others, fallen, with the common herd, a sacrifice to this might
devourer.

A very eminent physician has given the following direction, for the benefit of
those who have not wisdom enough left at once to abandon the odious and
pernicious practice of drinking distilled spirituous liquors, viz. By degrees
to mix water with the spirit, to lessen the quantity every day, and keep to the
same quantity of water, till in about the course of a week, nothing of the dram
kind be used along with water. By this means the person will suffer no
inconveniency, but reap great benefit upon leaving off drams or spirits as has
been tried by many. If any gnawing be left in the stomach upon quite leaving it
off, a little warm broth, weak tea, or any thing of that kind, will be a
service. The appetite always increases in a few days after leaving off drams,
unless by the too long continuance of them, the tone of the stomach is
destroyed. And when the stomach is thus affected a cup of carduus, camomile,
wormwood or centaury tea, every morning fasting and every evening will be found
a good remedy.


