A CIRCUMSTANTIAL ACCOUNT Of an Attack that happened on the 19th of April 1775,
on his MAJESTY'S Troops, By a Number of the People of the Province of
MASSACHUSETTS BAY.
ON Tuesday the 18th of April, about half past 10 at Night, Lieutenant Colonel
Smith of the 10th Regiment, embarked from the Common at Boston, with the
Grenadiers and Light Infantry of the Troops there, and landed on the opposite
Side from whence he began his March toward Concord, where he was ordered to
destroy a Magazine of Military Stores, deposited there for the Use of an Army
to be assembled, in Order to act against his Majesty, and his Government. The
Colonel called his Officers together, and gave Orders, that the Troops should
not fire, unless fired upon; and after marching a few Miles, detached six
Companies of Light Infantry, under the Command of Major Pitcairn, to take
Possession of two Bridges on the other Side of Concord: Soon after they heard
many Signal Guns, and the ringing of Alarm Bells repeatedly, which convinced
them that the Country was rising to oppose them, and that it was a preconcerted
Scheme to oppose the King's Troops, wherever there should be a favorable
Opportunity for it. About 3 o'Clock the next Morning, the Troops being advanced
within two Miles of Lexington, Intelligence was received that about Five
Hundred Men in (...) to oppose the King's Troops; At this Time the advanced
Light Companies loaded, (...) were not loaded when they received their first
Fire*
and on Major Pitcairn's gallopping up to the Head of the advanced Companies,
two Officers informed him that a Man advanced from those that were assembled*
had presented his Musquit and attempted to shoot them, but the Piece flashed in
the Pan: On this the Major gave directions to the Troops to move forward, but
on no Account to fire, not even to attempt it without Orders. When they arrived
at the End of the Village, they observed about 200 armed Men, drawn upon a
Green, and when the Troops came within a Hundred Yards of them, they began to
file off toward some Stone Walls, on their right Flank: The Light Infantry
observing this, ran after them; the Major instantly called to the Soldiers not
to fire, but to surround and disarm them; some of them who had jumped over a
Wall, then fired four or five Shot at the Troops, wounded a Man of the 10th
Regiment, and the Major's Horse in two Places, and at the same Time several
Shots were fired from a Meeting House on the left: Upon this, without any Order
or Regularity, the Light Infantry began a scattered Fire, and killed several of
the Country People; but were silenced as soon as the Authority of their
Officers could make them.

^
After this, Colonel Smith marched up with the Remainder of the Detachment, and
the whole Body proceeded to Concord, where they arrived about 9 o'Clock,
without any Thing further happening; but vast numbers of armed People were seen
Assembling on all the Heights: while Colonel Smith with the Grenadiers, and
Part of the Light Infantry remained at Concord, to search for Cannon, etc.
there; he detached Captain Parsons with six Light Companies to secure a Bridge
at some Distance from Concord, and to proceed from thence to certain Houses,
where it was supposed there was Cannon, and Ammunition; Captain Parsons in
pursuance of these Orders, posted three Companies at the Bridge, and on some
Heights near it, under the Command of Captain Laurie of the 43d Regiment; and
with the Remainder went and destroyed some Cannon Wheels, Powder, and Ball; the
People still continued increasing on the Heights; and in about an Hour after, a
large Body of them began to move toward the Bridge, the Light Companies of the
4th and 10th then descended, and joined Captain Laurie, the People continued to
advance in great Numbers; and fired upon the Kings Troops, killed three Men,
wounded four Officers, one Sergeant, and four private Men, upon which (after
returning the fire) Captain Laurie and his Officers, thought it prudent to
retreat toward the Main Body at Concord, and were fond joined by two Companies
of Grenadiers; when Captain Parsons returned with the three Companies over the
Bridge, they observed three Soldiers on the Ground one of them scalped, his
Head much mangled, and his Ears cut off, though not quite dead; a Sight which
struck the Soldiers with Horror; Captain Parsons marched on and joined the Main
Body, who were only waiting for his coming up, to march back to Boston; Colonel
Smith had executed his (...) by destroying all the Military Stores he could
(...) the Colonel, and Major Pitcairn, having (...) Pains to convince the
Inhabitants that no Injury was intended them, and that if they opened their
(...) when required, to search for said Stores, not the slightest Mischief
should be done; neither had any of the People the least Occasion to complain,
but they were sulky, and one of them even struck Major Pitcairn. Except upon
Captain Laurie, at the Bridge, no Hostilities happened from the Affair at
Lexington, until the Troops began their March back. As soon as the Troops had
got out of the Town of Concord, they received a heavy Fire from all Sides, from
Walls, Fences, Houses, Trees, Barns, etc. which continued without Intermission,
till they met the first Brigade, with two Field Pieces, near Lexington; ordered
out under the Command of Lord Percy to support them; (advice having been
received about 7 o'Clock next Morning, that Signals had been made, and
Expresses gone out to alarm the Country, and that the People were rising to
attack the Troops under Colonel Smith.) Upon the Firing of the Field Pieces,
the People's Fire was for a while silenced, but as they still continued to
increase greatly in Numbers, they fired again as before, from all Places were
they could find Cover, upon the whole Body, and continued so (...) for the
Space of Fifteen Miles: Notwithstanding their Numbers they did not attack
openly during the Whole Day, but kept under Cover on all Occasions. The Troops
were very much fatigued, the greater Part of them having been under Arms all
Night, and made a March of upwards of Forty Miles before they arrived at
Charlestown, from whence they were ferryed over to Boston.

The Troops had above Fifty killed, and many more wounded: Reports are various
about the Loss sustained by the Country People, some make it very considerable,
others not so much.

Thus this unfortunate Affair has happened through the (...) and Imprudence of
(...) Firing on the Troops at Lexington.


