A SELF-DEFENSIVE WAR LAWFUL, PROVED IN A SERMON, Preached at Lancaster, before
Captain ROSS's Company of MILITIA, in the Presbyterian Church, on Sabbath
Morning, June 4, 1775.

By the Rev. JOHN CARMICHAEL, A. M.

Now published at the Request of the Author, and corrected by himself from the
Copy printed at Lancaster;

Humbly offered to the Perusal of the MILITARY ASSOCIATORS of the City,
Liberties and County of PHILADELPHIA.

Then said he unto them, But now he that has a purse, let him take it, and
likewise his scrip: -- And he that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and
buy one.

LUKE 22:36. -- UNDIQUE TOTIS USQUE ADEO TURBATUR AGRIS.

Virgil. PHILADELPHIA: Printed for and Sold by JOHN DEAN, Bookbind in
LAETITIA-COURT. 1775.

TO all the brave SONS of LIBERTY, in North America, but in particular to the
Company of MILITIA in the Borough of Lancaster, known by the Name of ROSS's
COMPANY, Gentlemen, Officers and Soldiers, who appeared in their Uniform in
Church, to hear this Sermon, and at whose Request it is now published, it is
hereby most respectfully dedicated, by

Their hearty Friend, and very humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON, etc.
LUKE iii:14. And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall
we do? and he said unto them, Do violence to no man, and neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages. --


AT a time when the unjust storm of ministerial wrath is discharging itself, in
a cruel and ignominious manner, on the noble, patriotic, brave people of the
ancient, loyal, important colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England; --
at a time when all the other colonies in North America, like the true children
of a freeborn family, are roused to some just resentment of such insults, on
their natural and legal rights, taking each other as by the hand, and uniting
by the invincible chains of love, friendship, and interest, are determined to
support this their elder sister colony, now suffering so gloriously in the
common cause, or sink together; -- at a time when the alarm is sounding from
east to west, over this vast continent of North America, to arms! to arms! --
in short, at a time when the minds of all are in such a ferment, that they can
be scarce composed to hear any subject, but what may have some reference to the
present times; -- it is but reasonable to suppose, that even the Minister of
the Prince of Peace, whose business for ordinary is neither war or politics,
in such a situation, being member of civil society, and interested like other
men would improve the times, by adopting their public instructions, to the best
service of the people, and not offensive or displeasing to God; whose holy word
is a blessed directory in every emergency.

It is also but reasonable to suppose, that every judicious, sober American,
being now reduced to the dreadful alternative, either to take up arms,
apparently against that very government, which he was wont to revere, and under
which he expected protection for both life and property; or submit tamely to
the galling yoke of perpetual slavery; I say, it is supposable, that every such
Christian American soldier will be all ear to wholesome instructions, relative
to his present duty.

We own it is rare for soldiers to ask counsel of Gospel Ministers; and the
more pity -- for they are men and sinners, as well as others; but I am not
called to address Red-Coats, but CHRISTIAN Provincials; yet blessed be God, it
is not a case wholly unprecedented, for even regulars to apply to a Gospel
Preacher for direction; we have an instance in the words of our text. -- And
the soldiers demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? and he said unto
them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages. --

We here find a very important question proposed to a person, every way
qualified to solve it; for the mouth of truth itself tells us, that of all who
were then born of women, there was not a greater prophet than John the Baptist:
Also, the angel who predicted his birth, said, that he should be filled with
the Holy Ghost, from his mother's womb. He was therefore deservedly very
popular -- was raised for the great purpose of introducing the Jewish church to
the Savior of the world; and hence much true gospel light shone round this
great Preacher. -- The answers he gave the question, may be depended on to be
sufficient and conclusive.

But let us hear, what does John say; Does he tell them, to lay down their
arms, and throw them by, as there can be no sort of war lawful; as some would
have us believe! No, no, this is not his answer; John knew better; -- he knew
the present state of our depraved world would render war in many cases
unavoidable, and even necessary. -- So that a soldier might serve the end of
his being in his place and calling, as well as a plowman or preacher in his.

But then it must be a just war, conducted in a lawful, righteous manner; for
the legality of the action, will never justify the illegality of the manner of
prosecution.

The soldier must do violence to no man -- must not accuse any falsely -- and
must be content with his wages; leading vices these, for ordinary, among
regular troops; but the CHRISTIAN soldier must guard against them, from the
genuine principles of true religion, in the heart; and then may hope for
heaven, as well from a field of battle, as expiring on his couch in the midst
of peace and tranquillity.

I now deduce this doctrine from the text, thus explained -- Doctrine.

That although war is in itself a very great evil, and one of those sore
judgments, by which a holy God punishes the world for sin, therefore to be
deprecated, and avoided as much as possible; yet is, at times, by reason of
certain circumstances, so unavoidable, that it is our duty to enter into it --
The method I design to pursue, in opening up the doctrine, for improvement, is
the following: -- I. Humbly attempt to show (with submission to better
judgment) when a war is so unavoidable and necessary, that it is our duty to
enter into it. II. Show how we should enter into, and prosecute even a just
war. III. Improve the subject, by the deduction of a few natural inferences
from the whole.


You are sensible, my hearers, that there are some Christian people in the
world, and some of them in these parts, who merit the regard of the public, by
their general character of industry, inoffensiveness and sobriety; yet do
maintain it, as a sacred conscientious tenet, not to be dispensed with, not to
go to war, or take up arms on any occasion whatsoever; and charity, the leading
grace of the Christian system, will lead us to deal tenderly with such, as far
as we have grounds to believe they are sincere in their profession: We ought to
pity such for their mistake, and, if possible, to convince them; but not by any
means to urge them against their avowed sentiments, lest we come under the
odious appellation of persecutors.

As far as these sober people make use of the Bible, to found their principles
on, they rely on such passages as these, Genesis ix, 6. He that sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed; and Exodus xx, 13. Thou shall not kill;
and in the New Testament, But I say unto you, love your enemies; -- if any
smite thee on the one cheek turn to him the other also; -- for all they that
take the sword shall perish by the sword: Matthew. v.39, 44 and xxvi.52. and
hence conclude, though I think falsely, that all war is unlawful, except the
spiritual, with our own corruptions, by the sword of the spirit, in Christ's
spiritual kingdom, which is not of this world, else would his children fight.

But if I mistake not, these people regard only such passages of holy
scripture, as seem to favor their favorite opinion, let the language of other
passages be what they will; -- and hence their own imagination is substituted
instead of divine revelation, so that when people are determined to keep by a
sentiment, be it right or wrong, there is an end of all disputation. --

We readily allow, that it would be happy for us all, if there was no moral or
natural evil in the world. But how plausible soever such opinions may appear,
to the weal of society, they are rather calculated to the condition of
innocent, than depraved nature; which now is, and ever has been such, since the
fall of our first parents, that there is need of some remedy to curb its evil
tendencies, or mankind would scarce be able to subsist in the world; and this
our alwise righteous Creator knows; and has therefore set up civil government
to keep men from destroying each other: But civil government has no power, if
it has not the sword, to be a terror to evildoers, and a praise to them that
do well. -- Hence it will follow, that men are under a necessity to part with
some of their natural rights, to secure the rest; they must give part of their
earnings to such as are chosen by themselves to rule the whole; and then again,
they must help the rulers to execute the good and wholesome laws of government,
against their violators. Suppose, for instance, a great banditti rise to rescue
murderers; if these are not quelled, government is overthrown, if the people do
not assist good government, as here then arises a necessity to go to war.

And suppose again, on the other hand, which is very supposable, that the
rulers of the people should give way to the many temptations their high
stations will lead them to; to indulge the inclinations of a lust for absolute
dominion, independent of the people, so that all the barrier of oaths and
covenants are broke through, to effect the plan; and the people have no
security, for either life or property, but the mere sovereign pleasure of the
absolute rulers; -- then the people are under a disagreeable, but pressing
necessity, rather than be crushed by an iron rod, to re-ascertain their own
just rights; and stand forth all of them to oppose such tyranny: -- Here then
is another instance of self-defence -- in which a war is both unavoidable and
necessary, and therefore lawful, if self-preservation is lawful; which is the
point I shall next, in order, endeavor to prove indisputably, both from the
light of nature, and divine revelation; and first from the light of nature.

It is certainly evident, wherever we turn our eyes, on any part of the whole
creation of GOD, that the principle of self-love or self-preservation, or the
desire of existence, is deeply engraved on the nature of every creature. And
when this great first principle is observed, it is, and must be agreeable to
God, as he will love his own work; and so also, the neglect of the exercise of
this principle, cannot but displease him, as it is unnatural and monstrous.
Thus the generous vine will extend her arms, to lay hold on the first
neighboring prop, and with her little tender tendants, twine around it, to
preserve her clusters from perishing on the cold ground.

The little industrious be is furnished by her Creator with a sting, to
preserve for her own use her sweet honey, the fruit of her toil and industry.

The ox has his horns; and the horse his teeth and hoofs. -- The deer her feet
for flight, and the fowls their wings to escape danger and preserve themselves.
And shall man, the noblest creature in this lower world, be destitute of this
necessary principle! which we see engraved by instinct on the irrational
creation: Man is blessed with reason to direct his enquiries, in search of
happiness. His maker God allows him to seek to be as happy as he possibly can,
both in this life and the life to come. But since man is a fallen, sinful
creature, he has lost his true road to happiness -- and can never find it,
until his Maker points it out to him in the Holy Bible. Here we are taught how
to conduct both in the civil and religious life: We are certain the scriptures
allow us to defend ourselves in the best manner we can against an enemy.

Therefore, such passages, as would seem to speak a different language; such as
those already quoted, must be understood, in a consistency with this great law
of nature; as well as consistent with other parts of scripture. For Christ came
not to make void, or destroy the law, but to fulfill -- when therefore we are
forbid to shed blood, or to kill; it is innocent blood is meant -- but this
does not forbid to execute a murderer. The divine law requires, that a murderer
should be executed, and forbids to take a ransom for his life.

Also, when a body of wicked people join together, or a nation unite, to fall
upon and destroy without any just cause an innocent people: The insuited, or
invaded people, are then to unite together, to oppose, expel and punish the
guilty invaders -- as in Judges v.23. Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the
Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof: Because they came not to the
help of the Lord, against the mighty: And Jeremiah xlviii.10. Cursed be he that
does the work of the Lord deceitfully; and cursed be he that keeps back his
sword from blood: And in Luke xxii.36. Jesus Christ told his Disciples to arm
themselves against approaching danger. -- And he that has no sword let him
sell his garment and buy one.

And since our Lord did not allow the Disciples then to defend themselves by
their weapons, for when Peter cut off Malchus's ear he immediately healed it,
and bid Peter to put up his sword, to let them know, and the enemy also know,
that he was Lord of life and death -- and that the Disciples were safe with
such a person as Jesus, while the age of miracles continued; I say, since this
was the case then, we must understand the passage to intend, that it is both
lawful and a duty, for the followers of Jesus Christ, in a time and age, when
we are not to expect miracles, to arm ourselves and use our arms for our own
preservation against any invading enemy.

Also, it must of course follow, that where our blessed Lord enjoins us, when
smote on the one cheek, to turn the other also, he does not mean to forbid us
to use lawful and proper means of self-preservation. But the meaning must be as
the phrase is proverbial, that we should at no time discover a revengeful or
unforgiving disposition; but should be ready to put up with a good deal of
ill-usage, before we would create disturbance, -- yea that we should do any
thing consistent with our own safety. Again, where our Lord enjoins us to love
our enemies -- he cannot possibly mean that we should love them better than
ourselves -- that we should put it in the enemy's power to kill us, when we had
it in our power to save our own life, by killing the enemy. I say, this cannot
be the meaning; for that exposition will thwart the original first great law of
self-preservation. The meaning therefore must be, that we do not cherish a
spirit of hatred toward the enemies, and would be willing to be reconciled
again -- and would be desirous, the enemy would be convinced of his evil
sentiment against us, that we might be again on friendly terms, -- that we can
be sincere in our prayer to God, to bring such a desirable event to pass. Again,

That a self-defensive war is lawful, I will prove from the conduct of Jesus
Christ himself. If civil government is necessary to self-preservation, and war
is necessary, at times, in government, as has been already proved; then it will
follow, that those who support civil government, do support war, and so of
consequence approve of war. But Jesus Christ did pay his tribute money, to the
Emperor Tiberius, Matthew xvii, 27. And those who are acquainted with the life
of Tiberius Caesar know that he had frequent wars. Our Lord did here, as in
several other places, draw a line of distinction between church and state; the
church was his own kingdom, and spiritual in its nature and government, and was
not of this world; but the state was a distinct constitution, was of this
world, was purely civil, and it was not essential to the being of an Emperor,
of what sort of religion he was of, or whether of any, as was the case of
Tiberius, Tiberius was a Pagan; but as the Jews were tributaries to the Romans,
and our Lord was a Jew by birth, he paid his tax as a peaceable member of the
commonwealth; but had our Lord been a Mennonist he would have refused to pay
tribute, to support war, which shows the absurdity of these people's conduct.

Had our Lord been a Covenanter of the church of Scotland, he would refuse to
pay tribute, because the Emperor was not a Covenanter. -- I own, it is not
essential to the very being of a King to be a Christian, yet it is essential to
the being of a good man, to be a Christian; and certainly the more pious and
truly godly any Christian ruler is, if he is not a bigot to a party, or certain
denomination, but equally regardful of all, the regular, sober, and well
behaving, in all his dominions the happier for the people. -- In Romans 13, from
the beginning, to the 7th verse, we are instructed at large the duty we owe to
civil government, but if it was unlawful and Antichristian, or anti-scriptural
to support war, it would be unlawful to pay taxes; if it is unlawful to go to
war, it is unlawful to pay another to do it, or to go to do it: What a foolish
trick those people put on their consciences, who for the reasons already
mentioned will not pay their taxes, and yet let others come and take their
money, where they can find it, and be sure they will leave it where they can
find it handily.

I think I have now proved, from the light of nature, from the reason of things
-- from the Old and New Testament, as well as from the example of Christ and
his Apostles, that a self-defensive war is lawful.

Now those who deny this doctrine ought, if they would be ingenuous, candid and
honest, to place their argument on this footing: Suppose themselves all on some
part of our Globe, and without any connection with any people but themselves,
they had all the necessaries of life; in such a situation, if they carry with
them the common nature of the human species, as it has discovered itself in the
world in every age, since the fall of Adam; these good, peaceable, inoffensive
people would soon find evil dispositions and practices break out even among
themselves; if they would then make no resistance at all, to those evils, but
on their avowed principles, when smote on the one cheek, turn the other; there
would soon be an end of their society -- the evil would soon destroy the
peaceable and good out of the world; then the judgments of the Almighty would
undoubtedly overtake and cut off the wicked, when there would be none else in
the world; and then there would be an end to the being of mankind on the earth.
Now this was the result of things in the Antedeluvian age, when there was no
civil government at all in the world, the wicked destroyed the righteous, till
there was none left but Noah and his Family; -- the Almighty saved him by a
miracle, and cut off the rest entirely from the globe. -- And though Noah was
as good a man as any of those people with whom I am now disputing, his
posterity degenerated, and the world needed government to keep it in being to
this day. It is also equally unfair, to say, Let us stand still and see the
salvation of God; for if this proves any thing, it proves too much, it proves
that we are to use no means at all, for why to use lawful means in our power
one time, and not another; we must therefore neither plow or sow; build, raise
stock, or do any thing in the use of means, but stand still and see the
salvation of God: But our reason is given us to use it in a proper manner, to
preserve our own lives and the lives of others, as God's servants, in a state
of probation in this world; and God will reward every one finally, according to
his works; when we have no means in our power, we honor God to trust him, as
Israel at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness; -- but when means are in our
power, and we do not use them, we then tempt God, and rebel against his
government, which he exercises over the world, in the way of free and moral
agency.

Therefore for these people, to argue as they do now, when they are among other
societies, -- who they know will preserve the state from slaughter or slavery,
in the use of lawful means, as has been now proved, is vastly disingenuous, and
will undoubtedly subject their opinions to this censure, that it is a sanctuary
of sloth -- for greed -- cowardice, etc. -- for it is easy to stay at home and
earn money, to what it is to spend money and expose life, to protect and defend
the worldling coward; -- it is easy to pay money, to what it is to be slain in
battle, etc. But after all that has been said, I am myself so warm an advocate
for the sacred rights of conscience, that if these people will not be convinced
of their duty; can not get their eyes open; they are to be pitied, but not
persecuted. I beg of all, for God and conscience sake, to let them alone, if
they will not in these terrible times, draw the sword for Liberty and their
Country; surely they will not against Liberty and their Country; and if we can
do with them, we can without them: O then, let there be no disturbance on that
head! But should any of these inoffensive guiltless anti-warriors be detected
in assisting Gage or his army with provisions, etc. for lucre or any other
motive whatever conscience could not apologize for them but ought to be dealt
with accordingly.

I now proceed to the second thing proposed, in this discourse, to show how a
lawful war is to be carried on.

1st. Every one that draws the sword, should be well satisfied, in his
conscience, that he is called of God to do so; -- that, with a good conscience
and courage, he may rely on God for strength and protection. -- Then it is
drawn for these reasons, or else it cannot be lawful; either to oppose a
foreign enemy -- or to assist the magistrates to suppress a riot, or wicked
faction and rebellion that may have broke out, by a lawless set of ruffians,
that will be under no restraint of law -- or to oppose the unjust, usurped,
anti-constitutional claims of mere tyranny on the essential and unalienable
rights of the people.

2dly. Every soldier should see to it above all things, that his peace is made
with God, by believing in his Son Jesus Christ for salvation; and have some
comfortable evidences of the truth of his faith, by his love to Jesus Christ,
in keeping his commandments; -- else how can he expect a blessing, or success,
even in a just cause, if he is himself in a state of enmity and rebellion
against that God, in whose hand his life is, and whose are all his ways: For no
soldier is so undaunted and truly courageous, as him that on the principles of
true religion, is above the fear of death.

To rush forward on death, thoughtless of, and unprepared for, a future
eternity, is rather a species of mere madness, than true heroism.

3dly. As the Christian soldier must set out in the fear of God, so he must
persevere, fully confiding in, and relying on, the justice and righteousness of
the superintendency of Jehovah, over all the fates, and to us unforeseen
occurrences, that may or can happen in time; and thus with becoming boldness
and Christian serenity, accompanied with true courage, put his life in God's
hands.

4thly. The soldier must observe strictly those directions in our text: He must
do violence to no man; as soldiers carry with them the instruments of death,
they are too prone to conduct themselves toward the defenseless with pride and
insolence; something of this temper discovered itself, at the time that these
Regulars asked John in the manner of their asking the question; -- others
treated John with respect and manners; -- the very Publicans called him Master;
-- but the Red-Coats came and demanded of him, as if they were his superiors,
and he must obey them. -- As standing armies are too frequently made up of the
scourings of gaols, and the refuse and filth of the people, who make that the
last shift for a living -- they are but too often found destitute of either
good principles or education, and sunk into every species of dissoluteness and
debauchery. We could wish the King's troops at Boston, had not by their cruelty
and inhumanity of conduct, given the world too lively and striking a proof of
the truth of this observation; -- hence the very name of a Red-Coat (pardon the
expression) stinks in our nostrils.

But blessed be the God of heaven, that the gentlemen who now form our militia,
in America, are the Americans themselves, whose characters are known to be not
such as but just now described; and who we hope, under God, will save this
country, and of consequence the British empire from impending ruin.

5thly. Soldiers must not accuse any falsely; -- this is a certain species of
wickedness too common to soldiers; -- those of them that watched the sepulcre
of our Lord, falsely accused his disciples, that they came and stole his body
while they slept; they were hired to tell this lie by government, and what will
not poor ignorant, sottish, selfish, low-liv'd, ill-bred, graceless creatures,
that have no fear of God at all, do for money; -- And I wish we may find that
the soldiers at Boston, have sent no lies home, or false accusations of the
brave Provincials -- when they gave them such a severe drubing in the action of
Lexington.

Lastly under this head, as the design of raising armies is the defense of the
people, as soon as this is bravely ascertained, the Christian soldier should
lay by the sword, and disband the army, lest their existence, when not
necessary, should occasion the very miseries, they were raised to avert. A few
inferences shall now conclude this discourse.

1. Our subject teaches us deeply to bewail the universal depravity of human
nature; -- O Adam! in what a deplorable condition is thy family now! what have
thou done! -- how many evil passions and appetites rage in the world! Envy,
wrath, malice, dissimulation, covetousness, pride, brutal lusts, etc. etc.
whence arise those crushing woes and calamities of wars, murder, rapine,
slaughter and desolations among mankind. How just it is for a holy God, as the
moral Governor of the world, to punish such sinful guilty creatures.

2. We learn hence the exceeding innate evil of sin, if the punishment is not
inadequate to the offense, which we are not to suppose; then the offense is
very great, because of the great punishment inflicted.

3. We also learn from our subject, to admire the care of divine providence
over the human race, to continue men on the earth amidst such deluges of
miseries or destruction on every hand* And as civil government, in the hand of
divine providence, is subservient here too, we ought (...) bless God for the
institution, and support it (...) government continues to observe its original
^^sign, viz. the protection of the lives and properties of the people.

4. We may also acknowledge the goodness God, in abridging the life of man, to
70 year^ for that is long enough for the wicked (...) and the righteous to
suffer -- and be absent from that rest that God has prepared for his people.
How amazing that the Church of Christ has not been swallowed up, by the united
combinations of all the evil -- spirits of darkness, and the wicked in this
world in every age! this is the mighty power of God indeed!

5. We learn from this subject, the special need our world stands in of a
SAVIOR, that by the grace of his holy covenant, according to the great rich
divine plan he has revealed in the holy Bible, such sinful creatures as we are,
may be sanctified and pardoned, and made fit for usefulness in this life, and
the enjoyment of God in heaven.

6. Our subject teaches us to be reconciled to the thoughts of death, on the
true principles of gospel holiness, whenever it shall please God to call us
hence; as all in this sinning, teasing, mortifying, disappointing world, as
Solomon justly ex^^^sses it, is vanity and vexation of spirit; and yet on the
other hand, we must not repine at the hand (...) God, if we are continued long
even in a state (...) affliction; -- but should say with that old
Testament-saint, all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change
come: -- It is our great wisdom and interest, to take heed, that we have not
with Dives our good thing here, but would make the best of this present life,
as a wilderness passage, through which we would journey to the better country,
the heavenly.

7. We hence learn how much it is our duty to be both frequent, and very
fervent in prayer to God, for the spiritual kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which consists so much in peace and love, to come with divine power and energy,
to check and stop those evils that now rage in the world, as it is well known,
by long experience, that it is the holy spirit accompanying a preached gospel,
that is the only sovereign remedy, to cure the evils that are in the hearts of
men, to qualify them to be real blessings to each other, as members of society
in this life, and to put them in a capacity for communion with the holy Trinity
and saints and angels in heaven.

8thly And lastly, Our subject teaches us, how much we should deprecate the
calamities of ware -- especially those of a civil war; the most awful of any,
if it could be avoided. And Oh what (...) awful dark cloud, pregnant with all
the hor^^^^ of civil war, hangs now over this whole conti^^^^ of British
America; and this terrifying thought leads me to close this discourse in two
addreses.

1st. To all my hearers in general -- you are this town, now at ease, in the
lap of peace and plenty; far from any scene of either blood or slaughter -- in
the heart of a rich province, situated in the center of the whole American
Continent -- you hear of distress, but you do not yet feel it; and God forbid
you ever should, as some of your worthy brethren now do in Boston. But know, my
dear hearers, that if you abuse these rich, temporal good things (with which
the God of heaven has distinguished you) in luxury, profaneness,
Sabbath-breaking, swearing, uncleanness, drunkenness, worldliness, pride and
contempt of the sacred and divine instructions of his holy word and ordinances,
your sins will find you out, and God will visit you with his chastising rod for
your iniquities. Let all then be exhorted by a sincere, unfeigned repentance,
for past sins and reformation of life and manners, to fly to the Lord Jesus
Christ by faith, as a hideing place from the storm, and a covert from the
tempest -- be much in prayer to God, to overruled these unhappy disturbances
for his own glory, (...) the best weal of Zion -- pray that they may (...)
brought to a speedy and happy issue on the genuine principles of liberty and
true religion -- ^ay that the just attempts of all America, for ^^ese great
ends, may prove successful -- guard against every thing that has the least or
remotest ^^^dency, to jar the blessed unison of the whole American harpsicord,
as now set to the tune of liberty, by the honorable great artists the
CONTINENTAL CONGRESS -- Let every denomination of Christians treat each other
with love and respect, as brethren engaged in, and struggling for the one and
same common cause -- treat all the officers of civil government in this
province with becoming honor and respect -- sympathize with your distressed
suffering brethren in Boston, both with your prayers and purses. Finally, dread
nothing that can befall you, so ruinous to yourselves and posterity in this
life, as slavery. Therefore use every lawful means to avert it; see then that
you most heartily accord with whatever may be the final determination of all
America agreed to in the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

I now turn myself to the Gentlemen of the Militia, Officers and Soldiers that
appear before me in Church in their UNIFORM.

By your present appearance you declare to the world, that you are nobly
willing to risk y^^^ lives and fortunes to save your Country from slavery; you
are accompanied with the since* wishes of all good people, for God Almighty to
bless you, protect and succeed you in your brave undertakings.

Your own improved understandings will lead you to apply the several
instructions suggested in this Sermon, relative to your duty as warriors;
should we be all so unhappy, as that you should be ever called to action on
account of the present struggles for liberty. In the mean time allow me to
require of you, to do your utmost to preserve and maintain the good order and
peace of this province inviolate; for it is certain, that nothing next to
slavery is more to be dreaded, than the anarchy and confusion that will ensue,
if proper regard is not paid to the good and wholesome laws of government. And
should we be subjected to such evils, we will, and must blame our Militia for
no men have it so much in their power to keep the peace and good order of
society as the gentlemen of the sword.

You must still continue to revere royalty, and observe your allegiance to the
King, on the true principles of the constitution. Your drawing the (...) now
must not be against the person of his ^^^esty; but the mal-administration of
his go^^^rnment, by designing, mischief-making mini^ters. Your present
appearances must then be not of choice, but of necessity. While his Majesty
George the third will observe his own coro^^^^on oath, and the principles of
the revolution, (...) the support of which against all Jacobite facti^^^ and
Tory plots of popery, his ancestors of (...) illustrious line of Brunswick were
placed on the throne of Great Britain, do you observe your allegiance.

I am happy, that I can with a good conscience, congratulate you and myself
this day, on the certainty we have, for the justice and goodness of our cause:
The angry tools of power who mislead government, may call us American rebels,
who would throw off all government, -- would be independent and what not. --
But we can now, with great confidence, appeal to God that that is false -- we
desire no such things -- we desire to be as we were in the beginning of the
present unhappy reign -- we have tried every lawful, peaceable mean in our
power -- but all in vain! -- we would love them if they would suffer us -- we
would be peaceable, obedient, loving subjects if they would let us; but it
would seem as if the present ministry were determined to cram disloyalty, and
disobedience down our throats -- and then call us all rebels -- then confiscate
our country and sell it, to pay their 140,000,000 of debt, or else we know not
what they would be at. (...) do in America all declare ourselves the subjects
of King George the third, but we never swore allegiance to the Parliament of
Great Britain or else we would have above 500 Kings -- th^^ are our
fellow subjects, chosen by the freeholders of that island to legislate for
them, as our Assembly does for Pennsylvania; but if their present claims are
admitted, we may give up our Assemblies -- and our Charters are ciphers! --

In the close of the last war, the King had not in all his dominions so many
more affectionate subjects than the Americans -- and in every valuable
enterprise which would exhaust both treasure and blood the brave New-Englanders
took the lead -- and by our industry and trade with England, the nation rose to
her present eminence; and now the very power we helped to give her, is retorted
on us with redoubled vengeance and unheard of cruelty -- but if they beat down
our trading Cities and oppress us all they can, we will have our woods and
liberty; for as we are the descendants of Britons, we scorn to be slaves. -- We
are now come to our ne plus ultra -- the sword, the last argument must decide
the controversy. Therefore, you can, GENTLEMEN SOLDIERS, appeal to GOD, for the
justice of your cause, he is the judge of all the earth, and will do right, the
final ^^^^rmination of all matters is in his righteous, ^^^y, powerful hand.
When England went to war with France and Spain in the time of last ^^^gn, they
invoked the aids of the God of hea^^^ by fasting and prayer -- and then
government discovered no leanings to popery -- But now, when they are going to
murder and butcher their own children in America, that have been so obedient,
useful and affectionate -- we do not hear that they ask counsel of God -- but
if they do not let us ask counsel and assistance from the God of heaven -- he
is on our side, we hope, and if God is on our side we need not fear what man
can do unto us.

We have all the true friends of virtue; of liberty and righteousness on earth
on our side -- we have all the angels of heaven on our side -- for we have
truth and justice on our side -- therefore we have the God of truth and justice
on our side, although for wise purposes of divine providence, a good cause is
permitted to be for a time under a cloud -- to try the patience and faith of
God's people, that the deliverance may finally appear, as it ever will be God's
own work; God will never forsake his own side of the question -- Courage then!
courage my brave American soldiers, if God be for, who can be against you? --
Equip yourselves, and to be equipt for this warfare -- put on, Gentlemen, the
gospel armoury -- have your feet shod with its preparation -- for your helmet
salvation -- for your shield, faith -- and be girt with truth -- this, Sirs, is
a gospel uniform, that well becomes the Christian soldier -- and thus go forth
in the name of the Lord of hosts, and may he protect you, bless you, and
succeed your very laudable and grand undertaking, in connection with all the
Militia of North America; and may God grant that out of these present tumults,
disturbances and commotions, a great and mighty empire may rise up in this
western world, for King JESUS, as well as a protestant King built on the solid
principles of liberty and true religion; and the glory shall be given to his
holy name, now and for ever more, Amen.

FINIS.

