January 7, 1775. To the INHABITANTS of ANNE-ARUNDEL county.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU are requested to meet at the city of Annapolis, on Monday the 16th
instant, to nominate deputies to attend, on behalf of this county, at the next
provincial convention, and to choose a committee of observation; permit me to
offer to your consideration, the reasons, which induce me to solicit your
attendance on that day. The inconvenience arising from the season of the year,
I am satisfied, will not prevent you, if convinced, that your duty to your
country requires your attendance. You have always distinguished ^^^^selve^
(...) cause of liberty, and never been exceeded by any county, in zeal and
public spirit.

Your liberty and happiness, and that of your posterity, depend on the event of
the present struggle with the British ministry: they seem determined to make
you slaves, you are resolved to be free: the American congress has pointed out
the means of preserving freedom: a suspension of your trade; -- and the
necessary preparations to enable you to repel force by force, if that should be
employed to subvert your rights and liberties: these are the means recommended
by the united opinion and advice of America. The freedom of millions, the
political salvation of all British America, can only be secured by executing
with fidelity and resolution the advice of the congress.

A strict compliance with the association and resolves of our late provincial
convention, dpends in great measure on a prudent and wise choice of your
committee of observation: I would recommend it to consist of a considerable
number of gentlemen of the best understanding, fortune, and influence in the
county, without any regard to profession, religion, or residence; men able to
speak your sense on any question, and to whose resolutions you would wish to
give that weight, which their utility, and the public good might require.

The appointment of deputies, to represent this county, at the next convention,
in April; which will not be held, if American grievances should in the mean
time be redressed, appears to me of the greatest consequence, and to demand
your most deliberate attention: If the British ministry should continue deaf to
our complaints, and to the voice of reason, of policy, and justice, and and
should determine to enforce, at all events, its arbitrary decrees, how dreadful
would be our situation, in the midst of all the horrors and calamities of civil
war! We scorn, we reject with contempt, the base humiliating conditions of
slavery -- We are determined to resist even unto death, to save our country, or
bravely perish in her ruins. If American grievances should not be redressed
(and I fear they will not) questions of such a magnitude and difficulty (...)
arise, as to require the united wisdom, knowledge, and fortitude of this
province. Your virtue will then be put to a severe trial -- Consider then with
attention, the nature and importance of the trust, and to whom you delegate
your power at this very critical and alarming crisis of your affairs. -- You
never were called on to exercise your great constitutional right of electing
your representatives, at a time which required more judgment in your choice. I
would recommend but one TEST -- an honest man with ability and resolution. --

"The Congress thought themselves bound in duty to observe to the colonies,
that the schemes agitated against them had been so conducted as to render it
prudent, that they should extend their views to the most unhappy events, and be
in all respects prepared for every contingency." The necessary means of
preparation were left to each province, as best acquainted with their own
peculiar circumstances. -- Your deputies met in provincial convention were of
opinion, that a well regulated militia is the natural strength and only stable
security of a free government, and unanimously recommended to the freemen of
this province to form themselves into companies, choose their officers, learn
the military exercise, be provided with arms and ammunition, in readiness to
act on any emergency, and to raise money for the purchase of arms and
ammunition: They entreated, they conjured every man by his duty to God, his
country, and his posterity, cordially to unite in defense of our common rights
and liberties. I want no argument to convince me of the immediate necessity of
putting this province in a posture of defense. If any one should object to the
measure, I would answer, THE CONGRESS ADVISED IT: -- The deputies of all the
counties of this province unanimously recommended it: The first with me is
sufficient, the latter conclusive: The deputies were gentlemen of the first
fortunes, ability, and knowledge, well acquainted with our circumstances, and
undoubtedly spoke the sense of the whole province. The private opinions of some
few individuals, (...) respectable for integrity of character, soundness of
judgment, and their attachment to the cause of America, ought to have little
weight in opposition to the advice of the continental congress, and the
recommendation of your own provincial convention.

I have not the least doubt that this county will inviolably observe and
execute the association, and the resolves of the province: I question not but a
very great majority of you will form yourselves into a militia, and liberally
contribute for the purchase of arms and ammunition. Every man is bound to serve
his country; all are obliged, or none. Every man is bound to contribute his
endeavors to advance and secure the general good. This county is called on by
the province to raise L. 866, for the purchase of arms and ammunition. Every
man then in this county is bound to contribute in some proportion to the
property which he holds, and the more his property is worth, the more he ought
to pay for the security of it. But there are a few among you (I rejoice but a
few) who, in this time of public danger and calamity, separate themselves from
their country, and though blessed with very ample fortunes, refuse, or decline,
to contribute any part thereof, to the support of the public cause, or to unite
in defense of our common rights and liberties. -- Our convention in June
recommended contributions for the support of our distressed brethren in Boston;
not one farth^^^ was given by the same gentlemen; a congress was deemed proper
to collect the sense of (...) same persons did not contribute to the support of
your delegates: the congress (...) the colonies to arm in defense of their
liberties; your late convention unanimously recommended a militia, and
subscriptions to raise money for the purchase of arms and ammunition; the same
men, persevering in the same line of conduct, have declined to comply with
either of the requisitions; they withdraw their persons and their fortunes from
the service of their country: but they are as much interested, and have as deep
a stake to lose as any other men in the province; they, and their posterity are
to enjoy, with you, all advantages arising from the success of the present
contest with Great Britain; they must be involved with you in all the
consequences of a slavish subjection; liberty procured by you will be equally
enjoyed by them; slavery fixed on you will be equally intailed on them and
their posterity. -- If such indeed was their situation, it would be difficult
to account for their conduct. -- In truth, if America succeeds, they will be
benefitted as much as any men in the province, without contributing any part of
their property, without any risque of forfeitures, and with safety to their
persons; their present behavior may entitle them to the protection of the
ministry. If we fail, they will possess their estates, and enjoy their offices;
promotion may reward their present conduct, and their resentment may be
gratified by seeing some of your best and firmest friends, executed as rebels
and traitors. -- Such is the double, crafty, and, in their opinion, secure game
played by some few among you. Place, therefore, no confidence in such men, view
them as foes to the rights of British America, let their names be published to
the world, that they may be universally contemned, as the enemies of American
liberty; let them be the object of your contempt, but let them not feel the
force of your resentment.

I cannot conclude without once more earnestly requesting a full meeting of the
county: numbers will command respect, and give weight to your resolutions.

AN AMERICAN.


