THE CRISIS. NUMBER I.
Potior visa est periculosa libertas quieto servitio.

SALUST.
TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND AND AMERICA.
Friends and Fellow Subjects,
IT is with the greatest propriety I address this paper to you: It is in your
defense, at this great, this important crisis I take the pen in hand: A crisis
big with the fate of the most glorious empire known in the records of time; and
by your firmness and resolution, you may preserve to yourselves, your immediate
offspring, and latest posterity, all the glorious blessings of freedom given by
Heaven to undeserving mortals; by your supineness and pusillanimity, you will
entail on yourselves, your children, and millions yet unborn, misery and
slavery.

It is in your defense I now stand forth to oppose the most sanguinary and
despotic court that ever disgraced a free country.

It is in your defense I now unsheath the sword of justice, to oppose the most
profligate and abandoned administration that ever showed the weakness, or
abused the confidence of a prince.

It is in your defense I now stand forth, and with a firmness becoming an
Englishman determined to be free, to oppose every arbitrary and every
unconstitutional act of a venal and corrupt majority smuggled into the present
new fangled court parliament, through the villainy of Lord North, and purchased
with the public money, to betray their trust, enslave the people, subvert the
Protestant religion, and destroy the glory, honor, interest, and commerce, both
foreign and domestic, of England and America; and all this villainous sacrifice
of a great empire, a brave people, and the glorious truths of Heaven, to comply
with the ambitious views, and gratify the mean vindictive spirit of one,
assisted by a numerous train of deputy tyrants, whose sole aim has been to
trample under foot the sacred rights of mankind, and the English constitution

It is in your defense, and in defense of the liberties of my country, that I
now stand forth, with a fixed resolution, to oppose, and show to the world,
unawed by fear, the dangerous tendency of every act of lawless power, whether
it shall proceed from the King, the Lords, or the Commons.

I will endeavor, in conjunction with my fellow laborer in this great work, to
rescue the liberty of the press (that bulwark of freedom) from the ruin with
which it is now threatened by special juries of Middlesex, and the arbitrary
decisions of a Scotch Chief Justice, the glorious advocate for despotic sway.
The heavy fines, and cruel imprisonment of the two Woodfalls, without even the
appearance of guilt, and contrary to the intention of the jury, will be
faithfully recorded by the pen of truth, and fill many pages in the black
catalogue of Murray's Lord Mansfield's name is Murray.
crimes.

It shall be my endeavor, in this degenerate age, to revive the dying embers
of freedom, and rouse my countrymen in England from that lethargic state of
supineness and inattention, in which they seem to sleep, at this time of
national danger, when a mighty kingdom, and all the dearest rights of men are
hastening to their ruin; that they may yet stand high on the roll of fame,
equal with their brave and virtuous brethren in America, who are now struggling
in the glorious cause of liberty, against the cruel oppressions and destructive
designs of exalted villains, whose actions will be transmitted to posterity in
characters of blood, and their names for ever branded with eternal marks of
infamy; while America will remain the glory and admiration of the world, and be
held in the highest veneration to the end of time. Let not the long envied
glory of Britain, O my countrymen, be eclipsed by the virtuous actions of the
Americans in the new world! Our danger is the same, their cause is our cause;
with the constitutional rights of America must fall the liberties of England;
let us then, show ourselves equal to them in virtue, courage, firmness, and
resolution; and, as they have done, prove to the world, we are alike enemies to
tyranny, and lawless power, and that we never will be slaves to one, nor to a
majority of five hundred and eighty-eight tyrants.

We will strain every nerve, and brave every danger, to stimulate our
countrymen on this side the Atlantic, to a noble exertion of their rights as
freemen; to show them the danger, as well as the infamy of remaining quiet
spectators of their own destruction; and to remove that dark cloud of slavery,
which now obscures the glorious light of freedom; and, but for the virtue of
our forefathers, would ages ago have overwhelmed this kingdom, like the states
around us, in a long, a lasting night of misery and ruin.

Upon this plan, and with these principles, we set out, and intend to proceed,
that the present (if not too far degenerated) and future generations may enjoy
undiminished all the blessings of liberty. To accomplish this end, we will risk
every thing that is dear to man, and brave both royal and ministerial
vengeance, to preserve from ruin (if possible) the natural rights of mankind,
the sacred constitution of the British empire, and the freedom of our country.

Agreeable to our motto we shall ever think, "Liberty with danger preferable to
servitude with security."

We should glory in the smiles of our Sovereign, but will never purchase them
at the expense of our liberty; nor will we ever give up, but with our lives,
the right to expose and publicly display, in all its hideous forms, the cruel
despotism of tyrants. We can conceive no reason why the laws and religion of
England should be sported with, and trampled under foot, by a Prince of the
House of Brunswick any more than by one of the House of Stuart; surely upon
every principle of justice, reason, and common sense, whatever is tyranny and
murder in one man, is equally so in another; and if it is just to oppose and
resist one, it is as just to oppose and resist the other. It is not a name, nor
an office, however important, that can or ought t^ bring respect and reverence
to the possessor, while he acts below, and is unworthy of them. Folly and
villainy ought to have no asylum; nor can titles sanctify crimes, though in our
days they protect criminals. A royal, right honorable, or a right reverend
robber, is the most dangerous robber, and consequently the most to be detested.

Our modern advocates for vallany and slavery have found out a new way of
arguing and convincing the judgments of men; they make nice distinctions
without a difference, and tell the world what was tyranny in the time of
Charles the First is not tyranny in the days of George the Third, and to this
they add a long catalogue of virtues which he never possessed; they say he is
pious, that his chief aim is to render his subjects a happy, great, and free
people (and indeed he has more than once said so himself) these and many other
falsehoods, equally wicked and absurd, they endeavor to instill into the minds
of the too easily deluded English. These, and such like artifices, have ever
been made use of in the reigns of arbitrary Kings, to deceive the people, and
make them with more ease, and to chains well polished, submit their necks, and
even reverence and adore the hand that rivets them. Thus do tyrants succeed,
and the galling yoke of slavery, so much complained of by almost every nation
in the world, becomes a crime of the first magnitude in the people, through
their own credulity and vile submission. Truth, in spite of all the false
coloring of venal writers, speaks a different language, and declares in
opposition to the pen of falsehood, that bloodshed and slaughter, violence and
oppression, popery and lawless power, characterise the present reign; and we
will defy even the pensioned Johnson, after the closest examination of the two
reigns, to tell which is the best. Charles broke his coronation oath, butchered
his subjects, made ten thousand solemn promises he never intended to perform,
and often committed perjury (but these are no crimes in a King, for most Kings
pretend a divine right to be Devils) he tried to overturn the constitution by
force, but found his mistake when it was too late, and that even royal villainy
does not always succeed; and when the just vengeance of Heaven overtook him, he
saw (though he would not believe it before, and imagined he had a divine right
to shed human blood) that the same power which raised him up, could pull him
down. The present Sovereign, not wishing to make a figure in history without a
head, and being more mild and gentle, just and good, has improved upon the
plan, and is now tearing up the constitution by the roots, under the form of
law; this method of proceeding is certainly much safer, and more judicious, as
well as just; for what right can an Englishman have to complain, when he is
legally made a slave by act of parliament. How wicked! how rebellious! must the
Americans be, and what levelling principles must they possess, to resist the
divine right of the King, and the divine power of the Lords and Commons, under
the sanction of a divine act of parliament, sent from heaven to plunder,
butcher, starve or enslave them; just as it shall come into their divine heads,
or the heads of their divine instruments; and when once they have carried this
divine law into execution, according to their righteous intention, we shall
soon see on this side the Atlantic, that they have the same divine right to use
us in the same merciful and divine manner. This is but the first divine step of
a diabolical plan for shedding human blood, reducing an industrious, brave,
flourishing, and free people, from a state of affluence to that of misery,
beggary, and slavery; and nothing but a resolution in the people here will be
able to prevent the next divine step on the same plan, from laying in ruins all
the rights of the British, with those of the American world.

The altar of despotism is erected in America, and we shall be the next victims
to lawless power; all the horrors of slavery now stare us in the face; our
religion subverted, freedom, law, and right, artfully undermined; the Roman
catholic religion not tolerated, but established; a majority of the House of
Commons, and the House of Lords, mere creatures of the King; in short, every
engine of oppression and arbitrary power is at work to accomplish our ruin.

O, my countrymen! that we could but inspire you with noble sentiments of
LIBERTY, rouse you to a just sense of your immediate danger, and make you feel,
sensibly feel, all the blessings derived from freedom, the natural right of
every man, but more peculiarly of Englishmen; it is our birthright, our
inheritance; it was handed down to us by our ancestors, and sealed often with
their blood; let us then, in justice to them, to ourselves, and to posterity,
make a noble constitutional stand, in conjunction with our noble and spirited,
but suffering fellow subjects in America, against the present plan long fixed
by the minions of power to destroy it, and overturn the constitution, a
constitution ten thousand times superior to any system ever devised by the
Greeks or Romans.

At such a time as this, when the merciless, the relentless hand of tyranny is
tearing out the vitals of freedom, sapping the foundation of public security,
making a mockery of justice, and destroying all the envied rights of Britain
and the truths of Heaven; I say, at such a time, to be inattentive, or
inactive, is infamy; and he who can tamely see his country upon the brink of
ruin, without putting out his arm, and lending a helping hand to rescue her
from destruction, must be an abandoned wretch, a disgrace to the name of
Englishman and to his country.

[To be continued.]

