To the Freeholders and Freemen of the City of NEW YORK.
Fellow Citizens,
SEVERAL Members of the General Assembly having declared, that the appointment
of Delegates, to meet in the next Continental Congress, had better come from
the people, than from their House; they having drawn up a list of grievances,
similar to those contained in the proceedings of the Continental Congress, and
intending also to petition the King on our behalf; have left this important
matter to your nomination. -- The Chairman, Mr. Isaac Low, with the unanimous
voice of your Committee, have thought proper, to call you together on Monday
next, to take your sentiments, on the best method of choosing such Delegates.

You cannot be insensible of the many stratagems, made use of by the
ministerial tools among us, To divide, and then destroy; as is evident in the
hand bill, signed John Thurman, in which it appears, they have nothing else in
view, than to postpone this important matter, until it will be too late to
appoint any Delegates; for they would leave it until the 20th of April, from
which delay, the time will be too short to take the sense of the counties on
this subject, as there will then be but twenty days left, until the tenth of
May, the day, on which the Continental Congress are to meet at Philadelphia.

Rouse therefore, my dear Fellow Citizens! and spurn with indignation at their
treacherous purposes -- Their insinuation, that the day is too short, for your
consideration, is an insult upon your understandings: All of our sister
colonies, have already chosen their Delegates, and shall we delay concurring in
a measure, that has been the subject of consideration, ever since the last
Congress?

You cannot be ignorant, that if we do not appoint Delegates, all the Colonies
will, and must withhold their trade and connection from us; whereby, as our
late respectable Delegates assert, we shall not only act a dishonorable part,
but our debt due from them will remain unpaid; we shall be destitute of many
necessaries which we now receive from them, and the next Congress may be
induced to enter into Measures against u^, for our perfidy. In our Union, we
have every thing to expect; in Disunion, Ruin and Destruction. I entertain not
the smallest doubt, but on this day, you will discover to these Seekers of
court favors, that we are not to be cajoled out of our inestimable and
constitutional privileges, by such contemptible pretexts. -- Consider who these
people are, who thus darkly advise, and you will soon find their drift is to
enslave this free and happy Country, in order to obtain Pensions and Places for
themselves and sons. If ever we are taxed by a venal British Parliament, these
very persons will be our tax-masters, whilst unhappy for us, we shall be little
better than beasts of burden; and, by the sweat of our brows, support them in
luxury and iniquity. -- And the severity of this more than cruel burden, will
be most heavy on the industrious poor. The eyes of all America are now upon us,
-- let us acquit ourselves like men, deserving the glorious cause for which we
contend -- We have already chosen a respectable and approved Committee; as
such, let us strenuously support them in the measures they have adopted, and
frustrate the wicked attempts of our enemies.

NEW YORK March 4, 1775. AMERICANUS.


