THE STRICTURES ON THE FRIENDLY ADDRESS EXAMINED, AND A REFUTATION of its
Principles attempted. ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.

Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, ne quid very non audeat.

Printed in the Year 1775.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF some small inaccuracies should occur, and he hopes there are no essential
ones, the indulgence and candor of the public will make allowances for the
hasty production of a day, without the use of books to which its author could
have reference.

THE STRICTURES ON THE FRIENDLY ADDRESS examined, etc.
FRIENDS, and FELLOW SUBJECTS,
THE poisons which have lately been too lavishly scattered among you, call
aloud for an antidote; and by their operations they appear to be of so deadly a
kind as to require the immediate counteraction of some powerfully efficient
recipe; till such an one is produced, a less forcible prescription may, by
stopping their progress, be found salutary.

Of late two pamphlets have appeared, the authors of which the contending
parties of this country seem to consider as the invulnerable champions of their
different principles and interests, and each has therefore naturally attracted
the attention of its friends and opposers; but the zeal of the whigs, in
dispersing abroad their boasted and favorite production, has far outstripped
that of the tories, who perhaps, not considering an appeal to the head as so
adapted to the purposes of party as one to the heart, have not inserted the
Friendly Address in a News-Paper; -- have not considerably reduced its price;
or sent it abroad gratis, as a stimulus to their friends It is observable in
these impressions, designed for general use, it has been thought advisable to
omit one of the best turned and best deserved compliments to an officer of high
rank, that, in the compass of a small reading, I as yet remember to have seen:
-- Such insiduous arts, and such want of candor are inex^^^^able, and would
disgrace the noblest of causes.
: These being the honors which party has conferred on the strictures on that
performance, it may not be unamusing or unprofitable to examine on what
foundation this boasted bulwark of faction is erected. This writer, like a true
disciple of the noble author of the Characteristics, tries every thing by the
touchstone of ridicule; but does he know that it can place all subjects, even
the sacred precepts and mysteries of our holy religion, in the same point of
view; and like the jaundiced eye, seeing through a tainted medium, reduce all
objects, however varied in colors, to its own loathsome hue? He commences with
a notable discovery from unerring signs, of his antagonist's profession; but I
much query if any one, from his subsequent observations, would be induced to
consider him a soldier.

The friends of British government in America are, I trust, not so contemptible
as the picture of this stricturer would ludicrously display them; many have
already declared their attachment to its cause, and fifty times their numbers,
at present overwhelmed by popular fury, would in the day of trial avow it: I
wish not to see royal standards erected or swords flaming in the front and in
the rear, but alas! the melancholy face of affairs on this continent too
strongly indicates it; and then I am convinced the regular troops would not on
experience be found so contemptible as he endeavors to represent them; or that
colony forces could be so easily raised and disciplined as he asserts: A
simplification of maneuvers that can be learnt in three months, will not bring
you, Americans, to that steadiness, that you shall with regularity and
composure, like the English troops at Fontenoy, evolute in the face of a
victorious and superior army: For my part, I will go further than even this
rapid instructor, and engage to teach schoolboys, with wooden guns on their
shoulders, to form and reduce from a line of fire to a line of impression in
half an hour; but to train men for war requires labor, experience and time;
and to reduce them to perfect submission to every superior, is with difficulty
effected in legal establishments, never in popular and tumultuous associations;
deprived of that coersive power which in the former produces obedience, their
leaders in vain seek by attentions and courtesies that compliance with their
commands which the others derive from established undisputed authority.

A yeomanry like the American, the most happy and comfortable of any in the
world, are but ill prepared to support the fatigues, dangers and wants of long
campaigns; they would soop miss those solaces which domestic tranquillity
afforded them, and would revert to their pristine avocations and delights;
their acquaintance with the use of implements of husbandry would stand them in
but little stead, for to what purpose should they employ them? It has long been
acknowledged a principle in war, that irregulars are not calculated for
defense, but attack; their vigor and intrepidity may bear down all obstacles
to the latter, but too surely they will fail in that patience and perseverance
which is indispensably requisite for the former. When the New England
provincials, under General Pepperrell, in the year forty-five, attacked
Louisbourg, they laughed at the regular methods of approach proposed to them,
and by a concurrence of fortunate circumstances, united to valor, carried that
important fortress; this is a fact which many of them can vouch, and most if
not all the rest of them have heard repeatedly from their fathers, when
recounting the archievements of their youthful days; and they must then have
also told them, that the petulance of their brave countrymen was more than once
on the point of giving up that glorious enterprise. -- Consider therefore, I
adjure you, by those ties and relations which endear life, and strew flowers
along the rugged path of its pilgrimage; consider, before you engage in an
attempt of so serious, so hazardous a nature, as the opposing a royal and long
constituted army, what may reasonably be expected from forces so liable to
defections as the unrestrained and hastily levied troops of these colonies must
ever be: Your numbers are also held forth to you as powerful and unconquerable,
and I do not deny that on so extended a continent as this many armies of
forty-thousand each might, in the various operations of a war, to advantage be
employed; but supposing it possible for this even to be the case, what must be
its unavoidable consequences? All your peasantry being engaged in martial
expeditions, the land would want its culture, and a dearth in a very few months
must infallibly ensue, which would deprive your soldiers of even necessary
sustenance To strengthen this observation, Germany last war afforded melancholy
proofs to what distress a country is reduced, when occupied by contending
armies.
, for they must forego at the commencement every idea and wish for their
accustomed luxuries: Are you yet to be told that there are discases which are
endemic to a camp, and that when famine with "baneful smile" stalks through its
avenues she will add fresh poignancy and malignancy to its inseparable
disorders? From most of these evils your opponents will be free; from long
practice their constitutions are habituated to the fatigues of the most rigid
discipline, they may feel distemper but they are better enabled to repel it
than you, unused to hardships ships, can possibly be; nor will they be haunted
by the smallest dread of want; your ports, blocked up by the navy of England,
though denying you relief, will afford them plentiful supplies, and in case of
defeat a most sure retreat till augmented by numerous and powerful
reinforcements; for remember, that Great Britain, during last war, did at one
time carry conquest through every quarter of the globe, and that you assisted
her only in this.

Hitherto, Americans, I have only pointed out to you the instability of your
own force; it behooves you as you have examined how far you can rely with safety
on it to change the scene, and see how it stands opposed to that of your
antagonists, and here the prospect is different, taught to conquer by
discipline, they firmly confide in what they know is irresistible; and not
distracted by jarring principles and movements; with them every part of the
machine acts in harmony and concord, and every spring and every wheel conspires
to produce its necessary efficient force.

It matters not of what persons armies are composed, since the profession has a
natural tendency to create in them new principles and ideas of fortitude,
submission and reliance on the wisdom and experience of their superiors: Your
informant has told you the British troops are made up of "the most debauched
weavers prentices, the scum of the Irish Roman Catholics who desert upon every
occasion, and a few, very few Scotch who are not strong enough to carry packs."
I have cultivated an acquaintance with the most sensible of the military
gentlemen, and have found them men of candor and worth; from their information
and my own observation, I will now in these particulars lay before you a true
and impartial state of the British army The writer of the Strictures in stating
the number of the British infantry, has, either through negligence or
purposely, committed an error, by not including the marines: Their
establishment is, I think, upwards of four thousand. This corpse, though
existing under a different act of Parliament, may properly be denominated an
addition to the marching regiments, as in the expeditions of last war it
frequently co-operated with them, and by its vigor and intrepidity contributed
to their memorable successes. This is only produced as an instance of what
occurs in every page, unfair reasoning from misrepresented facts; for a
trifling peace establishment is not to be computed the force of Britain, -- it
is founded on a plan, recommended by Marshall Saxe for the French army, of
having many battalions with more officers to each than requisite for the number
of private men, that in case of necessity, new levies might be ingrafted on
them, and by that means a considerable body of troops, fit for actual service,
be almost instantaneously completed.
: If that part which England affords is only the most debauched weavers
prentices, whence arises the great interest which the friends of many of them
have with the country gentlemen, and which is often powerfully employed in
soliciting their discharges? And by what arts have so many apprentices, without
detection, deserted their masters, and broke their indentures? But all
recruiting officers, and I suspect the Stricturer can affirm it, know that it
is the country and not the towns which completes their battalions, that they
beat up only on market-days when peasants not mechanics resort to them; and you
can all of you judge from the appearance of those recruits which have been
brought hither, if they were the produce of villages or cities. The scum of the
Irish Roman Catholics, he tells you, forms the proportion from that country,
but unfortunately two strong circumstances militate against this assertion, for
the legislature of Ireland, from fatal experience, jealous of the Roman
Catholics, has, under the severest penalties, prohibited them the use of arms,
and disqualified them from forming a part of the defense of their country: Yet
I am told that some few notwithstanding, are smuggled into the service, but
this can only be in those regiments lately on that establishment, and in them
very inconsiderable; the other circumstance is, a law which from the fear of
depopulation, proscribes the enlisting any man for other than the establishment
within that kingdom: His annexment that they desert upon every occasion, is not
better grounded upon fact; -- here the mention of desertion makes me wish to
advert to this great source of triumph in your popular leaders; they proclaim
to the world how numerous have the instances of it been from the army quartered
in Boston, and yet, I am well informed, it is no more than has always been from
a similar body of troops, even to the natural enemies of their country; and I
heartily wish they could as easily reconcile to their consciences the seducing
men from their allegiance and duty to the worst of crimes, perjury and the
greatest of earthly evils, unprepared, and almost certain death if retaken: Our
author makes up the small residue with a few, very few Scotch, who are not
strong enough to carry packs: I am told, had he been at the trouble to examine
muster rolls he would have found them not so inconsiderable; that this is
probable we may reasonably conclude from the number of emigrants who have
quitted that country to come here, and what their condition is, those who have
seen them will judge: In fine, what is actually the present state of the whole
British army, one who has not seen all of it cannot with precision determine,
but if I might judge from those regiments which, in their tour of duty, have
been sent here, I should pronounce it more than versed in the tricks of the
parade, I should pronounce it highly trained and qualified for service; but it
is objected that few of them have seen action, and therefore they are much to
be doubted: Who can have told this author so? For most surely he has been
strangely misinformed; of the little army stationed in this capital there are
two of the Quebec, and one of the Minden battalions, in which many of the
officers and soldiers who conquered on those glorious days still remain, and in
most of the other regiments which compose it many of the veterans of last war
are to be found; and for my own part when I view this small but finely
appointed army, and consider that it is under the command of two Generals of
approved knowledge and experience in war, I feel much confidence in the
difficulties it would be able to furmount, and the victories over irregulars
which, in human probability, it would assuredly obtain.

In order to induce in you a belief of his military principles and knowledge,
he produces an instance in proof from the constitution of the King of Prussia's
army, but even was it, which I have the greatest reason to doubt, literally as
he has stated, it cannot then, I apprehend, be brought as a precedent in this
case, for there is no similarity between the connected and absolute power of
that monarch over all his dominions and the distinct and widely separated
colonies of North America: Between supporting the authority of the lawful
Sovereign and rebelling against him.

He tells you also, that no inferences can be drawn from the conquest of Quebec
by the army under General Wolf, but believe me he is much mistaken, for last
war will afford abundant proofs to the contrary: Was it the conquering
attributes " Would have made him, Wolf, reject with horror the HANGMAN's
OFFICE, which others, who are not endowed with his conquering attributes, will
with readiness accept." When men of genius and education, in defiance of facts,
descend from the delicacy of language to the sscurrility of the lower orders,
human nature stands appalled, and sorrowing laments the misapplication of
knowledge and talents; -- but disappointed ambition and its consequent
disaffection will, with the benevolent, plead some mitigation, even though the
(...) is aimed at a character, which was once deservedly the subject of his
highest admiration and praise.
of Wolf that unsupported carried on the six British battalions to glory and
decisive victory at Minden? Or was it his genius that stormed the Moro? Or was
it that hero who defended Arcot against all the force which France could muster
in the East? His own instance, the corpse which General Monkton led to conquest,
wars against the assertion; all these were wrought by that spirit and strict
discipline which has ever actuated and supported the British infantry. I mean
not to tear from the laurelled bust of Wolf those honors which deservedly deck
it; -- I know he was a soldier, a general, and what is more, a man; and though
it is notorious that he was particularly an enemy to large standing armies in
time of peace, it is notorious also, that in time of peace he formed the
twentieth regiment, a model from which others learnt to conquer and extend the
dominions of their country; and yet he was a most liberal, virtuous citizen,
and sedulously preserved and improved the palladium committed to him by the
constitution "for the safety of the kingdom, the defense of the possessions of
the crown of Great Britain, and the preservation of the balance of power in
Europe Vid. Preamble to the act for punishing mutiny and desertion.
."

After having with many arguments and more humor taught you to despise the
armies of Britain, he proceeds and attempts with the same weapons to convince
you of security from invasion by foreigners, and tells you of a convention of
the empire in the year 1764; but does he not know that the resolves of that
body have ever been held in derision by its members from the time that the
Landgrave of Hess and Prince Maurice of Saxony laughed at the decrees of the
Aulic Council, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, more powerful than any of his
successors, till his Majesty of Prussia and the Elector of Hanover, stood
unmoved, and sustained the thunders of the imperial ban? In fact it is not more
regarded than a papal bull when it opposes the inclinations of a Monarch. --
You all of you know what in England, France and Spain was formerly the power of
the Lord Paramount over his Feudatories, and such is precisely the present
state of the Germanic body; and therefore I do not see, why the Landgrave of
Hess, if it suits his convenience, may not send over as many of his troops as
required; and should they ever be solicited, I dare aver, that an idea of their
not returning will never occur to him or his ministers to prevent their being
dispatched, nay that they would lack faith even though our Stricturer, in the
spirit of vaticination, has predicted it This is perhaps the most preposterous
idea that ever was hatched in a distempered brain; but I beg pardon, perhaps
this author is entrusted with the purport of the Observator on the Boston Fort
Bill's embassy, and can tell that he is sent to divulge to the Landgrave of
Hess this amazing secret.
; but how the Elector of Hanover, backed by the power of Britain to enforce his
commands, should want credit to procure a few thousands of his own subjects, is
what I cannot comprehend Britain has another resource, which has perhaps not
occurred to the Friendly Addressor or his critic: She is in the strictest
alliance with Russia, whose troops, come from ravaging the extensive provinces
of Turkey, would overrun this continent with the same facility they passed the
Danube, still carrying conquest in their front, and swept before them
unnumbered fortresses.
: It is as mysterious to me that Great Britain, when divorced from her
colonies, should be destitute of every requisite for supporting her navy,
though she possesses the northern and southern extremities of this continent,
and her trade to Russia and the Baltic is open and free, and she can from
thence supply herself with all the materials for shipbuilding on at least as
reasonable conditions as she does now from America.

This lively writer has amused you with many historical allusions, but, alas!
they are seldom in point; that by which he marks out the facility of forming
excellent officers is a most striking instance of this, for to what pitch must
military knowledge have arrived in the times of the civil war, when two large
armies were for three days marching within ten miles of each other, and both
remained ignorant of their enemies situation? -- In this case it was chance or
numbers that must decide, for each was unacquainted with discipline; and if
there were faction and agitators in the parliament army, the noble historian of
those troubles, and he would have wished to conceal it, tells us that the royal
forces were not less insested by dissension, party and private opinion; if
therefore the inference which in the strictures is drawn from this uncommon and
tempestuous period, is just, let every man of candor, reading and
understanding determine.

The last consideration, Americans, which he thinks it is his duty to offer
you, is, whether or no you shall demolish his Majesty's forts and barracks: I
consider not by whom they were erected, or for what purpose, but, beyond doubt,
the property of all such public buildings and of all public military stores is,
for the security of the realm, vested in the crown; and to attempt to seize,
retain, or destroy them, is by the law declared to be high treason: His
proposition therefore is, whether you shall at once plunge yourselves into open
rebellion and thereby incur its penalties, or not: To what a precipice would
this author lead you? When I look down my senses forsake me, and at the
prospect my blood rushes tumultuously to, and retreats from its citadel, the
heart. Yes, unhappy and infatuated citizens, with anguish I am forced to
acknowledge, that such violences as he recommends have in part been committed.
O righteous God! do thou avert the justice of the empire, and, by inspiring its
governing powers with thy milder attribute of mercy snatch this deluded people
from the imminent calamities, dangers, ruin, and destruction which await them!

FINIS.

