A SERMON, PREACHED AT YORK-TOWN, Before CAPTAIN MORGAN's and CAPTAIN PRICE's
Companies of RIFLE-MEN, ON THURSDAY, JULY 20, 1775. BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED
BY THE HONORABLE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS FOR A GENERAL FAST THROUGHOUT THE TWELVE
UNITED COLONIES OF NORTH AMERICA.

BY DANIEL BATWELL, M. A.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP, IN MARKET-STREET. M,DCC,LXXV.

A PRAYER.
O MOST Mighty God, terrible in thy judgments, and wonderful in thy doings
toward the children of men! We thy sinful servants here assembled before thee,
confess, and adore the mysterious strokes of thy supreme Providence.

LONG has the land rejoiced in the abundant emanation of thy tender mercies.
Not our merit but thy goodness, has turned the wilderness into fruitful fields,
and the lonesome solitude into the cheerful dwellings of men. From year to
year, almost from day to day, new habitations have sprung up, which ought to
resound with the praise of thy holy name, of thy eternal and uncreated son, and
of thy most blessed spirit.

BUT alas with grief and shame we acknowledge, that we have not always made a
right use of thy continued favors. Not according to thy benefits have been our
improvements, not according to thy bounty has been our gratitude. Our hearts
smite us when we reflect on the many instances of our neglect of heavenly, and
our attachment to earthly things. Creation and all its blessings, redemption
and all its graces have but too frequently elapsed from our memories; and
whilst we have been anxiously attentive to the life that now is, we have been
foolishly inattentive to the promise of the life to come. We see, we feel, we
own ourselves unworthy of the least of thy gracious vouchsafements; whereby as
a state we have been gradually led from weakness to strength, as individuals
from lonely helplessness to all the numerous comforts of society.

HENCE doubtless it is; so it becomes us to believe, and so confess, that thou
have permitted the brightness of our prospect to be overclouded, hence, for
without thy sovereign will nothing can take effect, the dreadful flame of
discord has been kindled, and the devouring sword of war unsheathed: Hence, we
are wounded in the tenderest part, are at variance with those whom hitherto we
have revered as fathers, honored as teachers, loved as brethren, and dealt
with as friends. For it is not an open enemy that has done us this dishonor,
neither is it an adversary that has magnified himself against us; but it is
even our brother, our guide, and familiar friend, with whom we took sweet
council, and in the most amicable intercourse, walked together in the house of
God.

IN this severe distress whither shall we fly but to thy presence? As a
religious society, prayer is our only weapon: O may it prove the prayer of the
humble, may it pierce through the clouds, reach the footsteps of thy Almighty
throne, and not turn away till thou, O most high, regardest it! St. Paul, the
chosen vessel of thy son, our savior Jesus Christ, has taught us to make
prayer and supplications for all men -- for Kings, and for all that are in
eminent place* that they, exercising their authority with righteousness and
justice, we may lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, urged
therefore alike by our duty, our inclination, and our necessity, we meekly and
devoutly implore thee in behalf of George thy servant, our King, and Governor,
that wisdom descending from above may inform his soul, and (...) ^^late his
thoughts, words, and actions; that ^^^ing upon himself as the common father and
protector of all his subjects, he may cherish them all without distinction,
watch over them for their good, and endeavor to preserve them in wealth, peace
and happiness: and more particularly because it is our more immediate concern;
that he may extend his care and regard to the inhabitants of this land and
province -- may know, and accept, and rejoice in their loyalty and dutiful
affection -- may be always ready to hear their complaints, and redress their
sufferings* that so, happy in the felicity of his people, and distinguished by
a life of goodness here, he may reign over us honored and beloved, till it
shall be thy pleasure to remove him to a life of glory hereafter. We also pray
thee for the rulers of this our country, that thou would give them righteous
and understanding hearts, that wisdom and gentleness, fortitude and moderation
may equally animate their councils and actions, that in the present dangerous
crisis of affairs, they may leave nothing undone that appertains to our safety
and welfare, nor do any thing from a principle of ambition, vainglory, or self
interest, that in the midst of war they may remember peace, and in the very
moment of opposition, wish, long, pant, for a safe, happy, and honorable
accommodation.

O GRACIOUS God who alone make men to be of one mind in a house, a city, a
kingdom, a continent, and even a whole world, suffer not, in the sincerity of
our hearts, and bitterness of our souls we beseech thee, suffer not those to
remain long divided, whom the same language, the same descent, the same
manners, the same constitution, the same religion, have so intimately united.
We confess that we are severed for our mutual sins, but do thou most gracious
father, reunite us for thy mercy's sake. A terrible misconception is gone
forth, remove it, O remove it, thou, whose conceptions are clearer than light,
and who alone can regulate the wills and affections of sinful men. We humble
ourselves under thy correcting hand, and confess the justice of all thy
judgments, but we pray, we are allowed to pray, that the duration of our
punishment may be shortened, and our tribulations come to an end. We pray for
millions now under affliction, and for millions yet unborn in both countries,
who without thy interposing favor, will hereafter be affected by the
consequence of the present calamities, yet not on ourselves but on thee do we
rely for our deliverance, not on our merits, but on our Savior's merits do we
depend for mercy: Hear us therefore, O Lord, hear thy people who call upon
thee, that all the world may know, that thou art our savior and mighty
deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A SERMON, etc.
1 KINGS, viii.40. That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the
land which thou gave to our fathers.


BY the covenant which Almighty God was pleased to enter into with his people
the Jews, an immediate intercourse was established between heaven and earth.
Each deviation from the divine law was followed by sure pains and penalties;
each return to holiness was a certain return to peace and prosperity. The sin
of individuals never failed to bring upon them the curse, their repentance
always restored them to the blessing. Whenever the state fell from its
allegiance to Jehovah, then straightway came the great, the terrible day of
vengeance: No sooner was the trumpet blown in Zion, the fast sanctified, and
the solemn assembly called, no sooner did the Priests and Ministers weep
between the porch and the alter, and say spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thine heritage to reproach; no sooner was the act of public humiliation
performed, than public redress ensued -- the Lord was jealous for his land, and
pitied his people, and removed far off them the northern army.

ON this foundation of God's unchangeable promise it is, that King Solomon at
the dedication of the temple frames his petition in the verses preceding the
text. His claim* the sacred historian goes on to inform us, was allowed; and
the most high by fire from Heaven ratified afresh the covenant.

THE process is most plain and most awful. Israel offended, the God of Israel
punished with the famine, the pestilence, or the sword: The people conscious of
their sins, made solemn prayer and supplication; the Lord saw the sincerity of
their repentance, and heard from heaven his dwelling place and forgave them. --
What was the consequence? -- Man by correction learned to fear his God, and
that holy fear insuring the divine protection, he continued to dwell in safety
in the land of his fathers.

HAPPY will it be for us, happy will it be for every nation under the sun, if
due attention is given to this important lesson. Were we but all convinced that
righteousness exalts a kingdom, whilst sin is a reproach to any people, and
did we sanctify this conviction by practice, what a glorious, what a delightful
scene of things would immediately present itself to our view! The nations would
be bound in a golden chain of amity: None would groan under oppression, for no
one would dare to oppress: The haughty invader, the cruel spoiler, the
relentless destroyer, would be terms no more made use of: And each man sitting
in safety under his own vine, and under his own fig tree would rapturously
exclaim, -- Lo this is the true, the genuine reign of Christ upon earth!
Behold, the kingdoms of this world are become, not in name, but in deed, not in
appearance, but in reality, the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

BUT the multiplied provocations of the sons of men forbid us to indulge the
least expectation of so pleasing a prospect. The beauteous vision shifts away
from before our eyes, and in a moment we return to the real unhappy state of
things, a world of discord and lamentation, of violence and woe, where the long
forbearance of the Almighty is much more conspicuous than his judgments --
Where it is more reasonable to ask, why cities and states are permited to
stand, than why they are destroyed -- where the abominations of Canaan, and
even of Sodom and Gomorrah, are frequent in some communities -- and where in
the best and most virtuous congregations, the preacher has still to cry aloud
with solemn and unceasing voice, -- except ye repent ye must inevitably perish.

BLESSED forever be the hallowed lips of our most gracious redeemer, who
foreseeing that faith would decay, and love wax cold among his disciples, has
so affectionately called us to repentance, who delivering us from sin, and well
knowing that we should lead ourselves therewith a fresh, has softened all the
difficulties of this essential duty, and rendered it easy for us to perform;
who kindly himself receives our intercessions, presents them to the throne of
grace, and from thence procures us indubitable and authentic pardon! and
blessed be the influence of that divine comforter, who has this day removed the
stony from our hearts, and melted them into the sincerest contrition, all
humbly to bewail our man fold transgressions, all devoutly to acknowledge the
divine dispensations, all piously to pray for the removal of them from
ourselves and our brethren, and all, I trust to depart in peace and comfort,
full of good hopes and good resolutions, unburthened of our sins, our
consciences appeased, and the love of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, beaming upon our souls with unclouded splendour.

RELIGIOUS discomposure tends ultimately to our composure and tranquillity, When
the judgments of God are abroad, the inhabitants of the earth learn
righteousness. Did we ever expect to see the day, when all the various
communions of this wide-extended continent should be bowed as the heart of one
man to deprecate the wrath, and to entreat the protection of heaven, in one and
the same hour, in one and the same cause? O it is a goodly sight, and all the
angelick host will applaud our humiliation! it is to begin at the right end;
for being once secure of defense from above, what is it that can possibly
confound us. Love thou, and art thou beloved of thy maker? His friendship
shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea, in seven shall no evil touch thee; in
famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword,
thou shall not be afraid of the scourge of the tongue, nor of destruction when
it comes, yea though thou walk through the valley of the shadow of death
thou shall fear no evil, for he is with thee his rod and his staff shall
comfort thee.

THE present situation is the most distressful that could have happened to
beings endued with humanity. It is more replete with anguish, than even with
danger. I have heard, and can well believe, that the opposing armies respect
and pity each other in the very instant that their weapons are uplifted to
destroy. Can we avoid praying that hearts so framed might be permitted to meet
in equal and honorable union; neither conquering nor conquered, but as free
citizens of the same realm, entitled to the same rights and privileges. Much,
too much, does our case resemble that recorded in scripture where King Rehoboam
assembled the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin to fight against the
house of Israel: But alas! alas! there is no Prophet, no Shemiah the man of
God, to speak unto Rehoboam and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin, saying,
ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the house of Israel; return
ye every man to his house.

BUT my duty in this sacred place leads me no farther than to bewail the
miseries brought upon this country by those fatal misconceptions that have gone
forth on the other side of the atlantic, and to exhort my little flock, so to
prepare themselves by unfeigned faith, by holy prayer, and by genuine
repentance to deserve (if man can be said to deserve) the temporal blessings of
the Almighty, which I trust, nor trust in vain, will be poured out upon us, if
we patiently and manfully abide the appointed trial. There is who reigns on
high, and at his pleasure breaks the bow and knappeth the spear in sunder,
and burns the chariots in the fire; for his good time let us wait with
calmness and submission, and let us endeavor to shorten the period by the
integrity of our behavior, and by the fervor of our devotions. That good time
will come; let us not doubt it for we have a gracious master in heaven; when
the labor of some of our fellow citizens, and the sorrows of others shall
cease -- when our darkness shall be turned into light, and our mourning into
joy -- when our loyalty shall stand confirmed, and our liberty established by
sufferings -- and when we shall meet again in the Lord's house, to celebrate
his returning mercies, whose wrath we now deprecate, and to whose judgments we
now bend with submissive addoration.

FOR in revolving the days of old, and considering the manner in which it has
pleased the almighty ruler to exercise his moral government, there is no reason
to think, that any state legitimately constituted, will be destroyed by his
supreme fiat, till that state has rendered itself unworthy of continuance, by
acts that defile its purity, and corrupt its very essence. I say legitimately
constituted, meaning where the natural rights of mankind have been respected in
its constitution, because with domination founded in tyranny the allwise, and
alljust ruler has no connection: That is not his work, but rather the work of
that malignant being, who delights in human wretchedness. Now the means by
which the rulers of a state may shamefully deviate, and thereby provoke the
fullness of divine anger, are chiefly idolatry, persecution for religious
opinions, (...) invasion of their neighbors, mean pilfering and stealing of
adjacent lands, and laws made on purpose to oppress, or corrupt the people.
When enormities such as these prevail, it is neither to be wondered or murmured
at, if the storm descends from above, and sweeps away such a perverted
government from the face of the earth. But from enormities such as these,
blacker than the blackest night, more savage than the howlings of the wild
beasts of the forest, disgraceful to reason, to truth, to justice, and to human
nature, this land of our hopes, and desires is most notoriously, and remarkably
free. No man can dwell therein who believes in more than one God, the Creator
of the universe, and none who profess themselves the servants of that
allglorious being, can be molested for their religious principles. It is not
upon the records of history, nor in the memory of man, that this government has
ever in any shape, much less in wantonness, invaded the property of others:
From the poor untutored Indian it has uniformly disdained to borrow, and
abhorred to steal: Fair and open purchases have preceded every settlement: Its
laws -- but why should I praise its laws to those who live under them, when
their good report is spread far and near, when I have heard it a thousand times
acknowledged in Europe, that they are the mildest, and most equitable now in
force on the terrestrial globe? Can we entertain a suspicion that such a state
is obnoxious to the supreme legislator? No, we may rather comfort ourselves
with the assurance, that however greatly we have sinned as individuals, yet
that the judge of all the earth will not suffer the benevolent work of one
immortal man to be defaced or demolished.

WITH respect to the present unnatural disputes, it would ill become my place
and station to say any thing with the tone of decisive authority: My master's
kingdom is not of this world, nor am I appointed a Ruler, a Judge, or a
Divider: But if nothing more is designed, than what is professed; if to
preserve our rights and privileges be the sole aim of the Continental Congress,
and of those who assemble at their biddings; if no sparks of disloyalty, no
desire of change, no intentions of removing the ancient land marks, lie
concealed beneath the fair outside of public good; I say, if this be the case,
and according to the best of my observation it really is so, then we have a
good cause, and may expect the blessing of Heaven upon our endeavors. For the
blessing of legal, and equal Liberty we pray; and though our prayers are sincere,
yet because of our tender attachment to our parent state, grief mixes with our
devotions: For the same liberty our fellow citizens are to fight; and they will
surely do it, with steady though reluctant courage -- with hearts that wish to
save, in the same moment that they are obliged to destroy.

IT happens, that many defenders of this land are now before me. Summoned to
immediate service, they have arrived here at this solemn season, and have
joined in our act of humiliation. These I will exhort to go on to their
appointed destination, in the fear of God, in the sentiments of true honor, in
the love of Liberty and of their Country -- Descended from ancestors who in the
old world often proved, they preferred freedom to life, I trust you have not
degenerated from their nobleness of soul, but will even strive to exceed your
forefathers in deeds of valor, generosity and humanity. Remember that a
glorious cause is put into your hands; beware of disgracing it by any unworthy
proceeding: Remember, that the Congress, where resides the collected wisdom and
the general voice of the people, breathes a firm and manly, but yet a moderate
and reconciling spirit: Remember that they mean to hazard every thing dear for
the recovery of our rights, and the moment those are recovered to sheathe the
sword. I have a commission, and it is written in the most luminous characters
of truth; to bid you honor the King -- yet I trust you want not the
admonition: But I have no commission to bid you honor those, who wickedly
stand between the throne and the subject; and yet I believe, you will begin to
respect them, when they learn to respect themselves, and the common rights of
humanity. Go, Brethren, and may the Lord of Hosts be with you: Go, and fill up
the measure of your fame, more by generous behavior, than even by feats of
arms: Go, and defend our franchises, our wives, our children, and possessions:
Go, and bring us back a speedy and honorable peace: And having done so, may
you long enjoy in the bosom of that peace, the illustrious title you will have
acquired of Protectors and Preservers of your Country.

FOR us, Brethren, beloved in the Lord, let us, as I have already admonished
you, proceed as we have this day begun, and strive to deserve in some sort, the
Benediction of the Almighty. Nor only now with united hearts and voices, but
also singly and separately in the closet, unfeignedly confess and deplore our
many sins, and offer up our supplications to the allwise, omnipotent, and
merciful Disposer of all events, to forgive our iniquities, remove our
calamities, and avert those dessolating judgments with which we are threatened:
That he will bless our rightful Sovereign King George the Third, and inspire
him with wisdom to discern and pursue the true interest of all his subjects:
That a speedy end may be put to the discord between Great Britain and the
American Colonies without further effusion of blood; and that the British
nation may be influenced to regard the things that belong to her peace before
they are hid from her eyes: That these Colonies may be ever under the care and
protection of a kind Porvidence; and be prospered in all their interests: That
the divine blessing may descend upon all our civil rulers, and upon the
Representatives of the People in their several Assemblies and Conventions; that
they may be directed to wise and effectual measures for preserving the Union,
and securing the just Rights and Privileges of the Colonies: That virtue and
true religion may revive and flourish throughout our land: That America may
soon behold a gracious interposition of Heaven, for the redress of her many
grievances, the restoration of her invaded rights, a reconciliation with the
parent state on terms constitutional and honorable to both: And that her civil
and religious Liberties may be secured to the latest posterity.

THE END.

