CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Impropriety of exporting RICE TO GREAT BRITAIN.
ADDRESSED TO The Provincial Congress OF SOUTH CAROLINA, To meet on JANUARY
11th, 1775.

SOUTH CAROLINA: CHARLESTOWN, Printed by PETER TIMOTHY, M.DCC.LXXV.

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
UNION ought to be a grand object in all our proceedings. The permission to
EXPORT RICE TO GREAT BRITAIN, which surprises, but not pleases, the generous
planters of this colony, had ne^^^ proved fatal to that Union in the Grand
Con^^^^^^ Our accepting this indulgence will break (...) here -- A noble
refusal of the dangerous permiss^^^, is the only way to preserve it.

Let this colony open its eyes. Let not their partiality for the worthy
gentlemen who mistook them, lead a generous people to mistake themselves. We
can heal the wound, if we are not obstinate in doing wrong.

I will take the liberty of throwing a few hints together, which may cast light
upon the subject, for their benefit who have not attentively viewed its parts;
and hope to be happy in seeing the bone of contention removed, by the spirit of
the colony.

Let it then be premised,

First. It is a matter universally agreed upon, that a non-exportation to
Great Britain, Ireland, and the West India islands, is a necessary, an
absolutely necessary, part of the American plan of defense: that a mere
non-importation, is too lame and ineffectual a measure.

Secondly. But to render such an agreement of real efficacy, it must extend to
the staple commodity with which every colony trades to those places. Nothing
can be more ridiculous, than to talk of a non-exportation, in which the grand
staple of each colony is to be exported. Export rice and indico from
South Carolina, and I believe the world will not call it a non-exportation
agreement, though you should lay an embargo upon potatoes and oysters.

Thirdly. Almost equally ridiculous, would be the proposal of shutting up trade
with all mankind, because good policy demands to shut it up with Britain. I
always suspect the man who proposes too much, as having a design to prevent any
measures whatever. We may get a supply of necessary articles from other parts
of the world, the want of which might possibly force us to break our resolves.
The call for arms and ammunition in case of extremity, ought to keep up a trade
with the Dutch. A vessel, once at sea, may go to Britain, it is true. There
will be breaches of faith, but the amount of such pieces of infidelity, will
not be so great, as to prevent the good effects of the agreement.

Fourthly. In any such agreement that can be formed, we cannot expect, that all
the colonies should be upon an equal footing. You must give them all the same
staples, the same trade; you must exactly assimilate their different climates,
soils and produce, before you can put them exactly upon a level, as to the
article of self-denial and suffering. That man is in a political delirium, who,
in such a case, will make an exact equality the grand object; and to insist
upon it, is to insist upon an impossibility. One part must expect to suffer
more than another, and that in proportion, to the quantity of its staple, which
is concerned in trade to the prohibited ports. This is an unavoidable evil. But
if non-exportation is never to be attempted, until a plan of exact equality is
hit upon, we shall never have one; and if the cause of these colonies must
depend upon such an expedient, all is lost. The very proposal of such an
equality, as a suspending term, I take to be, either highly frivolous, or
highly insidious.

It appears frivolous -- as the grand struggle is not, whether one colony shall
have equal advantage with another, but whether all shall be free. If indeed
there was a prospect, that the Northern colonies would gain by our loss: if
they were like to take away our trade in future time, the supposed inequality
might justly make us jealous. But, as this cannot be pretended, so to examine
critically, whether there will be an exact equality in our losses, before we
consent to measures confessedly necessary for our mutual salvation, is to
trifle egregiously. It appears strange to me, that ever such a thought should
be started by an honest man. The question to me seems not, whether we shall go
equal loss and gain, to an ounce or a scruple? we are not merchants or
apothecaries settling accounts: but whether the measure is necessary, to secure
our freedom? if necessary, whether the grand object we are contending for, is
worthy our suffering? whether we should be willing to submit to the present
loss, rather than bear the curse of slavery? I think there is not one true
Carolinian, untouched by the baneful poison of corruption, who can hesitate a
moment. Nay, the man who represents us as unwilling to adopt any such
self-denying measure, does the colony great injustice. The voice of the people,
when they sent their members, was, for any, nay, the most self-denying,
measures: they could scarcely be restrained from them at the time; and they did
not commit their power to five men, in order to save them from suffering in
common with their brethren; but to agree, if necessary, to the most vigorous
measures. For this purpose, unlimited powers were demanded. For this purpose,
unlimited powers were granted. They surely had no thought of suspending the
union of the continent, of suspending the liberties of America, upon an exact
equality of losses.

But though it is frivolous, yet it is a popular argument -- it puts on the
saint-like appearance of concern for the country.

I am aware of the dangerous power of jealousy. I know the effect which an
artful harangue, upon this topic, is apt to have, upon those who do not see its
tendency. If you can persuade the people here, that the Northern colonies are
only scheming to preserve their trade, while you are duped to let yours suffer
-- you will do more by this stratagem, than by a thousand arguments. Make them
believe this, and it is a wonder, if they are not ready even to give up their
liberties to a tyrant, rather than be thus outwitted. I do not pretend to
vindicate the conduct of all the Northern delegates; some of them are suspected
of being snakes in the grass. But I am bold to say, that there is not the least
evidence of such a design in the colonies in general. I defy the man who throws
out the ungenerous insinuation. I view it rather as an insidious attempt to
carry a cause, by exciting popular jealousy. It is agreed, that to stop our
exports to Britain is absolutely necessary. The Arbiter of all has so ordered
it, that our exports to Britain are greater than those of any other colony; but
does it follow, that, therefore, the Northern colonies mean to dupe us? The
argument is popular, but it is dishonest. All that justly follows, is, a
possibility of our suffering more than some others in the glorious struggle.
And where was ever a struggle for Liberty, in which the sufferings of every
individual were exactly balanced? I believe you are convinced, that Boston
suffers, innocently suffers already, more than you all.

The grand argument therefore, for our persisting in the exportation of Rice,
concludes nothing, even if the premises were true. But,

I hope to make it appear to you, that they are not true -- that we are upon a
better footing than most of the other colonies, even if the exportation of Rice
to Britain, etc. was prohibited: I hope to make it appear, that the measure
extorted from the Congress, is unnecessary, impolitic, impracticable, and
ruinous.

1. The premises I think are not true. It is alleged, that we are not upon so
good a footing as they, if Rice to Britain, etc. is prohibited. I think, on the
contrary, we have equal, if not greater advantage, Let it be considered,

We may find vent for two thirds, if not for all our crop of rice, even if the
trade to Britain and the West India islands is not open. It is known, that the
ports to the southward of Cape Finister are open by act of parliament, which
will not expire until this struggle will probably be over. There is a legal way
to carry rice to them, without touching in England. Lisbon, all the ports in
the Mediterranean, the Azores and Canaries, are open, and take off now 30,000
tierces per annum. If the Portugueze, etc. knew, that the vent of rice through
Britain was obstructed, they would gladly be your factors for 30,000 more, to
the great injury of the English trade; as thereby the shipping of other nations
would get the employ of theirs, and some hundreds of English and Scotch ships,
and many thousand hands, whom this business sustains, would be out of bread.

Besides, we can ship our rice (though not directly hence) from the Northern
colonies, in the same manner that the merchants of New York and Philadelphia
now do, without touching in England; and by that means supply, in the Baltic,
all the Danish, Swedish, and Russian ports, as well as the great marts of
Holland, Hamburgh, etc. etc. This would take off not less than 40,000 tierces
more. And even a novice in trade must see, that if the Dutch, and others, had
the least hint given, that they would be welcome as our carriers, the whole
crop, though it was ever so large, would be gladly engaged. The English laws
have hitherto rendered it not worthy their notice -- these resolutions will
alter the case.

For the above articles, I appeal to the men in trade -- and from them to the
whole province, whether the resistance made to the non-exportation of rice to
Great Britain, etc. was not needless, to say no more -- and, whether we are not
upon a much better footing, as to our staple, than any one Northern colony,
even if those four pestilential words had never cursed the fourth article of
the association?

As to the exports of the Northern colonies to Europe, by the tenor of the
association, every one knows that the principal articles will be, Fish, Wheat,
and Flour: the others are scarcely worth mentioning.

Their fish will easily find a mart. But be it remembered, that this is neither
exported in English bottoms; the English merchants are not the factors of it,
as they are of our rice landed in Britain; nor are the people of that country
employed in it. Fish, for the most part, goes immediately to the Catholic
dominions, for the good people there to fast upon. Be it also remembered, that
only three colonies have any thing to do with the fish trade; and not one
fiftieth, I had almost said not one hundredth man, in those colonies, has any
concern in it.

Unground Wheat goes mostly to Lisbon and the Madera's; but (if Canada is
struck off the list) not one thirtieth bushel is exported in the whole grain.

As to Flour, it mostly finds its vent in the West India islands. It supplies
that vast part of the English, French, Danish, and Dutch dominions with bread.
But all this immense market is shut up, and flour, a much more perishable
article than clean rice; an article which always spoils in one season, is left
to sour on their hands. The part of their crop which Lisbon, the Canaries,
Azores, and a few Mediterranean ports take off, is but a small relief. It is
well known, that the merchants have not found it profitable, to embrace the
permission to carry it to Great Britain. So stands this grand staple of the
Northern colonies obstructed, that they have not an equal chance to get it off,
as we have to vend our rice.

But if you consider their other staple commodities, you will find, that they
must suffer inexpressibly, if we may call it suffering, when we are only
prevented getting rich. Their Iron, which has, of late, almost supplied all
Britain and Ireland -- their Copper -- their Tobacco, which amounts to an
immense sum -- their Timber, which builds near all the houses in the islands,
and freights multitudes of ships to England -- their Staves and other Lumber,
on which the West India islands depend -- their Pot-Ash, equal, perhaps more,
in value, than our whole crop of indico -- their Beef and Pork -- their Flax
Seed, upon which all Ireland depends -- their Peltry, Hemp, and many other
articles -- all which, collectively taken, infinitely exceed their Flour and
Fish -- all these, I say, they have consented to lay utterly aside.

It will appear, I think, to an unprejudiced mind, that, far from "skulking,"
as they are illiberally said to do in this contest, they will be the greatest
sufferers. If there is any skulking, it is on the side of those, who demand a
permission to export their chief staple to England. All that is wanted, or
desired, is, to break off our exports to Britain. They have done that fully. We
continue our chief export to Britain. We dissent from the united agreement of
all America: and that, when we should have fared perhaps better than the rest,
if we had come into the association in the fullest terms. In proportion to our
numbers, we should perhaps have received more cash in remittance, than any one
Northern colony. But we, as it were, break the sword of America -- we cruelly
dissent -- we export to Britain, and give our enemies cause to despise us. I
cannot but hope, that the argument of non-equality will hereafter hide its
serpent head, and no more delude this unhappy colony, into a betraying of the
cause of freedom.

As for the pretense, that rice is a perishable article, it has no weight.
Little of it need remain on hand. It will keep an hundred years, in the rough;
some years, when clean: and if most of the rice planters would spend one whole
season in making improvements, it would be of more service to them than (...)

But I argue farther,

2. That the demand of a free exportation of rice, was UNNECESSARY.

The spirit of the people here did not render it necessary, nor did their
exigences require it. It is plain, that the rice planters did not desire -- did
not expect -- were greatly surprised at it, when it came; nay, in general, have
since, that wished the odious distinction had never existed. This colony boasts
a spirit equal to any on the continent. They have the honor of being
proverbial for patriotism. They plainly testified, that they desired no
favors, at their general meeting. Had not this been the case, they never would
have put it in the power of any men to bind them. They continue of the same
mind still.

Our exigences do not require it. This appears in a striking light, from what
has been said already: But let me ask, what exigency can we plead? One of
three, no doubt: either that of remittance to merchants at home -- or to
procure us bread -- or for negro clothing. I make no reply to the first. It is
stale. It has been answered a thousand times. Their righteous sufferings, as a
criminal part of that nation which is forging chains for us, will ever be
answer enough.

As to the necessity of exports to buy us food, none can pretend to this. We
wallow in plenty of provisions, even while we export them. We shall not have
the less, when this exportation is restrained.

As to negro cloth, I am sorry to hear it mentioned. Is there not cloth enough
in the colony, with the old garments which they already have, to cloth the
negroes comfortably for the next winter? Is not this a colony that demands less
clothing than any other, at the same time that we may easily grow sufficient
cotton in one season, to cloth us for five? Has not providence merely
innundated us with Weavers from Ireland, as though with a view to this very
crisis, who only wait the word to come down from the back parts in swarms?
There are more weavers now in the colony, than the clothing of twice our
number would require; and two seasons surely afford time enough for it. Nor can
it be disputed, after the example of Virginia, so far to the North, that cotton
is by much the best and cheapest clothing that can be made for them.

Not only unnecessary: -- the exportation of rice to Britain and her isles, at
the present time, is truly IMPOLITIC.

Rice is the most important export from America to Great Britain. The value of
our crop landed there is perhaps more than a million and an half currency. Now,
they have the profit, of being factors for this great sum -- they have the
advantage of employing between two and three hundred vessels in the trade to
America, and to different parts of Europe, in transporting this bulky article
-- they have the benefit of giving business to thousands of hands, who, without
this, would perhaps want their bread: -- besides, the continual imports of rice
into Britain, keeps down the price of provisions there, in proportion as it is
consumed -- and much more is actually consumed, than the advocates for the
usual exportation are willing to allow, upon the present occasion. Great
quantities are consumed in the single article of Starch. Rice supplies the navy
with a part of its provision, as well as merchant men on their voyages. This
finds the English merchant the best article of foreign trade. This is also part
of the provision for the slave trade, which still goes on to the islands. In
short, I am much inclined to believe, that the single article of rice prevented
from landing in Britain and the islands, will more affect their trade, than all
other articles of North-American exports together, only excepting Tobacco and
Indico.

And while we have so good a prospect of a vent for our crop elsewhere, shall
we, in this very crisis of our affairs, act so very impolitic a part, as to
give the nation all these advantages against us, when we have in our hands so
great a weight to throw into the scale of American freedom? I would blush for
my countrymen, if I thought them so far divested of the common principles of
prudence.

Not only unnecessary and impolitic -- the plan proposed is IMPRACTICABLE; and
I fear the consequences will be ruinous.

Impracticable, I do not fear to assert the plan proposed, as a sugar-pill to
the indico planters, viz. to exchange rice for indico. Perhaps the difficulty
will be at least as great, to gain the consent of individuals to this, as to a
qualified non-exportation. But how is it to be executed? Where are the numerous
committees to be found, who, unpaid, shall take the endless task of inspecting
every barrel of rice, and every pound of indico, that comes down to market, and
to ascertain its specific value? Where is the court, daily to preside over the
constant Barter, and to decide the numerous disputes which must arise between
man and man? Where are the open offices in which all this vast business is to
be transacted? Where are the free stores, in which the produce must lay after
the decision? Or, must the indico men from Ninety-Six have the trouble first,
to send down their crop -- then to have it inspected -- then appraised; -- then
sell their proportion of rice; -- then carry home that part of their indico
which they are obliged to keep, or else leave it here under the care of others?
And who can ensure the rice planters, that the same indico shall not be brought
a second and a third time, and re-claim rice, until it is all expended? A
scheme of such intricacy, needs whole years to adjust it. It needs a complete
new set of officers to execute it. Endless disputes -- unavoidable division,
must be foreseen, by those who know any thing of mankind. How much more simple
-- how much more eligible, the plan of equality, as to all exports to Britain
and her islands?

Not only impractible, is the proposed plan of exporting rice -- but I fear it
is RUINOUS,

Not to the pockets of the merchants here -- not to the merchants in England --
but RUINOUS

To the peace, harmony and mutual confidence of the colonies; who are
distressed, that their most faithful friends of Carolina seem, in this, to have
deserted them. A confidence which, I know, the rice planters would spill their
blood to secure and cultivate, and which they never desired should suffer
injury on their accounts. RUINOUS

To the peace and harmony of this province itself. I dread the gathering cloud.
I dread the effects of jealousy, lowering from the West and North. By one act
of noble generosity, you may dispel it, in spite of the devil himself. RUINOUS,
I fear,

To the whole system of our commercial struggle. Ruinous to all our plans of
defense. Ruinous to panting hunted Liberty herself. How must it discourage our
suffering brethren, when they find their most spirited supporters shrinking,
like cowards, from the shadow of a little self-denial! How must it make the
ministry chuckle, to find the seeds of so luxuriant a jealousy sown among us,
and their only hope confirmed! How must it envigorate their declining spirits,
to find our association so burlesqu'd, so crippled, where they expected it to
prove the most robust and active! How must it blast the expected fruit of
popular clamor in England, to find that, by our parsimony, they are delivered
from feeling much of the effects of a boasted non-exportation. Give them rice,
and you do much to silence and make them easy under the bungling tyranny of the
present court. God forbid, that you should accept of the extorted gratuity,
upon such ignoble, such ruinous terms!

But, what a stroke! -- what a master-stroke of policy, as well as patriotism!
to REFUSE to export rice, and exhibit an instance of firmness and love to our
country, which must damp the ardour of the ministerial assassins, confirm the
tottering confidence of all America, prove the death of our intestine jealousy,
and, in the end, hasten the conclusion of this glorious, this divine struggle,
for the rights of men and of Britons.

I would therefore humbly propose, that, without seeming to overset the
compelled agreement of the Congress, we should only declare it to be the sense
of this colony, that the permission TO EXPORT RICE TO EUROPE, SHALL BE
UNDERSTOOD, AS EXCLUDING GREAT BRITAIN, AND HER DEPENDANT ISLANDS.


