THE GENERAL, ATTACKED By a SUBALTERN: OR THE STRICTURES ON The Friendly
Address EXAMINED, AND A REFUTATION of its PRINCIPLES ATTEMPTED.

Addressed to the People of America.

Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, ne quid very non audeat. THE STRICTURES, ON The
Friendly Address EXAMINED, etc.
Friends and Fellow Subjects,
THE poisons which have lately been too lavishly scattered among you, call
aloud for an antidote; and by their operations they appear to be of so deadly a
kind, as to require the immediate counteration of some powerfully efficient
recipe; till such an one is produced, a less forcible prescription may, by
stopping their progress, be found salutary.

Of late two pamphlets have appeared, the authors of which, the contending
parties of this country, seem to consider as the invulnerable champions of
their different principles and interests; and each has therefore naturally
attracted the attention of its friends and opposers; but the zeal of the whigs,
in dispersing abroad their boasted and favorite production, has far
out-stripped that of the tories, who, perhaps, not considering an appeal to the
head, as so adapted to the purposes of party, as one to the heart, have not
inserted the Friendly Address in a News-Paper; -- have not considerably reduced
its price; or sent it abroad gratis, as a stimilus to their friends It is
observable in these impressions, designed for general use, it has been thought
advisable to omit one of the best turned, and best deserved compliments to an
officer of high rank, that, in the compass of a small reading, I as yet
remember to have seen: -- Such insidious arts, and such want of candot are
inexcuseable, and would disgrace the noblest of causes.
:

These being the honors which party has conferred on the strictures on that
performance, it may not be unamusing or unprofitable to examine on what
foundation this boasted bulwark of faction is erected. This writer, like a true
disciple of the noble author of the Characteristics, tries every thing by the
touchstone of ridicule; but does he know that it can place all subjects, even
the sacred precepts and mysteries of our holy religion, in the same point of
view; and like the jaundiced eye, seeing through a tainted medium, reduce all
objects, however varied in colors, to its own loathsome hue? He commences with
a notable discovery from unerring signs, of his antagonist's profession; but I
much query if any one, from his subsequent observations, would be induced to
consider him a soldier

The friends of British government in America are, I trust, not so contemptible
as the picture of this stricturer would ludicrously display them; many have
already declared their attachment to its cause, and fifty times their numbers,
at present overwhelmed by popular fury, would in the day of trial avow it: I
wish not to see royal standards erected, or swords flaming in the front, and in
the rear, but alas! the melancholy face of affairs on this continent too
strongly indicates it; and then, I am convinced, the regular troops would not,
on experience, be found so contemptible as he endeavors to represent them; or
that colony forces could be so easily raised and disciplined, as he asserts: A
simplification of maneuvers that can be learnt in three months, will not bring
you, Americans, to that steadiness, that you shall, with regularity and
composure, like the English troops at Fontenoy, evolute in the face of a
victorious and superior army: For my part, I will go further than even this
rapid instructor, and engage to teach schoolboys, with wooden guns on their
shoulders, to form and reduce from a line of fire to a line of impression, in
half an hour; but to train men for war, requires labor, experience, and time;
and to reduce them to perfect submission to every superior, is with difficulty
effected in legal establishments, never in popular and tumultuous associations;
deprived of that coersive power, which, in the former produces obedience, their
leaders in vain seek by attentions and courtesies that compliance with their
commands, which the others derive from established undisputed authority.

A yeomanrry, like the American, the most happy and comfortable of any in the
world, are but ill prepared to support the fatigues, dangers and wants of long
campaigns; they would soon miss those solaces which domestic tranquillity
afforded them, and would revert to their pristine avocations and delights;
their acquaintance with the use of implements of husbandry would stand them in
but little stead, for to what purpose should they employ them? It has long been
acknowledged a principle in war, that irregulars are not calculated for
defense, but attack; their vigor and intrepidity may bear down all obstacles
to the latter, but too surely they will fail in that patience and perseverance
which is indispensably requisite for the former, When the New England
provincials, under General Pepperrell, in the year forty five, attacked
Louisbourg, they laughed at the regular methods of approach proposed to them,
and by a concurrence of fortunate circumstances, united to valor, carried that
important fortress; this is a fact which many of them can vouch, and most, if
not all the rest of them have heard repeatedly from their fathers, when
recounting the achievements of their youthful days; and they must then have
also told them, that the petulance of their brave countrymen was more than once
on the point of giving up that glorious enterprise. -- Consider therefore, I
adjure you, by those ties and relations which endear life, and strew flowers
along the rugged path of its pilgrimage; consider, before you engage in an
attempt of so serious, so hazardous a nature, as the opposing a royal and long
constituted army, what may reasonably be expected from forces so liable to
defections as the unrestrained and hastily levied troops of these colonies must
ever be: Your numbers are also held forth to you as powerful and unconquerable,
and I do not deny that on so extended a continent as this, many armies of
forty-thousand each might, in the various operations of a war, to advantage be
employed; but supposing it possible for this even to be the case, what must be
its unavoidable consequences? All your peasantry being engaged in martial
expeditions, the land would want its culture, and a dearth in a very few months
must infallibly ensue, which would deprive your soldiers of even necessary
sustenance To strengthen this observation, Germany last war afforded melancholy
proofs to what distress a country is (...), when occupied by contending armies.
, for they must forego at the commencement every idea and wish for their
accustomed luxuries: Are you yet to be told that there are diseases which are
endemic to a camp, and that when famine with "baneful smile" stalks through its
avenues, she will add fresh poignancy and malignity to its inseparable
disorders? From most of these evils your opponents will be free; from long
practice their constitutions are habituated to the fatigues of the most rigid
discipline, they may feel distemper, but they are better enabled to repel it
than you, unused to hardships, can possibly be; nor will they be haunted by the
smallest dread of want; your ports blocked up by the navy of England, though
denying you relief, will afford them plentiful supplies, and in case of defeat,
a most sure retreat, till augmented by numerous and powerful reinforcements;
for remember, that Great Britain, during last war, did at one time carry
conquest through every quarter of the globe, and that you assisted her only in
this.

Hitherto, Americans, I have only pointed out to you the instability of your
own force; it behooves you as you have examined how far you can rely with safety
on it, to change the scene, and see how it stands opposed to that of your
antagonists, and here the prospect is different; taught to conquer by
discipline, they firmly confide in what they know is irresistible; and not
distracted by jarring principles and movements: with them every part of the
machine acts in harmony and concord, and every spring, and every wheel
conspires to produce its necessary efficient force.

It matters not of what persons armies are composed, since the profession has a
natural tendency to create in them new principles and ideas of fortitude,
submission and reliance on the wisdom and experience of their superiors: Your
informant has told you the British troops are made up of " the most debauched
weavers' prentices, the scum of the Irish Roman Catholics, who desert upon
every occasion, and a few, very few, Scotch, who are not strong enough to carry
packs." I have cultivated an acquaintance with the most sensible of the
military gentlemen, and have found them men of candor and worth; from their
information, and my own observation, I will now in these particulars lay before
you a true and impartial state of the British army The writer of the Strictures
in stating the number of the British infantry, has, either through negligence
or purposely committed an error, by not including the marines: Their
establishment is, I think, upwards of four thousand. This corpse, though
existing under a different act of Parliament, may properly be denominated an
addition to the marching regiments, as in the expeditions of last war it
frequently co-operated with them, and by its vigor and intrepidity contributed
to their memorable successes. This is only produced as an instance of what
occurs in every page, unfair reasoning from misrepresented facts; for a
trifling peace establishment is not to be computed the force of Britain, -- it
is founded on a plan, recommended by Marshal Saxe for the French army, of
having many battalions with more officers to each that requisite for the number
of private men, that in case of necessity, new levies might be ingrafted on
them, and by that means a considerable body of troops, (...) for actual
service, be almost instantaneously completed; and then, I feel assured, that an
exhausted nation, from her refuse, could send forth numbers, that world prove
formidable, even to her most powerful enemies.
: If that part which England affords is only the most debauched weavers
'prentices, whence arises the great interest which the friends of many of them
have with the country gentlemen, and which is often powerfully employed in
soliciting their discharges? And by what arts have so many apprentices, without
detection, deserted their masters, and broke their indentures? But all
recruiting officers, and I suspect the Stricturer can affirm it, know that it
is the country and not the towns which completes their battalions, that they
beat up only on market-days when peasants, not mechanics resort to them; and
you can all of you judge from the appearance of those recruits which have been
brought hither, if they were the produce of villages or cities. The scum of the
Irish Roman Catholics, he tells you, forms the proportion from that country,
but unfortunately two strong circumstances militate against this assertion, for
the legislature of Ireland, from fatal experience, jealous of the Roman
Catholics, has, under the severest penalties, prohibited them the use of arms,
and disqualified them from forming a part of the defense of their country: Yet
I am told that some few, notwithstanding, are smuggled into the service, but
this can only be in those regiments lately on that establishment, and in them
very inconsiderable; the other circumstance is a law, which, from the fear of
depopulation, proscribes the enlisting any man for other than the establishment
within that kingdom: His annexment that they desert upon every occasion, is not
better grounded upon fact; -- here the mention of desertion, makes me wish to
advert to this great source of triumph in your popular leaders; they proclaim
to the world how numerous have the instances of it been from the army quartered
in Boston, and yet, I am well informed, it is no more than has always been from
a similar body of troops, even to the natural enemies of their country; and I
heartily wish they could as easily reconcile to their consciences the seducing
men from their allegiance and duty to the worst of crimes, perjury, and the
greatest of earthly evils, unprepared, and almost certain, death if retaken:
Our author makes up the small residue with a few, very few, Scoth, who are not
strong enough to carry packs: I am told, had he been at the trouble to examine
muster rolls he would have found them not so inconsiderable; that this is
propable we may reasonably conclude from the number of emigrants who have
quitted that country to come here, and what their condition is, those who have
seen them, will judge: In fine, what is actually the present state of the whole
British army, one who has not seen all of it cannot with precision determine,
but if I might judge from those regiments, which, in their tour of duty, have
been sent here, I should pronounce it more than versed in the tricks of the
parade. I should pronounce it highly trained and qualified for service; but it
is objected that few of them have seen action, and therefore they are much to
be doubted: Who can have told this author so? For most surely he has been
strangely misinformed; of the little army stationed in this capital there are
two of the Quebec, and one of the Minden battalions, in which many of the
officers and soldiers who conquered on those glorious days, still remain, and
in most of the other regiments, which compose it, many of the veterans of last
war to be found: and for my own part, when I view this small, but finely
appointed army, and consider that it is under the command of two Generals of
approved knowledge and experience in war, I feel much confidence in the
difficulties it would be able to surmount, and the victories over irregulars,
which, in human probability, it would assuredly obtain.

In order to induce in you a belief of his military principles and knowledge,
he produces an instance in proof from the constitution of the King of Prussia's
army, but even was it, which I have the greatest reason to doubt, literally as
he has stated, it cannot then, I apprehend, be brought as a precedent in this
case, for there is no similarity between the connected and absolute power of
that monarch over all his dominions, and the distinct and widely separated
colonies of North America: Between supporting the authority of the lawful
Sovereign, and rebelling against him.

He tells you also, that no inferences can be drawn from the conquest of
Quebec, by the army under General Wolf, but believe me, he is much mistaken,
for last war will afford abundant proofs to the contrary: Was it the conquering
attributes " Would have made him, Wolf, reject with horror the HANGMAN's
OFFICE, which others, who are not endowed with his conquering attributes, will
with readiness accept." When men of genius and education, in defiance of facts,
descend from the delicacy of language ot the scurrility of the lower orders,
human nature stants appalled, and sorrowing, laments the misapplication of
knowledge and talents; -- but disappointed ambition, and its consequent*
disaffection will, with the benevolent, plead some mitigation, even though the
shaft is aimed at a character, which was once deservedly the subject of his
highest admiration and praise.
of Wolf, that, unsupported, carried on the six British battalions to glory
and decisive victory at Minden? Or was it his genius that stormed the Moro? Or
was it that hero who defended Arcot against all the force which France could
muster in the East? Vide Orme's History of Indostan; the best military history
that this, or perhaps any other, age has produced.
His own instance, the corpse which General Monckton led to conquest, wars
against the assertion; all these wrought by that spirit and strict discipline
which has ever actuated and supported the British infantry. In mean not to tear
from the laurelled bust of Wolf those honors which deservedly deck it; -- I
know he was a soldier, a general, and what is more, a man; and though it is
notorious, that he was particuarly an enemy to large standing armies in time of
peace, it is notorious also, that in time of peace he formed the twentieth
regiment, a model from which others learnt to conquer and extend the dominions
of their country, and yet he was a most liberal, virtuous citizen, and
seduloulsly preserved and improved the palladium committed to him by the
constitution, "for the safety of the kingdom, the defense of the possessions of
the crown of Great Britain, and the preservation of the balance of power in
Europe." Vid Preamble to the act for punishing mutiny and desertion.


After having, with many arguments, and more humors taught you to despise the
armies of Britain, he proceeds, and attempts with the same weapons to convince
you of security from invasion by foreigners, and tells you of a convention of
the empire in the year 1764; but, does he not know, that the resolves of that
body have ever been held in derision by its members, from the time that the
Landgrave of Hesse and Prince Maurice of Saxony, laughed at the decrees of the
Aulic Council, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, more powerful than any of his
successors, till his Majesty of Prussia and the Elector of Hanover, stood
unmoved, and sustained the thunders of the imperial ban? In fact, it is not
more regarded than a papal bull, when it opposes the inclinations of a Monarch.
You all of you know what in England, France and Spain, was formerly the power
of the Lord Paramount over his Feudatories, and such is precisely the present
state of the Germanic body; and therefore I do not say, why the Landgrave of
Hesse, if it suits his convenience, may not send over as many of his troops as
required; and should they ever be solicited, I dare aver, that an idea of their
not returning will never occur to him or his ministers, to prevent their being
dispatched, nay that they would lack faith, even though our Stricturer, in the
spirit of vaticination, has predicted it; This is perhaps the most preposterous
idea that ever was hatched in a distempered brain; but I beg pardon, perhaps
this author is entrusted with the purport of the Observator on the Boston Port
Bill's embassy, and can tell that he is sent to divulge to the Landgrave of
Hesse, this amazing secret.
but how the Elector of Hanover, backed by the power of Britain, to enforce his
commands, should want credit to procure a few thousands of his own subjects, is
what I cannot comprehend: Britain has another resource, which has perhaps not
occurred to the Friendly Addresser, or his critic: She is in the strictest
alliance with Russia, whose troops, come from ravaging the extensive provinces
of Turkey, would overrun this continent with the same facility they passed the
Danube, still carrying conquest in their front, and swept before them
unnumbered fortresses.
It is as mysterious to me, that Great Britain, when divorced from her
colonies, should be destitute of every requisite for supporting her navy,
though she possesses the northern and southern extremities of this continent,
and her trade to Russia and the Baltic, is open and free, and she can from
thence supply herself with all the materials for shipbuilding, on at least as
reasonable conditions as she does now from America.

This lively writer has amused you with many historical allusions, but, alas!
they are seldom in point; that by which he marks out the facility of forming
excellent officers, is a most striking instance of this; for to what pitch must
military knowledge have arrived in the times of the civil war, when two large
armies were for three days marching within ten miles of each other, and both
remained ignorant of their enemies situation? -- In this case it was chance or
numbers that must decide, for each was unacquainted with discipline; and if
there were faction and agitators in the parliament army, the noble historian of
those troubles, and he would have wished to conceal it, tells us, that the
royal forces were not less infested by dissension, party and private opinion;
if therefore the inference, which in the Strictures is drawn from this uncommon
and tempestuous period, is just, let every man of candor, reading and
understanding, determine.

The last consideration, Americans, which he thinks it his duty to offer you,
is, whether or no, you shall demolish his Majesty's forts and barracks: I
consider not by whom they were erected, or for what purpose, but beyond doubt,
the property of all such public buildings, and of all public military stores
is, for the security of the realm, vested in the crown; and to attempt to
seize, retain, or destroy them, it by the law declared to be high treason: His
proposition therefore is, whether you shall at once plunge yourselves into open
rebellion, and thereby incur its penalties, or not; To what a precipice would
this author lead you? When I look down, my senses forsake me, and at the
prospect my blood rushes tumultuously to, and retreats from its citadel, the
heart. Yes, unhappy and infatuated citizens, with anguish I am forced to
acknowledge, that such violences as he recommends, have in part been committed.
O righteous God! Do thou avert the justice of the empire, and by inspiring its
governing powers with thy milder attribute of mercy, snatch this deluded people
from the imminent calamities, dangers, ruin, and destruction! Which await them!

FINIS.
STRICTURES ON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, A "FRIENDLY ADDRESS TO ALL REASONABLE
AMERICANS, ON THE Subject of our Political Confusions."

ADDRESSED TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.

"Let Us canvass Him in his broad Cardinal's Hat." SHAKESPEARE. Printed in the
Year 1775.

STRICTURES, etc.
TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.
A PAMPHLET, entitled A Friendly Address to all reasonable Americans,
advertised and sold by Mr. James Rivington, of New York, is of so extraordinary
a nature that it is difficult for any Man, who is interested in the welfare of
the Community (whatever contempt he may have for the performance) to remain
silent. I know not whether the author is a Layman or Ecclesiastic, but he
bears strongly the characters of the latter. He has the want of candor and
truth, the apparent spirit of persecution, the unforgivingness, the deadly
hatred to Dissenters, and the zeal for arbitrary power, which has distinguished
Churchmen in all ages, and more particularly the high part of the Church of
England; I cannot help therefore considering him as one of this order.

The design of his Pamphlet is manifestly to dissolve the spirit of union, and
check the noble ardor prevailing through the continent; but his zeal so far
out-runs his abilities, that there is the greatest reason to think that his
Reverence has labored to little effect. His discretion seems to be still less
than his genius. A man of common judgment would not so wantonly have attacked
the general reigning principles and opinions of a People, whom he intends to
seduce or intimidate out of their rights and privileges: For instance, I
believe there are at least ninety-nine Americans in an hundred, who think that
Charles the First was an execrable tyrant, that he met with no harder fate than
he deserved, and that his two Sons ought in justice to have made the same exit.
To descant therefore on the criminality of the resistance made to that tyrant;
to affect on every occasion giving the title of rebellion to the civil war
which brought him to justice, is a degree of weakness which no man who is not
blinded by the demon of jacobitism could possibly be guilty of. But to preach
up in this enlightend age (as he does in almost express terms) passive
obedience, is a mark of lunacy, or at least it proves that the moment a head
begins to itch for a mitre, it loses the faculty of reasoning, for if the
principle of passive obedience is admitted, the gracious Prince, for whom his
Reverence professes so great a devotion is a downright usurper, and the
Parliament of which he speaks so respectfully, Lords and Commons, are rebels
and traitors.

The doctrines he aims to inculcate are as follow -- That the Parliament has a
right to tax you without your consent; that the duty upon tea is no tax; that
this duty is your only grievance; that the cause of Boston is their own
concern; that it is not your cause; that the punishment of Boston is a just
punishment; that it is lenient; that it is not equal to their crimes; that the
Bostonians are rebels, traitors, and pampered fanatics; that the Congress are
little better; that no misconduct of administration can justify or excuse open
disrespect; that submission is to be paid to the higher powers, whatever
character they be; that an Apostle enjoined submission to the tyrant Nero; that
of all people under heaven, the King's American subjects have the least cause
for complaint; that the present confusion of the Colonies has been occasioned
by false alarms; that none of your legal rights have been invaded; no injury
has been done you, and consequently that you can never be justified in
resenting that of which you have no reason to complain; that you are no judges
of the rights of Parliament; that the Parliament ought to act according to
their own judgment, not according to yours, even in things which concern you
principally or soley: that they assert they have the right in question; that
you have never proved they have not; that you have always believed or allowed
they have it until the present occasion; that the Quebec Bill is a just and
constitutional Bill; that the Canadians are likely to prove the best and most
loyal subjects in his Majesty's American dominions; that there is too much
reason to believe that the minds of the Americans are unprincipled, and their
hearts disposed for rebellion; that since the reduction of Canada they have
been bloated with a vain opinion of their own power and importance; that the
Island of Great Britain is able to govern (that is to dragoon) ten Americas;
that the moment it is known that America is no longer under the protection of
Great Britain, all the maritime powers of Europe would join to ravage your sea
ports, plander and seize your ships merely for the pleasure of ravaging; This
is perhaps the most preposterous idea that ever was hatched in a distempered
brain. America (more particularly since the distractions in Poland have taken
place) has been the great granary or cella penaria of Europe. Is it possible to
conceive that the different maritime powers should unite to deprive themselves
of the chief means of subsistence, merely for the fun's sake? Is it not more
natural to suppose that they would out-bid each other, for your friendship and
commerce on which so much depends? When the Low Countries withdrew themselves
from the dominion of Spain, did England, France, and the other Powers
immediately set about ravaging their sea ports and seizing their ships? Did
they not, on the contrary, exert themselves directly and indirectly to assist
them? The case is similar, the event would be similar; and that Great Britain
would not be powerful enough at sea, when separated from her Colonies; to
prevent this assistance, I shall refer my readers to Massie's Estimates, the
authority of which has never been disputed, and which demonstrate, that more
than half the naval power of Great Britain stands on her American foundation.
that all the maritime powers of the world would not dispossess Great Britain
of the empire of the sea even when America is separated from her. -- Now I
challenge the world to produce so many wicked sentiments, stupid principles,
audaciously false assertions, and monstrous absurdities crowded together into
so small a compass. All his positions are indeed so self evidently absurd and
false, that it would be an insult to American understandings, seriously to
attempt refuting them. I shall only beg leave to take notice of the curious
argument he uses to prove the duty on tea to be no tax, it is that, unless we
consent to the tax we are not to pay the duty. We may refuse purchasing it if
we please. The same logic would demonstrate that a duty on beer, candles, or
soap, would be no tax, as we are not absolutely obliged to drink beer; we may
drink water, we may go to bed before it is dark, and we are not forced to wash
our shirts. His assertion that Great Britain, when divorced from her Colonies,
will still hold the empire of the seas in spite of all the powers of the world,
is still more ingenious. It amounts to this, that without the possible means of
procuring timber, iron, plank, masts, pitch, tar, or hemp, to furnish out a
single frigate, they may build more ships then all the world put together; that
when her nursery for seamen is destroyed, and all the commerce on which the
existence of seamen depends, is annihilated, they will then be able to man more
fleets than the whole universe put together. But I am ashamed of trespassing on
the public patience, in making strictures on such ridiculous articles, I shall
therefore pass to some questions which have not been so much agitated, and on
which, if I mistake not, his reverence lays the greatest stress; for as he
modestly declares, that he has no opinion of your courage, it was natural for
him to consider intimidation and terror, as the most powerful figures of
rhetoric. Regular armies from Great Britain, Hessians, Hanoverians, royal,
standards erected, skilful Generals, legions of Canadians, and unnumbered
tribes of savages swords flaming in the front and rear, pestilence, desolation
and famine, are all marshalled in a most dreadful order by this church militant
author. But let us somewhat minutely examine the picture, and see whether,
stripped of its false coloring, it has any thing really terrifying. His
reverence begins with assuring us, that there is no room to doubt, but that
such an army as was employed in the reduction of Canada (that is an army of
seven thousand men) would be more than sufficient for the conquest of all the
disaffected American Colonies, (which are in fact all the Colonies.) Should
such a resolution become necessary in order to reduce them to obedience. For my
own part I think there is very great reason to doubt, that seven thousand, even
of the best troops, are able to conquer two hundred thousand of the most
disorderly peasantry upon earth, if they are animated in defense of every thing
they hold most dear and sacred; and there is still greater reason to doubt,
that seven thousand very indifferent troops, composed of the refuse of an
exhausted nation, few of whom have seen action of any kind, should be able to
conquer two hundred thousand active, vigorous yeomanry, fired with the noble
ardor, we see prevalent through the continent all armed, all expert in the use
of arms almost from their cradles. The success of Quebec it is true, does
infinite honor to the English arms, the army was, I believe, only seven
thousand, the enemy were perhaps more than double, but sixteen thousand men are
not two hundred thousand. The fate of Canada, depended upon one decisive
action, but it is impossible to calculate how many victories must be gained
before these Colonies could be subdued, whereas a single victory gained by the
Colonies must decide the contest in their favor. In the affair of Quebec there
is another circumstance to be considered, it was Wolf, who commanded: a man of
the most wonderful talents, formed to level all difficulties; to render the
most despicable soldiery, almost instaneously, an army of Heroes. In short, the
genius of the man was so extraordinary, the event was so extraordinary, that no
inferences can be drawn from it; but this without presumption may be asserted,
that no General now existing in the British service, would with double or
treble his number have succeeded in the same circumstances. One thing more I
must add in honor of that illustrious personage, that the same greatness of
soul which qualified him to conquer the natural hereditary enemies of his
country, would have made him reject with horror the Hangman's office, which
others who are not endowed with conquering attributes, will with readiness
accept.

It is notorious that Mr. Wolf was not only the first of soldiers, but that he
was a most liberal virtuous citizen, that he was passionately attached to the
liberties of his country, and of mankind; and that he was particularly an enemy
to large standing armies in time of peace. It is on the other hand remarkable,
that all the advocates for standing armies; all those who are the fondest of
the faddling and parade of war are the most active in avoiding real service.

This tremendous soothsayer, on the supposition that so great a miracle should
happen in our favor, as that the trifling body of five hundred thousand men
though firmly united (for every man in America, firmly united, would not amount
to less,) should be able to withstand his seven thousand goes on to rattle in
our ears, armies of Hessians and Hanoverians. I wish to Heaven he had for once
deviated into probability and truth. I wish ten thousand of them could possibly
be transported tomorrow. The purpose they would answer, is a purpose devoutly
to be wished for; they would be an addition to this continent of just so many
useful and excellent citizens, for I will venture to affirm, (affirming is
infectious) that in less than four months not two of these ten thousand would
remain with their Colors. But does not this Reverend Gentleman know that in
the year 1764 a convention was formed by most of the Princes of the empire, at
the head of which convention were the Emperor himself and the King of Prussia,
to prevent the alarming emigrations which threatened depopulation to Germany?
Does he not know that no troops can march out of the empire without the consent
of the empire? Does he not know that the Elector of Hanover and the Emperor are
upon exceedingly ill terms? Does he not know that the Elector of Hanover and
the King of Prussia are still upon worse? Is he sure that the Landgrave of Hess
would sell his troops (for as not one man would return back to their country,
he must consider them as for ever sold?) Is he sure that as the finances of
Great Britain stand, the vast sum necessary for this purchase would be
conveniently found? Is he sure that the State of Hanover would consent to such
a draining of their country? I know not how it is; but his most excellent
Majesty GEORGE the Third, who in England is justly esteemed the most gracious
of Sovereigns, the wifest, greatest, and best of Kings, is not very popular in
the Electorate of Hanover. These people seem to think it hard that Two Hundred
and Twenty Thousand Pounds should annually be drawn from them, for the purposes
(as they conceive it) of corrupting the Members of St. Stephen's Chapel, in
order to support the power and authority of a set of men, who from the
beginning have been enemies to the succession of the Hanover line, and who
showed a particular animosity to their last and favorite Prince, George the
Second; but these difficulties (great and unfurmountable as to a common mortal
they appear) our divine Exorcist has in an instant conjured down, and by a
single motion of his enchanted wand, has transported whole armies, in spite of
their respective Princes, and without the consent of their respective States,
from the interior parts of Germany across the Atlantic into the plains of
New England and Pennsylvania. But he does not confine himself to the
introduction of his Germans. He proceeds next to erect the Royal Standard, to
which he tells us that all who have the courage to declare themselves now
friends to government, will undoubtedly resort, and these he says in a good
cause, will be of themselves formidable to their opposers: Dreadfully
formidable they must be indeed: There would resort to it, let me see, (for the
respectable town of Rye have declared themselves a kind of neutrals rather than
friends to government) there would resort to it, Mr. Justice Sewell, the
honorable Mr. Paxton, Brigadier Ruggles, and about eight or ten more mandamus
Councilmen, with perhaps twice their number of Expectants, and not less than
twenty of the unrecanted Hutchinsonian Addressers. These the four Provinces of
New England alone would send forth. New York would furnish six, seven or
probably eight volunteers from a certain knot, who are in possession or
expectation of contracts, and the fourth part of a dozen of high flying Church
of England Romanised Priests. I represent to myself the formidable countenance
they will make, when arranged under the Royal or ministerial Standard; but what
will add to the terror of the appearance, will be their Reverend Pontifex
himself, whom I conceive marching in the front, an inquisitorial frown upon his
brow, his bands and canonicals floating to the air, bearing a cross in his
hands, with the tremendous motto, In hoc signo vinces, flaming upon it in
capital letters of blood, leading them on, and exciting them to victory. It is
impossible that men, who are not under an infatuation by the judgment of heaven
should flatter themselves, that forty thousand American Yeomanry (for we are
assured by the same great authority that more than forty thousand cannot be
brought to action) should stand the shock of this dreadful Phalanx.

But I should beg pardon for attempting to be ludicrous upon a subject which
demands our utmost indignation. I shall now therefore on the presumption that
the People of England should be so lost to sense, virtue and spirit as to
suffer their profligate Misrulers to persevere in their present measures,
endeavor to state to you what is their force, and what is yours. I shall
endeavor to remove the false terrors which this writer would hold out, in
order to intimidate you from the defense of your liberties and those of your
posterity, that he and his similars may wallow in sinecures and benefices
heaped up from the fruits of your labor and industry.

Great Britain has, I believe, of infantry at home (comprehending Ireland, and
exclusive of the guards) fifteen thousand men. They find the greatest
difficulty in keeping the regiments up to any thing near their establishment --
what they are able to procure are of the worst sort. They are composed of the
most debauched Weavers prentices, the scum of the Irish Roman Catholics, who
desert upon every occasion, and a few, very few, Scotch, who are not strong
enough to carry packs -- This is no exaggeration; those who have been lately at
Boston, represent the soldiers there (one or two regiments excepted) as very
defective in size, and apparently in strength: But we shall be told they are
still regulars, and regulars have an irresistible advantage. -- There is,
perhaps, more imposition in the term regular troops, than in any of the jargon
which issues from the mouth of a Quack Doctor. I do not mean to insinuate, that
a disorderly mob are equal to a trained disciplined body of men; but I mean,
that all the essentials necessary to form infantry for real service may be
acquired in a few months. There cannot be a stronger illustration of the truth
here advanced, than the Prussian army. They are composed of about one third of
the King's own subjects, two-thirds foreigners. The third, consisting of his
own subjects, are, when the exercising season is over, (which lasts six or
seven weeks) suffered to return to their families, and attend to the business
of husbandry -- half of the other two thirds, consisting of foreigners, are not
only permitted, but encouraged to work at their trades in the garrison towns,
and never touch a musket for the rest of the year, so that, in fact, only one
third are, in the modern language, to be called regular Soldiers; these
generally make their escape the first opportunity: It may be said therefore,
that the King of Prussia has gained all his victories with a sort of Militia.
I mean, that it is very possible for men to be clothed in red, to be expert
in all the tricks of the parade, to call themselves regular troops, and yet, by
attaching themselves principally or solely to the tinsel and show of war, be
totally unfit for real service. This, I am told, is a good deal the case of the
present British Infantry; If they can acquit themselves tolerably in the
puerile reviews, exhibited for the amusement of royal Masters and Misses in
Hyde Park or Wimbledon Common, it is sufficient.

In the beginning of the late war, some of the most esteemed regular regiments
were sent over to this country; they were well dressed; they were well
powdered; they were perfect masters of their manual exercise; they fired
together in platoons; but fatal experience taught us they knew not how to
sight. While your Militia were frequently crowned with success, these regulars
were defeated or baffled for three years successively in every part of the
continent. At length, indeed, (after repeated losses and disgraces) they became
excellent troops, but not until they had absolutely forgotten every thing
which, we are assured, must render regulars quite irresistible. The corpse sent
from this country under General Monkton was, I believe, for its number, one of
the best armies that ever was led to conquest, and yet, if I have been rightly
informed, there was not a single regiment of them that could go through the
manual exercise, or at best, they performed it most wretchedly. It is likewise
said, that when, after their glorious and rapid conquest of Martinico, they
were joined by the spruce regiments from Europe; such was their uncough
appearance, that they were scarce honored with the title of Soldiers by those
Gentlemen. Upon the whole, it is most certain, that men may be smartly dressed,
keep their arms bright, be called regulars, be expert in all the anticks of a
review, and yet be very unfit for real action. It is equally certain, that a
Militia, by confining themselves to essentials, by a simplification of the
necessary maneuvers, may become, in a very few months, a most formidable
infantry. The Yeomanry of America have, besides infinite advantages, over the
peasantry of other countries; they are accustomed from their infancy to fire
arms; they are expert in the use of them: Whereas the lower and middle people
of England are, by the tyranny of certain laws almost as ignorant in the use of
a musket, as they are of the ancient Catepulta. The Americans are likewise, to
a man, skilful in the management of the instruments necessary for all military
works; such as spades, pickaxes, hatchets, etc. Taking, therefore, all
circumstances into consideration, there will be no rashness in affirming, that
this continent may have formed for action, in three or four months, an hundred
thousand infantry: For as to the assertion of one friendly adviser, that no
more than forty thousand could act to advantage, I confess I do not understand
it, nor does he, I believe, understand himself. If he means that sixty thousad
men cannot be ranged in a field capable of containing only forty thousand, we
shall all agree with him; but how in the operations of a war upon a vast
continent double this number should be a disadvantage, I can have no conception.

Let one simple general plan be adopted for the formation and subdivision of
your battalions; let them be instructed only in so much of the manual exercise
as to prevent confusion, and accident in loading and firing; let them be taught
to form, to retreat, to advance, to change their front, to rally by their
colors; let them be taught to reduce themselves from a line of fire to a line
of impression, that is, from two deep, to four, six, or eight. This is all so
easy and simple, that it may be acquired in three months. Let some plan of this
sort be adopted. I say, and there is no doubt but that, in the time I have
prescribed, you may have an army on foot of seventy, eighty, or an hundred
thousand men, equal to all the services of war.

Should this be admitted, it will be still objected, that you have no able
officers to conduct you. I do not know that you have; but is it certain that
those sent to dragoon you have better? I have taken some pains to inform myself
what methods these Gentlemen, said to be bred to arms, take to qualify
themselves in a superior degree for the profession. What is their rotine of
instruction? Do they read much? I am assured that they do not; from books alone
the theory of war can be acquired, and the English service in times of peace
affords them no practical lessons; for mounting guard once or twice a week, or
the preparation for the review of a single regiment can never be esteemed as
such. It is much to be lamented, that the Gentlemen of the Army do not apply
more of the many leisure hours they have upon their hands to reading. The
majority of them are of a generous disposition, which, did they cultivate, by
conversing with the great historians and orators of antiquity, and the more
liberal political writers of our own country, a standing army would be
something less an object of jealousy to all virtuous citizens. We might perhaps
see them instead of being advocates and partisans of the present Ministry, a
check upon their wickedness. I am inclined to think that few or none of the
officers have condescended to inform themselves of the merit of the present
contest. Let me conjure them for once to read coolly and heartily the whole
process, afterward to lay their hands upon their hearts, and answer, whether
the People of America in general, and of Boston in particular, are "more sinned
against or finning?"

Now I am upon the subject of the Officers of the Army, I take the opportunity
of mentinning, with the respect due to him, one Gentleman of high rank amongst
them -- the tenure of his conduct while in command, was so liberal, and his
letters quoted in the House of Commons, were so fair, candid and friendly to
this Continent, that he is entitled to the thanks of America. He is indeed of a
country that owes not only its prosperity, but its existence to the same
principles which actuate America.




Another circumstance, Americans, may be added for your comfort. It has been
allowed by some of the most candid of the regulars themselves, that during the
last war upon this continent, your countrymen the provincial Field-Officers
were in general, more understanding and capable than their own of the same
rank. But the history of the civil war in the year 1641, furnishes us with the
strongest instances that excellent officers may be soon formed from country
gentlemen, citizens, lawyers, and Farmers. The Parliament's army (as our
priestly writer would call them, the rebellious Republicans) were chiefly
composed of this class of men. In the beginning of this war, they were treated
with the same affected contempt, and almost in the same opprobious terms as
you, the people of America, are by your friendly and decent adviser.

Whoever would infer from the tenure of these papers, that the writer is
desirous of precipitating, or could look with indifference upon the calamities
of a civil war, does him great injustice. He considers them with all the horror
natural to a feeling man and honest citizen. He execrates the memory of those
men to whom they may justly be attributed, but he is persuaded that they never
originated, (at least in states of any considerable extent) in the turbulent
dispositions of the people, nor in the arts of demagogues, but in the
oppression of their rulers, in the wantonness, folly, pride, or avarice of
Kings, Ministers, or Governors. The Grislers of Switzerland the Granvels of
Holland, the Lauds and Straffords of England, were the undoubted authors of the
tragedies acted in their respective countries: And if this continent should be
stained with the blood of a single citizen, it can never be charged to the
unreasonable pretensions of the people, but to the Bernards, Hutchinsons, and
some other traitors of a similar stamp.

He is convinced, that being prepared for a civil war is the surest means of
preventing it; that to keep the swords of your enemies in their scabbards, you
must whet your own. He is convinced, that remonstrances, petitions, prayers and
supplcations will make no impression on our callous Court and abandoned
Parliament; England, Ireland, America, even Guernsey, Jersey and Minorca are
witnesses of their inessicacy. He in convinced, that fear alone can operate;
there are symptoms that it already begins to operate; the monster, Tyranny,
already begins to pant, press her now with ardor, and she is down; already the
Ministry have expressed in their letters an inclination to make some
concessions; to meet you half way. Which, I suppose, may be construed thus,
that as they find they have it not in their power to establish, by force, the
despotism which they aimed at, they shall be very well satisfied, if you will
just cede so much of your rights and privileges, as will enable them, by
extending their pecuniary influence and sapping your virtue, to take away the
rest at their leisure.

There now remains, people of America, one consideration which (however it may
be taken) I think it my duty to offer. History tells us that the free states of
Greece, Thebes, Sparta, Athens, and Syracuse were all in their turns subjugated
by the force or art of tyrants. They almost all in their turns recovered their
liberty and destroyed their tyrants. The first act upon the recovery of their
liberty was to demolish those badges of slavery, citadels, strong holds, and
military tenements; the Switzers did the same; the people of England (lost in
corruption and lethargy as they are) could never be prevailed upon to suffer
barracks amongst them; even the courtly Blackstone is startled at the idea. No
separate camps, no barracks no inland fortresses, says he, should be allowed;
in fact, wherever barracks are freedom cannot be said to exist, or she exists
so lamely as scarcely to deserve the name.

It is worth your consideration, Americans, whether these badges should remain
or no. I shall now conclude, brave citizens, with invoking the Almighty God
from whom all virtues flow, to continue you in that spirit of unanimity and
vigor which must insure your success, and immortalize you through all ages, as
the champions and patrons of the human race.


