THE CRISIS. NUMBER III.
Thy name, O Chatham, with some few more, is made, rare instance, immortal by
defeat; and to thee NEW HONORS rise from the ruins of thy country. While you
live, never fading laurels, the just reward of thy virtue, conduct, and
fidelity, shall crown thy hoary head, and shade thy venerable brow. -- And may
thine and Britain's ravished eyes behold thy foes and hers, for their treachery
and villainy, dragged to execution, dressed and dishonored in funeral ROSEMARY
and the baneful YEW.
To the KING.
SIR,
TO follow you regularly through every step of a fourteen years shameful and
inglorious reign, would be a task as painful as disagreeable, and far exceed
the bounds of this paper; but we are called upon by the necessity of the times,
the measures you are pursuing, by every principle of justice and self
preservation, and by the duty we owe to God and our country, to declare our
sentiments (with a freedom becoming Englishmen) on some of those dreadful
transactions and oppressions which this kingdom has labored under since the
glory and luster of England's crown was doomed to fade upon your brow; and to
point out to you, Sir, your own critical and dangerous situation.

Sir, it is not your rotten troop in the present House of Commons; it is not
your venal, beggarly, pensioned Lords; it is not your polluted, canting,
prostituted bench of Bishops; it is not your whole set of abandoned Ministers;
nor all your army of Scotch cutthroats, that can protect you from the people's
rage, when drove, by your oppressions, and till now unheard of cruelties, to a
state of desperation.

The day, we fear, is not far distant, when you will have reason, too much
reason, to wish you had acted like a father, and not like a tyrant; when you
will be bound to curse those traitors, those exalted villains, whom now in the
face of day, without a blush, you can be base enough to call your friends; be
assured, Sir, your danger is great amidst all this fancied security, and it
will be impossible for them to preserve you from the just resentment of an
enraged, long abused, and much injured nation: Should that day ever come, but
Heaven avert the stroke, where can you hide yourself from the tenfold vengeance
of a brave and mighty people, with law, justice, heaven, and all its sacred
truths on their side.

Then, like the wounds that bleed afresh, will be brought to their minds your
barbarous and unprovoked massacre in St. George's Fields; when men and women
were indiscriminately and inhumanly slaughtered, to gratify what would have
disgraced even your footman; a pitiful revenge. Then, Sir, they will remember,
with horror and indignation, the letter of thanks sent from the Secretary of
war, by your order, to the officer on duty the 10th of May, 1768 (the day of
carnage) and likewise your pensioning, and screening the murderers from the
punishment of the law. Then, Sir, they will remember the horrid plan laid at
Brentford, for destroying the right of election; or in the most savage manner
to take away the lives of the freeholders of Middlesex, which was (to make use
of a word from your merciful royal dictionary) effectually carried into
execution, and several people killed; to this plan, Sir, formed by Proctor and
your minions, you must have been privy, as the event afterward sufficiently
proved. -- Then, Sir, they will remember the mean, low, and criminal
subterfuge, you had recourse to, to dispense with the laws, and set aside the
just ^erdict of an honest jury to pardon those hired ruffians, Balf and
M'Quirk, convicted upon the clearest evidence of premeditated murder. Then,
Sir, they will remember the insults they received, and the ignoble answers you
gave, to the remonstrances and petitions, delivered by them to the throne,
praying a dissolution of parliament. Nor will they forget, Sir, the infernal
plan for smuggling the present House of Commons, and destroying all the rights
of this free country. In a word, Sir, these and every other despotic and bloody
transaction of your reign, will rise fresh in their minds, if they should be
drove by your encouragement of popery, your persecutions, your oppressions,
your violations of all justice, your treachery, and your weakness, into a fatal
and unnatural civil war in America; I say, they will rise fresh in their minds,
and stimulate them to deeds of glory, nay, they may pursue with implacable
revenge the author of all their miseries.

The people, Sir, with a candor and indulgence peculiar to Englishmen, passed
over the injuries and insults in the first part of your reign, or kindly laid
the blame at the door of your ministers; but it is now evident to the whole
world, that there was a plan formed by Lord Bute and yourself, either before,
or immediately after you came to the crown, for subverting the British
constitution in church and state; which to our grief, with indefatigable pains
and too much success, Lord Bute's tools and your infernal minions have carried
into execution; therefore it no longer remains to determine who is now the
greatest criminal in England.

Consider, Sir, if through the late and present iniquitous measures, and an
obstinate resolution in your Majesty to (...) SWORD is forced to be drawn in
America, it cannot remain long unsheathed in England; we hope there is some
virtue here; and we entertain a better opinion of our countrymen, than to
believe they are so far degenerated as to TAMELY see a mercenary army of
soldiers, who are at all times a terror to the peaceable inhabitants of every
free state BUTCHER their BRETHREN and FELLOW SUBJECTS in America, because they
are determined to defend their own rights and the British constitution; I say
they never will TAMELY see that, without putting out a helping hand, and
sharing with them the glory of a decisive victory over tyranny, and all the
agents of the infernal monarch of the dark regions of hell, who would enslave
the world.

Should you, Sir, still pursue the same tyrannical measures, only to gratify a
mean vindictive spirit, and be the author of such dreadful mischiefs; O, we
shudder at the thought! The people will then perhaps treat you, Sir, with as
little ceremony, as little respect, and as little mercy, as you and your
minions have treated them; for, Sir, whenever the state is convulsed by civil
commotions, and the constitution totters to its center, the throne of England
must shake with it; a crown will then be no security, and at one stroke all the
gaudy trappings of royalty may be laid in the dust; at such a time of dreadful
confusion and slaughter, when the son's weapon drinks the father's blood, and
we see a ruffian's blade reeking from a brother's heart, when rage is burning
in the breasts of Englishmen, provoked by wrongs not to be borne by men, all
distinctions must cease; the common safety and the rights of mankind, will be
the only objects in view, while the King and the peasant must share one and the
same fate, and perhaps fall undistinguished together.

Let these things, Sir, be well weighed; tremble for the event; drive those
traitors from your breast, who now surround you; let the just and honest have
your confidence, and once more make your people happy, great and free; be not
the instrument of their destruction; consider the solemn and sacred oath you
made at your coronation, to protect your subjects in all their rights and
liberties, and the Protestant religion as by law established; consider, Sir,
what a perversion of all right and justice that must be (besides the heinous
crime of perjury) when instead of being their PROTECTOR, you become their
DESTROYER.

Your plan, Sir, for bringing the colonies by force of arms into a state of
subjection to your will, is cruel, bloody, and, I hope, impracticable. It is
repugnant to every principle of humanity, justice, sound policy, and the
natural rights of mankind; it is the foulest disgrace to you, and will reflect
eternal infamy on your reign and memory, as the Sovereign and father of a free
people; it is such a plan of encroaching violence and lawless power, as the
Americans never can, never ought, nor ever will submit to; it is such a scheme
for enslaving, or destroying the human race, as every man ought to execrate and
condemn, and to oppose even till he perish.

Men, Sir, at three thousand miles distance must think it extremely hard to
work, toil, and run hazards, only to support the infamous luxury of high
pampered Lords, a rotten court, and your tribe of venal senators, minions,
pimps, and parasites, the pest of society; and to be taxed and mulct by them at
their pleasure. All nature, Sir, revolts even at the idea of such a state of
human misery.

Force, Sir, can never be used effectually to answer the end, without
destroying the colonies themselves. Liberty and encouragement are necessary to
keep them together, and violence will hinder both. Any body of troops
considerable enough to awe them, keep them in subjection, and under the
direction of a needy Scotch Governor, sent only to be an instrument of
slaughter, and to make his fortune, would soon put an end to planting, and
leave the country to you, Sir, and your merciless plunderers only; and if it
did not, they would starve the inhabitants, and eat up all the profit of the
colonies. On the contrary, a few prudent laws, Sir, (but you seem to be a
stranger to prudence as well as to justice and humanity) and a little prudent
conduct (that too has been long despaired of by the kingdom) would soon give us
far the greatest share of the riches of all America; perhaps drive other
nations out of it, or into our colonies for shelter.

If violent methods be not used, at this time, to prevent it, your Northern
Colonies, Sir, must constantly increase in people, wealth, and power; their
inhabitants are considerably more than doubled since the Revolution; and in
less than a century must become powerful states; and the more powerful, the
more people will flock thither. And there are so many exigencies in all states,
so many foreign wars, and domestic disturbances, that these Colonies can seldom
want opportunities, if they watch for them, to do, what you, Sir, might be
extremely sorry for; throw off their dependence on the mother country.
Therefore, Sir, it should be your first and greatest care, that it shall never
be their interest to act against that of their native country; an evil that can
no otherwise be averted, than by keeping them fully employed in such trades as
will increase their own, as well as our wealth; for, Sir, there is too much
reason to fear, if you don't find employment for them, they may find some for
you. Withdraw then, Sir, from America your armed ruffians, and make a full
restoration of the people's rights; let them tax themselves, and enjoy their
property unviolated by the hand of tyranny; thus, Sir, the subsequent part of
your reign may yet be happy and glorious. May the compact between you and the
people be no more invaded; may you be speedily reconciled to the just demands
of the Colonies; may Lord Bute, Lord Mansfield, Lord North, and all your
Majesty's infamous minions, who would precipitate you and the kingdom into
ruin, answer with their heads (and soon) for their horrid crimes; and may the
succession in your Majesty's Royal House, and the religion, laws, rights, and
liberties of the subject go hand in hand down to all posterity, until this
globe shall be reduced to its original chaos, and time be swallowed up in
eternity.

[To be continued.]

